

Arida versus Arida & Ors; Arida versus Arida & Ors (No. 2) [2014] NSWSC 579 (13 May 2014) 
Last Updated: 14 May 2014 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Arida versus Arida & Ors; Arida versus Arida & Ors (No. 2)  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): April 2014  
Decision Date: May 2014  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
Slattery J  
Decision: 
No interest is payable to the vendor-trustees upon the settlement of the
Church Street contract from the revised completion date set by the Heads of
Agreement of 24 December 2013. Costs follow the event in relation to the
Interest Motion issues determined 4 April 2014. Each party to bear his own costs of the Citibank Motion.  
Catchwords: 
CONTRACT - vendor and purchaser - construction of agreement - whether interest accrues to the vendor during the period from the revised completion date set under the contract of 24 December 2013 and its actual completion date - contractual entitlement to interest depends on whether vendor 'ready, willing and able' to complete and whether vendor in default - COSTS - general rule that costs follow the event - whether the general rule is displaced because the issues on the Interest Motion are analogous with the determination of a dispute concerning a trust fund - whether each party should bear his own costs after the settlement of the Citibank Motion.  
JUDGMENT
Several issues remain after the Court gave its principal judgment in these proceedings on 4 April 2014: Tony Arida versus Sid Arida; Tony Arida versus Sid Arida <case> Facts, matters and persons are referred to in this second judgment in the same way as they are in the principal judgment and both judgments should be read together. 
The Court's principal judgment decided that any interest payable to the vendor at settlement of the Church Street contract should be calculated from the 24 December 2013 revised completion date set by the Heads of Agreement and not from the original Church Street contract completion date of 12 July 2012. The Court made directions for the calculation of any interest due at the completion of the Church Street contract and reserved issues of costs for further consideration. 
Three issues remain: (1) whether any interest is payable from the newly set completion date under the Church Street contract; (2) whether Sid, Joseph and George Arida should pay Tony Arida's costs of the motion determined in the principal judgment (called in these reasons "the Interest Motion"); and (3) whether Sid, Joseph and George Arida should have an order for the costs of their 5 March 2014 motion in the Citibank proceedings 2010/266736 ("the Citibank proceedings"). These reasons deal with each of these issues in turn.
In the argument on these remaining issues Mr Jones SC and Ms McWilliam continue to appear for Mr Tony Arida, and Mr Ryckmans appears for Sid, Joseph and George Arida.

Interest After the Revised Completion Date of the Church Street Contract
Mr Jones SC and Ms McWilliam submit on behalf of Mr Tony Arida that no interest was due to the trustees at the settlement of the Church Street contract on 24 January 2014, on account of delay between the revised settlement date of 24 December 2013 and the actual settlement. The principal judgment accepted there may still be dispute between the parties about whether interest would still be chargeable for this period in accordance with special condition 36 between: Arida versus Arida & Ors; Arida versus Arida & Ors <case> at <case> and [63]. 
The defendants' position on this issue is less clear. In their written submissions they first declared that they "make no submission in respect to [this] question of interest". But then they qualify that position by pointing out that Mr Tony Arida was required to complete the contract on 24 December but failed to do so and that therefore interest should be paid from that date until the date of actual completion. In oral submissions Mr Ryckmans submitted that he did not appear for the trustees, the vendors, but that the correspondence leading up to settlement would have to be examined. 
This question of whether the purchaser is required to pay one-month's interest is really a contest between Mr Tony Arida and Mr Ryckmans' clients, the defendants. If Mr Tony Arida is successful it is the defendants who will lose their proportionate benefit of the one-month's interest. Mr Ryckmans had sufficient opportunity to put all that he wished in answer to Mr Tony Arida's submissions on this issue. The Court can now determine it without further reference to the submitting trustees. 
Mr Tony Arida's submission is that the trustees cannot demonstrate any entitlement under special condition 36 to the claimed interest. Mr Tony Arida submits that the trustees did not put themselves in a position to settle on 24 December 2013 and were therefore: (1) in default as vendors; and (2) were not ready, willing and able to settle on that day. Therefore interest cannot run in the trustees' favour under special condition 36 from that day. 
The principles applicable to the construction of clauses such as special condition 36 may be shortly stated. The purpose of such clauses is through the entitlement to interest to give the vendor some hold on the purchaser but at the price that the vendor must satisfy the stated conditions: in Re Woods' and Lewis' Contract  <case>. 
The special condition 36 proviso that the vendor be "ready, willing and able to give title to the purchaser" is directed at a particular nominated date for completion, as the clause only provides for an entitlement to interest from that nominated date, "commencing on the Completion date and continuing until completion of this contract". The clause requires the Court to assess the vendor's disposition and capacity to complete as at the date set for completion. Here that is the revised completion date of 24 December 2013.
Special condition 36 also establishes a co-ordinate proviso that non-completion of the contract should be for reasons "other than the vendor's default". Lindley LJ traced out the meaning of "default" in a similar context in Re Hetling & Merton's Contract [[1893] 3 Ch 269] at 281 as follows: "If a vendor knows the material facts - knows that there are difficulties which it is his duty to overcome - knows he may not be able to overcome them by the time fixed for completion, and he fails to overcome them by that time, although no fresh unforeseen occurrence prevents him from doing so, the delay caused by such failure on his part is attributable to his wilful default in the sense in which that expression is used in contracts of this description, and his right to interest during such delay is excluded."
North J applied this Lindley LJ statement in Re Wilsons & Stevens Contract [[1894] 3 Ch 546] in dealing with the practical relationship between what a vendor can foresee and present and 'default', as follows: "Accordingly, I have to discern here whether it is a case where the vendors saw that there were certain difficulties but, nevertheless, thought they could be overcome, or on the other hand, whether some unforeseen occurrence sprung on them which was not attributable in any way to their negligence or default, which had the effect of contributing to delay in completing the purchase."
Mr Tony Arida submits that examination of the correspondence both before and after the revised completion date of 23 December makes clear that the vendors/trustees failed to make themselves available to settle on that day and failed to obtain the concurrence of other parties whose concurrence was necessary to enable settlement to occur then: Re Young & Harston's Contract [[1885] 29 Ch 691] are examples of the general judgment to be made about a vendors' conduct in such circumstances: a vendor who knows there are difficulties that it is his duty to overcome and fails to overcome them by the time set for completion is guilty of "wilful default". The effect of these cases is not altered by the fact that some of the contracts refer to "wilful default" rather than "default" as appears in special condition 36.
In my judgment the evidence measures up to Mr Tony Arida's submissions. The position the trustees took through their solicitors from about 20 December 2013 meant that as at 24 December 2013 they were not "ready, willing and able" to settle and they were in default. The following main pieces of correspondence show this clearly.
The relevant chronology is within a short compass. On 17 December 2013 the parties settled the 2010 proceedings in short minutes of order which included an agreement for the parties to use their best endeavours to settle all the transactions provided for in clauses 4 and 11A in the Heads of Agreement by 10am on Monday, 23 December 2013. The parties immediately set about attempting to arrange settlement. On the afternoon of Friday 20 December the solicitors for Tony Arida posed a settlement adjustment sheet to the solicitors for the trustees, which assumed that the first payment under the Heads of Agreement would be made to Mr Tony Arida on 23 December and that, subject to the clearance of funds, settlement could then take place on 24 December 2013. But not surprisingly no provision was made for the payment of special condition 36 interest in this settlement adjustment sheet from Mr Tony Arida.
The same day, 20 December 2013, about mid afternoon the solicitors for the trustees claimed interest of $569,205.48 under special condition 36. Then at 3.44pm, Mr Tony Arida's solicitors made their position clear "we are instructed that the purchaser is not required to pay interest given the agreement reached between the parties on 21 August 2012 and noted in the Heads of Agreement of that date". At 4.03pm the solicitors for the trustees simply seem to have given up on the idea of settling on 23 or 24 December, emailing back: "Unfortunately we aren't going to be able to settle on Monday or Tuesday. I need to get clarification and everybody I need to contact is unavailable. I will be back in the office on 6 January but everyone else involved is on leave until 13 January."
The settlement did not proceed before Christmas 2013. It all just seemed too hard. The trustees and their solicitors exhibited none of the indicia of genuine effort to settle in 2013 from this moment.
When the solicitors returned to work on Monday, 13 January the correspondence resumed. Mr Tony Arida's solicitors noted that day the advice of the solicitors for the trustees "that you were unable to settle the matter prior to Christmas given the uncertainty regarding the settlement of the first payment referred to in the HOA and the absence of the relevant staff in your office to clarify the relevant settlement adjustments". Correspondence ensued between 13 January and 24 January through which period the parties agreed to set aside the amounts which the vendors/trustees were claiming on settlement.
This course of events shows that the vendors/trustees were in "default" under clause 36 on 24 December. First, they clearly intimated to Mr Tony Arida's solicitors that they were only prepared to settle if they were paid a very substantial amount of interest to which this Court has found they were not entitled. They were not prepared to provide clear documents of title in accordance with the terms of the contract and were in my view in default.
Secondly, notwithstanding that the 2010 Proceedings settled a week out from the proposed settlement date of 24 December, and by their very terms anticipated settlement on that or the previous day, the trustees did not organise sufficient staffing and other legal capability to settle on 24 December. Their solicitors' office was closed that day. And they did not take any earlier steps to anticipate whether there would be any issue about the settlement adjustment sheet and the interest that may be claimed up to settlement, well before the last afternoon that their solicitors' office was open for 2013 business on 20 December.
Also the lack of staff and the lack of their making any arrangements for a 24 December settlement shows they were not ready, willing and able to settle on the revised completion date of 24 December. The vendors/trustees are not entitled to any interest after 24 December 2013 under special condition 36.

Costs of the Interest Motion Determined on 4 April 2014
Tony Arida was successful on the Interest Motion determined on 4 April 2014. Sid, Joseph and George Arida had brought this motion in the 2011 proceedings. In the principal judgment the Court noted (at [64]) that under UCPR, r 42.1 costs would normally follow the event but that one or other party may seek a special costs order. 
Sid, Joseph and George Arida, the unsuccessful applicants on the Interest Motion, submitted that costs should not follow the event and that "some other order should be made" under UCPR, r 42.1. They submitted that the proper order was that each party bear his own costs of the Interest Motion. Mr Tony Arida opposes the Court making such an order: submitting that costs should follow the event. In the result Mr Tony Arida's submissions are the more persuasive, for the following reasons. 
Sid, Joseph and George Arida argued that the principles to be applied in the exercise of the costs discretion on the Interest Motion were analogous to cases involving the division of a disputed fund such as might be in issue under the [Succession Act 2006](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/), [Part 3.2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/index.html#p3.2) or under the [Property (Relationships) Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984298/). In those situations the Court will be more ready to depart from the usual rule that costs follow the event and look at "the overall justice of the case": Sherborne Estate (No. 2); Re Vanvalen versus Neaves <case>; <case> - [25].
Sid, Joseph and George Arida develop this analogy further in argument. They submit they were never parties to the Church Street contract which was entered into by the trustees for sale as vendors and Tony Arida as purchaser. They submit that the trustees for sale had responsibility for the conduct of the dispute about the interest issue between themselves and Mr Tony Arida. When Mr Tony Arida objected to the payment of interest under the Church Street contract the trustees agreed to retain in trust at the 24 January 2014 settlement sufficient monies to recover Sid, Joseph and George Arida's share of interest payable under the contract, namely $479,862.81, pending the resolution of the interest issue. Sid, Joseph and George Arida submit that this was a compromise reached between Mr Tony Arida and the trustees, despite the view held by the trustees' solicitors that interest was properly payable to Sid, Joseph and George Arida.
Sid, Joseph and George Arida claim they were not directly involved: in the settlement of the Church Street contract; in determining the proper settlement amount; or in reaching the compromise to set aside the amount of $479,862.81 in claimed interest. Indeed, they point out that the trustees themselves appear to have supported the relief being pursued by Sid, Joseph and George Arida. And the proper course was for the trustees themselves to make an application under [Trustee Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/), [s 63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/s63.html) to determine who was ultimately entitled to the trust moneys and that Sid, Joseph and George Arida only brought their application because the trustees and Tony Arida refused to do so. The submission is that had the trustees brought an application under the [Trustee Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/), [s 63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/s63.html) the trustees' costs would have been borne by the fund, and not by the parties. In the circumstances Sid, Jospeh and George Arida submit that the appropriate order is that each party should bear his own costs of the Interest Motion. 
Mr Jones SC and Ms McWilliam on behalf of Mr Tony Arida persuasively answered this submission. The Court's reasons below accept the correctness of their analysis.
The contest between these parties was not about the splitting of a pre-existing fund such as a deceased estate or the contested joint property of parties separating after a failed relationship. The payment into trust on account of interest was only the result of the present contest between the trustees and Mr Tony Arida as to whether or not any sum of interest was payable at settlement under the Church Street contract. The fund would not have existed but for the trustees taking the point that interest dated from 24 July 2012 up to the date of settlement, the very point which was resolved in the Interest Motion on 4 April.
Authority makes clear that this case would not have been resolved under [Trustee Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/), [s 63.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/s63.html) Whilst the trustees may perhaps have brought the matter to Court under [Trustee Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/), [s 63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/s63.html), the present contest was unlikely to be ended by such a proceeding. An application for judicial advice is generally not an appropriate vehicle to settle disputes between parties to a trust: Hartigan Nominees Ltd versus Rydge [(1992) 29 NSWLR 405] at 970H-971B per Hoffman LJ. 
The defendants insisted the trustees seek interest from Tony Arida at the settlement on 24 January 2014. The defendants' submission is that acting independently, the trustees pressed forward with their own view of the proper construction of the Church Street contract so as to demand interest under special condition 36 back to 12 July 2012 shortly before settlement. This contention is not borne out by the correspondence. The email correspondence from the solicitors from the defendants, Somerset Ryckmans, clearly shows that just before settlement the defendants insisted that "our clients will not agree to settlement unless interest was paid to our clients...[t]here is no basis for the interest share to which our clients are entitled being withheld on settlement...[i]f there is any dispute regarding interest this can form part of future proceedings to be brought by our clients against Tony Arida".
The position which the trustees took the following day on settlement corresponded exactly with the defendants' proposal. This is hardly surprising. The trustees may have exposed themselves to potential liability to their beneficiaries, the defendants, if they did not conform with their wishes. At 4.10pm on Thursday, 23 January 2014 Somerset Ryckmans emailed the solicitors for the trustees: "we don't consent to the trustees completing this sale without accounting to our client's for the interest component as well as the principal component due and payable to our clients as per the settlement figures previously provided. We reserve all of our client's rights". The defendants are directly responsible for the trustees' decision occasioned by this correspondence, to make an invalid demand for interest at settlement. The defendants must now bear the costs consequences of their actions. 
In the result therefore I do not find persuasive the analogy with trust proceedings for which Sid, Joseph and George Arida contend. The costs of the Interest Motion will follow the event. 
Costs of the March 2014 Motion in the Citibank Proceedings
The last issue between these parties related to the incidence of costs consequent in the Citibank proceedings also filed by Sid, Joseph and George Arida on 5 March 2014 ("the Citibank Motion"). The Citibank Motion sought the payment out to the applicants/defendants of an amount of $199,983.33 from the trust account of their solicitors, Messrs Somerset Ryckmans. On the morning of the hearing, 27 March 2014, Mr Tony Arida's counsel advised counsel for the defendants/applicants that this sum of $199,983.33 could be released by Messrs Somerset Ryckmans to the defendants/applicants, as their motion had sought. As a result there was no need for Messrs Sid, Joseph and George Arida to pursue their motion any further. But the question of the costs of the Citibank Motion was unresolved. It was agreed that the question of these costs would be argued together with all other questions after the Court had given judgment on the Interest Motion. The Court has received written and oral submissions on the question of the costs of the Citibank Motion. 
The monies that the Citibank Motion sought to release were being held by Messrs Somerset Ryckmans as part of another compromise made on 23 December 2013 to permit the settlement of all the transactions agreed in clause 11 of the 17 December 2013 short minutes of order and contemplated by clauses 4 and 11(a) of the Heads of Agreement to proceed. Clauses 4 and 11(a) of the Heads of Agreement are set out in the Court's principal judgment (at [12] and [17]).
The parties' dispute related to the interpretation of clause 4 of the Heads of Agreement. This clause permitted the amount of the "first payment" to Mr Tony Arida as defined to be calculated by having deducted from the agreed value (as defined) of the properties in the parties' joint venture, "25% of the debt owed by any of the plaintiff, the first to third defendants to the following financial institutions as at 30 June 2005 that was secured by the Properties including but not limited to [certain named financial institutions]". The apparent commercial objective of this clause was to permit Sid, Joseph and George Arida to deduct Mr Tony Arida's share of the liabilities of their property joint venture. This clause means that Mr Tony Arida would only receive his 25 per cent share of the net value of these properties after the satisfaction of all liabilities associated with the property of joint venture. But for this clause to work fairly and efficiently from Mr Tony Arida's perspective (together with clause 11(b) and (c) of the Heads of Agreement - by which the defendants would obtain debt releases for and indemnify Mr Tony Arida against any joint venture debt obligations), it was important that Mr Tony Arida be able to verify that all liabilities associated with the property joint venture were being deducted from the agreed value in the calculation of the first payment.
On 23 December 2013 Mr Tony Arida disputed that one of the debts (an Citibank Loan Facility xxxxxx901) that the defendants sought to deduct from the Agreed Value under Heads of Agreement, clause 4, was (i) a debt owed at 30 June 2005, (ii) that was secured by one or more of the properties set out in the schedule to the Heads of Agreement. It was not in issue that the amount of the disputed facility as at June 2005 was $799,933.37, so that Mr Tony Arida's 25 per cent share of this facility as at that date was $199,983.33. Because Mr Tony Arida alleged this was not a deductible debt, this sum was left by agreement in Somerset Ryckmans trust account when the first payment was made on 24 December 2013, pending resolution of the dispute.
That there was a dispute about this facility is not surprising: the bank's solicitors declared that it could not find the original facility agreement, which "has been misplaced and is not in the security packet in our possession". The defendants claimed that the facility for an $800,000 loan had been signed in or about April 2005 and that Citibank did advance that sum to the defendants secured over joint venture properties that same month. The defendants not unreasonably assumed that, as they were paying out this facility they were "not in the habit of paying banks on non existent loans", contending that the plaintiff should not be disputing this amount was deductible from the Agreed Value.
The defendants argued that the plaintiff's concession at trial showed that the plaintiff's case was always unarguable and that the plaintiff was bound to lose and should have conceded earlier. The defendants relied on McHugh J's well known statement of relevant principle in relation to the awarding of costs where there has not been a hearing on the merits in Re Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs; Ex Parte Lai Qin <case>; [(1997) 186 CLR 622] ("Lai Qin") at 624 that: the court will usually make no order as to costs unless it can be seen that either one party has simply capitulated, because the other was certain to succeed, or because one party has behaved so unreasonably that the other should have the costs of the action.
Here the defendants can demonstrate neither of the conditions in Lai Qin which would displace the usual result that each party should bear its own costs. Whilst there was ultimately no issue that the Citibank facility was owed as at 30 June 2005, that was established by a bank statement that really only gained special prominence in the served evidentiary materials when attached to an affidavit served on the eve of the hearing - even though it may be accepted that the bank statement was available earlier. In my view it was not unreasonable of Mr Tony Arida to demand strict proof of these facilities, before accepting the quantum of the first payment. His lawyers casting a suspicious eye over what was less than perfect loan documentation, to ensure that the best obtainable evidence was made available was not unreasonable in the circumstances.
Moreover, it cannot be said that Mr Tony Arida was bound to lose the Citibank Motion. He was arguing a point of construction that the words in the Heads of Agreement clause 4 "the debt owed by any of the plaintiff, the first to third defendants"...meant that the relevant debt obligation sought to be deducted must be owed by all three defendants; the words after the comma must be read conjunctively. The relevant bank statement only refers to two of the three defendants. In my judgment this point was arguable and Mr Tony Arida was not bound to lose it.
In the circumstances the appropriate order is that each party bear its own costs of the Citibank Motion.

Conclusions and Orders
The Court has determined the three remaining issues in these proceedings. No interest is payable to the vendor on completion of the Church Street contract between, 24 December 2013, the settlement date of that contract as set by the Heads of Agreement, and the actual settlement date of that contract on 24 January 2014. The Court sees no reason to vary the usual order that costs follow the event in relation to the Interest Motion issues determined on 4 April 2014. And each party must bear his own costs of the Citibank proceedings. 
Orders must also be made to deal with the funds set aside on the settlement of the Church Street contract on 24 January 2014. Therefore the orders of the Court will be as follows: 
Order that the sum of $479,862.82 held by the trustees for sale be paid to the plaintiff, Mr Tony Arida without any deduction on account of interest accrued up to the settlement of and under clause 5(c) of the Church Street contract as defined in Arida versus Arida  <case> for the period 24 December 2013 to 24 January 2014; 
Order that the first, second and third defendants pay the plaintiff's costs of the defendants' 5 March 2014 motion in proceedings 2011/109699; 
Make no order as to costs of the defendants' motion in proceedings /266736 to the intent that each party will bear his own costs of those proceedings.

Adjourn both proceedings (2011/109699)(2010/266736) for mention before the
Registrar in Equity at 9am on Tuesday, 30 September 2014.

Stay order 1 until 5pm on Tuesday 20 May 2014.

Reserve for further consideration, if required, the question of whether any interest is claimable by Mr Tony Arida on the sum of $479,862.82 referred to in order (1), and direct that Mr Tony Arida serve by 5pm on Thursday, 15
May 2014 any written submission (of no more than 2 pages) he wishes to advance as to the basis of any claim for interest on the said sum of $479,862.82.

If no submission is served pursuant to order (6) then the Court will note in chambers that no such claim is made.

If a submission is served in accordance with direction (6), the defendants may serve any written submission (of no more than 2 pages) in reply by 5pm on
Tuesday, 20 May 2014.

The parties will notify the Court in their submissions whether they will require an oral hearing of any interest issue or whether the parties are content for the Court to determine any such issue in chambers.
 * * * 
