

Philip Karadaghian versus Big Beat (Australia) Pty Ltd [2014] NSWSC 496 (30
April 2014) 
Last Updated: 1 May 2014 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Philip Karadaghian versus Big Beat (Australia) Pty Ltd  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): February 2013, 12-13 June 2013, 25 July 2013, 22 November 2013  
Decision Date: April 2014  
Before: 
Rothman J  
Decision:
Prayer 5 of the Motion, notice of which was filed on 27 September 2012, dismissed; 
Prayers 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the Motion, notice of which was filed on 27 September 2012, adjourned to a date to be fixed; 
The first defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of and incidental to the motion, except those costs solely referable to an appointment with and the report of Professor Mattick, which costs will await the outcome of those particular prayers for relief. 
Liberty to apply on 2 days' notice.
 
Catchwords: 
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - withdrawal of admissions and amendment of pleadings - principle to be applied - admission probably correct - irremediable prejudice  
JUDGMENT
HIS HONOUR: The first defendant in these proceedings, Big Beat (Australia) Pty Ltd (Big Beat), seeks leave of the Court to withdraw certain admissions made in pleadings. It is necessary to describe the substantive proceedings and the facts giving rise to the original admission. 
Philip Karadaghian sues Big Beat, largely in negligence, arising from an assault on 20 October 2007. The assault is alleged to have occurred in circumstances where Big Beat, being the owner and occupier of premises known as Home Nightclub, engaged security services, an employee or agent or subcontractor of which assaulted the plaintiff. 
The plaintiff commenced proceedings by the filing of a Statement of Claim on or about 22 October 2010 naming Big Beat as the first defendant and Ambiant Pty Ltd (Ambiant) as the second defendant. The proceedings were initially filed in the District Court of New South Wales and transferred to this Court in August 2011. 
On 2 May 2011, Big Beat filed a defence admitting that at all material times, and in particular relevant to the incident on 20 October 2007, it made arrangements for the provision of security services at Home Nightclub. The first defendant, Big Beat, also admitted that they contracted with Ambiant for Ambiant to provide security services and security personnel to the Home Nightclub. 
On 31 May 2011, Ambiant filed a defence admitting that they were contracted to provide security services on the relevant date. Ambiant was not insured or licensed under the [Security Industry Act 1997](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sia1997255/) as at 20 October 2007. 
It is appropriate to recite that the original Statement of Claim was filed approximately two years after the plaintiff's solicitor, Gregory Masselos of Steve Masselos & Co, had written to Big Beat seeking particulars of the identities of the occupier of Home Nightclub and the entity responsible for the provision of security services on the relevant date. In a letter dated 25 November 2008, Big Beat, over the signature of its Financial Controller, Edward Waterson, responded to the earlier letter from the plaintiff's solicitor to the effect that the relevant security provider was Ambiant. It was on the basis of this representation that Ambiant was named as the second defendant and the pleadings were framed asserting, as fact, that which had been admitted in the letter of 25 November 2008. 
In or about June 2012, Big Beat formed the view that the admission should not have been made and that the contract for security services was with Victor Moraitis and/or another company, Southland Security and Protection Pty Ltd (now in liquidation) (Southland). On 27 September 2012, Big Beat filed and served an amended notice of motion seeking leave to withdraw the admission in paragraph 5 of its Defence of 2 May 2011, pursuant to r 12.6 of the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/). That motion also sought leave to amend the Defence regarding the security entity contracted on the relevant date. 
Apart from the procedural issues mentioned above, evidence has been adduced relating to the manner in which the admission was originally made and what now purports to be a different scenario to that to which Big Beat and Ambiant admitted. It is necessary to deal with that evidence. 
Before doing so, it is necessary to stress that which may be obvious from the foregoing, namely, that the admission as to the identity of the security contractor was first made by letter dated 25 November 2008, some two years prior to the filing of the Statement of Claim. Big Beat then reiterated the admission when it filed its Defence on 2 May 2011. Ambiant also admitted that fact. 
It is only Big Beat that seeks to withdraw the admission. Ambiant, which has admitted the same facts, does not seek to withdraw its admission. Ambiant, it is reiterated, is said to be the contracting party. 
There are two essential circumstances which require acknowledgment, before detailing some of the evidence that had been adduced. First, Mr Simon Page was a Director of Big Beat and was the Principal Director of Big Beat. It was Mr Page who, it seems, was the person responsible for arranging contracts in relation to security at Home Nightclub. Mr Page suffered a head injury on 2 May 2010 which has arguably rendered him incompetent to give evidence. Nevertheless, Mr Page was the Principal Director (and competent) on 25 November 2008 when Big Beat first admitted the identity of the security provider at Home Nightclub. 
Mr Waterhouse, by affidavit sworn 20 November 2012, attests to the process he recalls following in order to answer the letter from Steve Masselos & Co dated 5 November 2008. It is noteworthy that Mr Waterhouse does not attest to the proposition that he did not discuss the matter with Mr Page. Nor does he deny that he received instructions from Mr Page as to the answer to be given. 
The second factual aspect to which reference must be made, before dealing with the evidence before the Court, is that Victor Moraitis was the director of a number of companies including Ambiant (at least at some stage), Southland and PGP Security. Mr Moraitis has dealt with Mr Page in the period since his injury and disagrees with the assessment of Mr Page's wife (and the neurologist, occupational therapist and speech pathologist reports currently before the Court) as to his ability to communicate and/or give evidence, even if only by affidavit. 
I have no doubt that Mr Waterson had authority to make the admission in the letter of 25 November 2008. There can be no doubt that solicitors acting on behalf of Big Beat had the authority to make the admission in the Defence filed in the proceedings. 
The Evidence
The Court received evidence dealing with the alleged facts as to the identity of the supplier of security services at the relevant time and place. That evidence must be received in the context that Ambiant continues to maintain that it was the security provider contracted to Big Beat at the relevant time and place. 
I deal first, although the evidence was adduced later in time, with the testimony of Mr Victor Moraitis. As earlier stated, he was a Director of Ambiant as at 20 October 2007. He instructed his solicitors to file Ambiant's Defence in the proceedings now before the Court. Therefore, he was responsible for the admission to which Ambiant still adheres. 
By affidavit affirmed 2 November 2011, Mr Moraitis confirmed that Ambiant was the relevant security provider. He also attested to the existence of an incident report relating to the plaintiff's assault, recorded in the security diary kept by Ambiant. 
His oral evidence was to a slightly different effect. He gave evidence as to the establishment of Ambiant by two persons, including himself, with the stated intention that it would provide security services to Home Nightclub. It was intended to supersede Southland as the provider of security services. 
His oral testimony was to the effect that Ambiant commenced providing security services to Home Nightclub in mid-2007. 
His evidence was to the following effect. Mr Moraitis met with Mr Page at least weekly and discussed security services. Mr Moraitis told Mr Page of the existence of Ambiant at or about the time he set up the company. As at 30 June 2007, Mr Page was aware that the business of Ambiant had started to provide security and the company had been brought to Mr Page's attention on more than half-a-dozen occasions as at 20 October 2007. 
Mr Moraitis testified that it was Ambiant that employed and paid the security guards (Transcript, 83). 
Arguably inconsistently, Mr Moraitis also attested that Ambiant was conducting its business "in conjunction" with Southland and that the security services were provided by Southland but billed as Ambiant. 
Mr Moraitis was the "Principal", in his view, of both Southland and Ambiant, and a number of other corporate entities. He also testified that Southland's licence was the one displayed at Home Nightclub at 20 October 2007. It was a requirement of the law that the security licence be displayed. 
The plaintiff submits that I should reject Mr Moraitis' evidence at it "defies all credibility". I will deal with that submission after dealing with the other evidence. 
The Court has already dealt, in part, with Mr Waterson's evidence. He testifies as to the manner in which he came to the conclusion necessary for the making of the admission in November 2008 and for adherence to that admission in instructions that gave rise to the filing of the Defence. As earlier stated, Mr Waterson does not state that Mr Page was unavailable at the time in 2008 when the request from the plaintiff was answered. Further, Mr Waterson does not say that he did not speak to Mr Page about that response. 
Mr Waterson does say that the records of Big Beat that he inspected disclose that the invoice for the security services was an invoice from Ambiant, which was paid. However, on a later inspection he believes, from some other records, that PGP Security was the relevant provider. He has no independent recollection of the identity of the security provider and was not privy to the terms of the security contracts. 
Mrs Page testified as to the fact that Mr Page dealt with security arrangements exclusively on behalf of Big Beat. She has no direct knowledge of any arrangements made with Ambiant, Southland, or PGP Security. However, Mrs Page testified that she gave instructions to Mr Waterson that Ambiant were the security provider for the purposes of the pleadings, not the earlier letter. She does not testify that Mr Page did not give such instructions. 
Mrs Page was aware, from conversations, that Mr Moraitis provided security services via corporate entities rather than in his personal capacity. In particular, Mrs Page was unaware whether Mr Page had contracted Ambiant to provide security services on 20 October 2007, but did recall seeing a master licence of "PGP Southland" in the security room at the Nightclub and, at a later time, for Southland. Further, while Mrs Page was aware of "PGP" and/or "Southland", she was unable to locate any invoices for Southland. Her knowledge of Southland seems to be confined to seeing its master security licence, although the date it was seen is unclear and unknown. The later discovered invoices, although not clear, relate to "PGP Security" but not to "Southland" by name. 
Ms Page (i.e. Sophie Page) worked for Big Beat at Home Nightclub but was not involved in any negotiations with Mr Moraitis concerning security contracts. Her affidavit attests to recalling Southland's security licence displayed at the Home Nightclub prior to 2007. She could not recall ever seeing a licence for PGP, otherwise known as Paramount Global Protection, or for Ambiant. She accepted that she had no recollection or independent recollection of whose security licence was being displayed at a time before January 2008. 
Mr Stamatakis was one of the security guards at Home Nightclub and said he was employed by Ambiant on the night in question. He testified that Ambiant paid his wages in 2007 but could not specifically recall whether that included 20 October 2007 because of the passage of time. Likewise, he could not recall the master licence that was being displayed at the Nightclub. 
Mr Jon Dupre gave evidence. Mr Dupre was the licensee nominated on the master security licence held by Southland as at 20 October 2007. 
Mr Dupre with Mr Gerald Gleeson, Mr Moraitis and Mr Markowski formed Southland Security and Protection Pty Ltd in December 2006. The company obtained a master licence under which, initially, Mr Markowski was the nominated licensee. 
The venture was not successful. Mr Moraitis and Mr Markowski resigned from the board of the company and as Directors on 30 June 2007, or effective as that date. Mr Dupre wrote to the Security Licensing and Enforcement Directorate of the New South Wales Police Force on 11 July 2007 substituting his own name for that of Mr Markowski as the master licence holder and doing so on the ground that Mr Markowski had resigned from Southland. Mr Dupre did not inform ASIC as soon as he should have, but I accept his evidence that the failure to notify ASIC was an oversight. 
Mr Dupre testified that Mr Moraitis had no further business dealings with Southland after 30 June 2007 and that Southland never provided security services to Big Beat after 30 June 2007. In particular, Mr Dupre testified that Southland was not providing security services at the Home Nightclub on 20 October 2007. Mr Dupre held, in his possession, the master licence for Southland as at 20 October 2007 and it was never (i.e. after 30 June 2007) displayed at the Home Nightclub, which premises he had never attended. 
Importantly, from the prospect of prejudice, Mr Gleeson, his business partner, who, according to Mr Dupre would have corroborated his evidence, passed away in February 2011 and the business records, that, according to Mr Dupre would also have corroborated his evidence, were destroyed in July and December 2010. 
It is unnecessary for me to come to any final conclusion on credibility. The evidence can be reconciled. If it were necessary to state a preference, I would clearly prefer the evidence of Mr Dupre over that of Mr Mortaitis. Mr Dupre's evidence was corroborated by independent contemporaneous records. 
Nevertheless, the evidence is reconcilable. It seems that Mr Page and Mr Moraitis had meetings with each other about the provision of security services, during which discussions agreement was reached. It also seems that Mr Moraitis paid little or no regard to the separation of the corporate entities with which he was associated, or was once associated, or the proper identification of the entity on behalf of whom he was acting. To reiterate the somewhat trite proposition of the former Lord Chancellor, Edward Thurlow, corporations have neither bodies to be punished nor souls to be condemned. They act through individuals. 
The evidence establishes that Mr Page and Mr Moraitis concluded an agreement for the provision of security services. Mr Page was acting on behalf of Big Beat. The evidence is ambivalent as to the entity on behalf of whom Mr Moraitis was acting. It may be the identity of the security provider was a matter left to the discretion of Mr Moraitis. Nevertheless, on the evidence before the Court, at this juncture, Mr Mortaitis was not in a position to agree on behalf of Southland to provide security services and the security services were not provided by Southland. 
On the balance of probabilities, the evidence of Mr Stamatakis is accurate. It is most likely that he provided security services on 20 October 2007 as an employee of Ambiant. 
The importance of that finding is that Ambiant was not a licensed provider of security services under the [Security Industry Act 1997](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sia1997255/) at the time that the plaintiff suffered his injury. Ambiant was deregistered on 6 October 2010. Its registration was reinstated by the Court on the application of the plaintiff. The allegation of negligence against Big Beat includes a substantial allegation that Big Beat was negligent in outsourcing its security services to an entity that was not licensed. 
There is no evidence that Mr Moraitis is, himself, the holder of a master licence. Even if Big Beat agreed with Mr Moraitis that he, through one or another entity, would provide security services, without ensuring that the services were to be provided by a holder of a master licence, Big Beat would have similar, but not identical, difficulties with an allegation of negligence. 
Nevertheless, the Court finds, on the balance of probabilities, that Ambiant was the provider of security services and that Mr Moraitis was negotiating those security services on behalf of Ambiant, which employed the security guards. The Court is not in a position to find that the foregoing arrangement has been disproved or that the foregoing arrangement is contrary to the facts, or even the arguable facts, arising from the evidence that has been adduced. At best, from the perspective of Big Beat, it can be said that it is arguable that there is a possible hypothesis inconsistent with that state of affairs. 
Principles on Withdrawal of Admissions 
The [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) (UCPR) at r 12.6 deals with the question of withdrawals. The Rule is in the following terms: "r 12.6 Withdrawal of matter in defence or subsequent pleading 
A party raising any matter in a defence or subsequent pleading may withdraw the matter at any time.

Despite subrule (1), a party may not withdraw any admission, or any other matter that operates for the benefit of another party, except with the consent of the other party or by leave of the court.

A withdrawal under this rule is to be made by filing a notice of withdrawal stating the extent of the withdrawal.

If the withdrawal is by consent, the notice under subrule (3) must be accompanied by a notice from each party whose consent is required by subrule to the effect that the party consents to the admission or other matter being withdrawn in accordance with the notice of withdrawal."
In turn, the Court's exercise of discretion to grant leave to withdraw an admission is informed by the provisions of [s 64](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s64.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) (the Act), which provides the Court with the power to amend any document at any time in the proceedings and, as a consequence, imports the criteria in [s 58](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s58.html) of the Act and, necessarily [s 56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) and [s 57](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s57.html) of the Act. Those provisions are in the following terms: "[s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html)
Overriding purpose 
The overriding purpose of this Act and of rules of court, in their application to civil proceedings, is to facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings.

The court must seek to give effect to the overriding purpose when it exercises any power given to it by this Act or by rules of court and when it interprets any provision of this Act or of any such rule.

A party to civil proceedings is under a duty to assist the court to further the overriding purpose and, to that effect, to participate in the processes of the court and to comply with directions and orders of the court.

Each of the following persons must not, by their conduct, cause a party to civil proceedings to be put in breach of a duty identified in subsection (3): any solicitor or barrister representing the party in the proceedings, any person with a relevant interest in the proceedings commenced by the party.

The court may take into account any failure to comply with subsection (3) or (4) in exercising a discretion with respect to costs.

For the purposes of this section, a person has a relevant interest in civil proceedings if the person: provides financial assistance or other assistance to any party to the proceedings, and exercises any direct or indirect control, or any influence, over the conduct of the proceedings or the conduct of a party in respect of the proceedings.
 [s 57](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s57.html) Objects of case management 
For the purpose of furthering the overriding purpose referred to in [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) , proceedings in any court are to be managed having regard to the following objects: the just determination of the proceedings, the efficient disposal of the business of the court, the efficient use of available judicial and administrative resources, the timely disposal of the proceedings, and all other proceedings in the court, at a cost affordable by the respective parties.

This Act and any rules of court are to be so construed and applied, and the practice and procedure of the courts are to be so regulated, as best to ensure the attainment of the objects referred to in subsection (1).
 s 58 Court to follow dictates of justice 
In deciding: whether to make any order or direction for the management of proceedings, including: any order for the amendment of a document, and any order granting an adjournment or stay of proceedings, and any other order of a procedural nature, and any direction under Division 2, and the terms in which any such order or direction is to be made, the court must seek to act in accordance with the dictates of justice.

For the purpose of determining what are the dictates of justice in a particular case, the court: must have regard to the provisions of sections 56 and 57, and may have regard to the following matters to the extent to which it considers them relevant: the degree of difficulty or complexity to which the issues in the proceedings give rise, the degree of expedition with which the respective parties have approached the proceedings, including the degree to which they have been timely in their interlocutory activities, the degree to which any lack of expedition in approaching the proceedings has arisen from circumstances beyond the control of the respective parties, the degree to which the respective parties have fulfilled their duties under section 56 (3), the use that any party has made, or could have made, of any opportunity that has been available to the party in the course of the proceedings, whether under rules of court, the practice of the court or any direction of a procedural nature given in the proceedings, the degree of injustice that would be suffered by the respective parties as a consequence of any order or direction, such other matters as the court considers relevant in the circumstances of the case.
 s 64 Amendment of documents generally 
At any stage of proceedings, the court may order: that any document in the proceedings be amended, or that leave be granted to a party to amend any document in the proceedings.

Subject to section 58, all necessary amendments are to be made for the purpose of determining the real questions raised by or otherwise depending on the proceedings, correcting any defect or error in the proceedings and avoiding multiplicity of proceedings.

An order under this section may be made even if the amendment would have the effect of adding or substituting a cause of action that has arisen after the commencement of the proceedings but, in that case, the date of commencement of the proceedings, in relation to that cause of action, is, subject to section 65, taken to be the date on which the amendment is made.

If there has been a mistake in the name of a party, this section applies to the person intended to be made a party as if he or she were a party.

This section does not apply to the amendment of a judgment, order or certificate."
The exercise of discretion in allowing the withdrawal of admissions has been the subject of significant authority. As his Honour White J commented: "Admissions made formally and deliberately by a party legally advised should not be permitted to be withdrawn unless the party seeking to withdraw them can point to an error when the admissions were made or a relevant change of circumstance" (SLE Worldwide versus WGB & Ors <case>
His Honour referred to Sangora Holdings Pty Ltd versus Dunstan (unreported, Supreme Court of Western Australia, Full Court, 13 April 1999) to the effect that the withdrawal of an admission in a pleading is a serious matter because from that point onwards the admitted fact ceases to be an issue and the action precedes upon that assumption, which, in its absence, may have resulted in a very different proceeding or a proceeding on a very different basis. Moreover, the longer the period during which the admission has stood, the less readily permission will be granted for its withdrawal. 
Fundamentally, the courts have indicated that the indulgence of granting leave to withdraw an admission may be granted where the applicant can show: * (i) That the admission was made inadvertently; or * (i) * (ii) That the admission was contrary to the established facts. 
As stated by Santow J (as his Honour then was) in Drabsch versus Switzerland General Insurance Company Ltd & Ors (unreported, 16 October 1996, Supreme Court of NSW), where his Honour discussed the principles relating to consent to the withdrawal of particular admissions and said: "I set these principles out as follows:
Where a party under no apparent disability makes a clear and distinct admission, which is accepted by its opponent and acted upon, for reasons of policy and the due conduct of the business of the court, an application to withdraw the admission, especially at appeal, should not be freely granted;
Coopers Brewery Ltd versus Panfida Foods Ltd [(1992) 26 NSWLR 738] per
Rogers CJ Comm D, followed in IOL Petroleum Ltd versus O'Neill per Young J (Young
J, 17 November 1995, unreported) and Apex Pallett Hire Pty Ltd versus Brambles
Holdings Ltd (Supreme Court of Victoria, Full Court, 8 April 1988, unreported), and in that respect not following H Clark (Doncaster) Ltd v
Wilkinson [[1965] Ch 694] at 703.
The question is one for the reviewing judge to consider in the context of each particular appeal, with the general guideline being that the person seeking on a review to withdraw a concession made should provide some good reason why the judge should disturb what was previously common ground or conceded; IOL Petroleum Limited versus O'Neill (supra), in the context of withdrawing a concession made before the Registrar.
Where a court is satisfied that admissions have been made after consideration and advice such as from the parties' expert and after a full opportunity to consider its case and whether the admissions should be made, admissions so made with deliberateness and formality would ordinarily not be permitted to be withdrawn; Coopers Brewery Ltd versus Panfida Foods Ltd (supra) at 745 and 748. Thus a court will not lend its approval to the withdrawal of admissions where, by analogy with the making of amendments, this is actuated by purely tactical reasons; compare Devae Prufcoat Pty Ltd versus Altex Industrial
Paints Ltd (Cole J, 15 March 1989, unreported).
It will usually be appropriate to grant leave to withdraw an admission where it is shown that the admission is contrary to the actual facts. Leave may also be appropriate where circumstances show that the admission was made inadvertently or without due consideration of material matters. Irrespective of whether the admission has or has not been formally made, leave may be refused if the other party has changed its position in reliance upon the admission; H Clark (Doncaster) Ltd versus Wilkinson (supra), in that respect not doubted.
Following Cohen versus McWilliam and Anor [(1995) 38 NSWLR 476], a court is not obliged to give decisive weight to court efficiency, such that a party who wishes to defend its claim is entitled to a hearing on the merits, with cost orders being available as a means of compensating the other party for any costs thereby unnecessarily incurred or not fairly visited on the other party."
The foregoing recitation of principle needs to be understood in the context that his Honour was then dealing with an appeal but, with the necessary changes being made, the principles apply with similar force. Further, the judgment of his Honour was delivered prior to the judgment of the High Court in Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd versus Australian National University  <case>; [(2009) 239 CLR 175], which confirmed the wider considerations necessary, other than the rights of any individual party, mandated by the provisions of the [Civil Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) in order "to facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings" and issues of case management. These involve due consideration to the public interest and the efficient management of courts' resources. Notwithstanding those qualifications, the principles enunciated by Santow J in Drabsch, supra, inform the exercise of the Court's jurisdiction and power. 
Conclusion
There are two fundamental issues with which the Court must deal in determining whether or not to grant leave to withdraw the admissions made. A third issue emerges being the delay in the application from the time when the admission was first made or between now and the time when the facts became known to the applicant. 
Nevertheless, it seems that the issue of delay need not be one that requires discussion, given the view the Court, as presently constituted, has as to the two fundamental issues. Those issues are whether the admission was inadvertently made and whether the admission was contrary to the established facts. 
The admission was a formal and deliberate admission made initially in correspondence and later in pleadings. The admission was made at a time when the individual responsible for contracting between Big Beat and the providers of security services was available and active in the management of Big Beat. The officer of Big Beat that made the admissions was a person authorised so to do and made those admissions, at least, after a study of the relevant documentation. 
In the foregoing circumstances, the admission was not made inadvertently or by mistake. The question that then arises is whether the admission was wrong, namely, contrary to established facts. 
As is clear from the findings of fact made earlier in these reasons, Big Beat has failed to satisfy the onus cast upon it to satisfy the Court that the admission made was contrary to established facts. At best, from Big Beat's perspective, there is an arguable possibility that a corporate entity other than Ambiant was the contracting party with Big Beat. Nevertheless, on the evidence before the Court, Ambiant was the employer of the security guards. Ambiant was also a company with which Mr Moraitis was associated. 
As earlier stated, the overwhelming impression is that Mr Moraitis is a person who paid insufficient regard to differentiating between the various corporate entities with which he was associated and paying insufficient regard to identifying precisely the corporate entity on behalf of which he was then acting. The evidence adduced by Big Beat does not satisfy the Court that Ambiant was not the supplier of the security services with which it was utilising and with which it had contracted. 
The foregoing conclusion is made bearing in mind that the balance of probabilities is the requisite burden of proof, but also bearing in mind, in an interlocutory application of this kind, that something short of final acceptance of the truth or accuracy of the evidence to be adduced is required. In other words, if the evidence to be adduced by Big Beat in this area was unequivocal, even though subject to issues of credit, it would seem to me that Big Beat would have satisfied the onus cast upon it. It is not for the Court as presently constituted to determine with finality which of a number of witnesses is to be preferred at trial. 
However, the evidence adduced by Big Beat comes nowhere near that lower requirement. I am not satisfied that the admission, when made or now, was contrary to established fact or facts, if the evidence adduced by Big Beat were to be preferred. 
Lastly, the unavailability of one crucial witness (Mr Gleeson) and the unavailability of a significant amount of documentation points to an irremediable prejudice that would be suffered by Mr Karadaghian, if the admission were withdrawn. Material that has been produced, including earlier invoices in relation to companies other than either Ambiant or Southland; the official records in relation to master licences and ASIC records, including correspondence with ASIC; and the failure to produce or be capable of producing the security licence said to have been displayed at the relevant location on the relevant night; point not only to prejudice but to the likelihood that the admission made was open and probably correct. 
Following the major hearings in relation to these matters, the applicant on the motion (Big Beat) sought leave to re-open because of further documentation that was discovered by it, but had not previously been produced in answer to a subpoena that covered the documents. The foregoing is not intended as a criticism of the answer originally given to the subpoena. 
The additional material points starkly to the failure of Mr Moraitis to differentiate clearly between various corporate entities with which he had an association. It takes the matter little further. 
In the circumstances, the Court refuses leave to withdraw the admission. Little or no attention has been paid to the cross-claim. Different issues arise in relation to it. I will reserve the parties' rights in relation to the cross-claim which may go only to questions of contribution. In the circumstances, the Court makes the following orders:
Prayer 5 of the Motion, notice of which was filed on 27 September 2012, dismissed;
Prayers 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the Motion, notice of which was filed on 27
September 2012, adjourned to a date to be fixed;
The first defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of and incidental to the motion, except those costs solely referable to an appointment with and the report of Professor Mattick, which costs will await the outcome of those particular prayers for relief.
Liberty to apply on 2 days' notice.
 * * * 
