
Thousands of nurses needed in North West hospitals, figures reveal
By Gill Dummigan
Health Correspondent, BBC North West
21 November 2017
 From the section England Share this with Facebook Share this with Twitter Share this with Messenger Share this with Email Share
Nurses
Image caption
Nurse staffing is down nearly 10% at some trusts in the North West
Hospitals across the North West are short of thousands of nurses and consultants, according to NHS figures.
Over 3,200 nurses and 500 consultants are needed by trusts in the area, Freedom of Information requests by BBC North West Tonight have revealed.
NHS bosses said trusts had to "help themselves to find ways of attracting qualified staff".
Estephanie Dunn, regional director for the Royal College of Nursing (RCN), called the figures "concerning".
She said the increased use of unregistered support staff had resulted in "significantly" worse outcomes for patients.
'Shortages in key areas'
Greater Manchester had the highest number of vacancies, with 1,559 nurses and 223 consultants needed.
The figures reveal that one trust - the Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust - is 450 nurses short, equivalent to 9.7% of full staffing.
A trust spokesperson said this was "in line with the lower end of the national average."
Mikhil Jain
Image caption
Dr Mikhil Jain, from Mumbai, India, said he wanted to work in the UK for surgical experience
Greater Manchester Health and Social Care Partnership's Jon Rouse said the "bottom line is that we can't rely on national workforce planning".
"We've got shortages in a whole number of key areas."
He added that it "means getting our act together, using that strong brand, getting out into the market and finding ways of attracting qualified personnel to work here in Greater Manchester".
Across Lancashire and Cumbria, there is a shortage of 696 nurses, 40 junior doctors and 150 consultants.
Presentational grey line
Nursing vacancies in the North West
Central Manchester University Hospitals Foundation Trust: 449.6
University Hospital of South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust: 288.5
East Lancashire Hospitals NHS Trust: 213
Stockport NHS Foundation Trust: 195
Pennine Acute Hospitals NHS Trust: 163
Presentational grey line
Recruiting Indian doctors
The latest NHS figures, taken between January and March 2017, show the North West has the third highest number of doctor vacancies in England.
In response to the crisis, many hospital trusts have been getting increasingly creative in their search for staff.
Wrightington, Wigan and Leigh Foundation Trust has begun recruiting hundreds of doctors from India and Pakistan through a mixture of contacts and social media.
The medics are already qualified, but will get extra training and experience while the hospitals get the staff they need.
Dr Mikhil Jain, from Mumbai, India, said he came to the UK for surgical experience.
"It's also just to enjoy some quality of life here. I'm massively interested in football as well," Dr Jain added.
Student nurses
Image caption
One hospital trust is running a scheme to train local nurses
The same trust is also is also running a scheme to train - and retain - local nurses.
Once qualified, they are then invited to come and work for the trust, with the eventual plan to develop an on-site academy in Wigan.
'Pipeline of nurses'
Assistant Director of Nursing, Amanda Cheesman, said the scheme began after some European nurses started to return home following the Brexit referendum.
"We want to recruit new talent into the organisation but we want to retain it as well and that's what we're trying to do. To invest that loyalty into the organisation."
She added: "Hopefully by 2020, we're going to have a lovely pipeline of nurses coming through some of our initiatives to get where we want to be."
Student nurses Molly Evans and Jane Woodall went straight from school to the Royal Albert Edward Infirmary in Wigan.
After two years' training at the hospital, and at the local college, they'll go to university, before returning to Wigan to work.
"We're all going to go on to become nurses... we've been told we've got a guaranteed job by the age of 21. So it's really good."
