
Inside a pro-Russia propaganda machine in Ukraine
By Andrei Soshnikov
BBC Russian
13 November 2017
Share this with Facebook Share this with Twitter Share this with Messenger Share this with Email Share
A picture of four men dressed in camouflage and holding gunsImage copyrightTWITTER/@OAPB6UPDVTOTNTR
Image caption
Pro-Ukrainian, neo-Nazi or just actors in in a "fake news" video?
A Russian "troll factory" in St Petersburg is working with the self-styled "Donetsk People's Republic" in eastern Ukraine to produce extreme propaganda videos that aim to discredit pro-Ukrainian elements and stir up the conflict in the region, BBC Russian has learned.
A series of fake news videos produced by a group called the Russian Liberation Movement have emerged on YouTube dating from 23 August.
The videos show extremist groups with hidden faces, distorted voices and posing with weapons.
The fighters identify themselves with a confusing array of labels. At times they describe themselves as pro-Russian rebels in Ukraine, as pro-Ukrainian rebels in Russia and even as fighters from so-called Islamic State - even though they have also made videos potentially deeply offensive to Muslims.
Screenshots from some of the videos created by the 
Image caption
Screenshots from some of the videos created by the "Russian Liberation Movement"
'The Fatherland'
In one of these videos, six armed men are draped in a neo-Nazi flag.
They appear to be extreme Russian anti-government nationalists, helping Ukrainians to fight what they describe as "Putin's bloody regime" in Eastern Ukraine and claim they are "turning their gaze towards the Fatherland".
In another video, the Russian Liberation Movement claims responsibility for a suspected arson attack in the Russian city of Rostov, saying it was their "first successful attempt at a terrorist act on Russian soil". The suspected arson attack did indeed happen - one person was killed and more than 100 houses were damaged - but there's no indication that it was linked to political groups or terrorism.
In later videos, the militants explain how to seize a building and use hand grenades. They also hoist a pig's head on to a Koran and send "greetings" to Chechen President Ramzan Kadyrov.
But BBC Russian has discovered a number of similarities between characters and locations in the videos and people and backgrounds in other online films which aim to recruit men to defend the "Donetsk People's Republic" - indicating that the videos are fakes produced by anti-Ukraine fighters operating in the region.
You might also be interested in:
'Russian trolls' promoted California independence
Facebook detects 'Russian-funded' campaign
Russia rejects new Donetsk rebel 'state'
Follow BBC Trending on Facebook
Earlier this year pro-Russian fighters in Donetsk declared a breakaway republic called Malorossiya, although Moscow did not recognise the split.
Western governments accuse Russia of helping the rebels in the region with regular troops and heavy weapons. Despite strong evidence to the contrary, Moscow denies that, while admitting that Russian "volunteers" are helping the rebels.
Ukraine map - rebel-held territory
