

Jeoglam P/L t/as Grafton Nursing Home versus Dennis [1996] NSWSC 221 (24 June )

JEOGLAM P/L T/as GRAFTON NURSING HOME versus DENNIS /92; CL NR600070/90 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE, SHELLER, COLE JJA 
CATCHWORDS: PERSONAL INJURY - injury during course of employment - duty of care of employer - whether risk of injury foreseeable - duty to provide safe system of work - negligence 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:Allowed 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: The defendant, Jeoglam Pty Limited trading as Grafton Nursing Home, appeals against a judgment of Mr Justice Grove of 11 September 1992 in favour of the plaintiff/respondent, Ms Rebecca Ann Dennis.

The respondent brought this action to recover damages for injuries she sustained at about 2.30am on 22 July 1984 in the course of her employment by the appellant. The respondent was permanently employed as a nursing aide in the Grafton Nursing Home where there were between 60 and 70 geriatric patients requiring full-time care. The respondent was employed on a part-time basis on the night shift on Saturday and Sunday nights between 11pm and 7am.

One of the patients on the night in question was Mr Biffen, who was about 70 years old. He apparently weighed something in the order of 18 stone. During the night Mr Biffen was checked as part of the ordinary routine. When he was checked it was discovered that he had urinated in his bed. Mr Biffen was a man who was known to be likely to manifest violence. He was apparently regarded as one of the three or four patients most likely to give trouble. When he woke up on being checked he was described as being grumpy. The respondent followed what was said to be the only instruction given for such circumstances, which was to leave him for awhile in the hope that he would calm down. Sister
O'Meally, the sister in charge, and Nurse McLean were also on duty on the night in question.

The respondent and Nurse McLean returned to Mr Biffen after checking other patients and got him into a seated position. The respondent was standing in front of Mr Biffen with her legs between his, attempting to remove his night attire which consisted of a wet pyjama coat which was placed on back to front.
At that point Mr Biffen lashed out with his right arm and struck the respondent. Mr Justice Grove, in his judgment, described this as an unforewarned aggressive action by the patient. As a result of this, the respondent suffered injury in respect of which she made this claim.

When his Honour came to deal with the issue of liability, he put aside, for reasons which have not been challenged on this appeal, expert evidence that had been given in the trial. He approached the issue of negligence on the basis that, it was well known to the appellant and ought to have been known to those responsible for the conduct of the home that there were persons, including this particular patient, who had the potential for attacking and doing injury to its employees.

His Honour said that with that knowledge and the foresight that such incidents might occur, it seemed plain that the duty of reasonable care of the employer extended to maintaining and instituting a reasonably safe system of work and to instructing and training its employees in connection with coping with such incidents. His Honour then said: "It was manifestly insufficient response to the perceived danger in my view, to give no further instruction than that if such patients became violent, to leave them alone until they calmed down.

I am further of the view that there were reasonably practicable steps available to prevent this accident. It is not necessary for me to specify any precise steps. It seems to me, however, that, having regard to the description of the size of the patient the attitude of the employer in leaving three women only to cope with these 60 or 70 patients without the availability of male strength was unreasonable. A practical way of doing something to prevent this sort of accident would be to engage a wardsman or male nurse. It is not a denial of equality of men and women to recognise that they are different. Nor do I think I need specify explicit routines to be satisfied in the general sense that training is available to enable women and others to learn how to cope with attacks upon them. No effort seems to have been made whatsoever to deal with this foreseeable danger. The impression I gained from Sister
Richards, who presently is the Director of Nursing, is that she well recognized the risk involved but has not considered that it might not be inevitable. In this case the risk has fallen due and I consider the plaintiff's injury arose out of breach of duty of care on the part of the defendant. Accordingly, there will be a verdict in her favour." 
It is this passage in his Honour's judgment which the appellant attacks in the various grounds of appeal upon which it now relies in its amended notice of appeal.

His Honour referred to there being no further instruction than, if the patients became violent, to leave them alone until they calmed down. He went on to say that there were reasonably practicable steps available to prevent the accident. His Honour suggested that a practical way of doing this would be to engage a wardsman or male nurses. There was no evidence before his Honour of any other instruction that could or might have been given which would have acted in a way likely to have prevented this particular accident, nor was there any evidence to suggest that if a wardsman or male nurse had been engaged, that would have made any difference in the circumstances of this accident.

There are two ways in which the question of preventability in this case might have been approached. One would be to suggest that there was some commonsense method that might have been adopted by the defendant to prevent this accident.
The alternative was to suggest that the defendant might have introduced into the system of work something which could be identified and which would have acted to prevent this accident. However, if the second approach is to be adopted, it is absolutely essential that evidence be led to satisfy the Court of such an available method of dealing with the problem. In this case there was no such evidence.

Mr Murray of Queens Counsel, in the course of his submissions, pointed out that the instructions given were limited as his Honour described them. He suggested that obvious instructions might have been given, that extra help might have been employed, that a male nurse might have been employed, but it is not possible, in my opinion, for a Court to speculate about such matters in the absence of evidence. As his Honour said in the course of his judgment, what occurred here was the result of unforewarned aggressive action.

In my opinion, there is nothing to suggest that an appropriate safe system of work required that any further instruction be given or that a male wardsman be employed. Nor is there anything to suggest that if either of those courses had been followed, it would have made any difference on the night in question.

Accordingly, in my opinion, on the evidence before his Honour, there was no basis upon which his Honour could conclude that the appellant was negligent.
For these reasons, in my opinion, the appeal must be allowed. The consequence of that is that the following orders should be made:
Appeal allowed;
Set aside the judgment of Mr Justice Grove of 11 September 1992;
In lieu thereof, judgment for the defendant;
The plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs of the action;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act.

CLARKE JA: I agree.

COLE JA: I also agree.

CLARKE JA: The orders of the Court will be as Mr Justice Sheller has announced.
 * * * 
