

R versus Jones and Ors (No 9) [2007] NSWSC 1160 (8 June 2007) 
Last Updated: 22 October 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: R versus Jones & Ors (No 9) <case>  
JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 2006/2009  
HEARING DATE{S):  
JUDGMENT DATE: 8 June 2007  
PARTIES: 
Regina 
Adam Jones  
JUDGMENT OF: Buddin J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
J Pickering (Crown) 
D Price (Adam Jones) (Accused)  
SOLICITORS: 
S Kavanagh (Solicitor for Director of Public Prosecutions) 
Conaghan Hunter P/L (Adam Jones)  
CATCHWORDS: 
Application to amend indictment - duplicity - application for directed verdict - availability of alternative verdict of accessory after the fact to manslaughter  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/)  
CASES CITED: 
R versus Cameron [[1983] 2 NSWLR 66] 
R versus Carter and Savage [(1990) 47 A Crim R 55] 
R versus Hurley & Murray <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>  
DECISION: 
Leave granted.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION  
BUDDIN J  
Friday 8 June 2007  /2009 - Regina versus Adam JONES  /2010 - Regina versus Samuel JONES  /2011 - Regina versus Elizabeth Jean JONES  /2012 - Regina versus Lydia JONES  /2007 - Regina versus Adam Samuel JONES  
JUDGMENT - (No 9) Matters arising at end of the Crown case concerning counts alleged against Lydia Jones  HIS HONOUR: At the end of the Crown case, a number of issues arose concerning the form of the indictment in relation to the counts involving
Lydia Jones. The accused Adam Samuel Jones, Adam Jones, Samuel Jones and
Elizabeth Jean Jones are each charged with the murder of William Smith. It is alleged that each was a party to, and participated in, a joint criminal enterprise the purpose of which was to attack the deceased with either an intention to kill or to inflict grievous bodily harm upon him.  They are also each charged with having wounded Noah Smith Snr with intent to kill him. The Crown case is that each of the four accused was party to, and participated in, a joint criminal enterprise which had that purpose. In the alternative to that charge, each of them is also charged with wounding Noah
Smith Snr with the intention of inflicting grievous bodily harm upon him.  The accused Lydia Jones is charged with being an accessory after the fact to these offences. Count 2 in the indictment is in the following terms:  
On 9 October 2005 at Kangy Angy in the State of New South Wales Adam Samuel
Jones, Adam Jones, Samuel Jones and Elizabeth Jean Jones did murder William
Smith and that Lydia Jones knowing the said Adam Samuel Jones, Adam Jones,
Samuel Jones and Elizabeth Jean Jones to have committed the said serious indictable offence of murder of William Smith on 9 October 2005 at Kangy Angy in the state of New South Wales, did assist, maintain, harbour or receive the said Adam Samuel Jones, Adam Jones, Samuel Jones and Elizabeth Jean Jones.  Counts 5 and 6 are in the following terms:  
Count 5: 
On 9 October 2005 at Kangy Angy in the State of New South Wales Adam Samuel
Jones, Adam Jones, Samuel Jones and Elizabeth Jean Jones did wound Noah Henry
Smith with intent to murder the said Noah Henry Smith and that Lydia Jones knowing the said Adam Samuel Jones, Adam Jones, Samuel Jones and Elizabeth
Jean Jones to have committed the said serious indictable offence of wounding with intent to murder Noah Henry Smith on 9 October 2005 at Kangy Angy in the
State of New South Wales, did assist, maintain, harbour or receive the said
Adam Samuel Jones, Adam Jones, Samuel Jones and Elizabeth Jean Jones.  
Count 6: 
On 9 October 2005 at Kangy Angy in the State of New South Wales Adam Samuel
Jones, Adam Jones, Samuel Jones and Elizabeth Jean Jones did maliciously wound
Noah Henry Smith with intent to do grievous bodily harm to the said Noah Henry
Smith and that Lydia Jones knowing the said Adam Samuel Jones, Adam Jones,
Samuel Jones and Elizabeth Jean Jones to have committed the said serious indictable offence of maliciously wounding Noah Henry Smith with intent to do grievous bodily harm to the said Noah Henry Smith on 9 October 2005 at Kangy
Angy in the State of New South Wales, did assist, maintain, harbour or receive the said Adam Samuel Jones, Adam Jones, Samuel Jones and Elizabeth Jean Jones.  During the course of debate the Crown Prosecutor (who was not, I was informed, responsible for having drafted the indictment) acknowledged that each of those counts was, given the form in which they were drafted, duplicitous. The Crown indicated, when in effect put to an election, that he would seek leave to delete the names of the accused Adam Jones, Samuel Jones and Elizabeth Jean Jones wherever their names appeared in those counts. The application was made pursuant to [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s20.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) which provides that an amendment to an indictment may only be made, after it is presented, with the leave of the Court or with the consent of the accused. As it happened all of the accused consented to the amendment. Leave was duly given and the counts as amended, were confined to an allegation that the principal offences had been committed by the accused's husband, Adam Samuel
Jones.  The next issue which arose concerned the sufficiency of the evidence in relation to counts 5 and 6. An essential element of each of those offences, which the Crown must prove beyond reasonable doubt, is that the accused Lydia
Jones knew that Adam Samuel Jones had committed the offence of wounding Noah
Smith Snr with the intention of killing him. There is no direct evidence as to the accused's state of mind in respect of these offences. Nor, in my view, is there any material whatsoever from which an inference could be drawn that she had the requisite knowledge. More fundamentally, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the accused had the slightest inkling that Noah Smith
Snr had even been harmed, let alone wounded. It was for those reasons that I directed the jury to return verdicts of not guilty in relation to those counts. Accordingly, the only remaining count so far as Lydia Jones is concerned, relates to count 2. For abundant caution the accused was re- arraigned and pleaded not guilty to that count in its amended form. The jury was then sworn to try the accused on that count.  That leaves one further matter to be resolved. It is common ground, at least so far as these proceedings are concerned, that if the jury were to acquit
Adam Samuel Jones of murder then it follows that the accused Lydia Jones must be acquitted of being an accessory after the fact to murder. The Crown submitted however that the jury should be informed that it was open to them, in those circumstances, to return a verdict of guilty of being an accessory after the fact to manslaughter.  The principles which are to be applied are uncontroversial. In R v
Winner [(1989) 39 A Crim R 180],
Roden J, with whom Hunt & Allen JJ agreed said:  
It is trite law that quite apart from express statutory provisions, a jury may properly return a verdict of not guilty of the offence charged but guilty of a lesser offence. That is in accordance with what is frequently described as the principle that the greater includes the less. It is, however, subject to an important and stringent limitation. That is that such a verdict may only be returned if each element of the lesser offence of which the accused is convicted, is also an element of the greater offence with which he was charged, and has been alleged against him either expressly or by necessary implication in the indictment. (at 181)  Mr Terracini SC, who argued the point on behalf of the accused, opposed that course being taken. He conceded of course that such an offence was known to the law. His submission was that it could, and should, have been specifically pleaded as an alternative count in the indictment. In other words, he contended that it was not an alternative count that was available for the jury's consideration on this indictment. He submitted that it cannot be said that each element of manslaughter is also an element of murder and that accordingly it is not a true alternative offence. I have some difficulty accepting this submission given that manslaughter has always been regarded as an alternative count to the charge of murder without having to be specifically pleaded in the indictment. Moreover, both Adam Samuel Jones, his client at trial, and Adam Jones, both pleaded guilty to manslaughter even though it was not charged in the indictment.  Be that as it may, it appears that the proposition which Mr Terracini advances is, in any event, directly in the face of long-established authority dating back at least as far as R versus Richards [(1877) 2 QBD 311.] In more recent times there are a number of decisions which also tell against his submission: see R versus Carter and Savage <case>  Although those cases originate from so-called code States which have different statutory schemes dealing with the question of alternative verdicts, there is nothing to suggest that the principles enunciated in those decisions are not of more general application. There is also specific reference in the
NSW Bench Book to the fact that a person charged with being an accessory after the fact to murder may be found guilty of being an accessory after the fact to manslaughter. The decision in R versus Hurley & Murray <case>; [[1967] VR 526] is cited as authority for that proposition. Although I must confess that I was unable to locate support for the proposition in the passages in the decision which are the subject of report, I do not think that the principle has been doubted either in Victoria or in New South Wales: see generally R versus Tevendale <case>; <case>; [[1981] VR 737.]  Mr Terracini referred to a number of authorities which indicate that if the
Crown wishes the jury to consider an alternative verdict in the event that they find that the accused is not guilty of the principal offence, it should do so when opening the case to the jury: see R versus Cameron [[1983] 2 NSWLR ];
R versus Pureau [(1990) 19 NSWLR 372.] The authorities also indicate that, at the very latest, the issue of an alternative verdict must be raised before closing addresses so that the trial judge can then rule on whether or not the delay has caused prejudice to the accused.  As it happens, I adverted to the possibility that it was open to the jury to return a verdict on this alternative basis when ruling on an application for a separate trial made on behalf of the accused Lydia Jones before the jury was empanelled. Accordingly, the parties have been on notice about this possibility since the outset of the trial.  The only prejudice to which Mr Terracini could point was the possibility that the jury may return a verdict which was compromised. I informed Mr
Terracini that I would direct the jury in terms that they must not follow that course.  I am far from satisfied that the accused will be prejudiced in having the alternative verdict go before the jury. Moreover, as the Crown pointed out, the maximum penalty for the offence of accessory after the fact to manslaughter is 5 years imprisonment, whereas the maximum penalty for the offence of accessory after the fact to murder is 25 years.  In any event, the trend of authority makes it plain that if an alternative verdict is open upon the evidence (as it is in the present case), then a trial judge is bound to leave it to the jury's consideration regardless of the attitude of the accused: see generally, for example, R versus King <case>; [(2004) 59 NSWLR 515.]  
LAST UPDATED: 19 October 2007 * * * 
