

Atkinson versus Coady, Commissioner of Police and Betts Matter No 25071/88 [1998] NSWSC 360 (19 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 September 1998 
GEORGE ATKINSON versus BRIAN ANTONY COADY, COMMISSIONER OF POLICE and ROBERT JOHN BETTS /88 June 1998 
Black AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By notice of motion filed on the 23rd of May 1997 various orders are sought on behalf of the Plaintiff in relation to a summons filed on the 30th of August 1989 having been amended pursuant to leave of the 7th of February 1989. The First Defendant entered a submitting appearance and the motion was opposed by counsel for the Second and Third Defendants on the basis that the Amended Summons had been dealt with by Campbell J on the 20th of October 1989 and the minute of orders entered on the 29th of March 1990. Accordingly, it is submitted that no issue survives that judgment. 
The Amended Summons reads as follows:- "The Plaintiff claims:
An Order that the search warrant issued on 11th June 1988 by the first defendant in respect of premises at 40 Northland Road, Bellevue Hill ("the premises") be quashed.
A declaration that the entry upon, search of and seizure of property described in the annexure hereto from the premises by or at the behest of the second and third defendants was without lawful authority.
A declaration that the said entry upon, search of and seizure of the property from the premises is an abuse of process.
An Order that the second and third defendants be restrained from seeking to tender as evidence material obtained by that entry upon, search of and seizure of property from the premises.
Damages.
Costs.
Such other orders as the Court thinks fit." 
There is also annexed to th e Summons a list of ten items of property.

The orders entered upon the Summons read as follows:
The search warrant issued on the 11th of June 1988 by the First Defendant in respect of the premises at 40 Northland Road, Bellevue Hill is quashed.
The Second and Third Defendants are to pay the Plaintiff's costs.

The Judgment of Campbell J was appealed and I have the advantage in these proceedings of the Appeal Book exhibited to the Affidavit of Bradley Hunter
Rowe affirmed on the 4th of March 1998. That Appeal Book contains in addition to the Amended Summons, the affidavit material and a transcript of the proceedings before Campbell J together with Campbell J's judgment.

In his judgment Campbell J having decided that he was going to quash the
Warrant (see AB p.153) turned at p. 154 to "the other orders and declarations sought." He declined to make the declaration sought in paragraph 2 of the
Amended Summons. He also declined to make the declaration sought in paragraph
He then declined to make the order sought in paragraph 4 and in relation to the claim for damages in paragraph 5, he said this "Mr Horler did not press the claim for damages". He then went on to deal with a claim made in argument for the return of the seized goods which he declined to make. He then went on to award the Plaintiff costs.

The transcript of proceedings before Campbell J is silent as to any discussion about the claim for damages. However there are references in the material in the Appeal Book, particularly at pp 18 and 19 and at p 41 to/two passages being excluded from the affidavit of David Purcell Alder, in particular passages in paragraphs 2 and 7 thereof, such passages being capable of having some relevance to the issue of damages.

Annexure "C" to the affidavit of David Alder sworn on the 10th of November which was before me is a letter from Mr Horler QC, counsel who conducted the case on behalf of the Plaintiff before Campbell J. Paragraph 4 of that letter dated the 21st of October 1997 reads as follows:- "During the course of the hearing, I recall Campbell J directing some criticism to the form of the Summons and the orders sought, including a claim for damages. In summary, the exchange between the bench and counsel as I recall it was the Judge's observation that it was inappropriate in a summons in the Administrative Law Division to conduct a claim for damages to Mr
Atkinson's home and chattels." 
Counsel for the Plaintiff before me conceded that some discussion probably took place before Campbell J by reason of the provisions of Rule 4.2 of the
Supreme Court Rules. Whether or not the provisions of that rule were discussed is not for me to say. What is clear, however, is that no cross-appeal was entered on behalf of the Plaintiff in the appeal proceedings relating to
Campbell J's judgment and, in particular, there was no appeal from his
Honour's statement in his Judgment that the claim for damages was not pressed.

The central submission on behalf of the Plaintiff before me was that despite what appears from the judgment of Campbell J and the absence of any appeal by the Plaintiff therefrom the cause of action for damages survived by reason of s. 81 of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). That section provides as follows:- "(1) Where, in beginning or purporting to begin any proceedings or at any stage in the course of or in connection with any proceedings, there is, by reason of anything done or left undone, a failure to comply with the requirements of this Act or of the rules whether in respect of time, place, manner, form or content or in any other respect - the failure shall be treated as an irregularity and shall not nullify the proceedings, or any step taken in the proceedings, or any document, judgment or order in the proceedings; and subject to subsections (2) and (3), the Court may, on terms, set aside wholly or in part the proceedings or any step taken in the proceedings or any document, judgment or order in the proceedings or exercise its powers under this Act and the rules to allow amendments and to make orders dealing with the proceedings generally.

The Court shall not wholly set aside any proceedings or the originating process by which the proceedings were commenced on the ground that the proceedings were required by the rules to be commenced by an originating process other than the one employed .

The Court shall not set aside any proceedings or any step taken in any proceedings or any document, judgment or order in any proceedings on the ground of a failure to which subsection (1) applies on the application of any party unless the application is made within a reasonable time and before the applicant has taken any fresh step after becoming aware of the irregularity." 
In my judgment the section does not have the effect contended for. Insofar as the claim for damages may have been inappropriately commenced in the Amended
Summons under discussion, about which I express no view, the effect of the section would be that it had been validly commenced and accordingly was a valid issue before Campbell J. From the structure of Campbell J's judgment to which I have already referred, and from the clear statement by counsel for the
Plaintiff before Campbell J that the issue of damages was not pressed, it is clear to me that the claim for damages in those proceedings before Campbell J was abandoned and, by necessary implication of the terms of the Judgment, dismissed.

No application prior to the hearing of the Summons before Campbell J had been made for discontinuance of any part of the claims for relief pursuant to Order (2) and it is clear from the case of Flick v. Nash (Court of Appeal, 9
February 1987, unreported) that no application to discontinue that part of the claim could be made once the proceedings had started.

However, on the basis that there was some discussion before Campbell J about the claim for damages it seems to me that there were two course open to the
Plaintiff: either to ask for the claim to be preserved whether by seeking such directions pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p5)
Rule 7 as are presently sought, or seeking to adjourn the claim, or in some other way; or to abandon the claim.

It is not for me to speculate what might have happened if subsequent to the proceedings before Campbell J further proceedings in respect of damages had been commenced for such a course has not been taken. The relevant limitation period has now expired and counsel for the Second and Third Defendants stated that the provisions of the Act would be relied upon if fresh proceedings were instituted.

By reason of the affidavit of the Plaintiff herein sworn on the 10th November in which he says he never authorised anyone to abandon his claim for damages it was submitted before me that by reason of Lewis v. Gombell
Constructions Pty Ltd [(1989) 18 NSWLR 528] I could not find against the Plaintiff. I do not see that the case cited has any relevance to the issue before me and I do not accede to that submission.

In the circumstances of this case therefore I am satisfied that the issue of damages was abandoned before Campbell J and that it did not survive, whether by reason of s. 81 or otherwise, after he made the orders which he did upon the Amended Summons: see Bailey v. Marinoff <case>; [(1971) 125 CLR 529] at p. 530 where Barwick CJ says "Once an order disposing of a proceeding has been perfected by being drawn up as the record of a Court, that proceeding apart from any specific and relevant statutory provision is at an end in that Court and is in its substance, in my opinion, beyond recall by that Court." 
Accordingly, I make the following orders:-
The Notice of Motion is dismissed.
The Plaintiff is to pay the costs of the First, Second and Third 
Defendants.
 * * * 
