

Regina versus Peter Uwe Funke [1997] NSWSC 96 (26 March 1997) 
REGINA versus PETER UWE FUNKE /96 DC 94/11/1032 
Wednesday 26 March 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Handley JA, Bruce J, Dowd J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - receiving - direction - conduct of trial 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
CRIMINAL LAW - receiving - direction - conduct of trial.
 
The appellant pleaded not guilty before the District Court to 15 counts of stealing and 15 counts of receiving the same goods. He was convicted by a jury on one count of stealing and 14 counts of receiving. The trial Judge directed the jury in accordance with the first limb of R versus Ately but not the second. No objection was taken by counsel for the accused.

HELD: (1) There was no objection to the way in which the defence case was left to the jury. There may have been tactical reasons for the course taken by defence counsel. [Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) should be applied. (2) The direction on recent possession was adequate in the light of the closing address of defence counsel. Defence counsel had not invited the jury to consider whether any of the explanations given by the accused in his dock statement for his recent possession might possibly be true. A direction in accordance with the second limb of R versus Ately [(1985) 9 NSWLR 226] was therefore not required.
 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: On 4 March 1996 Peter Uwe Funke stood trial before Shadbolt DCJ and a jury on 15 counts of stealing, contrary to <case> of the Crimes Act, and 15 alternative counts of receiving the same goods, contrary to <case> of the Crimes Act. The offences were alleged to have been committed between 19 February 1990 and 28 July 1993.

The accused pleaded not guilty to all charges. The jury found him guilty of 14 counts of receiving and of one count of stealing, and not guilty of the alternative counts in each case. He was sentenced on the counts on which he was convicted to minimum terms of 3 years and 6 months penal servitude, and additional terms of 14 months to be served concurrently.

The appellant appeals against his conviction and sentence. The 5 grounds of appeal against conviction challenged the Judge's summing-up in various respects. The first 2 grounds allege that the trial Judge failed to adequately instruct the jury on the nature of the defence case. The third ground alleges error in failing to adequately direct the jury on the doctrine of recent possession, the fourth alleges error in directing the jury on the requirement of knowledge as it bore upon the charges of receiving, and the final ground alleged error in directing the jury about the requirement for corroboration.

The first 2 grounds of appeal require consideration of the Judge's remarks in two passages of the summing-up. On the first day of the summing-up on 20
March, his Honour said: "As far as the defence case is concerned, the defence puts its case on one matter and one matter only, I want to make that quite clear. The defence case is simply a challenge to the Crown to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. There is no other defence put forward by his counsel but that. The totality of the counsel's address was on the weaknesses of the Crown case. It would be said on his behalf that Lapsevic, his evidence is either unreliable or wrong, that Harris's evidence is unreliable, and his committal evidence conflicts with the evidence he has given you; that Shepley's evidence regarding the ownership of two of the bobcats to the Sheriff and to Snead conflicts and is unsatisfactory, having regard to the evidence that he has given to you, that the access to the yard was not only in the possession of the accused, that Boyd had got the colour of the bobcat, which he said the accused opened with a key, and could be mistaken, and that it does not fall upon the accused to produce any papers, and that is quite right of course. And there is no evidence of Mr Funke having ground anything down, or altered any numbers. Funke himself is not a driver of these pieces of equipment and you should not draw any inference of his treatment of Boyd when Boyd came back with a truck and a bobcat on it. There was no attempt, after the police spoke to him, to hide any equipment. Also he had been a person who had invited police there to investigate a break, enter and steal.

Now, they are the two cases, as it were, briefly laid out to you".

After the withdrawal of the jury at the end of the first day's summing-up, the following exchange took place between the trial Judge and counsel: "HIS HONOUR: Nothing that you want to raise Mr Cavanagh? 
CAVANAGH: No, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: I will ask you this, because I do not - I paid careful attention to your address to the jury, and I took the case which is put on behalf of the accused from my understanding of that address, was I correct in doing so? 
CAVANAGH: Yes, your Honour".

It is apparent that at that stage defence counsel were satisfied that the
Judge had fairly summed up the nature of the defence case to the jury.

The trial Judge returned to this aspect of the matter towards the end of the summing-up on the second day of the summing-up, where he said: "The defence case is put before you simply on this basis - there has been a challenge to the Crown case and the Crown's ability to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. That is the only challenge which is advanced. It is said on his behalf that Lapsevic's evidence is unreliable or wrong; that Harris' evidence is unreliable and his committal evidence conflicts with the evidence which he has put before you; and the evidence regarding the excavator of both of these men is unsatisfactory. Shepley, it is clear, has claimed ownership to two bobcats, to the Sheriff of New South Wales or one of his officers, to Mr
Snead, but to you he maintains he was merely boasting".

His Honour then proceeded to remind the jury of aspects of the defence case.

After the jury had retired to consider their verdict, the following exchange took place with counsel: "CAVANAGH: There is only one more matter, your Honour, and that is in respect of your Honour's submission to the jury that the defence were simply relying on the Crown not being able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and has no other defences. Indeed, probably the most powerful defence that can be mounted is to show that the Crown has not proved its case.

HIS HONOUR: I am not to comment on the quality of that defence. All I am pointing out to them is that that was it, that you quite rightly and quite properly never relied on what he said to the jury in his statement and urge the jury to accept that. The absence of that was the basis upon which I formed a view that his only defence was the perceived weakness in the Crown case.

CAVANAGH: The perceived weakness in the Crown case, yes, your Honour, but there was also a statement from the accused and you have given the correct direction in respect of that.

HIS HONOUR: I have given the correct direction on it. I told them - most of it is irrelevant I might say, at least two thirds of it was quite irrelevant. I did not tell them that. I put after each item what he said about it to them the jury.

CAVANAGH: Yes, your Honour, I don't cavil with that.

HIS HONOUR: I thought I went a little further than you did by even alluding to the fact that he had spoken.

CAVANAGH: I thought I alluded to that, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: So briefly I did not even notice it.

CAVANAGH: Well, I suggested that I would not read his statement out to them, that indeed your Honour if minded to do that, but it was fresh in their minds.

HIS HONOUR: Well, I have done all I intend to do in respect of that statement.
I am not going to do any more about that".

In light of the exchange between his Honour and counsel at the end of the summing-up on the first and second days, I am satisfied that the appellant has failed to establish the existence of the errors alleged in grounds 1 and 2 of the notice of appeal. It seems evident that defence counsel, at the very least, acquiesced in the way in which the defence case was left to the jury.
This seems a clear case in which to apply r 4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), even if there was some technical miscarriage in these matters, although I am not satisfied that there was any error at all.

I would defer, for the moment, dealing with the third ground of appeal. The fourth ground of appeal alleges error in the directions of the trial Judge on the element of knowledge in relation to the alternative counts of receiving.
The trial Judge dealt with the element of knowledge at a number of places in his summing-up. The deficiency complained of in this ground of appeal was that the Judge failed to adequately instruct the jury that the accused was only guilty of receiving, if he knew at the time that he received the goods into his possession that they had been stolen. This matter was dealt with by the
Judge at pp 11, 12, 50 and 51 of the summing-up.

At page 11 the Judge said: "As far as the receiving is concerned, that occurs when a person receives goods knowing them at that time to have been stolen. The knowledge which is required that the goods were stolen must be actual knowledge, not suspicion.
But knowledge may arise in a number of ways".

On p 12, he again reminded them that the accused could only be guilty if he knew, at the time he took possession of the items, that they were stolen.

After the conclusion of the summing-up on the second day, the jury sought answers to further questions some three hours after they had originally withdrawn. One of those questions was, "Please clarify the meaning of receiving". In response to that question, the Judge again said: "Once a person has control and dominion over the goods, then he has received them and if at that time he knows that they are stolen, he has committed the act of receiving. There are two ingredients, that the accused took into possession, the goods mentioned in the indictment and at that time he knew those goods to be stolen".

In the light of those repeated directions, including the last directions after the jury had retired and sought further assistance from the trial Judge, I am satisfied that the directions given to the jury on the issue of knowledge were perfectly adequate, and that no error has been established in this regard.

The fifth ground of appeal concerns the question of corroboration. The Crown relied upon admissions alleged to have been made by the accused when originally interviewed at his own premises by two police officers. The police evidence was challenged in cross-examination and the accused, in the course of his statement from the dock, denied having made the statements attributed to him by the police officers. Defence counsel sought from the trial Judge a direction in accordance with McKinney versus The Queen <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 468], and the trial Judge agreed to give such a direction. The
McKinney direction, in the circumstances of this case, required the jury to consider whether there was any corroboration of the police evidence of admissions made by the accused. The Judge told the jury: "You will recall that there was some challenge to a statement which, it was said by police officers, the accused made to them at his yard and one made in the record of interview. It must be borne in mind that it is very difficult for an accused to bring evidence as to what was said to two police officers when there was no solicitor standing at his elbow, no friend with him when those words were alleged to have been said. It is easy enough for the police to fabricate such evidence and recent experience, and even longer experience for some, would indicate that this is not an unusual occurrence. But that does not mean to say that it happens all the time or on every occasion or this occasion. You have to look at each occasion anew, as it were. But because it is difficult to refute what has been said to police officers when they are recited in court, you should look therefore for corroboration that those words were in fact said before you accept them.

Now, corroboration is evidence which lies outside the evidence of police officers, but which points to those words having been said and the truth of the account which they give".

His Honour proceeded to instruct the jury that they might find corroboration in the fact that there was evidence that a backhoe on the appellant's property had gear box damage, and that the accused had made a statement to this effect to the police officers. His Honour said: "It is not something that either of the police officers might have known then or until a great deal later".

He also referred to the fact that it was common ground that conversations were taking place between the accused and the police officers when this particular conversation was alleged to have occurred.

As I understand his Honour, this matter was not left to the jury as corroboration of the particular conversation but merely as part of the surrounding circumstances which were not in dispute. I see no error in the way in which his Honour left the issue of corroboration to the jury. A conversation with the accused was the only possible source of information the police officers had at that time as to the existence of the damage to the backhoe. If, as the trial Judge said, that was not something that either of the police officers might have known then or until a great deal later, otherwise than from the accused, then the jury could safely conclude that the accused was the source of that information, and that this was some corroboration of their general account of what passed between them at that meeting. I would therefore reject the fifth ground of appeal.

This leaves the third ground of appeal relating to the failure of the trial
Judge to direct the jury on the issue of recent possession, and its significance in a case such as this, in accordance with the time honoured directions endorsed by this Court in R versus Bellamy [(1981) 2 NSWLR 727] and R v
Ately [(1985) 9 NSWLR 226.] These cases are authority for the proposition that where recent possession of stolen goods is relied upon as proof of stealing or receiving, the jury ought to be directed that if the accused person is found in possession of property recently stolen and he fails to give an explanation of how he came by it, then it is open to the jury to conclude that he is either the actual thief or a guilty receiver. If, however, the accused does give an explanation of how the recently stolen property came into his possession, then the jury must ask itself whether the explanation may reasonably be true. If they are satisfied that the explanation may reasonably be true, then they cannot convict merely on the basis of possession of recently stolen property. In the absence of other evidence to establish guilt, they should be directed to acquit.

In this case the trial Judge directed the jury in accordance with the first limb of this direction, but did not give the jury a direction on the second limb. The appellant, in his statement to the dock, gave explanations of how the recently stolen property came into his possession. His Honour would ordinarily have been bound to direct the jury that they should ask themselves whether those explanations might be, and if they were satisfied that they might reasonably be true, they could not convict merely on the basis of possession of recently stolen property, but only if there was other evidence to establish guilt. His Honour did not give that time honoured direction, but experienced defence counsel did not draw the deficiency to his Honour's attention and seek a redirection, and prima facie, therefore, r 4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) applies.

There was, of course, other evidence which the jury were entitled to accept, which established that the accused had either stolen or been guilty of receiving these items of stolen property. While parts of this evidence might, to some extent, be equivocal, on balance and taken as a whole, they constituted a strong Crown case.

There was, in the first instance, a large number of items involved, the subject of 30 individual counts. Company stickers had been placed on some of these items in circumstances indicating knowledge and complicity on the part of the appellant who was in control of that company. It was open to the jury to find that some of the explanations given by the accused were ludicrous as the Crown had suggested in its final address. Some of the items had been secreted in other yards or in containers. In some cases the prior ownership of the items was obvious on a close inspection. For example, prior ownership of some items by Boral and Telstra were clearly visible under a coat of paint on a close inspection. Steps had also been taken to obliterate identification numbers, and there was evidence of lies having been told to the police.
Finally, there was the evidence of number plates and the coincidence of identification numbers on some items.

In these circumstances the question is whether this Court should apply r 4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) or the proviso to <case> (1) of the Criminal Appeal Act. Both McClintock, counsel for the appellant, and counsel for the Crown, were invited by the Court to suggest whether there may have been tactical considerations which led defence counsel to avoid seeking such a redirection. It is fair to say that no convincing answer emerged in the course of the submissions of counsel either way.

It seems that the Judge did not give this further direction because of the way in which the defence case had been put to the jury in final address. In the passage from which I quoted in dealing with grounds 1 and 2 in the course of an exchange with counsel for the accused following the conclusion of his summing-up on the second day and after the jury had retired, his Honour said this, addressing Mr Cavanagh: "I am not to comment on the quality of that defence. All I am pointing out to them is that that was it, that you quite rightly and quite properly never relied on what he said to the jury in his statement and urge the jury to accept that. The absence of that was the basis upon which I formed a view that his only defence was the perceived weakness in the Crown case.

CAVANAGH: The perceived weakness in the Crown case, yes, your Honour, but there was also a statement from the accused and you have given the correct direction in respect of that.

HIS HONOUR: I have given the correct direction on it. I told them ... I put after each item what he said about it to them, the jury.

CAVANAGH: Yes, your Honour, I don't cavil with that.

HIS HONOUR: I thought I went a little further than you did by even alluding to the fact that he had spoken".

It is clear from this exchange that defence counsel, in his closing address to the jury, did not rely on the statement of the accused from the dock and the explanations in it as a reason for rejecting the Crown case and acquitting the accused. The case which defence counsel elected to put to the jury was a case based, not on the explanations given by the accused in his statement to the jury, but on the alleged weaknesses in the Crown case. Thatdecision of defence counsel at the trial can only have been deliberate, and in the light of the defence case, it seems to me that his Honour was not obliged to leave the second limb of the direction in R versus Ately to the jury.

In substance, defence counsel did not invite the jury, in his closing address, to consider whether the explanations given by the accused in his statement from the dock were a possible view of the facts which entitled him to an acquittal. Why that approach was taken is not clear, although it may be inferred, but it seems evident from the exchange that I have quoted that that was the approach that defence counsel took, and in my judgment, in those circumstances, his Honour was not bound to leave the second limb of the direction in R versus Ately to the jury. This is, no doubt, why defence counsel did not seek a redirection and indicates that this is a proper case in which to apply r 4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/).

In any event, for the reasons which I have given, this Court should apply the proviso to [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s6.html) 
The remaining question concerns the appeal against sentence. In the light of the 15 convictions of larceny and receiving of substantial items of equipment,
I cannot see any basis for concluding that the sentencing discretion of the trial Judge miscarried. In all the circumstances I would propose to order that the appeal be dismissed.

BRUCE J: I agree with the reasons given and order proposed by his Honour.

DOWD J: I also agree with the reasons given and order proposed.
 * * * 
