

Kelvar Bayturn Pty Limited versus Turner Matter No 20317/94 [1997] NSWSC 316 (18 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Kelvar Bayturn Pty Limited versus Turner /94 August 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /94 - Kelvar Bayturn Pty Limited versus Turner 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 20 May 1994. The process propounds a claim for damages by the plaintiff against its former solicitor. The retainer related to the sale by the plaintiff of certain land at Coffs Harbour. There was default by the purchaser under a Mortgage given by it. In purported mitigation of its loss, the plaintiff assigned the Mortgage to Lotago Pty Limited (Lotago). The plaintiff alleges breach of the retainer and negligence. One of the matters relevant to these questions is whether or not the defendant failed to advise the plaintiff to obtain personal guarantees from the directors of the purchaser. 
A Defence has been filed (it was amended on 29 February 1996). The Defence put the allegations of breach in issue. It also raised matters such as contributory negligence, acceptance and waiver of risk and failure to mitigate loss (by not accepting a proposal by the directors of the purchaser to provide personal guarantees).

On 19 May 1995, the defendant filed a Cross-Claim. The cross-defendants are directors of the plaintiff. The Cross-Claim makes allegations of breach of fiduciary duties owed by the directors to the plaintiff (paragraph 6). It makes allegations of breach of duty of care owed to the plaintiff (paragraph ). It propounds a claim for contribution and indemnity pursuant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lrpa404/s5.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lrpa404/), 1946.

A Notice of Grounds of Defence (the Defence) to the Cross-Claim was filed in
January 1996. The Defence admitted the allegations of the existence of a fiduciary duty. It put other matters in issue and denied entitlement to relief by way of contribution and indemnity.

There are two Notices of Motion before the Court. By Notice of Motion filed on June 1997, the cross-defendants seek summary disposition of the Cross-
Claim. By Notice of Motion filed on 26 June 1997, the cross-claimant (the defendant) seeks leave to amend the Cross-Claim. The real matter in issue between the parties is whether or not summary relief should be given in respect of the Cross-Claim. The proposed amendments are of no real significance. The cross-defendants do not oppose leave to amend in the event that their application for summary relief fails.

Mr Watson (the solicitor for the cross-defendants) has sworn an affidavit. It annexes copy correspondence that has passed between the parties during the period between February 1996 and April 1997. The parties have also tendered other documentation. There are company extract searches which show that the cross-defendants are also directors of Lotago. There is a copy of the interrogatories which the defendant has sought to administer against the cross-defendants. There is other copy correspondence.

Mr Watson has prepared written submissions. The submissions contain the following:- "6. Pursuant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lrpa404/s5.html) of the
Act, in order for the Defendant to succeed in his cross-claim against the
Cross-Defendants, the Defendant must establish that it is just and equitable that he recover a contribution from the Cross-Defendants.
In Daniels & Ors versus Anderson & Ors [(1994) 16 ACSR 607] at 734 to , the Court of Appeal considered whether a defendant could obtain contribution under the Act from a third party in circumstances where the acts of the third party had already been taken into account in reducing the defendant's liability to the plaintiff. Clarke and Sheller JA held that in such circumstances contribution could not be `just and equitable' and therefore was not recoverable, their Honours following the statement of
Jackson J in Doyle versus Pick & Rickwood [[1965] WAR 95] at 96 that: `... As the damages awarded against the defendant correspond exclusively to his own share of the responsibility and the negligence of the third party has already been taken into account in arriving at those damages, it would not be just and equitable that the defendant should have any recovery against the third party. If it were otherwise, then the third party would have to pay twice, because he is liable at the suit of the plaintiff for his share of the responsibility for the damage.'
It follows that the Defendant can only recover contribution against the
Cross Defendants in relation to allegations of negligence which are not properly taken into account in arriving at the damages to be awarded in favour of the Plaintiff.
Significantly, in this case, no allegation is made by either the Plaintiff or the Defendant that the Cross-Defendants acted outside either their actual or ostensible authority as directors of the Plaintiff. Furthermore, the
Plaintiff concedes that it is bound by the acts and omissions of the First
Cross-Defendant (see annexure A and b to the Affidavit of Mark Watson sworn 11
June 1997), who provided the instructions on behalf of the Plaintiff to the
Defendant (see paragraph 3 particular (b) of the Statement of Claim.
The allegations of negligence made in the Cross-Claim (see paragraph 6) all go to general allegations that: the Plaintiff did not properly assess the risks associated with the transaction; and the Plaintiff failed to obtain or accept any additional or collateral security for the transaction.

The matters alleged at paragraph 6 are all matters which would properly be taken into account in assessing the damages to be awarded in favour of the
Plaintiff against the Defendant. It is not just and equitable that the
Defendant also recover contribution from the Cross Defendants by reason of these same matters. Accordingly, the matters alleged cannot arguably sustain a claim for contribution against the Cross-Defendants and the Cross-Claim should therefore be struck out." 
The authorities make it clear that summary disposition should only be granted in what might be described as clear cases (see, inter alia, Webster v
Lampard <case>; [116 ALR 545).] It is a discretionary remedy. The discretion is exercised having regard to the circumstances of the particular case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The applicant bears the onus.

In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that the onus has been discharged. It seems to me that the questions raised in this application are matters which should be properly left for determination at a trial.
 [Section 5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lrpa404/s5.html) confers a statutory right of action enabling the recovery of contribution from any other tortfeasor "who is, or would if sued have been, liable in respect of the same damage". The section provides that "the amount of the contribution recoverable from any person shall be such as may be found by the Court to be just and equitable having regard to that person's responsibility for the damage".

As was made clear in Daniels, there is a difference between contributory negligence and liability in negligence to another party. In each of those cases, the questions are different. A different inquiry is involved (p 730).
In the present case, there are also other questions (including those thrown up by the plea of failure to mitigate loss).

In Daniels, the trial had taken place. The Court was in a position to determine the acts or omissions which were properly to be taken into account in determining the contributory negligence issues and those which constituted the notional liability to the plaintiff (p 734).

In this case, the Court is not in the same position. Any trial is yet to take place. The matter is brought before it on an interlocutory application and at a time when the pre-trial processes have not been completed.

The considerations raised by the present application concern a problem for which the solution may vary having regard to the circumstances of the particular case before the Court. The solution adopted in Daniels may not be appropriate in other cases. I am not satisfied that the Court is in a position to determine the appropriate solution at this stage of the proceedings.

At p 735, it was observed by Clarke and Sheller JJA:- "We are not, however, concerned with hypothetical situations but in endeavouring to provide the most satisfactory solution to the present problem.
Where, as in the present circumstances, a party has secured partial relief, by way of a finding of contributory negligence it would not, in our opinion, but just and equitable that it obtain an award for any compensation. If it were otherwise it would unjustly receive double compensation." 
Other matters were raised during submissions (inter alia, the cross-defendants have pleaded to the Cross-Claim and there has been subsequent delay). In the light of the views earlier expressed, it is not necessary to canvass these matters.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion brought by the cross-defendants. The cross- defendants are to pay the costs of that Notice of Motion. The defendant is to have leave to amend the Cross-Claim. Any Amended Cross-Claim is to be filed within 28 days. The defendant is to pay the costs of his Notice of Motion and any costs thrown away by reason of the amendment.

The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
