

B and M Activities Pty Ltd versus Perpetual Trustees Victoria Ltd; Perpetual
Trustees Victoria Ltd versus Textralian Enterprises Pty Ltd Matter Nos 5027/97 [1998] NSWSC 1039 (7 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 October 1998 
B & M ACTIVITIES PTY LTD versus PERPETUAL TRUSTEES VICTORIA LTD /97 
PERPETUAL TRUSTEES VICTORIA LTD versus TEXTRALIAN ENTERPRISES PTY LTD /97 September 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These two matters are being heard together. The evidence in one is evidence in the other. For convenience, during the trial, I referred to the plaintiffs in 5027/97 and the defendants in 4497/97 as being "plaintiffs" and the opposing parties "defendants" and I will continue to use that terminology in these reasons, except when formulating the orders that must be made. 
The plaintiffs, or one or more of them, have from time to time been the tenants of Shop TE12 in the Erina Fair Shopping Centre, east of Gosford. The plaintiffs make claims under the Trade Practices Act and otherwise in respect of certain representations which they say were made to them in respect of the lease. They seek to vary the current lease as well as obtain damages for what has happened in the past The defendants for their part seek arrears of rent and ejectment.

The statement of claim in proceedings 5027/97 essentially says as follows:- 
On 12 October 1993 the relevant plaintiff entered into a lease of Shop TE12; 
It was an implied term that that shop would have an area of 228 square metres whereas in fact it only contained 190 square metres; 
In about February 1993 the following representations were made to the relevant plaintiff: that a cinema complex would be constructed opposite the northern entrance to the plaintiffs' shop; that cinema complex would be constructed within 18 months; there would only be one eating area in the centre and that near the plaintiffs' shop; there would be 24 hour access to public toilets; there would be a significant flow of pedestrian traffic from the cinema complex in the vicinity of the plaintiffs' shop; allegations of various other representations which I do not need to deal with as they could not result in any substantial damages even if established.

Each of the representations were alleged to be false and misleading in trade and commerce. The plaintiffs claimed damages including expectation damages and a variation of the lease.

The defences are: 
To deny the making of the representations and each of them; 
To rely on express statements by the plaintiffs that when entering into the lease no such promises or representations had been made; 
There was no reliance by the plaintiffs on any such promises or representations; 
That the representations, if made, were not false or misleading; 
That the disputes between the parties had already been settled by agreement; 
The claims were barred by being out of time; vide <case> of the 
Trade Practices Act; 
Estoppel.

The defendants also filed a cross claim which restated some of the defences and sued for $13,375.70 not paid under the settlement agreement.

In the second proceedings the defendants claimed that the plaintiffs were substantially in arrears of rent. They claimed $83,024.93 for rent and/or occupation fee plus mesne profits. They also say that on 9 October 1997 they re-entered and terminated the lease, but later the same day the plaintiffs broke back into possession. The defendants say that they then gave a licence to occupy to the plaintiffs until 13 October 1997 and again re-entered on 20
October 1997. The plaintiffs deny the rental calculations and say that this in any event is caught up in the proposed variation of the lease. They deny the re-entry on 9 October.

The hearing of these issues took nine days. Mr M Evans appeared for the plaintiffs and Mr H Insall for the defendants. The hearing might have taken longer had I permitted the plaintiffs to do what, from time to time, it appeared they desired to do, that is inflate these sets of proceedings to some class action on behalf of disgruntled tenants in the centre, a class action, of course which these plaintiffs would control. However, Mr Insall objected whenever this appeared to be happenening, I allowed those objections, and the case kept as much as possible on its proper track. The nine day hearing included a view at Erina on the second day of the case and a day plus hearing submissions.

At the end of the evidence I indicated that I thought that there were ten heads under which I should structure my reasons for judgment and asked counsel to comment on these. They did so on the final day of hearing and as a result of those submissions, it was clear that the appropriate way was to deal with the case under the following 18 headings. Although the way the facts have fallen out, some of these headings require no discussion, I have adopted them for the purpose of structuring these reasons. In these headings the word "Landlord" covers the owner of the shopping centre, the manager or the manager's employees, "B & M" means B & M Activities Pty Ltd which was one of the plaintiffs and the lessee under the first lease that was granted, "B Slattery" means Bennett Joseph Slattery, who at most, though not all material times, was the controller of the plaintiffs, and "Textralian" means the tenant under the second lease that was granted. The questions are:
Were any of the following representations made by the Landlord to B &
M in February 1993: that a cinema complex would be constructed opposite the northern entrance to the plaintiffs' shop; that that would occur within 18 months; that there would be only one eating area in the centre and that would be near B & M's shop; that there would be 24 hour access to public toilets; that there would be a significant flow of pedestrian traffic past the centre; any other significant representation?
If any of the above representations were made, were they, or any of them, false and misleading in trade or commerce?
If the answer to 1 and 2 is "yes", did B & M rely on any such representation?
If questions 1, 2 and 3 are answered "yes", has B & M suffered any damage?
Did B & M and B Slattery make statements that it or he had not relied on representations? 
If so, did the defendants rely on the representations?
Were the statements referred to in 5 fraudulent? 
Is B & M relying on its own fraud in bringing these proceedings?
Are any of B & M's claims time barred?
What is the area of the plaintiffs' shop?
What is currently due and payable to the defendants for rent or occupation fee?
Are the defendants entitled to possession?
Was there a binding agreement to settle disputes? 
If so, what is its effect? 
Was the agreement induced by misrepresentation?
Were any of the representations in para 16 of the cross claim made in to Textralian. (In particular were there representations as to what research showed as to likely percentage of cinema patrons who would shop and the difference in effect between a cinema complex connected to the centre and a stand alone cinema)?
If the answer to 12 is yes, were any such representations misleading or deceptive?
If the answer to 12 and 13 is "yes", did Textralian rely on any of the representations?
If the answer to 12, 13 and 14 is "yes", did Textralian suffer any damage?
Did Textralian and B Slattery make statements that it and he had not relied on representations? 
If so, did the defendants rely on the representations?
Were the statements referred to in 16 fraudulent? 
Is Textralian relying on its own fraud in bringing these proceedings?
What, if any, orders should be made? 
I will deal with each of these issues in turn.
This is the principal representation which is relied on by the plaintiffs. It is thus appropriate to consider it at some length. It is first necessary to state background facts which are relevant not only to this representation, but to the other alleged representations of February 1993.

Erina Fair, in which the plaintiffs' shop is situate, is one of the largest regional shopping centres on the Central Coast. It includes, amongst others, a
Grace Bros department store, a Target store, a Big W, a Woolworths
Supermarket, a Franklins Supermarket, an HMV shop, an ABC store, an OPSM outlet, two newsagencies, as well as many speciality shops. The centre itself covers a considerable area in a main building of a rather unorthodox shape.
This main building is surrounded by extensive car parks. The plaintiffs' shop is at the very end of a northern extension to the centre that was built in and which is called the Boardwalk. Further to the north on the other side of the car parks are some bulk retailing stores such as Harvey Norman and
Joyce Mayne. On the western side down the hill from the main building is a cinema complex and a restaurant known as "Rustlers". This cinema complex was completed and open for business in 1996. On the south eastern side on the
Terrigal Road, is a McDonalds Restaurant. There is also a McDonalds outlet in the main centre close to the south side of the plaintiffs' shop.

Prior to the erection of the Boardwalk, there was an area known as an eatery, where persons could purchase food from takeaway food outlets and consume that food at tables situated close by in the wide aisles of the centre. This eatery area was at the other end of the centre to the plaintiffs' shop near the supermarkets.

The plaintiffs were attracted to the possibility of having a shop in the
Boardwalk in which it would place amusement machines. Negotiations took place and these culminated in an offer of lease being made by the defendants by letter of 18 February 1993. On about 23 February 1993 that offer was accepted.
From then until the formal lease was signed on 31 January 1994, time was spent fitting out the premises and getting ready to commence trade. I will deal with some of the events of this period as the story unfolds. The plaintiffs' shop opened for business on 12 October 1993. The lease continued until it was renegotiated in July 1996 and it was surrendered and replaced by a fresh lease under which the tenant was Textralian, another company in the plaintiffs' group. The tenant under the first lease was B & M. In each case, though it is irrelevant for present purposes, the tenant appears to have been the trustee of a discretionary trust whose beneficiaries appear at most material times to have been B Slattery and his family.

When the lease was initially negotiated, Maxwell Carter was also involved with the plaintiffs. B & M appears to be a name which was adopted for Ben and
Max the shortened forenames of the male principals. Mr Carter had an existing shop in the centre and it was he who seems to have made the first approaches for a lease of the current shop. Mr Slattery was a person who was experienced, in what is loosely called in evidence, "the amusement industry", and satisfied the landlord that he had the experience to operate an amusement centre at the centre. Mr Carter and his wife sold out their interest in the plaintiff companies and the shop to the Slatterys in June 1994. Thereafter, the
Slatterys have been the directors of B & M and Textralian and have been the controllers of those companies.

Mr Slattery says that he and Mr Carter had a meeting with Mr Rhon Levin, the defendants' then local leasing manager at Erina Fair at the end of January
At that meeting Mr Levin is alleged to have said, "Erina Fair turned over approximately $150 million last year and has passing trade of 140,000 per week. In addition to this traffic flow within 18 months of completion we will be adding a major cinema complex containing ten cinemas that will be situated on the northern entrance of the Boardwalk Eatery, right outside this proposed site." There was then some discussion that another amusement centre operator "Time Zone" was interested in the location and that quick action was required if the plaintiffs wished to avail themselves of this opportunity. Mr Levin then showed Messrs Carter and Slattery a plan.

Mr Slattery then says that on 3 February 1993, he and Mr Carter had a further conversation with Mr Levin. He says that at that meeting he handed to Mr Levin a letter which was annexed to affidavit PA01 and marked "BJS5" which contained the following: "Based on all the information compiled, and on the information that you have provided, we conservatively expect the business to achieve the following average annual turnover for the next three years ...".

Figures were then set out.
 "... By your figures Erina Fair turned over $240 million, with an average weekly traffic flow of 140,000 people. We will be located in a prime position alongside the new food mall and on the corner of what should become the main entrance into the Fair, also outside our main window is the taxi and bus pickup and drop-off for Erina Fair. We will have external access, an unrestricted trading hours, and a major cinema complex is to be erected within 18 months directly opposite our main entrance." 
I will return to that letter in due course because it is a clear forgery. At the same time Mr Slattery handed Mr Levin a document headed "Antecedents and
Character" with respect to himself.

On 18 February 1993, Mr Levin faxed Mr Carter with an offer of lease. This fax is BJS7 to the above affidavit. The particulars of offer showed that the "approximate area" was 228 sq m, the lease was for five years from the commencement date and the rent was set out. The offer also contained the following: "If you or your representatives have relied on any verbal or written representation, warranty or undertaking (that is not set out in this letter) which influenced you in considering a lease on these premises you should immediately advise us in writing, otherwise it will be agreed, by implication, that no such events occurred." 
The offer was said to be open until 22 February 1993.

On 23 February 1993, there was a further meeting between Mr Slattery, Mr
Carter and Mr Levin. Mr Slattery said, "The letter of offer doesn't include access to toilets, and having 24 hour unrestricted trading or the ability to sell and hire computer games." Mr Levin said, "We'll soon fix that" and took
BJS7 and wrote on it words covering those matters. Mr Slattery says that he then asked whether there were any obstructions in the shop such as support beams or columns and was told that the plan showed the shop to be free of any obstructions and that the tenants had 228 square metres of usable floor space.
Mr Slattery then said, "Good, then we could install all the power points inground before the slab is poured. Also, you have agreed to give us access to toilets. Where are they going to be? Are we using the toilets shown on that plan?" Mr Levin is alleged to have replied, "Yes, the toilets are located behind your southern wall. It should be easy to provide access to these toilets by a door through this wall. You would then have to lock the doors that provide access through to the shopping centre after hours." 
It is clear that the toilets referred to are now staff toilets which are not available for use by the public and that the plaintiffs have had to construct toilets within their own premises which has meant that there is less room for amusement machines.

Somewhere between February and May 1993, Mr Peter Miller took over from Mr
Levin. Somewhere between then and August 1993, Mr Slattery recalls a meeting with Mr Miller, Mr and Mr Slattery and Mr Carter during which Mrs Slattery said to Mr Miller, "While we're here could you please show me the proposed location of the cinema in relation to our shop?" to which Mr Miller, pointing north, said, "It will be out here." 
In about May 1993, it was clear that the Landlord required the plaintiffs to construct toilets for public use inside their shop. Mr Slattery complained to
Mr Miller and was told that the matter was not negotiable but that the
Landlord would contribute $15,000 towards the cost of the insulation of the toilets which it later did. At this stage Mr Slattery said that he had noticed two large cross beams in the shop located between two large RSJs and protested that they were encroaching on usable floor space. Mr Miller said, "That can't be helped. They are necessary structural support beams and will not affect your area." 
After the plaintiffs' shop opened and the lease was signed, the next significant matter was a letter written by Mr Slattery to the then retail leasing manager, David Tressider, on 17 August 1994. The first page only of this letter was annexed as BJS9 to the affidavit to which I have been referring. When the whole of the letter was tendered as DX10, and the second page was in evidence, it had quite a different significance.

The letter complained that since opening the plaintiffs' trading figures had been about $2,000 a week below projections. However, the plaintiffs had not been particularly concerned as they anticipated that the bulk retail section to open in October 1994 would bring back to the northern end of the centre people lost to the Boardwalk because of the opening of a second food court in the old eatery. The letter then goes on to say, "However our major concern is the location of the proposed cinema complex, and more importantly, whether the cinema would have or require any amusement equipment to be located in a cinema complex itself.
 "When we originally leased the shop for developing as a family entertainment centre, we dealt with Rhon Levin, who indicated to us that we would have a cinema complex possibly within a two year period and the proposed location was directly opposite our northern entrance on the bus stop. ..." 
The letter then continued at the foot of page 1, "Bearing in mind all of the above, we feel there are two very important issues at stake. (1) The location of a cinema, as we believe that there is another location under consideration besides the one indicated to us. We would naturally prefer the cinema opposite our entrance and the food court, and we are certain the other tenants in the food court feel the same." Then on the top of page 2 the following occurs: "2(A) Most importantly we would not like to see any amusement equipment located in the cinema itself.

If the cinema does require amusement equipment then we request that we have the first option to supply and maintain any equipment that may be required..." 
The letter is significant because although it does mention the location of the cinema back in August 1994, (a) the opening of the cinema is "possibly two years" (presumably from the date of the conversation with Mr Levin) rather than "within 18 months" as in the statement of claim, but more importantly, whilst there is a complaint about the location of the cinema, this is not as significant a matter so far as Mr Slattery was concerned as the fact that the cinema might have in it competing amusement machines.

Mr Tressider replied to this letter on 13 September 1994 saying, inter alia, "Whilst we sympathise with your thoughts regarding the position of the cinema, this is not physically or commercially possible.
 "We agree that amusements and cinema will complement each other and we hope that should the cinema proceed, your business will benefit from it.
 "Regarding first right of refusal, we are not a position to provide this at this time. We will try to keep you abreast of any possibilities regarding amusement." 
Mr Slattery says that there were a succession of managers at the centre from then until the end of 1994 and he could not find anyone who would be in a position to listen to his complaints about the position of the cinema. He also says that he got some comfort from Mr Tressider's reply in that "Should the cinema proceed, your business will benefit from it." It is hard to see how this could be so because Mr Tressider deliberately said that it was just not possible to put the cinemas in the position that Mr Slattery wanted them, and which he alleged had been represented to him as their position before he took the lease.

In early 1995, the Landlord's management sent an information sheet to the tenants informing them that the Gosford City Council had refused the application to develop a multi-screen cinema complex and restaurant adjacent to Erina Fair. It asked tenants to support the bid to overturn this decision.
In the centre newsletter that was issued about the same time, it was pointed out that figures indicated that some 58-61% of cinema visitors combine their cinema trip with some shopping at the centre. It should be noted that the proposal at this time was to build the cinema complex in its existing position, not to the north of the plaintiffs' shop.

In April 1995, the Land and Environment Court granted approval for the cinema complex.

Mr Brett Robson became the manager of the centre somewhere about March 1995.
Annexed to the affidavit to which I have already referred, is BJS20 which is a memorandum from Mr Robson of 4 April 1996 to his superiors about the cafe usage in the cinema complex. Just how a copy of this memorandum came into Mr
Slattery's possession is not at all clear. However, it says, amongst other things, "I understand representations were made to all of the Boardwalk Eatery tenants at the time of leasing that should the cinema development proceed the food components of the complex would include a family restaurant and the cinema operators' refreshment concession. In this regard it may be debatable as to whether or not we ever meant that this would include an express cafe usage. Further in the light of trading difficulties associated with the
Boardwalk Eatery and the past and ongoing threat of litigation already existing I believe their (sic) is a very real threat of escalating the issue.
...
 "One of the key reasons for introducing cinema complexes into our centres is to generate the spin-off sales benefits which largely flow into fast food sales. To now construct the complex as a free-standing building (for sound reasons) but then further reduce the opportunity for cross-flow of patrons would seem counter-productive to our original and longer term objectives, particularly once again in light of the trading issues and associated occupancy costs of retailers in the Boardwalk." 
It will be observed that this memorandum does not really address the present problem because it is directed not to the amusement centre, but to the
Boardwalk Eatery fast food outlets. Further, the memorandum is directed to cafes and restaurants in the cinema complex rather than to amusement machines.
Nonetheless, it does have some vague supporting value for the plaintiffs' case. During 1996, there were discussions between Mr Slattery and Mr Robson as to the size of the plaintiffs' shop. The plaintiffs stopped paying rent after the end of March 1996 because of these disputes. There were meetings between
Mr Robson and Mr Slattery in the middle of 1996, and as I will detail later, agreements were made for the first lease to terminate and for a new lease on adjusted terms to commence on 1 November 1996. For present purposes, the only significance that these discussions have is that there does not appear to have been any mention of the position of the cinema which was then in the course of being erected.

Mrs Slattery gave evidence. She left most of the initial discussions to her husband. She did, however, recall the meeting with Mr Miller who pointed to the north when saying where the cinema complex "will be built".

Mr Carter gave evidence. He says that at the meeting at the end of January Mr Levin said, "We'll be building a large cinema complex adjacent to the northern side of the Boardwalk Eatery, which means it will be adjacent to the northern door of your business" and "The cinema complex will be built within a period of about 18 months" and "You should spend more money on the northern entrance to your business as it will be your main entrance and that way you will be able to receive maximum exposure" and "The existing food court ...
will be closed. Some of those tenants will be relocated to the new Boardwalk
Eatery, which will be the only major food eatery in Erina Fair." 
Mr Carter recalls receiving the fax BJS7 and that shortly after receiving that fax he attended a further meeting with Mr Slattery and Mr Levin at Erina Fair when Mr Slattery questioned some of the terms of the new lease and Mr Levin said, "You have 228 square metres of usable floor space". He also remembers Mr
Levin saying, "Spend more money on the northern side and that will be your main entrance facing the cinemas." He also remembers Mr Miller pointing out to
Mrs Slattery where the cinemas would be located.

In cross examination it was put that Mr Levin had said that there was a proposal to locate a group of cinemas adjacent to the northern side of the
Boardwalk Eatery. Mr Carter agreed with that proposition and continued "It was the proposed site for where the cinemas would be located, which were in our northern wall and freestanding retail stores of Joyce Mayne at the time, but no, it was the proposed site." He was then asked: "Q. The proposed site, and it was quite clear to you that he was informing you about a proposal, is that not correct? 
A. That's correct." 
Counsel being comforted by these answers asked again on the next page of the transcript (T159): "Q. It is perfectly clear from that document that you believed at all times that what Mr Levin had said to you was that the cinema centre was a proposal?" "That document" was a letter from Mr Carter of 22 October 1997 headed "To Whom it May Concern" which is DX20. This was a document prepared by Mr Carter to assist Mr Slattery with his negotiations with the Landlord. The statement contained the following: "It was advised to us ... from Lend Lease Property Management 
Pty Limited that their proposal was to locate a group of cinemas adjacent to the northern side of the Boardwalk Eatery in Erina Fair ... These cinemas were proposed to be built by the 
Lend Lease Property Management Pty Ltd within a period of months from the opening of the new section called the Boardwalk, this situation never eventuated at the suggested location." 
Mr Levin gave evidence that in 1992 he had a number of discussions with Max
Carter and Mr Carter indicated he would like to take a shop in the proposed new northern wing of the centre (which was later called the Boardwalk) for an amusement centre and that he had a partner who had experience in the industry.
He can remember going through the proposed changes to the shopping centre with
Messrs Carter and Slattery and saying that "The existing food hall will be closed and renovated and it will be reopened with fresh food shops, takeaway food shops and tables and chairs to service the food hall. The main eatery will be here on the Boardwalk ... There is a proposal to construct a cinema complex and the proposed location is outside the northern entrance to the shopping centre." He says that he never used the potential cinemas as a selling point to the complex.

He says he has never seen the letters annexed to the affidavit of Mr Slattery as BJS5 and BJS6. He says that he did fax BJS7 to Mr Carter and that at a meeting on 23 February 1993 he added special conditions to BJS7 in handwriting: "3. Lessee allowed to trade outside core hours provided security provided at lessee's costs.
Lessee to have access to public toilets after hours." 
He denies any conversations about obstructions.

Mr Levin also says that had he been informed that either Mr Carter or Mr
Slattery were relying on the matters referred to in the statement of claim or that such matters had influenced them in considering entering into the lease he would have withdrawn the offer because he did have another tenant in the wings.

It can be seen that the dispute is not so much as to whether there was mention of a cinema complex immediately to the north of the plaintiffs' shop but whether that mention occurred in such a manner and in such circumstances as could be taken by an objective observer as being a firm representation.

There is some corroborating material that some such statement was made by Mr
Levin from other evidence. However, in the light of the fact that the question is not whether some such statement was made but whether a definite representation was made, this is of limited value. The real issue depends upon the evidence of Mr Slattery and the counter evidence of Mr Levin.

Mr Slattery's credibility was completely shattered by Mr Insall's thoroughly researched and skilful cross examination. His evidence was shown, to my mind, just to be completely unreliable.

The low point of Mr Slattery's case concerns the document, BJS5, to which I have already referred. Questions were put by Mr Insall to Mr Slattery in cross examination as to the different type face of BJS5 and BJS6 which were supposedly created on the computer on the same day and how it was they appeared to have been produced on two different types of printer. Later Mr
Insall came back to the question at T69 and Mr Slattery said that the document, BJS5 was prepared in February or perhaps January 1993. Mr Slattery said, "I did two of these documents." The cross examination then continued: "Q. You did two of those did you? 
A. Yes I made a mistake on one and it didn't affect the bottom line or the profitability but I two amounts of equipment update in leasing which was the same. I had two amounts of $100,000 in there where in fact it should have only been one of the gross takings of 780 and then 680, so I did a correction on it? 
Q. Where did you get the document that is annexed here - sorry, where did you get the copy of the document of which this is a photocopy? 
A. I am not with you. Off the original of the document which was given to Rhon Levin so all I have is a copy and you should have the original.

Q. So you kept a copy of the document did you? 
A. I have a copy.

Q. Did you keep the copy of the document that you say you gave to Mr Levin? 
A. Yes.

Q. And what did you do with that copy at about February 1993? 
A. I would have filed it.

Q. Filed it where? 
A. Probably with the other Lend Lease documents.

Q. And was it a photocopy? 
A. I don't know whether it was a photocopy or whether I printed two out of the machine.

Q. You don't know about that, is that your honest answer? 
A. Yes, sometimes if I want one copy I would print two. I might photocopy it. I have had a photocopier and a printer side by side so sometimes they would be printed, sometimes photocopied.

Q. Can you now state on your oath whether you know on your oath that this was a photocopy or a document that was printed? 
A. I can't be sure.

Q. Is that your honest answer to the question? 
A. Yes.

Q. Why is the document signed ...? 
A. I signed it, just put "Yours sincerely" and signed it.

Q. This is a copy that you retained for your records, is that right? 
A. Yes.

Q. Why did you sign it? 
A. I often did. Sometimes I just left it unsigned, sometimes I signed them.

Q. Which printer was this document printed, was it an Ink Jet printer or the old Macintosh printer? 
A. It looks like an Ink Jet printer." 
The witness then said that BJS6 which was printed on the same day was not printed on an Ink Jet printer and was asked how come he produced two documents on the same day with different printers. He said: "I'm not entirely sure".

At T71: "Q. Could you just answer the question please? 
A. Yes, but I have to reiterate here because Max Carter and 
I did our antecedents and character at the same time and I think Max got these printed, got his printed and mine printed at the same time. I'm not sure but he could have got this printed when he got his done. ...

Q. This document, the first document BJS5, was not given to 
Rhon Levin on 3 February 1993 was it? 
A. Yes. You should have the original of that. You should also have the original of a prior document.

Q. This document was created sometime well after 3 February , was it not? 
A. No.

Q. You didn't have a Ink Jet printer as at 3 February 1993 did you? 
A. I'm sure I would have yes.

Q. This document has been printed off subsequently to assist you in this case.

A. No. I don't see how it assists me, but that is not the case." 
He was then asked why, if it was as he now realises the only document of 1993 that referred to the cinema it was not produced at the interlocutory injunction application in October 1997. The answer was that he just did not think about it at that time.

The next day, in re-examination, Mr Evans asked about BJS5 and BJS6. He said, "At one point there you were asked a question, I think your answer was `Yes, but' and you were then not given a chance to continue. What, if you recall that, was the point you wished to make on those two documents?" The transcript does not disclose any "Yes but" in this part of the answer. However, over objection at T98, Mr Slattery said, "The antecedents (that is BJS6) were typed by me. Max Carter, I believe, did his own antecedents on my original computer.
The letter of February 1993 - I know I produced two letters to Rhon Levin on that day, the first one I had errors in. The second one I corrected the errors and took it up there.
 "I couldn't find the original, not original, my copy of those letters.

I only found my handwriting notes. When you were preparing for this case and back last year I retyped that letter off my notes and it is an accurate copy of what I produced to Rhon Levin on the 3rd and 
I have only typed out the second letter because the first one had errors in it and I didn't see any point in producing the flawed letter.

So I have typed both letters." 
Not unnaturally, that produced a request from Mr Insall to cross examine further which request I granted. He asked: "Q. Mr Slattery, you say that you printed the letter of 3 
February 1993 last year? 
A. Yes.

Q. When in last year did you print it? 
A. I am not sure. I was looking through our files to find all relevant documents. I have got other copies of the antecedents 
I also found last night, when I brought the document to you today. We were up till one o'clock this morning.

Q. Can you answer the question. When did you print the copy of the 3 February 1993 letter? 
A. Off my draft I had handwritten . I printed that last year, but I supplied two.

Q. When last year did you print the copy of the 1993 letter? 
A. I don't really remember...

Q. Mr Slattery, you have created this document as a deliberate forgery, in order to improve your chances in this case have you not?" 
His Honour: "Before you answer that might assume you have committed any crime I have to tell you your rights. It is that you can decline to answer the question and if you do decline there is a procedure we got through. What was your answer? 
A. No, I did not." 
Mr Insall: "Q. Yesterday I asked you some questions about the letter, do your remember? 
A. Yes.

Q. Yesterday you knew that you had printed the letter some time in late 1997, did you not? 
A. I wasn't sure when I printed it. I believe that.

Q. Can you just answer the question. Yesterday you were aware that you have printed the letter in 1997? 
A. I wasn't too sure yesterday. I had tried to think about it last night. On reflection I have done it some time in 1997. ...

Q. Did you print the document in preparing for this case? 
A. Yes, or before.

Q. You know that today, do you? You know that today? 
A. Yes.

Q. And yesterday you knew it as well, did you not? 
A. I wasn't sure exactly when I printed it yesterday.

Q. Mr Slattery I suggest to you that is an utter lie, do you agree? 
A. No." 
Mr Insall then put to the witness the answers he had given the previous day and suggested he was lying. The witness said at the top of T103: "A. I was not. I searched everywhere for that document. I couldn't find my copy. I found the notes that I wrote the letter off. I did find a copy of the first letter." 
Mr Insall then asked the witness about his previous evidence to say that he had filed the copy and asked him how that could be true when he had just printed off a new one from handwritten drafts. The witness tried to answer but did not do so satisfactorily. Mr Insall then called for the notes. The witness said, "I will produce them tomorrow. I will also produce the original letter,
I think, if I can find it tomorrow too." Mr Insall then completed: "Q. Why did you sign this copy of the letter of 3 February, 1993 that you printed off in 1997? 
A. I often signed copies. Just sometimes I don't. Sometimes 
I do.

Q. You signed it because you wanted to pretend it was a copy that had actually been provided to Lend Lease, did you not? 
A. It is a copy of the same letter I provided to Lend Lease." 
Unfortunately for Mr Slattery, he did not leave it there. On the eighth day of hearing Mr Evans sought, and over objection, was granted leave to re-open. Mr
Slattery's affidavit, PA31, was then read. In this affidavit he said that at page T102 Mr Insall had called for his notes that he used to reproduce a letter that he had deposed to having given to Lend Lease Property Management on 3 February 1993. He then said that he had found those notes on 2 August and his previous recollection of seeing them was on 23 December 1997. He found the notes in an archive box marked "Savas" (the name of business associates of the Slatterys) where they had been misfiled. He had brought them to Sydney on Monday 3 August but had forgotten about them until handing them to his counsel on the morning of 4 August. They had been handed to the court in the afternoon of 4 August and marked MI36, later DX36. His affidavit ended, "I did not have any intention of misleading the court when referring to the letter dated the 3rd February, 1993 as a copy of the letter I gave to LLPM on that date. To my mind the letter attached to my affidavit sworn the 23rd
December, 1997 dated the 3rd February, 1993, is a reproduction of the original letter that I gave to LLPM on the 3rd February, 1993 and so in that sense, is a copy of the letter dated the 3rd February, 1993." 
Mr Insall cross examined on this affidavit. He put to Mr Slattery that he was deliberately creating false evidence which, naturally enough, Mr Slattery denied. Mr Insall put that Mr Slattery must have known that Lend Lease did not have a copy of the letter that he was typing out in December 1997 to which the answer was, "I fully expected them to have all the letters." Mr Insall then said: "Q. You were creating the document and they could not have a copy of it at the time could they? 
A. I was not creating. I reproduced a copy of the same letter that was issued in 1993." 
Mr Insall then put that certainly by February 1998 Mr Slattery had seen Mr
Levin's affidavit denying that he had received the letter to which Mr Slattery agreed, and then the following is set out T406-408: "Q. And you knew in February that you had typed out a copy of 
BJS5 in December 1997? 
A. Yes. ...

Q. You remembered it in February this year did you not? 
A. I knew I had a copy of that letter.

Q. You remembered in February this year you had typed out 
BJS5 in December 1997? 
A. I could not find my original copy but I found my notes.
 ...

Q. You remembered at that time (30 April 1998) you had typed up BJS5 in December 1997, did you not? 
A. I didn't think about it at that point. I didn't think there would be any issue about the letter because I believed you would have the original - Lend Lease should have the originals of all those letters.

Q. Instead of evading the question can you answer it. Do you remember when you swore your affidavit in reply you typed out BJS5 in December 1997? 
A. I don't remember that. I did it, but typed it out as part of my defence in the case. ...

Q. In April 1998 ... you remembered you typed out BJS5 in 
December 1997? 
A. Yes.

Q. So you remembered it at the end of April 1998 and then you were cross examined about it in July 1998? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you knew, when you were cross examined about it in 
July 1998, that you had typed out the letter in December 1997 did you not? 
A. No, I knew I typed it some time in 1997 ...

Q. And you knew that on 13 July did you not? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you knew that on 14 July. Could you answer yes? 
A. Yes.

Q. So you knew on 14 July you typed out the document in 
December 1997 and yet when I asked you `this document was created some time later after 3 February 1993?' you answered `no'. Do you remember that? 
A. Yes I do.

Q. That was a lie, was it not? 
A. I was confused. I wasn't sure. ...

Q. You have just told me you knew you had typed out that letter in December 1997, and yet when I asked you `this document was created some time later after 3 February ' you answered `no'. That was a lie, was it not? 
A. Yes. I was relying on my original notes." 
Mr Insall then asked Mr Slattery whether it was true that he had recently written the notes and had then put them on a grill to age them artificially and that they had not been written in 1993 at all. Needless to say, these allegations were denied.

The last witness called by the defendants was Mr Anderson, a forensic document examiner. Mr Anderson only had overnight to examine the notes and admitted that his tests were not at the stage where he could give complete assurance about the matter. However he said that his examination showed that the notes had not been written on a pad as Mr Slattery had said, but in fact had been written sheet by sheet and then had been artificially aged by being put on some sort of grill because examination showed slight scorch marks in a regular pattern. Furthermore, the three individual sheets had not been together when they became crinkled because the crinkling was different on each and this was consistent with them having been written individually and then laid individually on a heating device to give the impression that they were older than they were. This, of course, is quite inconsistent with the sheets having been filed away in a box.

There was some cross examination as to whether the sheets could have been in the sunlight for some years and achieved this effect, but Mr Anderson said that this would not have given the effect he saw; in any event it is inconsistent with Mr Slattery's own evidence. The ironic thing about Mr
Anderson's evidence was that he said with this sort of paper, had there not been some attempt to age the documents artificially leaving tell-tale marks it would have been impossible for him to come to any conclusion as to when the notes were written.

After Mr Anderson had given his evidence, a short adjournment was granted and
Mr Evans considered whether he needed an adjournment to call counter evidence.
Doubtless after weighing whether time would give Mr Anderson the opportunity to find something more weighed against the possibility of an expert finding some defence to what Mr Anderson said, Mr Evans, wisely in my view, decided not to call further evidence.

The evidence of Mr Anderson together with the continually changing evidence of
Mr Slattery and his admissions makes it fairly clear that document BJS5 is a forgery and was created in December 1997 just before Mr Slattery swore his affidavit. This attempt to fabricate evidence must rank as one of the most despicable attempts to deceive the court that has been uncovered. Not only does the attempt completely destroy Mr Slattery's credibility as a witness, the court also has the duty to send the papers to the appropriate authorities.

Judges must always be careful that when they disbelieve the evidence of the primary witness for the plaintiff, that they do not ipso facto dismiss the whole of the case for the plaintiff because there may be other evidence which supports it. I need to examine that other evidence.

I should record that I am acutely conscious that in making a decision to take a shop in a shopping centre a prospective tenant is often not in a position to have access to reliable information, especially reliable information as to future developments of the centre and is likely to rely on statements made by those who are promoting the centre. It is also not uncommon for those who are promoting the centre to overstate the prospects of the centre. Furthermore, as is supported by the evidence in the instant case, the addition of a cinema complex to a shopping centre is thought to generate extra business for the shops in the centre. All these are general propositions which, as a man or woman of the world, a tribunal of fact has in the back of the mind. However, in any particular case there needs to be reliable evidence as to whether these tendencies in fact affected the prospective tenant in that particular case.

It is also to be borne in mind that allegations of false and misleading conduct are very easily made and that many prospective tenants only hear selectively what they want to hear and that the centre is often less able to defend itself from allegations because of a constant change of personnel.
Again, the same comments can be made about these thoughts. I state them because I believe it is necessary for people to realise that judges do not decide these cases from an ivory tower, but realise the pressures that are there in the market place.

The whole of the evidence (other than the discredited evidence of Mr
Slattery), suggests that Mr Levin did say that there would be a proposed cinema complex and that the proposal was to site the cinema complex at the northern entrance to the Boardwalk.

Although a lot of store was placed on the word "proposal" by the defendants, there is no particular magic about that word. One can be walking through a swamp in the middle of thick bush land and see a notice "Proposed site for multi-storey office block" and consider the whole thing a joke. On the other hand, a response to a proposal of marriage is something which, at least before statute intervened, led to an immediate and binding contract. A proposal must be considered in all the background circumstances as to whether it is something which is more than likely to happen or something that is just a possibility.

The context of Mr Levin's remarks appears to me to be more in the "This is something which may well come about" type of proposal rather than anything more.

Mr Slattery denies in para 39 of his affidavit PA24 that Mr Levin used the word "proposal". However, in his letter, DX10, of 17 August 1994 to Mr
Tressider, the words used were "Rhon Levin, who indicated to us that we would have a cinema complex possibly within a two year period and the proposed location was directly opposite our northern entrance on the bus stop." This letter is, I think, fairly close to what was said.

Thus, even if I had accepted Mr Slattery's evidence, the material proffered by the plaintiffs would not have made me conclude on the balance of probabilities that there was any such representation.
The alleged representation as to the 18 months can be dealt with briefly. In many respects the representation is linked with that of the site of the cinema complex. However, the time whether it be 18 months or two years was always just a possibility. It was never a matter which seemed to excite Mr
Slattery in any way in contemporaneous correspondence. For a man who was entering into a five year lease in any event a cinema complex possibly within two years is hardly the sort of statement that would amount to a representation that any tenant would rely on before entering into the deal.
So far as the eating area is concerned, again this part of the plaintiffs' case fails because of the lack of credibility of the plaintiffs' witnesses. The only additional fact that should be added is that the plan which was studied carefully by Mr Slattery on the evidence, did in fact show a second food hall with tables and chairs, and Mr Carter certainly was aware there would be a second eatery.
As to 24 hour access to public toilets, it is common ground that there was initially agreement that there would be 24 hour access to public toilets which was altered. The Landlord paid $15,000 towards erection of the tenants' toilets. I understand that this may not have been a good result for the tenant in that floor space was still being occupied by toilets that could have been occupied by machines, but the fact remains that the $15,000 was accepted many years ago and the complaint only arose relatively recently.
There is no evidence from which I could reasonably conclude that a representation about traffic flow was made during the 1993 negotiation period of the first lease.
No other significant representation arises.
Were such representations, or any of them, false and misleading? 
The answer is that this question does not arise because no representations were made.
Again, this does not arise, but were it to arise the answer would shortly be "No". Mr Carter acknowledged that there was no reliance and the only other evidence was the discredited evidence of Mr Slattery.

It is useful here to remind tenants that the court does not consider that when a lease is being negotiated that the tenant is in a position where it is entitled to special protection by a court of equity. A fortiori is this so in a case such as the present where the tenant approaches the landlord for a lease and proceeds to demonstrate to the landlord that it is a better prospect than some other prospect that the landlord already has in view. As Branson and
Emmett, JJ said in Leda Holdings Pty Ltd versus Oraka Pty Ltd [(1997) 20 ATPR -601at] pp 40,514, in a similar context " The relationship between the landlord and tenant, being that of parties negotiating at arm's length without any special disability, was not one which would normally be expected to give rise to any obligation of disclosure. When parties are dealing at arm's length in a commercial situation, it may well be that one party will be aware of information which if known to the other, would cause the other to take a different negotiating stance. That, however, is not such as to require disclosure of that information." 
Likewise, where the prospective landlord shares some information with the tenant as to what might or is expected to occur in a centre, that does not of itself constitute some material which the tenant is entitled without more to treat as gospel and to abandon any independent business judgment so that he or she can plead reliance.

In the instant case, should the matter need to be decided, it is clear that
Messrs Slattery and Carter, the then principals of B & M exercised their own judgment.
The question as to whether B & M has suffered any damage does not arise in view of my findings.
Did the plaintiffs make statements that they had not relied on the representations? 
There is no doubt at all that such a statement was made in the acceptance of the offer of lease. The real point being made by the plaintiffs under this head is that any such statement cannot assist the defendants in these proceedings. Basically this is because if there were representations made which were relied on by the plaintiffs in entering into the lease, their statements to the contrary, particularly in a standard form document, will be little worth. On the other hand, if no such representations were made, the plaintiffs fail in any event and it is not necessary to consider the effect of such a statement.

Another way of putting the same proposition is that clauses of this sort are valueless if they are being used to ground a pretence that the tenant has agreed to something to which he or she has not agreed (in other words a sort of sham), and they cannot operate if there is a misrepresentation which the landlord knows or should know about. Furthermore, they cannot prevent the tenant setting aside the agreement under <case> of the Trade Practices Act.
However, outside those limitations they operate validly. In particular, they can be used as part of the factual mix to show that the tenant has not in fact been the victim of a false representation.

The problem has been recently considered by the Federal Court on several occasions.

Mr Evans relies on various passages from key authorities. He notes that
Wilcox, J said in Collins Marrickville Pty Ltd versus Henjo Investments Pty Ltd [(1987) 72 ALR 601], 613-4, "If in fact the misleading conduct of the respondent has induced an applicant to enter into an agreement, that inducement is not negated because, in the agreement itself, the applicant says to the contrary."
However his Honour then says "Of course, the fact that the applicant so says may bear upon the question whether he or she should be believed in asserting that the misleading conduct was an inducement; although in the case of a printed exclusion clause this may be of little moment." 
Pincus, J, when a judge of the Federal Court, also dealt with this problem in
Waltip Pty Ltd versus Capalaba Park Shopping Centre Pty Ltd [(1989) 11 AT PR -975] at p 50,662 where he said that an innocent party whose agent has in fact made a misrepresentation unbeknown to the principal but where the applicant has signed an exclusion clause may enable the principal to sue on the exclusion clause. See also the decision of the Full Federal Court in
Clark Equipment Australia Ltd versus Covcat Pty Ltd [(1987) 71 ALR 367], 371.

The significance of this sort of provision was again examined by the Full
Federal Court in the Oraka case at pp 40,517-8.

In the present case, were it necessary to do so, I would have considered that the presence of the exclusion clause, taken with the other evidence led to the conclusion that there had been no representation on which the plaintiffs relied.
Were the statements made in the disclaimer of warranty clauses fraudulent? 
The answer is "No" because the plaintiffs fail on the main case.
Under [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), an action for damages in respect of a contravention of the Act must be commenced within three years after the date on which the cause of action accrued. The cases under the section show that the cause of action accrues when loss or damage is suffered as a result of the breach: Wardley Australia Ltd versus Western
Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514.] 
Mr Evans submits that B & M's cause of action did not crystallise until the representation that the cinema complex would be constructed outside the northern entrance to the Boardwalk was shown to be false. This happened only in 1995 or 1996. Mr Insall, on the other hand, says that if any damage was suffered by B & M, it was suffered the moment it entered into the lease.

It is not necessary to rule on this matter because in fact I have held no representations were made. My present view is that Mr Evans is more likely to be correct as a matter of principle, but that, on the facts, the cause of action arose no later than 13 September 1994, when Mr Slattery was informed that a cinema complex at the "proposed" location was neither physically nor commercially possible. As the proceedings were not commenced until December , they were too late.
The area of the plaintiffs' shop is not currently a matter of issue between the parties because of the subsequent agreement. In so far as it is alleged that there was a misrepresentation as to the area of the shop, my view is the documents do not bear this out. They talk in terms of approximately 228 square metres. That the area is less than 228 square metres is clear. However, it is not at all clear that the rent was fixed as so much per square metre; indeed if one divides the initial rent in the lease by 228 one does not get the sort of number that one would expect if this were so. I do not consider I need say any more about this.
The pleadings in 5027/97 show that there was an agreement to pay $61,940.78 by B & M for back rent up until 1996 which was to be paid by monthly instalments. B & M did not do this fully, and it is clear both from what is admitted on the pleadings and in the evidence that there is still $13,375.70 owing by B & M to the defendants.

Under the second lease to Textralian the amount owing until the purported re- entry on 9 October 1997 is, according to Mr J Prestoe's affidavit, DA10, to which there is no answer so far as quantum is concerned, $76,993.06.

It may be that I have overlooked some calculations as the quantum of the liability of the Slatterys to the defendants was not the prime focus of this litigation but it would seem to me that what I have just mentioned are the sums involved and in each case they were guaranteed by Mr and Mrs Slattery.
On 18 September 1997, the defendants served notices under <case> of the
Conveyancing Act on Textralian and the Slatterys in respect of breaches of covenants under the new lease to pay annual rent and the lessees' proportion of operating expenses and the marketing levy. There was a mediation conference at the plaintiffs' solicitors' office on 3 October 1997, but this did not resolve matters and, in due course, the Registrar, Retail Tenancy Disputes, issued a certificate that mediation has failed.

At about 7 am on 9 October, Mr Prestoe attended the shop together with Jim
McCreadie, the Property Manager of the shopping centre, Danny Fordham, a security officer, a locksmith and others. Jim McCreadie proceeded to place a chain and padlock around the roller shutter and around the external door.

I should note that because of the design of the plaintiffs' shop, one actually enters on to the demised space when one gets outside the eastern door underneath the curved feature above the doorway. Thus, there is no doubt in my mind that even if they did not go inside the doors the defendants entered on to the demised premises.

At about 9.40 that same morning, Mr Prestoe was told that the Slatterys had ground off the locks and chains and at about that time Mrs Slattery came into
Mr Prestoe's office and threw chain fragments on the floor and said, "You can shove them up your ass." 
At about 9.05 to 9.15 that night, Mr Prestoe and Mr McCreadie and five security guards attended the premises. It is common ground that they actually entered the premises because Mrs Slattery's affidavit admits as much. Mr
Prestoe said, "We have come to re-enter and secure the premises on behalf of the lessors" (those were the words of his affidavit; Mrs Slattery says the words were "We're here to take possession of the premises". It matters very little which was said because both sets of words express an intention to effect a re-entry). Mrs Slattery threatened the security officers with a black aerosol can of what she described as mace. The police were called and advised that the status quo should prevail until the morning, which advice was accepted. However, at about 9.30 that night, the defendants disconnected the power to the premises from the main electrical distribution switchboard.

I need not describe in detail the "discussions" of the morning of 10 October.
The Slatterys brought a generator onto the site to supply power which was opposed by the defendants because of the fumes and noise it would create. The upshot was that, by letter, Mr Prestoe offered to agree to allow Textralian to occupy the premises under licence until 5 pm on 15 October and to re-connect the electricity until then. Mr Slattery agreed to this by signing the space reserved on the letter for him to signify his agreement, but only after he had made a considerable number of handwritten amendments to the letter (see annexure M to Mr Prestoe's affidavit DA10).

Mr Prestoe became aware that the plainitffs were still trading on Tuesday 16
October. On 17th October, Mr Prestoe called at the premises and was told by
Mrs Slattery, "Ben signed the letter under duress because you turned our power off. I didn't sign it and we will continue to trade." 
At about 6.15 on 20 October 1997, Mr Prestoe again attended the premises with
Mr McCreadie and others, including a Mr Shane Fogg, a locksmith. Mr Fogg at Mr
Prestoe's instructions, cut a chain which had been erected by the Slatterys around a roller shutter door with bolt cutters so that Mr Prestoe could enter the premises and reclaim them. Mrs Slattery sprayed capsicum spray through the roller shutter, some of which entered Mr Fogg's eyes and hit Mr McCreadie on the forehead. The police arrived shortly afterwards.

On 22 October 1997, the summons in 4497/97 was issued seeking a declaration that there had been re-entry and for judgment for $76,993.06. This matter came before me as the then Duty Judge on 30 October 1997. On that day I made orders by consent which included noting the defendants' assertion that they have retaken possession and the plaintiffs' denial of that statement, together with an undertaking by the defendants not to exclude the plaintiffs from possession pending the final hearing of these proceedings. An occupation fee was agreed upon.

I have no personal recollection of anything that happened before me on 30
October. I was told by Mr Insall at this hearing and indeed, he put these matters to Mrs Slattery, that it was only when I had indicated during discussion with counsel that the defendants should succeed that there was a short adjournment during which Mrs Slattery revealed for the first time that when Mr Prestoe purported to take possession in the morning of 9 October, she was actually sleeping in the male toilet in the premises.

Although a re-entry can be effected by the landlord's representative going onto part of the property leased and saying "I enter into possession of this part of the property in the name of the whole", there has been some doubt in the authorities as to whether the landlord in re-entering must obtain possession to the physical exclusion of the lessee or those claiming under him.

In Tattersall's Hotel Penrith Pty Ltd versus Permanent Trustee Co Of NSW Ltd <case>; [(1942) 42 SR 104], , Roper, J held that such physical exclusion was necessary. That decision, together with others, was reviewed by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of
Queensland in Ex parte Whelan [[1986] 1 Qd R 500] at 506 and following. Thomas, J who gave the decision of the Court reviewed all the authorities and concluded that there were two lines of authority which were inconsistent and that the predominant view of the authorities in both
Australia and England ran contrary to Roper, J's proposition. The Queensland
Full Court held that all that was necessary was that the landlord enter on to the premises and make an unequivocal demand for possession.

Despite the almost legendary status of Roper, J as a judge who was hardly ever wrong, in Australia of the 1990s it seems to me that it is the duty of a single judge to follow a considered decision of the Full Court of the Supreme
Court of another State of Australia, in preference to a decision of a single judge of his or her own State. Accordingly, in my view, it is not necessary for the landlord to show that as at 9 October when it asserted an unequivocal right to possession and put the chains on the doors Mrs Slattery may in fact have been sleeping in the premises as she claimed.

However, even if what Roper, J said still represents the law, I could not find on the balance of probabilities that Mrs Slattery was inside the shop at that time. In view of her reaction on other occasions when a re-entry was attempted, it seems extraordinary that if she was on the premises she would not have heard an attempt at re-entry and made her presence known. A fortiori is this so if she thought that her being on the premises would thwart a re- entry unless she was physically removed. However, even apart from this, it almost belies belief that without any warning as to this being the day on which possession would be taken, Mrs Slattery would on this night, of all nights, have actually slept on a sleeping bag in the male toilet. Then there is the circumstance that the alleged fact of sleeping in the toilet was not actually proffered until the interlocutory hearing when one would have expected it would have been raised many days before that. In the light of these matters, and the general lack of respect I have for the credibility of the evidence tendered by the plaintiffs, I reject the assertion that Mrs
Slattery was sleeping in the premises or indeed upon the premises when re- entry was effected on 9 October.

It follows that the Landlord has re-entered and has been entitled to possession since 9 October 1997, or at least since 15 October 1997 when the licence agreement expired. The question in ejectment proceedings is whether, as at the date of the summons, the landlord is entitled to possession. That was 22 October 1997 and the Landlord was entitled to possession as at that date.
 & 12. These two matters can be dealt with together. The only real challenge to the binding effect of the agreement to settle the dispute was that the agreement was invalidated or should be set aside because of the representations that were allegedly made as set out in para 16 of the plaintiffs' cross claim.

On 9 July 1996, Mr Robson, who was then the Centre Manager, wrote to Mr and
Mrs Slattery to the effect that the shop had been surveyed by John B White Pty
Ltd and had been found to measure 215.2 square metres and that there would be an adjustment since the commencement of trade to account for the discrepancy in gross letting area of 9.6 square metres. The letter went on to say, "In the light of your current trading performance and in the spirit of commercial compromise we agree to the surrender of your current lease and to enter into a new Seven (7) year lease. A letter of offer reflecting the details agreed in our discussions is attached. Please return the attached documentation in this regard indicating your agreement to the surrender and new lease." The letter concluded, "Accordingly your acceptance of this proposal will finalise all the outstanding issues in relation to the lettable area of your tenancy, including the toilets and placements of structural beams." 
The evidence shows that this letter came about as a result of discussions that had been taking place between Mr Robson and Mr and Mrs Slattery over the preceding three months. On 8 July, Mr and Mrs Slattery had complained about the unfairness of what was being offered to them, and were told by Mr Robson that the deal which subsequently was recorded in the letter of 9 July was "as good as it gets".

On 23 July 1996, either Mr or Mrs Slattery attended Mr Robson's office and a few amendments were made on the letter of offer including the switch from B & M Activities Pty Ltd to Textralian Enterprises Pty Ltd. Mr and Mrs
Slattery then each signed a copy of the letter of 9 July confirming their acceptance of the proposal. The letter of offer contains a term against the heading "Warranties and Representations" "You and we must let each other know, below, anything we have promised said or done which has influenced your decision to take a shop in the Centre, and our decision to grant you a Lease."
Written in Mr Slattery's handwriting under "Things we have said to you" are these words, "Confirmation of ability to increase shop size if possible - when and to what size and proposed new rental. We would like the opportunity to re- locate to the cinema complex if and when the opportunity became available." 
Mr Slattery, in his affidavit PA05, says that at the meeting of 23 July, Mr
Robson repeated "This is as good as it gets" when Mr Slattery complained about the inadequacy of the proposal, but then Mr Robson added "Our research shows that it being stand alone complex only makes 1% to 2% difference in relation to the amount of trade you should do and you should receive a substantial increase in trade as a result of the cinemas." He said that the cinemas at
Charlestown were bringing in 600,000 people a year and that Erina Fair expected 650,000 a year but conservatively 400,000 and continued "Our research shows that 58% to 62% of these patrons will come across to the Centre and spend money." He is then alleged to have handed Mrs Slattery a copy of page 2 of his survey with a comment that Mr Robson was risking the ire of head office by doing so.

Shortly after Mr Slattery claims he said that on the figures Mr Robson had given, "We should realistically expect to get 10% of those people to spend $10 a year at our shop. That would then give us another $240,000 a year in turnover. At that rate on the basis of the proposal you're putting forward the business would be viable." He says Mr Robson replied, "Yes, the business would be very viable and if you have a new 7 year lease you've really got something to sell haven't you?" Mr Slattery said that had Mr Robson not made those representations he and his wife would not have agreed to enter into the new lease.

Mr Robson denies those conversations. He does say that he told Mr Slattery that research indicated that the cinemas would have an impact of somewhere between 1% or 2% on centre sales. He says he did receive a preliminary survey.
The person who took the survey reckoned that 27% of Central Coast respondents indicated that they would visit the proposed cinemas at Erina Fair at least once a month. Mr Robson has then in his handwriting worked at that 27% of 2 million is about $648,000 and has written this on the copy of the survey which is in his internal file. He denies, however, he gave a copy of the survey or even page 2 of it to the Slatterys. I believe this evidence of Mr Robson. It is consistent with other evidence in this case where copies of internal documents of the defendants appear in the plaintiffs' affidavits with no credible explanation as to how the plaintiffs secured them.

Mrs Slattery gives corroborative evidence of what her husband has put in his affidavit.

I cannot accept Mr Slattery as a witness of truth. I have also very great reservations about Mrs Slattery's credibility. I have not accepted her evidence that she slept in the centre overnight on 8/9 October 1997. Despite her denials it was quite clear that Mrs Slattery had prepared her evidence in conjunction with Mr Slattery, one indication of this is that they both produced identical verbatim conversations where neither of them had taken notes.

Mr Robson's denials are reinforced by the fact that the Slatterys already knew the use that was made by the defendants of passages in the agreement specifying that there was no representation or warranty made outside the document. Yet Mr Slattery inserted one matter in the space provided for "Things we have been told" but wrote not a word about the representation as to the additional patronage.

I am not satisfied that the representations in para 16 of the cross claim were made.

Accordingly, question 11 should be answered "Yes" and question 12 "No".
This does not arise though I would agree with Mr Insall that no falsity has been proved should any of the representations in para 16 actually have been made.
This again does not arise.
This does not arise, but I agree that there is no evidence that
Textralian suffered any damage even if such a representation was made and made falsely.
It would seem that this is immaterial but both (a) and (b) should be answered "Yes". The evidence clearly was that the defendants wanted an end to the dispute; they proffered the document, Mr Slattery filled in the blank. The evidence is from Mr Robson that he relied on those matters and would not have finalised the new lease documents otherwise.
This does not arise.
The orders that should be made follow from what I have said and from what
I am about to say about costs. I will put these in shorthand form and short minutes can be brought in in due course, together with proper calculations. In this section of the judgment, I use the terms "plaintiffs" and "defendants" in the strict sense of the persons who were the actual parties in the respective proceedings.

So far as costs are concerned, my view of the whole proceedings has been that they were based on a hypothesis invented by the Slatterys for which there was no reasonable support save and except their own fabricated evidence. Although there was "expert" evidence and other supporting material, when one looks at it closely, it is either irrelevant to the real point, or alternatively, dependent on history provided by the Slatterys. Thus costs should be on the indemnity basis.

Accordingly, I will merely publish these reasons and stand the matter over until 6 October, 1998 at 9.30 am for the purpose of bringing in short minutes.
If counsel contact my Associate early in the previous week, that date may be altered by consent. I will want to know beforehand if the time required to dispose of the proceedings will exceed 15 minutes. At that time, any question of postponement of the issue of the writ of possession may be discussed.

In short form, the orders I would expect to see are:- 
A. In 4497/97: 
I give judgment for the plaintiffs against Textralian 
Enterprises Pty Ltd, Bennett Joseph Slattery and Rhonda Daily Slattery in the sum of $76,993.06 plus interest in accordance with the Act and Rules.

I make an order that there be inquiry as to mesne profits due to the plaintiffs from 9 October, 1997 to date of vacation of the premises pursuant to these orders.

Subject to compliance with the appropriate formalities I make an order that a writ of possession issue to give the plaintiffs possession of Shop TE12 Erina Fair.

I request the Registrar to send the relevant papers in these proceedings including a copy of the reasons for judgment to appropriate authorities to consider whether an indictable offence has been committed in respect of fabrication of evidence or perjury by 
Bennett Joseph Slattery.

I order that the defendants pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings on the indemnity basis.

The exhibits may be handed out after 28 days on the usual basis.

Note that confidential Exhibit DX08 is only to be handed out to counsel or a solicitor with Freehill, Hollingdale & Page.

Exhibit PX36 is to be retained to be held in safe custody by the 
Registrar.

B. In 5027/97: 
I order that the claim be dismissed.

On the cross claim I give judgment for the cross claimants for $13,375.70 plus interest under the Act and Rules.

I order that the plaintiffs pay the defendants' costs on the indemnity basis.

The exhibits may be handed out after 28 days on the usual basis.
 * * * 
