

Regina versus Qian Le Zheng [1997] NSWSC 387 (8 September 1997) 
REGINA versus QIAN LE ZHENG /96 
Friday 16 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, STUDDERT J, LEVINE J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant Qian Le Zheng seeks leave pursuant to <case>(a) of the Criminal Appeal Act to appeal against an interlocutory judgment of his Honour Judge Mahoney QC whereby his Honour refused an application for a separate trial.

The applicant is at present awaiting trial in the District Court on a number of charges expressed in an indictment framed on 9 September 1996: the first count charges that between 30 September 1992 and 4 October 1992 the applicant and a co-accused, Joseph Ladislaus Meissner, supplied a large commercial quantity of a prohibited drug, namely heroin; the second count relates only to the co-accused Meissner and charges participation in the supply of heroin on 1 October 1992; the third count concerns the applicant only and charges him with an offence on 3 October 1992 of knowingly taking part in the supply of not less than the commercial quantity of heroin; the fourth count again concerns only the applicant and charges that on 3
October 1992 he did knowingly take part in the supply of not less than a large commercial quantity of heroin.

On 6 December 1996 the applicant was refused a separate trial from the co- accused mentioned in the first and second counts above and it is that refusal which the applicant here seeks to challenge.

It is the Crown case that the applicant, the co-accused Meissner and others, including a man named Johns, were parties to an agreement to supply not less than a large commercial quantity of heroin, being some seventy-five ounces.
The Crown further alleges that pursuant to that agreement the co-accused
Meissner knowingly took part in the supply of one ounce of heroin; that activity is the subject of the second count in the indictment. As against the applicant, the Crown case is that he knowingly participated in the supply of some twenty-five ounces, and that activity forms the basis of the third count, and that he knowingly participated in a further and larger supply of some forty-three ounces as charged in the fourth count. It is to be contended that the applicant's involvement in the supply of the large commercial quantity to which the first count relates is to be inferred from his conduct relating to counts three and four and to his presence at an asserted meeting with the person Johns on 2 October 1992.

The Crown intends to call some forty witnesses who the Court is informed would give evidence relevant to the attempted proof of the four offences charged in the indictment. If the applicant and the co-accused went to trial separately, then those same witnesses would have to be called twice. This was clearly a weighty matter for the consideration of the District Court judge when he refused to order a separate trial for the applicant.

However, it is submitted that the further delay that would occur before the trial commences if the applicant and the co-accused are to be tried together would be such as to cause serious injustice to the applicant. It is submitted that in refusing to grant a separate trial, the judge fell into error particularly having regard to the history of this matter.

The applicant was arrested as long ago as October 1992. He was refused bail up to the time of his first trial which took place in May 1994. The jury found him guilty and he was in due course convicted and sentenced in August 1994 to a head sentence of thirteen years four months with a minimum term of ten years backdated to the date he was taken into custody. There was an appeal from that decision and that appeal was heard by the Court of Criminal Appeal in November
It was held that the jury had been misdirected in material respects and in the result the appeal was allowed, the convictions were quashed and a new trial ordered: Zheng [(1995) 83 A Crim R 572.] 
The applicant applied unsuccessfully for bail following that appeal, bail being refused in April 1996. There have been later unsuccessful applications for bail, the second one being in the District Court and more recently still a further application was refused in the Supreme Court in March of this year.

The co-accused on the other hand has not been in custody over the past four and a half years but has been at liberty on conditional bail. He was originally indicted to stand trial with the applicant but he succeeded in having his trial adjourned because of the illness of his wife in 1994 and as a consequence of that successful application the Crown went ahead against the applicant alone at his first trial. For various reasons the co-accused did not stand trial before this court ordered a new trial for the applicant and thereafter the Crown decided upon a joint trial once more.

There were interlocutory rulings made in the District Court concerning the pending joint trial from which the co-accused sought leave to appeal to the
Court of Criminal Appeal, presumably pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal
Act. It appears from the terms of his Honour's judgment presently under consideration that his Honour considered it likely that should the co- accused's appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal prove unsuccessful the co- accused would endeavour to obtain leave from the High Court to appeal from a decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal. On the other hand, if the appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal proves successful his Honour understood it was likely that the Crown would pursue an application for leave to appeal to the
High Court. His Honour appears to have accepted the submission that late 1998 would be the earliest that a joint trial could be expected to proceed. That appears to have been the basis upon which the application for a separate trial was considered in the District Court.

Since the separate trial application was refused a trial date has been allocated in the District Court for the joint trial, namely 8 September 1997, and the applicant wants his trial to proceed then. The Court has today been informed that the trial date is to be confirmed on 13 June but it would seem that if the matter is ready to proceed the hearing date will be confirmed for September 1997. However, the co-accused's appeal to this court has not yet been allocated a hearing date and in these circumstances the applicant submits it is realistic to expect that the co-accused will seek to have the September trial date vacated. That, it seems to me, is a reasonable expectation.

Because of the period of time which this applicant has spent in custody and because of the way in which his Honour approached the matter, I would grant the applicant leave to pursue this appeal against the refusal to order separate trials.

The principles that govern applications for separate trials are well settled.
In Dellapatrona [(1993) 31 NSWLR 123] it was said in the joint judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal: "There remains a balance to be struck between the public interest in the efficient dispatch of criminal trials and in prejudice which may be caused to the accused. It is desirable to have all those charged in relation to a particular crime tried at the same time unless positive injustice would thereby be caused: R versus Oliver [(1984) 52 ALR 543] at 547.

When Judge Mahoney refused to order a separate trial he did so in the course of considering in the one judgment the applicant's application for bail pending his trial and the application for a separate trial. Both applications were unsuccessful but in the course of stating his reasons for his decision the judge did consider the lengthy period that the applicant has been in custody and he did also consider the further delay that there might be before the applicant went to trial.

The Crown has submitted that a consideration of his Honour's remarks discloses no error such as would warrant the intervention of this Court. I do not agree.
It seems to me that positive injustice would be caused if the consequence of a refusal to order separate trials was that contemplated by his Honour, namely the postponement of the trial until late 1998. Since delay of that length appears to have been in his Honour's mind as a likely consequence of refusing the relief sought, I am of the opinion that his Honour erred in refusing the application for separate trials. It seems to me that in reaching his decision his Honour did not have proper regard to the consequences of the refusal. A possible delay of this applicant's trial until the end of 1998, unless due to some meritorious application made by the applicant, cannot, in my view, be tolerated. By the end of 1998 the applicant would have been in custody for six years.

In my opinion this Court should intervene and I would propose the following orders:
That leave to appeal against the decision refusing the applicant a separate trial be granted;
That the applicant be granted a separate trial in respect of the charges specified in the proposed indictment bearing date 9 September 1996 to the content of which I have referred.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree.
 
LEVINE JA: And I agree.
 
PRIESTLEY JA: The Court makes the orders as proposed by Studdert J.
 * * * 
