

Sacon Constructions Pty Ltd versus Kezarne Pty Ltd Matter No 55007/97 [1997]
NSWSC 474 (10 October 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
SACON CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LIMITED versus KEZARNE PTY LIMITED /97 October 1997 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division Construction List 
Name of Case: SACON CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LIMITED versus KEZARNE PTY LIMITED 
Proceedings: 55007/97 
Dates of Hearing: 16, 17, 30 September 1997 
Date of Judgment: 10 October 1997 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr G L Turner 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Borak & Co 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr M R Gracie 
Solicitor for Defendant: Whitfields 
Adoption of Report of a Referee opposed. Held that the report should be adopted.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Reference Out 2 
The Pleadings Before The Referee 4 
The Hearing Before The Referee 9 
The Motion To Adopt The Report 10 
The Objections To The Report 
Denial Of Natural Justice 13 
The Evidence Of Mr Osmo 30 
Whether The Referee Failed To Have Regard To The 
Submission That He Should Assess The Risk Of A 
Claim By Pan Asia Against The Defendant 33 
Whether The Letter of 6 August 1996 Formed 
Part Of The Contract 41 
Pressurisation Ducts 48 
Plaintiff's Non Entitlement To Damages In Respect Of 
A Strike Of 9-11 October 1996 50 
Abandonment Of Claim Under Paragraph 6 51 
Items 29(a) And 30 51 
Findings On Items 3 And 31 Of Paragraph 6.104 56 
Findings On Back Charges (Paragraph 9.1) 57 
Omitted Works 65 
Conclusion 68 /1997 - SACON CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LIMITED versus KEZARNE PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By a Summons issued on 26 February 1997 the plaintiff, Sacon Constructions Pty
Limited, for which Mr G.L. Turner of Counsel appeared, sought judgment in the sum of $319,116 and ancillary relief against the defendant, Kezarne Pty
Limited, for which Mr M.R. Gracie of Counsel appeared. The basis of the claim was that the plaintiff, which carried on the business of a sub-contract formworker, had entered into an oral sub-contract agreement in about July 1996 with the defendant for the supply, installation, dismantling and removal of formwork for the placing of reinforced concrete by others on an eleven storey residential building at 1 Poplar Street, Darlinghurst, which building was being constructed by the defendant for Pan Asia Group Pty Limited, ("Pan
Asia").

During the course of the work disputes arose between the parties as to compliance with their contractual obligations. The defendant cross-claimed against the plaintiff seeking to recover $737,439 comprising monetary components for defective work, delay costs and the balance of moneys owing for amounts paid or incurred by it on behalf of the plaintiff as set forth in the
Defence.

The matter came before Bainton J on 14 March 1997 and, as it was being asserted that its resolution was urgent, his Honour specially fixed the hearing for 18 and 19 March 1997. He gave directions to facilitate that hearing, and, upon the plaintiff giving the usual undertaking as to damages, noted an undertaking by the defendant that until further order it would not disburse or otherwise dissipate any moneys, which may be paid to it by Pan
Asia pursuant to the contract entered for the construction of the building, otherwise than to pay amounts payable to non-executive employees and to other sub-contractors in accordance with the terms of the contract between the defendant and such sub-contractors.

The Reference Out 
After several days hearing before his Honour it appeared that the matter was one which was appropriate to be referred out pursuant to Part 72 rule 2(1) and, on 20 March 1997, his Honour made an order referring the whole of the proceedings to Mr Geoffrey Lumsdaine for enquiry and report. Mr Lumsdaine is an experienced referee and arbitrator with well recognised architectural and building qualifications and expertise. The obvious purpose of referring the matter to him was to enable a person with those qualifications to consider the various disputes raised by the parties within the structure of the reference rules and to report to the Court. His Honour's order directed that subject to paragraphs 4(b) to (e) of it the provisions of Part 72 rule 8 should apply to the conduct of the proceedings under reference, and continued:- "4(b) The reference will commence on 2 April 1997 unless otherwise ordered by the Referee; 
To that end the Referee may utilise his own experience in determining any question arising in the course of the Reference, and in particular, if he thinks fit so to do, he may make enquiries of any person by telephone or facsimile; communicate orally or by telephone at any time with any expert retained by either party on any issue arising in the Reference; the Referee may consider and implement such manner of conducting the proceedings under the Reference as will, without undue formality or delay, ensure a just determination is made and in particular he may have regard to the transcript of evidence in this matter in this Court to the same extent as he would do so had that evidence been given orally before him; 
Any evidence in chief before the Referee may, unless the Referee otherwise requires, be by way of written statements or affidavits signed by the maker of the statement or affidavit; 
The Referee submit his report to the Court in accordance with Part 72, rule 11 addressed to The Registrar, Common Law Division, Construction List, on or before 17 April 1997." 
Paragraph 5 of the order directed that the Referee had power to permit such amendments or additions to the matter in the schedule as he saw fit, including an amendment of pleadings, to dispose of the true issues between the parties, and paragraph 6 provided liberty to the Referee or any party to seek directions with respect to any matter arising in the proceedings under reference on twenty four hours' notice. The obvious intention of the reference out was to bring about as speedy a resolution to the problem as possible by a person the parties obviously accepted as qualified to consider the architectural and building disputes, which had arisen between them, on the bases set out in the order.

The Pleadings Before The Referee 
The pleadings, which were those ultimately before the Referee on the basis of which he was asked to determine the matter, are Exhibit 3 before me. The plaintiff sought judgment for $359,647 and consequential orders.

It pleaded that pursuant to a partly oral and partly written agreement or, alternatively, an oral agreement made in or about June, July or August 1996 with the defendant it agreed to supply work, labour and materials and to erect and dismantle formwork on a building project for $655,000. It alleged that the oral "part" was contained in conversations between Mr Nick Commisso, on behalf of the defendant, and Mr Corrado Sanna, on behalf of the plaintiff, on 2
August 1996, the substance of the conversation being that a class 3 finish on soffits and a class 4 finish on verticals "only" was required and that the price was $655,000. The written "part" was pleaded as contained in letters from the plaintiff to the defendant dated 3, 21 and 27 June 1996, and 4 July together with the drawings referred to in that letter, 6 August 1996 together with the architectural and structural drawings referred to in that letter, and a letter dated 17 July 1996. Reliance was also placed on parts of a letter dated 16 July 1996 from the defendant to the plaintiff.

It was pleaded that the terms of the agreement were that the defendant would make progress payments fortnightly for works completed by the plaintiff; that the defendant would facilitate the performance of the plaintiff's obligations to ensure completion of the agreement within sixteen weeks from commencement of work to the suspended floor; that the defendant would supply ablution, change and lunch sheds, "craneage on requirement of the Plaintiff", and scaffolding to core and the perimeter of the building; that the defendant would supply and remove rubbish, including bins; and that the defendant would ensure prompt supply of primary surveys to enable prompt commencement and completion of formwork in accordance with the drawings supplied by the defendant.

It was pleaded that the plaintiff undertook the work and that the defendant has not paid the balance of $166,171. Further, or in the alternative, it was pleaded that subject to the agreement there were variations to the work and the parties either agreed on a price for it or, alternatively, the defendant is liable to pay a reasonable price for it. In paragraph 10 a number of alleged breaches by the plaintiff are pleaded and the claim is then made for the balance allegedly owing and for $193,476 as a reasonable price for unpaid variations. The sum of those two amounts was sought, in the alternative, as restitution.

The defendant, in its Amended Defence, asserted the issues likely to arise as being the terms of the sub-contract; whether the plaintiff was in breach of the sub-contract; whether the claims for variations were properly made pursuant to the sub-contract agreement; and whether the plaintiff's claims are delay claims for works and variations pursuant to the sub-contract. The defendant put in issue the contract alleging that a second sub-contract agreement was in writing for a lump sum of $655,000 and pleaded that it was contained in letters from the defendant to the plaintiff dated 16 July, 10
August and 16 September 1996 and from the plaintiff to the defendant dated 6
August 1996. Various express alleged written terms of the agreement were pleaded, including that the plaintiff would only use class 3 formwork, and various alleged implied terms were pleaded.

In paragraph 7 alleged breaches of the sub-contract were pleaded including assertions of defective work, and failure to perform the work in a proper manner and to use only class 3 formwork.

In paragraph 9 it was pleaded that the defendant paid moneys on account of or incurred costs on behalf of the plaintiff by reason of the plaintiff's failing to perform properly its contractual obligations. It was alleged that the defendant paid accounts on behalf of the plaintiff in the sum of $13,823; for removal of excess rubbish in the sum of $12,540; for craneage costs for the removal of excess rubbish in the sum of $6,600; and for direct costs in the sum of $53,018. It pleaded that these amounts were deductible from any moneys payable to the plaintiff, and claimed an entitlement to deduct further amounts.

By its Reply the plaintiff agreed there were two contracts, but maintained that the second "was in the terms pleaded" by it. It denied that it ever received the letter of 10 August 1996. In paragraph 28 it pleaded that the plaintiff assumed that the contract work permitted class 3 on soffits and class 4 on verticals and that the defendant induced the plaintiff to adopt that assumption. It was pleaded that the plaintiff assumed that Mr Commisso had authority to agree to variations of the contract work, which assumption the defendant induced it to adopt and that it performed class 4 work on verticals. The thrust of the pleading was that the defendant was estopped from denying that class 4 work was required on the verticals and, further, from contending that work on the verticals was to be class 3.

In paragraph 4 the plaintiff admitted in answer to paragraph 9, that the defendant had paid it certain moneys, and that it did not know and could not admit "that the Defendant has paid any monies on account of the Plaintiff or incurred any costs on its behalf". In paragraph 10 of the Amended Defence it was pleaded that the defendant was entitled to deduct the amount specified in paragraph 9 from any payments. In reply, inter alia, to paragraph 10 the plaintiff asserted that the defendant was not entitled to make any deductions from progress claims or from any money payable to the plaintiff, and that it was not in breach of its agreements with the defendant.

In its Amended Cross-Claim there was a repetition of many matters pleaded in the Defence and claims for defective work less retention of $117,250; delay costs of $320,000 and the balance of money owing as specified in paragraphs 9, and 12 of $1,234.00. The Defence to the Cross-Claim repeated the matters set forth in paragraphs 1 to 12 and said that the defendant had not suffered any damage by reason of the plaintiff's breaches of its agreements.

The Hearing Before The Referee 
The proceedings before the Referee took far longer than expected and, on 3
September 1997, he submitted his report to the Court. He noted, in paragraph .1, that the hearing took place over seventeen days between 2 April 1997 and May 1997 and that written submissions were delivered by 18 June 1997. There was a further mention of the matter, or perhaps some part of the hearing, on May 1997, by which time the transcript had extended to 1,755 pages. The report noted that questions of quantum had, generally speaking, been determined by two consulting structural engineers, one each having been retained by each party for the purposes of the proceedings, either by agreement or in conclave with the Referee. This was a very sensible approach to those questions and the issue of quantum having been resolved in that way it is a little difficult to understand why the proceedings took so long. An essential purpose of referring matters out is to enable an expert, using his expertise and exercising a degree of informality which would not be open to a
Judge, to determine the matters referred as expeditiously and economically as possible. Evidence before me indicates that the costs for each side are substantial, it being asserted on behalf of the plaintiff that its costs were, as at early June 1997, in the order of $200,000.

Notwithstanding that the referee can have regard to matters within his knowledge as an expert and is able to conduct the proceedings with some informality in determining a matter on reference, he or she must comply with the rules of natural justice, in the context of a reference out, and must furnish a reasoned report to the Court for its consideration pursuant to Part rule 13.

The Referee's report, which comprised twenty pages, found that the plaintiff was liable to pay the defendant $96,710. This conclusion was reached by adding to the original contract sum of $655,000 an amount for variations and deducting therefrom omissions and back charges giving an adjusted contract sum of $631,320. From that he deducted amounts paid and rectification costs, the latter amounting to $237,401, totalling $728,030, which threw up the amount which he found for the defendant. In the report the Referee referred to the plaintiff as "the Formworker", and the defendant as "the Builder".

The Motion To Adopt The Report 
On 28 August 1997 Giles CJCommD listed the proceedings for directions on 12
September 1997 and, on that date, he granted the defendant leave to file in
Court a Notice of Motion, which he made returnable instanter, for the adoption of the report and for consequential orders. Mr Turner stated he opposed the adoption of the report and sought an adjournment. Mr Gracie stated that his client had no complaints about the report. His Honour was of the view, after hearing various submissions, that the question whether or not the report should be adopted ought to be considered as a matter of urgency and, accordingly, he stood the motion over to Tuesday, 16 September 1997:- ".. for hearing of the question of whether the report should be adopted and the consequences of its adoption, if that is the decision." 
The submissions before his Honour indicated, at least to some extent, the reasons the plaintiff was asserting the report should not be adopted and Mr
Turner provided to his Honour a document entitled:- "Points for Argument Against the Adoption of the Referee's Report".

The parties prepared themselves for the hearing, which commenced before me on September 1997 and continued on the following day. At that stage I formed the view that it was necessary to adjourn the hearing to enable the parties to prepare themselves better. I stated my reasons and gave directions for the further conduct of the matter, which included the furnishing of written submissions. There was compliance with these and when the proceedings were mentioned on 26 September 1997 the parties agreed that the hearing could continue on 30 September 1997, when it was completed.

The motion was supported, initially, by two affidavits of the solicitor for the defendant, Mr John Michael Whitfield, sworn 11 and 15 September 1997.
These were read without objection and Mr Whitfield was not required for cross- examination. Mr Turner took the position that as he was opposing adoption he should start and, accordingly, he led evidence and tendered a number of documents, which have been marked by reference to letters of the alphabet. Mr
Turner also called the consulting engineer retained by the plaintiff, Mr
William Osmo, to give oral evidence. Mr Gracie tendered certain documents, which bear exhibit numbers.

Although I have mentioned the time the proceedings took before the Referee I am not to be taken as having done so critically of the Referee or the parties.
However, I think I can state, without being critical, that it is unfortunate that a procedure designed to enable an expert to resolve issues expeditiously and economically, albeit within the confines of the procedures laid down and the requirements to which I have referred, should have taken a relatively long time and been attended with the very heavy cost burden consequential on a lengthy hearing.

However, the delay proved of advantage to the defendant. In paragraph 2.6 of the report the Referee noted that at the date of the commencement of the reference scaffolding was still in place around the building and that after the completion of the hearing, but prior to the receipt of the written submissions, the defendant made a further claim for defective work after the scaffolding had been removed on the basis that that allowed it to see work previously obscured by the scaffolding, which work it alleged to be, and ultimately the Referee found to be, defective. It will be necessary to deal with this matter in more detail in the light of the objection to the adoption of the report that relates to this issue. Suffice to say, at the moment, that the additional claims by the defendant brought about most of the rectification costs, which the Referee found to be payable to it, which resulted in the plaintiff's being required to pay money to the defendant. I assume that the overall result will be a matter upon which the defendant will seek to rely when any order for costs is considered, that matter having been reserved to the Court. Indeed, although the amount ultimately in issue between the parties is relatively small, the cost consequences are serious. In addition to the costs of the reference there have been several days of hearing before Bainton
J, some mentions, and three days of hearing before me.

The Objections To The Report 
Denial Of Natural Justice 
In paragraphs 1(a), (b) and (d) of his written outline, Mr Turner asserted:- "1. That the finding made by the Referee in relation to the (defendant's) additional heads of claim (paragraph 2.7 of report) should not be adopted because: it is contrary to the principles of natural justice; it is made without permitting the (plaintiff) the opportunity of adducing evidence (despite its request) on the issue of liability.
 [Amount involved: $133,546 plus 5% margin: $6,677.30 
Balance of claim: $140,223.30] ....

The experts relied on by the Referee in assessing quantum and the Referee in quantifying the damages proceeded on a wrong assumption." 
I propose, in the first instance, to consider the way the Referee dealt with this matter in his report. Paragraphs 2.6 and 2.7 stated:- "2.6 The date of commencement of the hearing, some three weeks after the roof was stripped and while scaffolding was in place around the building, is relevant in relation to the prolongation of the reference, since the preparation of the Builder's cross claims understandably required more time than was available in the first instance. It is also relevant to the delivery of some cross claims for defective work subsequent to the completion of evidence.
 .7 After completion of the hearing but prior to the receipt of submissions, the Builder amended its cross claim for defective work. The Builder claimed that the extent of the defective work on some external walls had been obscured by the covering scaffolding, and could not be properly assessed until removal of the scaffolding in June 1997. My inspection of the Works on 2 July, and comparison with my inspection in April, led me to admit the Builder's claim. Accordingly I overruled the Formworker's objection to this allegedly enlarged claim, and directed the Experts to address this material. Under the procedures for dealing with the Experts' evidence, I considered it unnecessary to reconvene the hearing. The parties were invited to address this matter in their submissions." 
In paragraph 6.103 the Referee further explained the way he considered matters of quantum. He said:- "I held Conclaves with the Experts Osmo and Hely regarding quantum only of Variation Claims and the Cross Claims for defective work. Arising from the Conclaves the Experts jointly addressed the items in detail on site concurrently with the progress of the hearing, and I have confidence and appreciation of the manner in which the Experts carried out this task. Consensus was reached on the majority of claims." 
It is important, of course, to remember that the Referee was expressly empowered to utilise his own experience in determining any question and to permit such amendments or additions to the matter referred to him to dispose of the true issues. In paragraph 7.1, under the heading "Defective Works", he stated:- "As noted earlier, the quantification of these counter claims for defective work were considered with engineer experts retained by the parties, Mr W. Osmo by the Formworker, and Mr B. Hely by the Builder. I confirm from my own inspection that the work is defective as claimed. As to liability, I have referred in sec 4.7 to the requirement in the Contract for Class 3 formwork. I note that the standard of workmanship evident on the majority of exposed vertical surfaces was below an acceptable standard for this class of work." 
It is now necessary to trace how the dispute giving rise to the allegation of a denial of natural justice arose. Basically the hearing before the Referee concluded on 26 May 1997 on which date, Tp.1753, Mr Turner asked whether the
Referee envisaged a further meeting with the experts in the presence of the legal representatives. This request was made because at that time the experts had not furnished their final report on the matters thus far agitated in the reference. The Referee said there would be a further meeting only if it was necessary:- "And if either of you on receipt of this report consider that you really need such a thing, then obviously let me know and we'll see. But I'll probably only do it on application." 
Thus, as at 26 May 1997, a report was awaited from the experts on which the
Referee required submissions but not a further hearing unless the parties, or either of them, sought it.

On 4 June 1997 the solicitors for the defendant sent a facsimile transmission to the solicitors for the plaintiff stating that Mr Hely had asked for assistance on further work, which he considered to be of a defective nature, which had become apparent on the removal of the scaffold, and which had been omitted from the defendant's original defect list. The facsimile transmission said:- "The removal of the scaffolding has exposed further defects and demonstrated that the painter although trying has been unsuccessful in trying to rectify the problem. The job is not good enough. We want the Referee to attend a further site inspection in relation to the above matter." 
On 6 June 1997 the solicitors for the plaintiff responded stating that the plaintiff considered the defendant's conduct was "scandalous in light of your refusal to permit us to address a new head of claim". It should be noted immediately that although the plaintiff had indicated to the defendant that it wished to raise a new head of claim, to which the defendant objected, the parties agreed that the plaintiff made no application to the Referee to add a further head of claim. Its complaint in this regard was, accordingly, of little, if any, significance. The letter continued that the parties had closed their cases, that the matter had proceeded for nineteen hearing days over three and a half months, and that there was ample time and opportunity for the plaintiff to prepare its cross-claim. This statement, if I may say so with respect, seems to overlook that, on one view, it was not until the scaffolding was removed that the defects were exposed. The letter suggested the defendant was engaging in "a further delaying tactic" and stated that there was vigorous opposition to Mr Hely's contacting the Referee or attempting to adduce material in respect to either the existing or any new heads of claim. It stated that any application to re-open "shall be vigorously opposed" and that a copy of the letter had been forwarded to the Referee together with a copy of the letter from the solicitors for the defendant.

On 18 June 1997 the solicitors for the defendant forwarded to the Referee further submissions under cover of a letter of that date of which a copy was sent to the solicitors for the plaintiff. The letter stated, inter alia:- "You will see from our supplementary submissions that you are being requested by our client to attend a view with Mr Hely and Mr Osmo in relation to the matters raised in Mr Hely's report. This report has not, as far as the writer is aware, been discussed with Mr Osmo. It is understood that Sacon will oppose a further view in relation to this matter and to the increased claim for defective work. We urge you to deal with this matter as detailed in the supplementary submissions. The premature nature of these proceedings and our client's inability to identify defects caused by formwork has been raised in these proceedings on a number of occasions." 
On 18 June 1997 the Referee wrote to the solicitors for both parties acknowledging receipt of the defendant's submissions of 18 June 1997 and the further report of Mr Hely of 14 June 1997. He said he believed a conference was needed to discuss:- "1. Whether the Cross claimant's claim may incorporate the additional matters referred to in the Hely Report? . If yes, arrangements to be made for a View by Referee.
 . If yes, does Cross defendant need to put on rebuttal evidence or question Mr Hely? . Any other matter raised by the parties of which at least forty eight hours notice is given to other party and Referee prior to the conference." 
The approach taken to this matter by the Referee was, if I may respectfully say so, exemplary, and he proposed a conference on 25 June 1997.

On 20 June 1997 the solicitors for the defendant suggested in a facsimile transmission to the Referee and to the solicitors for the plaintiff that a direction should be given by the Referee to the plaintiff to provide a short submission as to what prejudice it would suffer by dealing with the additional defects disclosed in the report of Mr Hely of 14 June 1997. It continued:- "It is our basic submission that the issue is one of prejudice to the plaintiff and in this case we can see none, other than the possibility of the cost of Mr Osmo having to re-attend the site and report. To decide not to deal with these additional defects would seriously prejudice our client and would be inconsistent with the nature and terms of this reference. The plaintiff's submission in its submission appears to be in short `it is too late'. We do not accept this is the case as this matter highlights what the defendant has complained about continuously and has been canvassed in the defendants supplementary submission on its cross claim as to the premature nature of these proceedings giving our client the inability to forecast future problems. It is suggested that the short submission by the plaintiff should be served by 4 pm on the 24th 1997." 
On 20 June 1997 the solicitors for the plaintiff sent a facsimile transmission to the solicitors for the defendant stating, inter alia, that they did not agree that there would be no prejudice to the plaintiff and that the additional claim was "substantial". The letter continued that if leave was granted to re-open the solicitors for the plaintiff would request that the solicitors for the defendant call evidence from Pan Asia, the plaintiff, the rendering company, and the concreter or, in the alternative, they be subpoenaed to give evidence. It was stated that the plaintiff would also require various witnesses for cross-examination, which would involve another five to ten hearing days, and that:- "The prejudice is simply our client can no longer afford legal representation in this case. (The legal costs to date being in the vicinity of $200,000)." 
It continued:- "Mr Gracie is (conveniently) not available until 7 July 1997, the Referee will also be absent after this date. The prejudice is quite apparent.

As is your clients deliberate attempt to cause delay throughout these proceedings." 
The reference to Mr Gracie's unavailability met with a robust response from the solicitors for the defendant and was not sought to be supported by any evidence that Mr Gracie was in any way a party to any alleged conduct of the defendant, which was productive of delay, if, in truth, there was any such conduct by the defendant. The solicitor for the plaintiff has stated that it was not intended to reflect on the integrity of Mr Gracie and that an apology has been given to him. I shall leave a letter setting these matters out with the file. Nothing more needs to be said about this.

The letter continued that there was disagreement with the proposition that the defects had just become apparent and that, on the contrary, the scaffold enabled the defendant "to closely inspect any defective work". Further complaints were made and the letter concluded:- "Our client's (sic) would only consent to the case being re-opened as follows: 
That the plaintiff's legal costs on a full indemnity basis be paid by your client (security required).

That the Referee provides an interim report based on the present heads of claim. That the report be adopted at court on 11 July, 1997 with any payment due being paid to the respective parties.

That after Mr Lumsdaine's return from overseas the reference continue on the new heads of claim.

That the plaintiff be entitled to file a new heads of claim as envisaged in our letter dated 2 June 1997. This claim we would only consider if the case is to be re-opened. it is not our intention to re-open the case on this head of claim while we believe there is merit to our claim, it would not be commercially viable, only if the case is to be re-opened by your defects." 
On 23 June 1997 the solicitors for the defendant sent a facsimile transmission to the solicitors for the plaintiff and a copy to the Referee, stating, inter alia, that there was no need to adduce further evidence or to have further hearings "as it is a matter for the experts which has consistently been the approach in this matter". It continued that the Referee should meet with them and inform himself of the matters "as he is entitled to do under the terms of the reference". The facsimile dealt with certain other matters, including the time when the plaintiff became aware of the further defects and, in the penultimate paragraph, stated:- "We therefore reject your suggestion that there is any need to re-open. What we are saying is that it is the extent of the defects with reference to quantum that has just become apparent and this can be dealt with by the Referee with the assistance of the experts." 
A conference was held with the Referee on 25 June 1997. The only evidence of what transpired is in a statement of Mr Adrian Gruzman of Counsel dated 15
September 1997, (Exhibit A), which was tendered by consent as to the truth of the matter set forth therein and on which there was no cross-examination. Mr
Gruzman confirmed his appearance before the Referee on 25 June 1997 and referred to the parties present. Suffice to say that both parties were represented by their officers, their legal representatives and their experts.
He stated that the main issue concerned "the alleged further defective work which was uncovered when the scaffolding was removed, or to be removed", and that the Referee desired to attend with the experts to see whether the scaffolding would have prevented the defendant determining that there were defects such as to allow it to re-open its case and adduce further evidence.
He continued:- "In accordance with your instructions, I submitted that if this was determined in favour of the defendant, there would then have to be further evidence and submissions by the parties on the question of liability and quantum.

The Referee did not wish to hear any further submissions on that day, saying that he would make his determination when he went out on site. The Referee did not make any directions about this, and was in a hurry to conclude the meeting on this day. 
The Referee said that he was short of time and was going overseas for a break for some four weeks and could not complete his report until after his return in any event." (My emphasis.) 
Although Mr Gruzman's report was not prepared until September 1997 I was informed from the Bar table, without objection, that he reported what transpired to the solicitors for the plaintiff shortly after the meeting. The remarks of the Referee could hardly have left any doubt that he proposed to deal with the matter by what he saw on site, and that thereafter he would complete his report on his return from overseas.

On 2 July 1997, on which date the Referee and the experts attended at the site and carried out an inspection, the Referee sent a facsimile transmission to the solicitors for the parties stating:- "Following the matters discussed at the conference on 25 June, I attended the building site at 1 Poplar Street Darlinghurst today. I inspected the works the subject of Mr Hely's Revised Report dated 14/6/97 with the Experts Mr Osmo and Mr Hely.

I determined that the matters raised were admissible, in as much as they refer to parts of the building works which were not sufficiently accessible for assessment prior to removal of the scaffolding and protective mesh.

I directed the Experts to re-assess the reasonable costs of rectification, and provide a joint report to their instructing solicitors on or before Wednesday 9 July 1997.

The plaintiff is to forward the Joint Report to me on or before Friday 11 July 1997." (My emphasis.) 
In my opinion this communication, read in the light of what had transpired on June 1997, made it abundantly clear that the Referee proposed to allow the defendant to raise the issue of the further defects, that he considered there were defects which required rectification, and that he instructed the experts to re-assess the reasonable costs thereof. So much was not in issue before me.

On 4 July Mr Osmo and Mr Hely went through Mr Hely's list of defects and costings and reached substantial agreement as to the costs of the further rectification work and, on either 5 or 6 July 1997, Mr Osmo prepared a revised costing, which he incorporated in a report, and, on 9 July 1997, Mr Hely did likewise. As the experts were not able to agree on the terms of a joint report, they provided separate ones. The reports, as well as dealing with the question of quantification, dealt with issues of liability. It was conceded by
Mr Turner that the solicitors for the plaintiff received the communication from the Referee of 2 July 1997 and the report of Mr Osmo of either 5 or 6
July 1997, shortly after each of those dates.

On page 1 of his report, Mr Osmo said:- "To have the portion re-painted because the builder had it painted prior to rectification should not be charged as rectification. As a general comment the formwork classification required was Class 3 and the quality of finish now required demands a better class hence the rendering." 
Mr Osmo's acceptance that the standard of work required was Class 3 is of significance when a further submission of the plaintiff is considered that there was no contractual specification of the standard.

On page 2, in dealing with another part of the work, he said:- "To now decide after the scaffold was (sic) been removed it was an unacceptable finish, is not a true statement. The boom hire the renderer and the paint amount is not acceptable to us in line with previous comment." 
On the same page, in relation to another aspect of the work, Mr Osmo said:- "The need for rectification of the wall face, now asked to be scabbled, rendered and then painted could have easily decided when scaffolding was all around as the joints between plywood sheets causing minor runs were accessible and close inspection would have given a better decision. The builder must have made the decision to accept the standard achieved but now once the face was painted he is not happy with the product caused by the consequence of his decision.

All the above costs have been assessed as fair and reasonable but we find them unnecessary as they could have been avoided if closer supervision by someone of authority on site made a decision or gave an instruction as to the standard required." 
Mr Osmo made reference to various other matters going to liability and concluded:- "It is obvious that the builder once his previous counter claim against the contractor has been reduced by the agreement of both experts, that he raised defects of dubious nature.

These claims arising from the consequence of his decision to leave the external concrete faces of the stairs and lift walls as they were and paint them in accordance with specification.

We can understand their concern on what will the owner say, but from the beginning, the class of formwork should have been specified and controlled, level by level, whilst the scaffold was close by and the workers available." (My emphasis.) 
The portion I have emphasised has some relevance when the plaintiff's submission that the defendant did not prove that Pan Asia would require it to carry out rectification work is considered.

It is necessary to read all these comments in the light of the complaint now made that the plaintiff's legal representatives did not have an opportunity of presenting evidence to the Referee on the issue of liability in relation to the additional defects. In his report of 9 July 1997 Mr Hely joined issue with observations made by Mr Osmo on liability.

Mr Gracie furnished a written submission to the Referee dated 11 July 1997, a copy of which was provided to the solicitors for the plaintiff at about the same time: Exhibit 5. The thrust of it was that Mr Osmo had gone beyond the limits of the evidence he was able to give in that his and Mr Hely's evidence was confined to matters of quantification. It concluded:- "Any matters contained in Mr Osmo's reports which do not deal solely with quantification of rectification works and which contain subjective commentary and matters relevant to liability must be excluded from any consideration by the Referee." 
Mr Turner submitted that this submission may have deflected the Referee from having regard to the matters relating to liability raised by Mr Osmo. That may be so, but the remedy was in the hands of the plaintiff or its legal representatives to seek to correct the position.

The plaintiff did not, thereafter, seek to have a further hearing or to put any further submissions before the Referee. The position, accordingly, was that the Referee had advised the solicitors for the parties on 2 July 1997 of what had occurred on 25 June 1997 and received submissions from Mr Osmo as to liability. He had also received, to the knowledge of the plaintiff, Mr
Gracie's further submissions and, I am prepared to infer, Mr Hely's further report, to which those submissions make express reference. In my opinion the
Referee was entitled to assume that Mr Osmo's report constituted the plaintiff's response to the complaints made, particularly when he received no request for a further hearing. As I have said his communication of 2 July 1997 made it clear that he was proposing, in consequence of his inspection, to allow the additional claim to be litigated and that, as matters then stood, he considered the only outstanding issue was the amount of rectification costs.
There was nothing to prevent the plaintiff's representatives from requesting a further hearing, if that was desired, to put any further material before the
Referee. At the risk of repetition I note that the Referee had before him Mr
Osmo's contentions and Mr Hely's rebuttals. There can be no suggestion that he did not have regard to them, although the weight he attributed to them may have been affected by Mr Gracie's written submission, the more so as there was no response to it from the plaintiff, and he was entitled, in terms of the order appointing him, to apply his own experience in resolving the conflicting views. In paragraph 7.1 he found that the work was defective "as claimed" and that the standard of workmanship on the majority of exposed vertical surfaces was below an acceptable standard for Class 3 formwork.

In a facsimile transmission sent by the Referee to the Associate to Bainton J on 2 July 1997, a copy of which was sent to the solicitors for both parties, the Referee, after recording some of the history of the matter, said:- "As scaffolding was removed recently, the defendant's Expert has re-assessed rectification costs of certain matters which were not previously sufficiently accessible for assessment. These have been addressed in a revised report which was handed to me at a conference with the parties on 18 June. As the plaintiff objected to its admissibility I attended a view with the Experts today to assess whether the revised report should be admitted at this stage. I formed the opinion that it should be admitted in order to determine the true issues between the parties, and directed the Experts to deliver a joint report on quantum by 11 July." 
The Referee advised that he would not be able to report by 12 July 1997 and sought an extension until 27 August 1997. No application was made by the plaintiff to the Referee to call further evidence.

The allegation of a denial of natural justice or procedural unfairness is said to arise because the Referee did not give the plaintiff the opportunity, which it had sought, to address on the additional defects, which the Referee made transparently clear he was prepared to consider. Indeed the only issue as he saw it, on a fair reading of the communications after the site inspection, was the quantification of the alleged defects. The obvious question of the plaintiff, which I asked Mr Turner, was why it failed to press for a further hearing, if it still wanted one, and why it did not make further submissions to the Referee on this point. Mr Turner said that in view of what transpired at the meeting of 25 June 1997 the Referee had "effectively closed off" any further hearing by the procedure he adopted. This may have been the view formed but, in my opinion, there was no justification for it. No reasons for the failure to make further submissions were advanced.

Firstly, the Referee had adopted an approach that he would hear the parties.
He had convened the meeting on 25 June 1997 and there is nothing in Mr
Gruzman's note that would suggest the Referee was taking an intractable approach. Indeed the clear impression is that he was acting with complete propriety. Secondly, the Referee advised the parties and the Court what views he had formed immediately after the view. If the plaintiff wished to respond or seek to call further evidence it was given ample opportunity to do so.
Thirdly, the plaintiff was aware of the submissions being made to the Referee.
It did not seek to respond. Fourthly, the Referee made it plain that he would not be finishing his report for some weeks. There was ample time for the plaintiff to make further submissions or apply for leave to call further evidence. There is no suggestion, nor could there be, that the Referee wrote his report without affording the plaintiff the opportunity of making an application to him. Fifthly, even if the plaintiff considered the Referee had a firm view that there would be no further hearing, such that a further approach to him would have been futile, (and I must say in the light of the very fair and proper way in which the Referee had conducted himself I would find it hard to believe that such a view was held), the Court could have been approached on short notice as the order for reference expressly provided. In my opinion the plaintiff, if it had wished to call further evidence or to make further submissions, had the remedy in its own hands. It simply sat by and did nothing. I consider that in the light of this failure the Referee was entitled to assume that the plaintiff wished to say nothing more. Even if he did not he did not deny the plaintiff natural justice or procedural fairness. I reject the plaintiff's complaints in this regard.

The Evidence Of Mr Osmo 
Mr Turner called Mr Osmo to give evidence before me. Although it does not appear on the transcript I stated that I would admit the evidence subject to objection. The evidence was called in relation to paragraph 1(d) of Mr
Turner's Points for Argument, namely that the Referee and the experts proceeded on a wrong assumption in assessing quantum. Mr Turner stated, in his opening submissions, that the wrong assumption was that what the experts were required to do was to report on quantum and not on liability.

Mr Osmo gave a chronology of the events, which involved attending on site on 2
July 1997 with the Referee and Mr Hely, attending at Mr Hely's office on 4
July 1997 and going through the claim, and writing his report on either 5 or 6
July 1997. He said, Tp.4, that he and Mr Hely went through Mr Hely's assessment making amendments to it, which were basically agreed. He continued:- "I did make comments in my report as to the validity and some of them I disagreed with Mr Hely with respect to the necessity of that quantum but not the quantum. We have analysed and verified the quantum, but I disagree with respect to all the necessity of that quantum and my report reflects my opinion." 
He was asked whether he made any assumption and he said:- "I made the assumption that we had looked at the work to be rectified as directed by Mr Lumsdaine, the work to be rectified, without considering the liability or the - if it was necessary or not. We looked at the claim, the report, and analysed if it was - the costing, the quantum, the bare quantum and then we made separate comment, each one made separate comment, Mr Hely made a comment and I made a comment." 
He continued that he did not assume that the work was required under the contract, the assumption being that the quantum had to be checked "not if it was required under the contract or not". He expressed the view that if the rectification was carried out it would improve the standard of work from Class to Class 2 "or better". In cross-examination Mr Osmo said that the question of liability was never discussed with the Referee.

In my opinion this evidence establishes neither a denial of natural justice or procedural unfairness, nor that the parties proceeded on a wrong assumption.
Mr Osmo made it clear, as his report had done, that whilst he considered his task was to assess the cost of rectification he none-the-less took the opportunity to comment on questions of liability. Nor did his evidence establish that he proceeded under any wrong assumption, or that the Referee was proceeding under any wrong assumption. In the circumstances it seems to me that the appropriate course is to reject the evidence.

The parties seemed somewhat at a loss to explain the consequence of this evidence. I suggested, and it seemed to be agreed, that one basis for receiving it was to determine whether there was any evidence which could possibly satisfy the fresh evidence test. I leave aside whether that is an issue which should be decided by the Court on the adoption of the report or by the Referee. Suffice to say that on no view, in my opinion, can such evidence as was available on the question of liability be regarded as fresh evidence.
It was obviously available during the hearing; submissions were made on it through the statement of Mr Osmo; and no attempt was made to call any other evidence although it must have existed prior to the Referee's furnishing his report. Reasonable diligence would, if it had otherwise been thought necessary that the evidence should be presented, have enabled that to be done. The point was highlighted, if that was necessary, by the submissions of Mr Gracie of 11
July 1997. In all these circumstances, I reject the plaintiff's submissions that the experts and/or the Referee proceeded on a wrong assumption.

Whether The Referee Failed To Have Regard To The Submission That He Should Assess The Risk Of A Claim By Pan Asia Against The Defendant 
A detailed submission, Exhibit E, was put before the Referee asserting, firstly, that the defendant had not established its claim fell under the second limb of the rule stated in Hadley versus Baxendale, and also that it was necessary, in considering the defendant's claims:- "To have regard to the fact that one needs to consider the real prospect that a claim will be made against it by the head contractor. This involves assessment of the probabilities. This is difficult and involves the tribunal in making an estimation. It is submitted that on the evidence such a claim is unlikely (particularly with respect to defects) and is to be treated as negligible." 
The submission made reference to the decisions in Tito versus Wardell (No 2) [[1977] 1 Ch 106], Belgrove versus Eldridge <case>; [(1953-54) 90 CLR 613] and Alucraft Pty Limited (In Liquidation) versus Grocon
Limited ( No 2) [1996] 2 VR 386. Its thrust was that there was no evidence available that the defendant would ever be called upon by Pan Asia to make good the defects. The submission before me was that the Referee failed to consider this point.

In paragraphs 4.807 and 4.808 the Referee said:- "4.807 The Formworker submits that the Builder is not entitled to damages based on its exposure for Liquidated and Ascertained Damages under the head contract, first because this would not comply with the principles expressed in Hadley versus Baxendale, and secondly that the Builder has failed to establish the probability that the Principal will make such a claim against it.
 .808 As to Hadley versus Baxendale, the question is whether it could have been in the contemplation of the Formworker that the consequences of a breach of its duty under the Contract would render it liable to damages of $5,000 per day. In my view it would be unlikely that a formwork sub-contractor would be unaware that timely completion of its work was critical to the construction programme on a building such as this. The usual constraint to completion is the installation of lifts, and this cannot be commenced until the concrete lift shafts are completed; i.e. until the formwork reo and concrete are completed. That is the situation with this project." 
Mr Turner raised no complaint about this finding, but submitted that the second point was not addressed. However, it is necessary to read the whole of the report. In Section 7, which dealt with "Defective Works", the Referee stated that the rectification work set out in Mr Hely's report of 14 June 1997 was carried out by the defendant while scaffolding was still in place and found, on removal of the scaffolding, that the remedy was insufficient to deal satisfactorily with the defects "and this work will be wasted when rectification under the AD claims is carried out". "AD" was the Referee's method of referring to the additional defects. It was implicit in this finding that the Referee considered that the rectification work would be carried out and this is made clear in sub-paragraph (b) on page 17 of the report:- "I accept the statement by Mr Osmo, Expert for the Formworker, to the effect that a percentage to cover overhead has been included in the rates used to determine the agreed costs. It is my view that in the context of rectifying defective work concurrently with project construction, a profit allowance of 5% is reasonable." 
The Referee continued in paragraph 7.3:- "The Builder claims entitlement to damages it may suffer in consequence of such defective work being rectified. Mr Hely stated that such rectification work would involve considerable dislocation, extra organisation, materials handling, clean up, rubbish removal, supervision etc ..., and that an appropriate margin to cover such indirect costs is 20% (of the rectification costs found). I believe that the rates used to arrive at the costs in 7.2 above reflect overhead costs, see (b) above, and that an additional margin of 5% as allowed is reasonable." 
It was submitted by Mr Gracie, correctly in my view, that the Referee was making findings in these paragraphs that, as a matter of fact, the rectification work would be carried out concurrently with project construction and that in those circumstances a profit allowance of five per cent, rather than twenty per cent, was appropriate. It is unthinkable that the Referee would have made this finding and allowed this amount if he was not satisfied that the rectification work would have to be carried out. Mr Gracie also submitted that whilst the defendant claimed an entitlement to retain the retention sum of $32,750 as security for further defects, which may become apparent, until after practical completion, the Referee was of the view that a reasonable opportunity to assess the extent of defective work had occurred and that the proceedings should finalise the disputes presented by the parties and effectively terminate the contract. In these circumstances he decided that it was inappropriate to maintain the retention sum. Mr Gracie submitted that this was a clear indication that the retention sum would not be needed because the amount the Referee proposed to allow for rectification would be sufficient to allow the work to be carried out.

The issue was presented to the Referee as one of fact, which, in my opinion, was correct. The Referee determined that the rectification work was going to be carried out. So much is, at the least, implicit in his allowance of a margin to the defendant to carry out the work. It was entirely consistent with the probabilities that the work would be carried out. Some rectification work had already been performed, which the Referee found to be wasted. In all these circumstances I am satisfied that the Referee came to the conclusion that, as a matter of probability, Pan Asia would claim against the defendant and it was not in issue that the agreement between Pan Asia and the defendant, Exhibit 2, allowed that to be done in certain circumstances: clauses 5.02, 6.09, 6.11 and .28.

Mr Turner submitted, and so much did not seem to be in issue, that the head contract did not provide a specification of the class of formwork required.
Accordingly, so the submission ran, there was no possible basis for asserting that the work was to be done conformably with any particular standard. I find this difficult to accept as a practical proposition but, in this case, I do not have to confront that problem. This is because Mr Turner agreed that before the Referee the plaintiff accepted that there was an obligation to provide class 3 formwork on the horizontals and class 4 formwork on the verticals. He also conceded that there as an issue before the Referee whether class 3 or class 4 applied to the verticals. The Referee found that class 3 applied to the verticals. The suggestion, therefore, that there was no standard required by the defendant to satisfy its contractual obligations to
Pan Asia took on an air of unreality. Of course, this submission has to be considered in the light of the requirement for Pan Asia to pay the defendant or, put another way, of the ability of the defendant to obtain payment from
Pan Asia. If the defendant contended that the work had to be performed at a certain standard it was obliged to pay the plaintiff for carrying out work at that standard. If it paid for that work it had to ensure, so far as possible, that it could recover what it paid from Pan Asia. Mr Turner said that if Pan
Asia received a better standard than that to which it was entitled it would not complain. I have no doubt that is so. But equally I have no doubt that if it had to pay for a higher standard than it had contracted for it would have complained. In those circumstances I see no reason why the Referee could not have drawn the inference that this was the standard Pan Asia required.

This conclusion is supported by the documents comprising Exhibit L, which were reports from a quantity surveyor apparently retained by Westpac Banking
Corporation to advise that the work was being carried out satisfactorily and that moneys were properly payable to the defendant. The reports tendered established that in the opinion of the quantity surveyor that was so. Mr
Turner said that he tendered Exhibit L to show that Pan Asia had no grounds to complain about the work, so that it was improbable it would do so in the future, and not to show that the work was not defective. What these documents did demonstrate was that the defendant was being paid for the standard of work for which it was charging, which is consistent with the acceptance by Pan Asia of the standard of work with which it was being provided and for which it did not object to paying. Certainly an available inference from that was that it required work to that standard. There were ample provisions in Pan Asia's contract with the defendant to allow it to have the work carried out properly.
If it did not meet the necessary standard the inference was that Pan Asia would seek to have the work rectified. As Mr Osmo said in his July 1997 report he could understand the concern as to what Pan Asia would say.

Mr Gracie submitted that the mere payment of progress claims on account was not evidence of an acceptance of the work, and that whether there would be such an acceptance would depend on the attitude taken by Pan Asia when practical completion was achieved. Mr Turner did not concede that that had occurred at the time the Referee wrote his report. However, in my opinion, it is clear from paragraph 7.4 by his use of the words "until after practical completion of the work" that he was satisfied that it had not occurred when he concluded his report.

The differences between the present case and Alucraft are stark. In that case a claim was made by the head contractor against a sub-contractor at a time when the head contractor had been paid the full amount owing under the contract, the head contractor had not undertaken any rectification work nor given any undertaking that it would undertake such work notwithstanding that some three years had expired since the date of practical completion, and there was no evidence that the principal was going to take any action against the head contractor for defective work in respect of which the head contractor was claiming against the sub-contractor. The Court held that the amount of the head contractor's loss was $35,000 but reduced the amount it could recover to $5,000 as representing, in some way, the risk that the head contractor may be sued. On the facts of that case it was held that the head contractor could not recover the full amount of the loss it claimed. I am by no means certain that that case has been distinguished from the basic principle laid down by the
High Court in Belgrove versus Eldridge. At p.620 Dixon CJ, Webb and Taylor
JJ said:- "It was suggested during the course of argument that if the respondent retains her present judgment and it is satisfied, she may or may not demolish the existing house and re-erect another. If she does not, it is said, she will still have a house together with the cost of erecting another one. To our mind this circumstance is quite immaterial and is but one variation of a feature which so often presents itself in the assessment of damages in cases where they must be assessed once and for all." 
Mr Turner submitted that in Alucraft the head contractor had no proprietary interest in the land, whereas in Belgrove versus Eldridge the plaintiff did, and that it was this factor which distinguished the two cases.
I do not think this can be so. The assessment of damages in any case is essentially an issue of fact and it must be done on a once and for all basis.
In the present case, as in Alucraft, the tribunal had to assess the possibility that the head contractor would be called on by the proprietor to make good the defects. The facts of the two cases differ dramatically and, in the present case, no final certificate had issued between the defendant and
Pan Asia. In my opinion the Referee's findings make clear that, as a matter of fact, he considered the defendant would be called on to carry out the work.
Therefore, in my opinion, he dealt with this point and found upon it adversely to the plaintiff.

In my opinion it is sufficient for me to be satisfied that there was evidence before the Referee that the rectification would, in all probability, be carried out, which evidence emerged from the fact that some rectification work had been done and the reasonable inference that Pan Asia would require the defects to be remedied. As I have said the Referee implicitly made these findings by allowing the amount for rectification but, more particularly, the margin of 5%, which he predicated on the basis of the work being carried out during the construction of the project.

Mr Turner also submitted that as no standard or class of work was fixed by the head contract there was no basis on which Pan Asia could have claimed against the defendant. At the risk of repetition I note that under the head contract the defendant was required to carry out the work in a proper and workmanlike manner. The standard of work the Referee found was class 3. Pan Asia was prepared to accept that standard and, so far as the evidence discloses, to pay for it. Accordingly, in my opinion, the Referee was entitled to find that if the work did not measure up to that standard there would be an obligation on the defendant to rectify it until it did. In all these circumstances, I reject that submission.

Whether The Letter of 6 August 1996 Formed Part Of The Contract 
Mr Turner submitted that the finding by the Referee in relation to the obligation of the plaintiff to provide Class 3 standard on the verticals was contrary to his finding that the letter of 10 August 1996, which contained no reference to that standard, was the source of the agreement, rather than the letter of 6 August 1996. In other words Mr Turner submitted that the Referee had found that the letter of 6 August 1996 was not a contractual document.

He submitted nextly that the finding that the plaintiff's obligation was to provide Class 3 standard work on the verticals failed to have regard to the evidence of the conversation in early August 1997 between Mr Commisso and Mr
Sanna, which was evidence capable of supporting a finding that there was an oral term of the contract that Class 3 standard was not required on the verticals.

It is necessary, in my opinion, firstly to consider the way in which the plaintiff pleaded its case in the Amended Summons (second version), which was before the Referee. Whereas, initially, it had been pleaded as an oral agreement, this pleading alleged it was partly oral and partly written or, alternatively, oral. The written part was particularised as being letters from the plaintiff to the defendant dated 3, 21 and 27 June 1996, 4 and 17 July , and 6 August 1996 "together with the architectural and structural drawings referred to in that letter". Reference was also made to "parts" of a letter dated 16 July 1996 from the defendant to the plaintiff.

In its Amended Defence the defendant denied that paragraph, but pleaded that the second sub-contract agreement between the parties was in writing and for a lump sum price of $655,000, and was evidenced by a letter from the defendant to the plaintiff dated 16 July 1996 and letters between the parties dated 6 and 10 August 1996 and 6 September 1996. By its Amended Reply the plaintiff denied receipt of the letter of 10 August 1996. There was, accordingly, an issue whether the letter of 10 August 1996 was received by the plaintiff.

Exhibit F before me, which was an exhibit before the Referee, contained the letters of 6 and 10 August 1996. The major significance of the letter of 6
August 1996 is that it stated:- "Please note that we have allowed for Class 3 formwork on this project." 
In the letter of 10 August 1996 the defendant made no reference to the standard of work. However, Mr Turner conceded that during the hearing before the Referee the plaintiff accepted that class 3 work was required on horizontals and class 4 work was required on verticals. The issue was whether, as the defendant contended, class 3 was the standard for verticals. It is a little difficult to see why the plaintiff would have tendered the letter of 6
August 1996 if it was not relevant to any part of the proceedings. It is also clear that Mr Osmo accepted that the work was to be to Class 3 and I have referred to what he wrote about this in his final report. If the letter of 6
August 1996 did not constitute part of the contract then there was a failure to specify any standard. However, as I have just noted, this was not the basis on which the matter proceeded before the Referee.

The Referee commenced to deal with the terms of the contract in paragraph 2.2 of the report, and he said they "emerged through a series of letters and discussions through May to August 1996". He noted various letters and, in paragraph 4.1, returned to the question of the contract. He said that from May to August 1996 there was a series of conversations and letters between the parties, several of which purported to be acceptances of offers or confirmations of agreements made, and that these negotiations culminated in letters dated 6 and 10 August 1996. The Referee then referred to the denial of the receipt of the letter of 10 August 1996, which evidence he rejected on the bases that he did not accept the evidence of the witness for the plaintiff who denied receipt, and to the fact that the contents of the letter had been "generally adopted and relied upon by the Formworker in its submissions". He continued:- "I find that the letter of 10/8/96 is in effect a counter offer to the terms of the letter of 6/8/96. I find also that the Formworker's subsequent continuance on site and failure to seek changes to the terms of this counter offer constitute an acceptance of those terms. Accordingly I find that the Builder's letter of 10/8/96 (Exhibit P74.21) contains the express terms of the agreement between the parties. It is necessary to examine several of these provisions in order to determine the obligations of the parties which are in dispute." 
No submission had been made to the Referee that the letter of 6 August 1996 did not constitute part of the contract. In fact both parties asserted it did and the plaintiff denied that it had received the letter of 10 August 1996.
That assertion by the plaintiff in the pleadings did not amount to an admission: Laws versus Australian Broadcasting Tribunal <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 70.] But it was an issue raised on the pleadings. However, Mr
Turner fastened on the Referee's statement that he considered it was a "counter offer" and expressed the "terms of the agreement between the parties". I do not think, on a fair reading of the Referee's report, that he took the view that it was a counter offer, which nullified any previous offers, nor that it was not a contractual document. Nor do I think that on a fair reading of the report the Referee used the words "counter offer" as destructive of the terms in the letter of 6 August 1996. In paragraph 4.203 the Referee referred to portions from both letters. In paragraph 4.302 he referred to the letter of 10 August 1996. He also referred to that letter in paragraph 4.602. In paragraphs 4.701 and 4.702, under the heading "Class 3
Formwork", the Referee noted the plaintiff's contention that the agreement between the parties permitted the use of Class 4 formwork for vertical surfaces, the basis for that contention being alleged conversations between Mr
Sanna and Mr Commisso in May 1996 and between the same parties, although it was agreed there was a mistake in the report by the reference to Mr Akbarian, in July/August 1996. The Referee continued:- "Mr Turner submitted that it should be found that the contract was partly oral and that this was a term of the Contract. However, the letter from the Formworker of 6/8/96 which forms part of the Contract contains the following: 
Please note that we have allowed for Class 3 formwork on this project.

Accordingly I do not need to canvass the evidence concerning the conversations. There is no uncertainty, and no need to import a contradictory condition. I find that Class 3 formwork is required under the Contract for all surfaces." 
It is quite clear that the Referee accepted that the letter of 6 August 1996 formed part of the contract. Therefore, his statements that the letter of 10
August 1996 was a counter offer and contained the express terms of the agreement cannot be read, in the context of the report, as meaning that the letter of 6 August 1996 was not part of the agreement.

In dealing with time for completion he stated, in paragraph 4.802, what he regarded as "relevant terms of the Contract" from the letters of 6 and 10
August 1996. In sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 6.104, in dealing with certain formwork for which he allowed the plaintiff $1,659 by way of a variation, he said:- "The Formworker's letter of 6/8/96 specifically excludes provision of this item. I find it is a variation to the Works." 
Accordingly, he relied on the letter of 6 August 1996 to reach a conclusion favourable to the plaintiff.

In paragraph (3) of the same paragraph, in rejecting a claim by the plaintiff, the Referee relied upon the final offer of 6 August 1996 as not excluding that work.

From what I have said it becomes clear that both parties were asserting that the letter of 6 August 1996 constituted part of the contract and, in various ways, relied upon its terms. The Referee accepted that the letter had contractual effect in the ways to which I have referred. In these circumstances it is impossible to conclude that, by referring to a counter offer contained in the letter of 10 August 1996, the Referee was deciding that the letter of 6 August 1996 was not part of the contract. I would also add a reference to paragraph 4.403 in which the Referee stated:- "The letter of 10/8/96 makes no reference to Rubbish. The Builder however has not disputed that it is liable, as noted in the Formworker's letter of 6/8/96, for supply and removal of rubbish bins." 
One therefore has the somewhat strange situation of the plaintiff, which took advantage of the terms in the letter of 6 August 1996 when they suited it, now seeking to deny, on the basis that the Referee referred to the letter of 10
August 1996 as a "counter-offer" and notwithstanding the denial by the plaintiff that it ever received that letter, that it formed part of the contract. In my view it is clear that the Referee found that the letter of 6
August 1996 did form part of the contract.

This led to the further submission that the Referee had erred in failing to have regard to conversations in early August 1996 as to the class of the formwork. The Referee dealt with the matter in paragraph 4.702 and concluded that the contract, as specified in the letter of 6 August 1996, was not uncertain and that there was no need to import "a contradictory condition".
The submission was put by Mr Turner on the basis that there was evidence "capable of supporting a finding that there was an oral term" that Class 3 standard was not required on the verticals. That was an issue of fact for determination by the Referee and he concluded it adversely to the plaintiff. I see no reason, on established principles of considering factual findings by a referee, why there should be any interference with this finding.

Nextly, Mr Turner submitted that the Referee erred in not applying the principles laid down by McHugh JA in State Rail Authority of New South Wales v Heath Outdoor Pty Limited [(1986) 7 NSWLR 170.] The passage relied on appears at p.191, where his Honour said:- "A preliminary question which arises is whether the so called parol evidence rule prevents reliance on the oral assurances of Mr Giles. Under that rule parol evidence is not admissible to contradict or vary the terms of a written agreement. But it is a rule whose scope and rationale is often misunderstood. It has no operation until it is first determined that the terms of the agreement are wholly contained in writing. The tendering of oral evidence to prove a contractual term, therefore, cannot be excluded until it is determined that any terms in writing record the whole of the parties' agreement: Corbin on Contracts (1960) Vol 3 at 385; Air Great Lakes Pty Limited versus K.S. Easter (Holdings) Pty Limited [(1985) 2 NSWLR 309] at 337." 
The present case did not give rise to the problem to which his Honour was adverting. The oral evidence was admitted. The Referee found that the contract was in writing and he did not consider, in these circumstances, that there was any need to look further to the alleged oral terms. In my opinion the Referee was entitled to adopt this approach.

Pressurisation Ducts 
Mr Turner challenged the finding in paragraph 4.617 that the formwork for the shaft walls to Stair 1 and Stair 4 Ducts formed part of the Contract Scope of
Works. The Referee dealt with this factual matter in a number of closely reasoned paragraphs commencing at paragraph 4.601 and I do not propose to repeat what he said. Mr Turner's submission, which I am quite unable to accept, was that during the hearing the engineering and architectural drawings were missing and that, in those circumstances, the Referee could not have made the factual finding he did. In paragraph 4.615 the Referee said what those drawings depicted and, by way of example, he set out in his report what he stated appeared on the engineering and architectural drawings in diagramatic form. I put to Mr Turner that he either had to accept that the Referee had the drawings, or satisfactory evidence of what they contained, before him, at some stage, to enable him to make the statements he did in his report, or that Mr
Turner had to make the submission that the Referee had in some way made up what was in the drawings. Mr Turner expressly disavowed any reliance on the latter proposition. In these circumstances I cannot see any basis on which the finding of fact made by the Referee can be challenged.

In his final written submissions Mr Turner stated that instructions would be sought as to whether this objection to the report would be abandoned. During oral submissions it was not abandoned expressly. For the reasons I have given
I reject the objection.

Plaintiff's Non Entitlement To Damages In Respect Of A Strike Of 9-11 October 1996 
The Referee dealt with a claim by the plaintiff for a variation in the sum of $10,043.57 for suspension of works between 9 and 11 October 1996 in paragraph of the report. He concluded, after a review of the facts, that breaches of safety standards by the plaintiff, and not failure to provide amenities by the defendant, were the major cause of the strike. He found there was no sufficient evidence that the defendant breached a duty to the plaintiff in relation to the provision of site amenities and, in this regard, he accepted evidence called by the defendant that the amenities provided were adequate.

The complaint made by Mr Turner was that a site diary entry of the defendant, which was tendered as a business record, asserted that the strike related to the failure to provide amenities. Mr Turner said, and so much was not contradicted, that the author of the diary note was not called to explain it and that the Referee did not make reference to it in coming to his finding. In my opinion the short answer to this submission is that there is no obligation on the tribunal of fact to refer to each and every piece of evidentiary material, which touches upon an issue to be determined. If the evidence appears to be highly significant or persuasive the failure of the tribunal of fact to deal with it may vitiate a finding of fact. However, the Referee's report makes it clear that he had evidence before him from those who were on the site as to the reasons for it. He dealt with that evidence in sufficient detail to indicate a full appreciation of the issue. In particular he noted that a union organiser had asserted that the strike was caused "only" by the "amenities issue". He said the witness was discredited and he could place little reliance upon his evidence. Whilst one hypothesis, which may be advanced, is that the Referee thought that the diary note only recorded that witness's assertion to the defendant as the reason for the strike, it is not, in my opinion, necessary to seek to pursue the hypothesis or consider whether it is a valid answer to the matter. It is sufficient, in my view, to conclude that the Referee was satisfied by the evidence to which he did have regard of the reason for the strike and his failure to refer to one piece of evidence, which on no view could have been treated as in any way decisive, does not vitiate his conclusion.

Abandonment Of Claim Under Paragraph 6 
Mr Turner abandoned paragraph 6 of his written outline.

Items 29(a) And 30 
Paragraphs 7 and 8 of Mr Turner's outline dealt with items 29(a) and 30 in paragraph 6.104, which were claims by the plaintiff respectively for "additional supervision" in the sum of $14,762, and "overtime" in the sum of $2,136. Mr Turner agreed that each of these were time related claims. The
Referee allowed neither stating in respect of each:- "I find no basis for this claim." 
Mr Turner submitted that this statement provided insufficient reasons. Once again it is necessary to look at the whole report.

The Referee dealt with the time for completion of the work in Part 4.8 of his report noting, in paragraph 4.801, that both parties claimed damages arising from the time taken to complete the work, and that the defendant's head contract rendered it liable to Pan Asia for delay in completion for liquidated and ascertained damages at the rate of $5,000 per day. He observed, paragraph .802, that the relevant terms of the contract were in the letters of 6 and 8
August 1996, the former providing for completion to be within sixteen weeks from commencement "of our work to suspended floor subject to extension of time for reasons beyond our control", and the latter providing "completion time will be 16 weeks from date of commencement of suspended slab". In paragraph .803 he said that it could be seen there was provision for adjustment of the stipulated time, but no protocol for making such adjustment nor any reference to damages arising from breach, and he continued:- "The Formworker bases its claim on the assertion that the Builder by its actions delayed the Formworker from completion within the required time; that such actions were in breach of the Builder's obligation to facilitate performance of the Formworker's work, and that the Formworker suffered damages from such breach in that it incurred costs related to unproductive labour and equipment." 
The Referee accepted, as a general principle, that the defendant was obliged to facilitate performance of the plaintiff's obligation to complete within the stipulated period, and that such a term should be implied to give business efficacy to the contract. He considered the relevant term to be implied was to the effect that the defendant agreed to use its best endeavours in all reasonable ways to ensure that the plaintiff was not obstructed or hindered in carrying out its obligations under the sub-contract, and that the plaintiff, on its part, would use its best endeavours, consistently with its obligations under the sub-contract, to execute its works so as to permit of the smooth and regular execution of the project.

In paragraph 4.805 the Referee made reference to the defendant's programmed work for completion of the plaintiff's work and compared that to the date of practical completion of the plaintiff's work, namely 8 March 1997. He found that the completion of the concrete structure was on the critical path, which meant that any delay to the pouring of the concrete frame would delay the completion of the project, and he said:- "Obviously the timing of this hearing precludes consideration of actual damages which may be suffered by the Builder arising out of late completion of the works under the head contract. The Builder bases its cross-claim on the presumption that it will be liable to the Principal for the Liquidated and Ascertained Damages of $5,000 per day provided for in the head contract for each day of delay in completion of the project." 
Thereafter the Referee set forth paragraphs 4.807 and 4.808 to which I have referred.

The Referee found that the date for practical completion of the plaintiff's work was 6 December 1996 and that, after allowing for 24.5 days for wet weather and industrial action and three weeks for the Christmas shutdown, the adjusted date for practical completion was 31 January 1997 and the actual date of practical completion was 8 March 1997.

In paragraph 26(c) the Referee said:- "There is no express provision in the Contract for Delay costs. I find no evidence of the Builder's breach of contract relating to these delays to give cause for a claim for damages. I note that reference to the Formworker's Wage Sheets showing the manpower resources applied to the work indicate that the Formworker took no action to mitigate any losses it might suffer as a result of delays. The claim fails." 
The Referee was there considering a claim for $39,690 for twenty one days during which it was alleged by the plaintiff that it was delayed in consequence of the defendant's actions.

It was submitted that once it was understood, and Mr Turner conceded, that claims 29(a) and 30 were delay related claims, the Referee had dealt with these claims at some length in his report and, accordingly, when he came to look at the particular claims they had to be considered against the background of what he had written. It was further submitted on behalf of the defendant that given his intimate knowledge of the evidence and the claims brought by the plaintiff the finding by the Referee indicated a satisfaction that there was no basis either in fact or in law for the claims. It was further submitted that no contractual obligation was ever referred to in support of a requirement on the defendant to provide for the plaintiff's supervision of its own men, nor, against the background of the findings that the defendant was not liable to the plaintiff for delay, could the claim for overtime based on delay be sustained. The defendant's submissions then made reference to paragraph 26(c), which I have quoted, and continued that this provided the context in which the Referee came to the conclusion that there was no basis for either claim.

I agree that if there were nothing more than a statement by a Referee that he could find no basis for a claim there may not be sufficient reasons. However, any such statement has to be considered in the light of all the material before the Referee and of the totality of the report. Thus, in the present case the statement has to be considered in the light of the express findings by the Referee as to the contractual situation and, once it is understood that claims 29(a) and 30 related to delay based claims, the Referee's reason for rejecting them, as being without basis, becomes clear from the report.

In my opinion, in the context of the whole report, the findings by the Referee are sufficient to advise the parties of the reasoning process by which he reached this conclusion. Once that stage is reached the Referee acquitted himself of the obligation to give reasons.

Findings On Items 3 And 31 Of Paragraph 6.104 
The challenge to the finding as to Item 3 was abandoned expressly by Mr Turner on the first day of the hearing before me.

Item 31 was in respect of "sloping balustrades" for which the plaintiff made a claim for $5,762 and the experts agreed the claim should be $5,418. The
Referee considered the amount payable was $3,700 because the rate to be applied per square metre was $35 rather than $42. Mr Turner submitted that no adequate reasons were provided by the Referee, which would enable the Court to consider whether or not he had "even applied his mind to the various claims that were made". This submission was also made in respect of Items 29(a) and .

In my opinion there is no justification for this attack on the Referee's findings in relation to Item 31 and it cannot be sustained. The Referee found that the applicable rate was $35 per square metre rather than $42 per square metre. Mr Turner did not submit that there was no basis on which the Referee was entitled to apply $35 per square metre rather than $42 per square metre and to come up with his final figure. His complaint was limited to whether the
Referee disclosed a reasoning process. The Referee, in my opinion, disclosed how he reached the figure. He chose to apply different figures. As I have said his entitlement to apply those figures was not challenged. Thus he revealed his reasoning process. The result may have been different if there was an attack on the figures he used. But there was not. I was referred to portion of what I wrote in Hughes Bros Pty Limited versus The Minister for Public Works (17 August 1994 - unreported) at p.13, where I said:- "In my opinion the Court must be able to see and follow a reasoning process. That does not, in my view, impose an unnecessary burden upon the Referee. The nature of what is required is that a reasoning process be disclosed or sufficiently disclosed to satisfy the Court that the finding was one based upon such an intellectual exercise." 
For the reasons I have just given I consider that it can be seen, quite clearly, how the Referee reached this result. Accordingly, I reject this attack on the report.

Findings On Back Charges (Paragraph 9.1) 
Claims 1.14 and 1.15 in paragraph 9 related to the double handling of a crane on 16 September 1996 and a charge for delay by the plaintiff in relation to a crane on 1 October 1996.

In paragraph 4.2 the Referee dealt at length with the issue of craneage. He referred to the problems because of the position of the site and to disputes arising in claims by the plaintiff that it suffered damages from delays arising from the defendant's failure to provide craneage in a timely manner, and claims by the defendant that it suffered damages arising from the plaintiff's inefficient and unreasonable use of crane time. He noted requirements in respect of craneage in the letters of 6 and 10 August 1996 and, in paragraph 4.204, the following submissions:- "The Builder contends that the concept of reasonableness must be implied in the Builder's obligation to provide craneage. The Formworker contends that the obligation to provide craneage on requirement means as required by the Formworker from time to time, and the question of reasonableness does not apply." 
In paragraph 4.206 the Referee found that it was a matter of common practice and commercial commonsense that the defendant was responsible for the orderly progress of works on site, and that the plaintiff was generally obliged to fit its operations to suit the defendant's methodology and practice consistent with the reasonable and proper needs of both parties. He considered that was set forth in the terms of the sub-contract from which he quoted and he continued, in paragraph 4.207, that it was clear, in his opinion, that the defendant would not be obliged to provide craneage if it were not required, and that the term "on requirement" must be read as meaning:- ".. as necessary for the construction of the Works and as reasonably agreed between the parties. Accordingly I do not accept the Formworker's contention as to the unqualified obligation of the Builder to provide craneage." 
In the plaintiff's submissions to the Referee in relation to Item 14 it was said there was no evidence of double handling nor that it was due to the plaintiff and there was no evidence to support a claim of $390, the evidence being that the crane was not available. It was further submitted that there was no notification of such claims prior to commencement of the proceedings and no evidence of breach of contract by the plaintiff.

In relation to Item 15 it was submitted to the Referee that there was no evidence of a request for craneage by the plaintiff for 1 October 1996, no evidence of payment of the amount claimed, no notification of the claim prior to the commencement of the proceedings, and no evidence of breach of contract by the plaintiff.

In my opinion when one reads the Referee's comments beside each of these items in the light of his express findings as to the contractual obligations of the parties in relation to craneage it is clear that he accepted that there was double handling and that there was delay, and that he was satisfied by the invoices to which he referred that the amounts were paid by the defendant and that it was entitled to recover them from the plaintiff. The Referee had made it clear what his views were in relation to the contractual obligations in relation to craneage and, in my opinion, it was not necessary for him, in the light of what he had already written, to repeat those matters when dealing with these separate items. The objections to these allowances should be rejected.

Items 1.16 and 1.17 were concerned with pump hire and formwork delay on 25
September and 30 October 1996 for which amounts of $930 and $1,125 respectively were claimed. The Referee allowed the first claim in full and $375 of the second claim. Items 1.18 and 1.19 were also for pump hire arising from formwork delay on 7 and 28 November 1996. In relation to Item 1.18 a claim of $1,140 was made and was rejected by the Referee as not proved. In relation to Item 1.19 the claim was for $1,085, which the Referee allowed.

Written submissions were made to the Referee, which included an absence of evidence of delay by the plaintiff, a failure to notify the claims prior to the commencement of the proceedings, no evidence of breach of contract by the plaintiff and no reliable evidence of the amount claimed. The Referee obviously took the view that in so far as he was satisfied that there was delay caused by the plaintiff, which caused additional cost to the defendant, the plaintiff was in breach of the contractual obligation to which he had earlier referred to proceed with the work in an orderly manner. He was also satisfied of the amounts from the documents to which he referred and, in so far as he was not satisfied of the total amounts claimed he gave his reasons.
In light of his findings as to the contractual obligations of the plaintiff not to delay the work I do not consider it can be said that he failed to have regard to whether there was a breach of contract. He found there was delay for which the plaintiff was responsible and, accordingly, that it was bound to reimburse the defendant for costs caused by such delay. The same comments apply to the attack made on his finding in relation to Item 1.21. If I may say so with respect to the submissions made against these items they fail to take into account the careful way in which the Referee had previously referred to contractual obligations and the obvious care with which he approached each of the claims made. Some he found to be agreed by the plaintiff, others he found to be not proved and others he found to be proved but only to a limited extent. Far from indicating a failure to have regard to the contractual obligations and the evidence before him, it seems to me that the analysis of the claims as appearing in paragraph 9.1, read together with the appreciation by the Referee of the contractual obligations, makes it clear that he gave consideration to these items.

Items 1.24 and 1.25 relate to two payments of $500 each to WorkCover in respect of notices issued by it. The written submissions of the plaintiff to the Referee were to the effect that there was no evidence of breach of contract by the plaintiff, which led to compensable damage, no entitlement to indemnity, and that the defendant was independently liable for its own wrong.
In this context it was submitted that there was no reliable evidence that the infringement notices issued because of the conduct of the plaintiff.

As I have pointed out earlier in dealing with the strike issue the Referee was satisfied that the infringement notices were brought about because of the failure of the plaintiff to have adequate safety standards. He said in paragraph 21(d) that two improvement notices detailing unsafe work practices of the plaintiff were issued. The Referee found that the plaintiff was responsible for the issue of the notices and, in those circumstances, there seems to be no basis upon which it could be said that the defendant was not entitled to recover the amounts it paid in discharge of the obligation thereby incurred by the plaintiff.

Item 1.33 was a claim for site office and car spaces of $3,805 of which the
Referee allowed $3,447.50. The plaintiff submitted to the Referee that there was no reliable evidence to support the claim, nor any evidence of breach of contract and that the amount included items not for the benefit of the plaintiff. The submission continued that it had not been proved what part of the $3,805 "was to the account of" the plaintiff "if any". It also said that the evidence of Mr Commisso was that the plaintiff had negotiated for two spaces only for a period of eight weeks. Essentially the submissions raised matters of fact.

Page 1180 of the transcript became Exhibit 7 before me. It contained some of the cross-examination of a witness for the defendant on this issue. The suggestion put to her was that the defendant was only entitled to make a claim for car spaces and was not entitled to make a claim to charge office storage, with which the defendant disagreed. Mr Turner then said:- "Q. I want to put this proposition to you: would you agree that under the terms of this lease or heads of agreement to the lease with Heysham, Kezarne was renting not only two parking spaces for Sacon but also for itself; amongst other things, space for use of lunchroom facilities and storage facilities? 
A. Yes, but we have not charged Sacon for the whole lot. There was an agreement made between Mr Commisso and I don't know who with Sacon and there was a document tendered at that time when you were cross-examining Mr Commisso.
 ...

There was a document which was tendered on the same day which gives the rate per car park space per week and I think also the square metreage which was written by Mr Commisso.

MR TURNER. I don't know what the document is." 
The issue thus propounded before the Referee was what area was occupied by cars for the benefit of the plaintiff. There was no suggestion of an evidentiary dispute that the plaintiff was not obliged at all to make payment for the spaces it used. Although it was said there was no evidence of breach of contract or damage the cross-examination, and no other part of the transcript was sought to be tendered by Mr Turner to cast a different light on that to which I have referred, would indicate that the issue was how much was chargeable to the plaintiff, not whether the plaintiff was liable at all. The
Referee dealt with it in that way and allowed the amount of the claim as subsequently reduced. I see no reason to interfere with this finding, nor, in my opinion, is the reasoning process defective.

Items 4.1 and 4.2 were for drill, grout and scrabble for landings on stairs 1 and 4 respectively. Claims for $4,993 and $4,294 respectively were made and of those amounts $4,342 and $3,134 were allowed, the Referee noting "Kezarne memo to Sacon 1/3/97".

The objection to these claims was that there was no evidence from Mr Commisso, that the claim was not proved, that there was no notice of claim prior to proceedings, and that the claim was a result of the plaintiff's own breach of contract to supply toby bars. It was also submitted that certain evidence was provided by the plaintiff and that the defendant did not adduce any evidence in respect of this claim. It was submitted on behalf of the defendant that
Items 4.1 to 4.14 all related to costs incurred by reason of specific breaches by the plaintiff requiring rectification by the defendant, or claims relating to claims made against the defendant by sub-trades whereby liabilities were incurred solely by reason of the plaintiff's defective works.

In paragraph 123 of the defendant's written submissions it was stated:- "It is respectfully submitted that these matters were conveniently provided in a scheduled format by the Referee for the very reason that the only objection raised by the plaintiff related to an alleged absence of evidence for the claim and no other basis. The Referee therefore conveniently identified the evidence relied upon by him and the amount of the claim. In some instances, he decided that the claim was not proved on the evidence and stated such finding." 
The plaintiff's written submissions to the Referee raised various points, which were essentially that the claims were not proved, that there was no notice of the claim given prior to the hearing and, in several instances, that there was no legal entitlement to recover. Essentially the complaint was that the claims were not proved. It was obviously a matter to which the Referee gave detailed attention and consideration not only in the light of the specific material provided to him, but also in the light of other findings he had made.

In the result I am not satisfied that there is any basis upon which this portion of his report should be rejected. I would repeat that it is necessary to look at these complaints in the context of the way in which the matter was fought before the Referee. A certain course having been charted before him it is not open, on the hearing of an application to adopt the report, to deviate from that course for the purpose of attacking a report. In the way in which the case was conducted before the Referee the method he adopted showed a reasoning process, which was sufficient to advise the parties of the basis for his conclusions.

Omitted Works 
In Part 10 of his report the Referee dealt with a claim for the value of omitted works. The only portion of this, which is attacked, is the Referee's reasoning in paragraph 10.3. He stated:- "The Builder claims $4,116 in relation to reduced height of parapet wall, based on $35 per square metre for formwork. In my view it would be unreasonable to apply that rate to reduction of surface area in such an element, since there would be no appreciable reduction in the labour to construct the work. Accordingly I consider an appropriate cost is $1,029 calculated as follows: m x 0.7m x $17.50." 
The attack made on this was that the Referee allowed the defendant to unilaterally reduce the contract price. It was submitted this would have constituted a breach of contract by the defendant and that, "ordinarily", "the general principle is that if one does not want the other to perform work despite an obligation to pay for it then it is a breach of contract not to do so".

It was not in issue that the sub-contract provided for variations. The plaintiff made substantial claims for them. The defendant submitted that the logical extension of the plaintiff's submission would be that there could be no variation, either up or down, without placing a party in breach of the sub- contract for lump sum works. It was further submitted that it did not amount to a breach of contract to reduce the scope of works particularly where the totality of the variations did not provide an amount of money less than the lump sum price.

The matter was considered in Carr versus J.A. Berriman Pty Limited <case>; [[1953] 89 CLR 327.] The contract there considered gave the architect an absolute discretion to omit work and imposed an obligation on the builder to comply with all the architect's instructions. At p.347 Fullagar J, with whom Williams and Webb JJ agreed, said:- "The clause is a common and useful clause, the obvious purpose of which - so far as it is relevant to the present case - is to enable the architect to direct additions to, or substitutions in, or omissions from, the building as planned, which may turn out, in his opinion to be desirable in the course of the performance of the contract. The words quoted from it would authorise the architect (doubtless within certain limits, which were discussed in R versus Peto) to direct the particular items of work included in the plans and specifications shall not be carried out. But they do not, in my opinion, authorise him to say that particular items so included shall be carried out not by the builder with whom the contract is made but by some other builder or contractor. The words used do not, in their natural meaning, extend so far, and a power in the architect to hand over at will any part of the contract to any other contractor would be a most unreasonable power, which very clear words would be required to confer." 
That is quite different from the present case. The present case was one in which a variation order was made and the work was not performed at all.

Carr was applied in Commissioner for Main Roads versus Reed & Stuart Pty Limited & Anor <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 378.] At p.383 Stephen J said:- "Clause 18 is a common enough provision to be found in engineering contracts and permits of the omission from time to time by the proprietor of portion of the contract work. What it clearly enough does not permit is the taking away of portion of the contract from the contractor so that the proprietor may have it performed by some other contractor (Carr ..). Yet this was what the engineer sought to do in the present case in relation to spreading a top soil." 
Gibbs and Mason JJ, although each wrote short separate judgments, agreed with the reasoning of Stephen J. The variation in the present case was, in my opinion, one permitted by the contract, and it cannot be characterised as were the impugned variations in those cases. The unreported judgment of Bryson J in
Bethlehem Singapore Private Ltd versus Barrier Reef Holdings Ltd of 27 October does not go to or require any different conclusion.

In my view this attack on the Referee's report must be rejected.

Conclusion 
In the result I reject all the attacks made on the report. I propose to order that it be adopted. I shall hear submissions from the parties on the judgment or judgments, which should be entered, (including any interest component), and on costs. I stand the matter over for further submissions, unless the parties in the meantime agree, on the final orders to be made.
 * * * 
