

Knudsen versus Kara Kar Holdings P/L [1996] NSWSC 403 (4 September 1996) 
KNUDSEN versus KARA KAR HOLDINGS PTY LTD /91 
Wednesday 4 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 13 April 1994, I delivered an ex tempore judgment in these proceedings. The first plaintiff had been dismissed from the suit by consent and I found that the second and third plaintiffs, Mr and Mrs Knudsen, were entitled to relief in respect of the first defendant's employees' pension fund, the relief being necessary because the first defendant as trustee did not bring into account $115,000. I also found a verdict for Mr Knudsen, the second plaintiff, for $14,000 for wrongful dismissal. Because the amounts were relatively small I urged the parties to see if they could determine the result of the case that flowed from those reasons without further ado. That was not possible and on 6 May 1994, I ordered that the second and third plaintiffs have liberty to take out a notice of motion returnable before the Master to take accounts. I reserved further consideration. The first and second plaintiffs were to be entitled to file a notice of motion before the Master for an inquiry as to what amount should be restored by the defendants to the pension fund. I gave leave to add a further party to the summons and made certain orders as to costs.

On 17 July 1995, I gave further directions as to the Master's hearing, though made it clear that the exact form of the inquiry was a matter for the Master.

Master Macready took evidence on the inquiry for 4 days during late 1995 and gave his reasons on 1 February 1996. The Master then called for further evidence and on 22 March 1996, made the following formal finding: "I find in accordance with the principles and for the purposes that I set out in my judgment that the amounts payable following this readjustment in respect of the non-complying fund are Mr Knudsen $61,043 and Mrs Knudsen $27,987. On the basis that there is a complying fund the figures are for Mr Knudsen $66,112 and Mrs Knudsen $30,336." 
Before me, it was noted that the parties had agreed that the appropriate figures, unless the point raised by the defendants were relevant, were $66,112 and $30,336 respectively.

Mr de Meyrick, who appeared for the defendants, said that it was important to note that the pension fund in question was one which was wholly funded by the employer's contribution. The rules provide for an absolute entitlement to certain benefits and a trustee's discretion to provide additional benefits.
There was no evidence of any exercise of the trustee's discretion, nor was there any exercise of a discretion to apply any part of the foregone benefits account which replaced the special reserve for any purposes referred to in clause 7.5 of the current Trust Deed.

The submission virtually is that the whole inquiry was completely unnecessary because without some evidence that the trustee had exercised its discretion, the plaintiffs were not entitled to any part of the $115,000 which the second defendant had abstracted from the fund. Mr de Meyrick relies on the decision of Rapa versus Patience - McLelland, J, 4 April 1985, showing that in a discretionary trust of this nature the Court is usually not entitled to act on its own opinion in lieu of the opinion of the trustee, at least where there is no material suggesting that the trustee has acted corruptly or contrary to the settlor's intention: McPhail versus Doulton <case>; [[1971] AC ], 451 and 457.

Thus the point which I have to decide (which I will simply call "the point") is whether, there being no evidence of any exercise of the trustee's discretion, the plaintiffs are entitled to any payment at all.

Mr Dodson for the plaintiffs, says that it is now too late to take the point.
Alternatively, if it is not too late, the point is precluded against the defendants because of the way in which the accounts of the trust were prepared.

The evidence before me on the point is that clause 10.4 of the Trust Deed which deals with what was to happen when a person left the service provides that the withdrawal benefit "shall be of a capital value equal to the total of his Member Contribution Account and his Productivity Account and such proportion of his Employer Contribution Account as is indicated by Schedule 4 having regard to his Category of membership, provided that the Trustee may in its absolute discretion in any particular case decide to increase a Member's
Withdrawal Benefit to an amount not exceeding his Accumulated Credit." 
Unfortunately, the deed does not define what is a "Category". When one looks at Schedule 4 one sees the words "Category B", but there is nothing in the deed to show what Category B means.

The accounts as at 30 June 1989 which were filed with the Commissioner of
Taxation and which are annexed to Mr Knudsen's affidavit of 15 January 1991, show that as at 1 July 1988 there was $115,455 in the special reserve which was reduced to $79,995 by using $17,490 to pay employer contributions and returning $27,000 to the employer. The difference in figures is made up because of income received. The note underneath these figures is as follows: "In prior years the loan back interest rate requirements and the loss of several employees prematurely because of the 1982 business recession, caused the Fund to have an excess of assets above the requirements for the remaining members' retirement benefits. An amount equivalent to the excess was transferred to the Special Reserve which, it is planned, will be gradually decreased by using it to provide permissible retirement accumulations each year for existing and future members." 
I dealt with this and other passages from the 1989 accounts in my earlier judgment. I merely state them here again for convenience. It will be remembered that in my earlier judgment I indicated that the significance of many of the notes was merely to show what the intention would have been had the shareholding in the company remained constant.

It will also be remembered that in fact Mr Yardy the other director of the first defendant and the second defendant to these proceedings had abstracted $115,000 from the pension fund in order to pay solicitors for his Gold Coast unit. When this became known to the accountants they recorded it as a return to the employer. After my judgment, the accountants rewrote the accounts to show that the payment was a loan to Mr Yardy. This had the effect of restoring the amount to the accounts (presuming it can be recovered from Mr Yardy), but that merely meant that the moneys were restored to the special reserve.

My earlier reasons for judgment really did not take the matter further than that. Indeed, it expressed a hope that as the most that the plaintiffs could receive would be less than $100,000 the parties could work out the consequences themselves. When an inquiry was ordered, it was as to what amount should be restored to the fund.

As I have indicated, the inquiry before the learned Master took 4 days. It was not anticipated by me that it could ever take this long. This is no criticism of the learned Master who appears to have approached the matter in his usual efficient way. Rather it was the way in which the parties presented the issues. The way this occurred is clear from the opening paragraphs of the learned Master's judgment. The Master said that one aspect of the question before him was "the amount of superannuation payable to Mr and Mrs Knudsen from a superannuation scheme".

At p 10 of the learned Master's judgment he pointed out that Mr Nancarrow, the defendants' accountant, did a reallocation of the funds, adjusting Mr
Knudsen's figure upwards from $7,661 to $41,922 and Mrs Knudsen's figure from $3,056 to $19,590 with adjustment of the special reserve from $13,010 to $65,796. The Master then said, "Mr Nancarrow concluded therefore that the amounts that should have been paid were the sums of $41,922 to Mr Knudsen and $19,590 to Mrs Knudsen." The Master then recalculated the matter at the appropriate date, 28 February 1991. The Master made it clear that he made his determination on the basis of adjusting figures of an existing distribution.
He then noted that the point had been made that as there had been no exercise of the discretion, the plaintiffs were not entitled to any distribution, but indicated that that matter went beyond his inquiry.

In his judgment of 22 March 1996, the learned Master said that because the accounts in 1990 were prepared showing a distribution of the special reserve in a particular way, he should assume that there was a distribution of the reserve in that way and merely adjust the figures. He then made the determination that he did.

It should be pointed out that when further consideration is reserved in proceedings that does not mean that the Judge is entitled to review and reconsider what has been decided by him or her at an earlier hearing. I so held in NSW Egg Corporation versus Peek (No 3) - 13 June 1986, unreported, and what I said there was based on the judgment of Lord Gifford, MR in Le Grand v Whitehead <case>; [(1826) 1 Russ 309], 311; <case>; [38
ER 120], 121.

It was not the practice of the Court of Chancery in these sort of proceedings and it is not the practice of the Court today to entertain on further consideration questions raised on the pleadings but with respect to which no direction is contained in the original judgment: Morgan versus Morgan <case>; [(1850) 13 Beav 441], 446; <case>; [51
ER 170], 172.

The authorities really do not disclose any other general principle than that there must be a fair trial. If a matter has been determined at one stage in the proceedings it is determined forever and cannot be reopened. Likewise if a point has been abandoned at an early stage of litigation, it must be treated as having been abandoned forever. Generally speaking, further consideration is reserved to the matters which were the subject of the inquiry which was directed and it is only in circumstances that are out of the ordinary that the
Court considers matters which could or should have been dealt with in the original judgment.

The present case is a peculiar one because the original judgment did not really do more than direct that it be worked out how much should come back into the fund. The parties then took the matter further and spent four days of trial time before the Master in having further questions determined as well.

It is really extraordinary for the defendants to say that because of the point, there really should have been no inquiry at all. If in 1994 the defendants really did intend to rely on the point, they should have said so then. The consequence of its success now if upheld would be that the plaintiffs would not be entitled to any more money, but that the defendants would pay the whole of the costs of the inquiry on the indemnity basis for wasting everybody's time.

However, it does seem to me that the parties have conducted the case before the Master on the basis that the Master was adjusting the figures that had been arrived at by Mr Nancarrow in his 1990 accounts in the light of the fact that an additional $115,000 plus interest had to be restored to the accounts.
This is not at all surprising. As I have already indicated, although clause .4 of the Trust Deed at first blush reads like impeccable legal drafting, the people who completed the deed and who administered the fund did not have particular regard to technicalities. Apart from using the meaningless description "Category B" in the 4th Schedule to the deed, the fund was administered on the basis that there could be a special reserve even though the deed made no provision for it at all. The whole factual matrix was that the trustee had a deed which would satisfy the requirements of the taxation authorities and that the fund was administered in practice on a "common sense" basis.

Thus it seems to me that the point is not one that the defendants can now take. It either should have been taken before me in 1994 or alternatively, the
Master's inquiry should not have been permitted to proceed for 4 days on the lines it did.

Thus, the plaintiffs are entitled to the sums awarded by the Master, namely $66,112 to Mr Knudsen and $30,336 to Mrs Knudsen.

Mr Dodson also asks for interest. As I said in my earlier judgment, this is an action to administer a trust rather than an action for money. However, the way it has been contested, the Court rate should be applied; cf Hagan v
Waterhouse [(1991) 34 NSWLR 308], 393.

The money should have been paid at the end of February 1991. From the end of
February 1991 to the end of August 1996 is 5.5 years. My calculation is $44,626 for Mr Knudsen and $20,477 for Mrs Knudsen.

Accordingly there should be a verdict for Mr Knudsen for $110,738 and for Mrs
Knudsen for $50,813.

As the defendants were unsuccessful in the inquiry before the Master and me the defendants must pay the costs of the proceedings. There should be liberty to apply. The exhibits may be returned after 28 days.
 * * * 
