

Regina versus Little Matter No 70030/96 [1997] NSWSC 495 (17 October 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Regina versus Gregory John Little /96 October 1997 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division /96 - REGINA versus Gregory John LITTLE 
REMARKS ON SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: On 18 September 1997, Gregory John Little pleaded guilty before me to the murder of Matthew Byrne Sharry at his flat at Goulburn on 2 October
He asked that I take into account on a Form 1 nine further offences, being two charges of maliciously damaging property by fire, charges of stealing from the person and stealing from a dwelling, two charges of attempting to steal a motor vehicle, and charges of break enter and steal, larceny and malicious damage.

The circumstances of the killing are particularly tragic. Mr Sharry, the deceased, aged 37, suffered a mental illness and, in an attempt to improve his living skills, the health authorities had arranged his accommodation at the flat where he met his death. Regular contact had been maintained with him and he was not considered to be aggressive or dangerous.

It seems that the prisoner did not know the deceased, but he had been associating with a woman, Ms Margaret Zagorowski, who lived in another flat in the same block. In the early afternoon of 2 October 1995, he went to that flat at a time when Ms Zagorowski was out, but her 12 year old nephew, Christopher
Zagorowski, was present. He then went to the deceased's flat and, in the event, he killed the deceased by stabbing him over 30 times in the face, neck and body.

What led to such a brutal killing is almost entirely a matter of conjecture.
The prisoner stole the deceased's ring and watch (the charge of stealing from the person on the Form 1), but to suggest that the motive for the killing was robbery is hardly an adequate explanation for it. According to young
Christopher Zagorowski, the prisoner took a knife from Ms Zagorowski's flat, saying that he was going to break into another flat and kill someone. Asked who it was he intended to kill, he said that he did not know. According to the resident of another flat, Ms Hallam, there was an exchange between two men in the deceased's flat, which escalated into an argument, the exact nature of which is impossible to determine from her account. In the course of it she heard sounds indicative of physical violence, ending with the sound of a person leaving the flat by the rear exit.

When he returned to Ms Zagorowski's flat the prisoner took off his shirt, which was bloodstained, and put on one of hers. He told Christopher Zagorowski that he had stabbed someone and that he would kill him if he told anyone. He and the boy then left the flat to walk to a nearby shop, looking for Ms
Zagorowski. In the vicinity of the shop they met her and two friends of hers,
Ms Casey Carter, who also lived at the flat, and Ms Ann Marie Stannard, who lived in another flat in the same block. They repaired to Ms Zagorowski's flat where, some time later in the afternoon, he took Ms Zagorowski aside and told her what he had done. Ms Stannard joined them and he told her also. The only motive he suggested was that he needed money for drugs.

Later the prisoner changed his shirt yet again and had Ms Zagorowski wipe blood from his shoes. He told her that he was going to set the deceased's flat on fire so as to "hide the evidence". He did so while the deceased's body was still in the flat, causing extensive damage (the first charge of maliciously damaging property by fire).

During the afternoon the prisoner had asked Ms Zagorowski for money, and she had obtained for him $10 from another resident of the block of flats, Ms
Criselda Carrington. However, he told Ms Zagorowski that he needed more money and it would seem that, for this purpose and because Ms Zagorowski wanted some cigarettes, she accompanied the prisoner and Ms Stannard to a service station where she intended to obtain some money from an automatic teller. The prisoner had earlier shown her a knife, which she understood to have been the murder weapon and, whilst walking towards the service station, she saw him dispose of the knife and some other object in the vicinity of a house on a corner. Ms
Stannard saw him dispose of two knives. Police later found at that location two bloodstained knives, both of which were broken at the junction of the handle with the blade, together with some items belonging to the deceased. One of the blades was bent and a forensic pathologist was of the opinion that either knife could have caused the deceased's wounds.

Near the automatic teller the prisoner entered a Ford Econovan, located its ignition keys, and told the two women that he was going to drive the vehicle away (the first charge of attempting to steal a motor vehicle). The women left him and, in fact, he did not take the vehicle. It was later found in the same position, but with its interior ransacked, and the keys were located near the block of flats.

Later in the evening he broke into a convent and stole some jewellery of one of the sisters (the charge of break enter and steal). Before leaving the convent he placed some handkerchiefs on the floor and set fire to them, damaging a small section of carpet (the second charge of maliciously damaging property by fire). He also entered a shed at the rear of a dwelling house and stole a hockey stick and two golf clubs (the charge of stealing from a dwelling). He later used a golf club to break into a Toyota Landcruiser by smashing the driver's window. He took a pocket knife and a coin case inside the vehicle and was still in the vehicle himself when its owner and two companions came upon him (the second charge of attempting to steal a motor vehicle and the charges of larceny and malicious damage). Those men restrained him and contacted the police. He was arrested and conveyed to Goulburn police station.

On 5 October 1995, detectives embarked upon an electronically recorded interview with him but, on legal advice, he declined to answer questions about the killing of Mr Sharry or about the other matters.

An understanding of this burst of criminality is confounded by the fact that the prisoner now claims to have no recollection of it. His account of his movements on the day in question emerges from the history he gave to Dr Bruce
Westmore and Dr Rob McMurdo, psychiatrists, and Ms Janet Devlin, psychologist, whose reports are in evidence. All he was able to recount was that he had been drinking heavily the previous night and, on the day in question, had consumed a large amount of fortified wine, commencing fairly early in the morning, and had also taken some heroin and tablets (probably Serepax, but this is unclear). That he was intoxicated finds some support in the evidence. His mother observed in the morning that his speech was slurred and he was "very wobbly". The women to whom I have earlier referred, who saw him after the killing, observed him to be drinking port and taking tablets. Ms Stannard described him as "drunk and pilled out", and later observed him "getting a really wobbly ... taking one step forward and three back".

It is clear that, after the killing, the prisoner was aware of what he had done and took steps, however crude, to cover his tracks. Nevertheless, I accept that he now has little or no memory of these events, no doubt because of what Dr McMurdo described as the "amnestic syndrome". The doctor saw this as resulting from his state of intoxication, and I accept that he was significantly affected by alcohol and drugs at the relevant time. The only conclusion I can reach about the killing is that arrived at by the psychiatrists and the psychologist: that the prisoner's purpose in approaching the deceased was to rob him (presumably, so that he could obtain more drugs and/or alcohol) and that the frenzied nature of the killing was the result of the disinhibiting effects of the substances which he had consumed.

The prisoner expressed his remorse for what he had done to several of the experts who examined him for the purpose of these proceedings, and I accept those expressions as genuine. I view his plea of guilty also as evidence of his contrition, particularly as he now has no memory of relevant events. While the case against him was undoubtedly strong, it is an exceptional course to plead guilty to murder and, in my view, he should be afforded a significant measure of leniency for having done so.

The prisoner is an Aboriginal man, now aged 30. He has a relatively minor criminal record, which does not include any significant matters of violence, and I propose to disregard it for present purposes. He was born in Young and is the third oldest of eight children. His family life was stable and happy and he has enjoyed a good relationship with his parents and his siblings. He is particularly close to one of his sisters, and to her daughters, to whom he has felt some commitment as his sister is a single mother. During his childhood his family ties assumed added importance because his father's seasonal work required them to move from place to place, and he found it hard to make friends and adjust to new environments.

He was a poor student and left school at the age of 15 while in year nine. The psychologist found him to be of "very limited intellectual capacity", and raised the possibility of his having suffered some brain damage as a result of longstanding substance abuse. He had been a heavy drinker since his mid teens, and over roughly the same period had also used marijuana and a variety of tablets. He had used heroin, although for how long is not entirely clear from the reports. At some stage he had also indulged in more obscure intoxicants, such as solvents. It seems that his abuse of these substances originated in, and was sustained by, his wish to be involved in the same activities as his peers, and was probably associated with his difficulty in forming friendships and his quest for acceptance.

After leaving school the prisoner did seasonal labouring work until, at the age of 17, he moved to Corinda in Queensland. There he worked with the
Community Development Project, a scheme designed to help young Aboriginals to obtain employment skills, and he was involved in establishing parks and gardens. He enjoyed this work and, while there, met his defacto wife,
Josephine Hudson. They commenced what has proved to be a longstanding relationship and had three daughters. Notwithstanding this, his attachment to his family of origin was such that he would travel to Goulburn for several months each year to spend time with them. In 1992, Ms Hudson and the children came to live with him at Goulburn, and she would travel to Queensland for part of each year to visit her family.

However, early in 1995, following the death of her grandmother, Ms Hudson returned to Queensland with the children for an indefinite period, staying on because she felt that her mother needed her. The prisoner moved back to live with his parents, and it was clear to his mother that he missed his wife and children and was depressed by their absence. This was how things stood at the time of the killing. In the circumstances, his dalliance with Ms Zagorowski (if that is what it was) is understandable.

In evidence before me were statements by Ms Hudson and by the prisoner's mother, who also gave oral evidence. She is employed by the Aboriginal Mental
Juvenile Justice Service and as a liaison officer with the Goulburn police, and her evidence impressed me as forthright and honest. The testimony of both women confirms what is clear from the history set out in the various expert reports: that this extraordinary outburst of violence is entirely uncharacteristic of the prisoner. He has the enduring support of his family and of Ms Hudson, who wishes to marry him, and plans that he should live with her and the children in north Queensland upon his eventual release. He had never sought professional help for his drug and alcohol abuse prior to being taken into custody, but has since undertaken a methadone maintenance programme and has been receiving appropriate counselling. Reports of his response are favourable and I assess his prospects of rehabilitation as good. Nevertheless,
I am satisfied that there are special circumstances, as I believe that he would benefit from the restraint of parole for a lengthy period and the supervision and guidance of parole officers for as much of that period as the
Probation and Parole Service considers necessary.

I have found this a most difficult sentencing exercise. Viewed objectively, the crime is very serious indeed. The conclusion that the prisoner intended to kill the deceased is inescapable. Indeed, his counsel realistically acknowledged as much. However, I should add that, notwithstanding the evidence of what he said to Christopher Zagorowski before going to the deceased's flat,
I am not satisfied that the killing was premeditated. The sentence which I impose must also reflect the criminality of the matters on the Form 1. They are of varying degrees of gravity and, of course, are overshadowed by the murder, but they cannot be ignored.

On the other hand, in the light of his plea of guilty, his background, and his prospects of rehabilitation, the prisoner has made out a strong case for leniency. I am mindful of the special considerations relating to the sentencing of Aboriginals discussed by Wood J in his valuable judgment in R v
Fernando [(1992) 76 A Crim R 58] at pp 62-3. I recognise that this prisoner's background is less deprived than that of Mr Fernando (and, indeed, of many people of his racial origin who come before the courts). Nevertheless, I have found the remarks of Wood J, particularly those relating to the pervasive effects of alcohol abuse within
Aboriginal communities, of assistance in my approach to the matter. The same must be said of the observations of Kirby P in his dissenting judgment in R v
Russell [(1995) 84 A Crim R 386] at -2.

The reference in the report of Ms Devlin to the prisoner entertaining suicidal thoughts whilst in custody is of concern. The substantial prison term which he must serve will be particularly burdensome for him as it will involve separation from his family for an extended period. I commend to the prison authorities, particularly those with responsibility for his placement, the concluding remarks of Ms Devlin in her report emphasising his need for regular contact with his family. He has been in custody since his arrest in the evening of 2 October 1995, and the sentence will commence on that date.

Gregory John LITTLE on the charge of murder, and taking into account the matters on the Form 1, I sentence you to penal servitude for 16 years, comprising a minimum term of 11 years commencing on 2 October 1995 and expiring on 1 October 2006, and an additional term of 5 years commencing on 2
October 2006 and expiring on 1 October 2011. You will be eligible for release on parole on 2 October 2006.
 * * * 
