

Associated Alloys P/L versus Metropolitan Engineering and Fabrications P/L and
Anor [1996] NSWSC 119 (10 May 1996) 
ASSOCIATED ALLOYS P/L v.METROPOLITAN ENGINEERING AND FABRICATIONS P/L &
ANOR /96 
FRIDAY 10 MAY 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
BRYSON J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Retention-of-Title Clauses. The parties.

These proceedings relate to Retention-of-Title clauses, sometimes called Romalpa clauses, incorporated in agreements for sales of goods. In recent years Romalpa Clauses have been the subject of contentions at the intersection between legal and contractual rights of parties in a commercial relationship for sale of goods, and interpretations in terms of equitable interests which claim consideration where rights over goods or debts are created in aid of bringing about payment. A clause by which the vendor retains title in the goods sold until he is paid could readily have imposed on it the interpretation that it is no more than a security or charge. That interpretation prevails in the United States under s.2-401(1) of the Uniform Commercial Code; see Williston on Sales 4th ed Vol.34, p335, referring to the Code and the different provisions of pre-code case law. (See too Mr Justice L J Priestley's article "The Romalpa Clause and the Quistclose Trust" in Equity and Commercial Relationships ed Finn (1987) at p221 note 18). In English and Australian law measures by which a vendor retains controls in various forms over goods until they are paid for do not receive this interpretation and are treated as what they literally are. Since Aluminium Industry Vassen B.V. v. Romalpa Aluminium Limited [[1976] 1 WLR 676] there have been a number of decisions where Retention-of-Title clauses have been considered, but there has been no general attempt to contend that Retention-of-Title clauses are charges per se. Clearly they are not. Decisions since 1976 have mainly addressed (a) whether vendors have equitable interests in moneys which are the proceeds of sub-sales of the goods, or sales of derived goods, arising out of equitable principles relating to dealings by fiduciaries and tracing moneys, or arising out of express terms of contracts, and (b) whether those interests are charges and are avoided under insolvency law. As decisions have been largely based on contractual terms which do not take standard forms, they have little authoritative force.

The first defendant Metropolitan Engineering is in financial difficulty. The second defendant Mr Shirlaw and a partner became administrators in a voluntary administration on 7 February 1996. Further, Westpac Banking Corporation, which held security over Metropolitan Engineering's land, buildings, plant and equipment, has appointed a receiver and manager of those assets. The administrators remain in control of the business operations.

Associated Alloys is a Steel Distributor. It has been supplying steel products to Metropolitan Engineering from time to time over the past 15 years. For some time, since 1991 or earlier, it has been the course of business for its invoices to Metropolitan Engineering to state at the foot of the front page "Romalpa Clause set forth on the reverse side hereof applies". The following has appeared on the reverse.
 "RESERVATION OF TITLE `It is expressly agreed and declared that the title of the subject goods/product shall not pass to the purchaser until payment in full of the purchase price. The purchaser shall in the meantime take custody of the goods/product and retain them as the fiduciary agent and bailee of the vendor.

The purchaser may resell but only as a fiduciary agent of the vendor. Any right to bind the vendor to any liability to any third party by contract or otherwise is however expressly negatived. Any such resale is to be at arms length and on market terms and pending resale or utilisation in any manufacturing or construction process, is to be kept separate from its own, properly stored, protected and insured.

The purchaser will receive all proceeds whether tangible or intangible, direct or indirect of any dealing with such goods/product in trust for the vendor and will keep such proceeds in a separate account until the liability to the vendor shall have been discharged.

The vendor is to have power to appropriate payments to such goods and accounts as it thinks fit notwithstanding any appropriation by the purchaser to the contrary.

In the event that the purchaser uses the goods/product in some manufacturing or construction process of its own or some third party, then the purchaser shall hold such part of the proceeds of such manufacturing or construction process as relates to the goods/product in trust for the vendor. Such part shall be deemed to equal in dollar terms the amount owing by the purchaser to the vendor at the time of the receipt of such proceeds'".

However there have been occasional exceptions when the invoice contained the statement I have quoted on the front page, but in fact there was no
Reservation-of-Title clause on the back.

When Metropolitan Engineering went into voluntary administration it had several large contracts on hand. By far the largest was for manufacture of pressure vessels, heat exchangers, columns and other industrial equipment for a Korean company referred to as Lucky Goldstar. Steel supplied by Associated
Alloys was used in the manufacture of these products. The steel so supplied was in various forms, including steel plate and formed dished ends for pressure vessels. Metropolitan Engineering ordered supplies of steel from
Associated Alloys in a series of orders commencing on 31 May 1995 transmitted and accepted by fax messages. Various terms of supply were set out in these messages, including prices, times and manner of delivery, incidence of customs duty and terms of payment, but there was no mention of Retention-of-Title clauses in these messages. Some of the goods ordered for use in the Lucky
Goldstar jobs were delivered, invoiced and paid for, but this litigation relates to the goods in three invoices which were not paid, or not fully paid.

Terms of the Invoices.

Invoice 583 dated 31 August 1995 for $US61,361.29 relates to five steel sheets described as "A387GR11 Class 2 Plate - normalised and tempered." One sheet was 2.268 tons and the other four were each 8.973 tonnes. The records of both vendor and purchaser appropriated a payment of $US14,000 which Metropolitan Engineering made late in January 1996 to this invoice, so that $US47,361.29 remains unpaid.

This invoice had the usual statement on the front but nothing was printed on the back.

Metropolitan Engineering must be taken to have known, from the course of business over some years, that Associated Alloys did business and sold steel on the basis that its standard Romalpa Clause would appear on the back of its invoices and would be incorporated in its agreements for sale. As a result
Metropolitan Engineering was bound by the Retention-of-Title clauses in cases where those clauses did appear on the backs of invoices and Metropolitan
Engineering accepted delivery and (as was invariably the case) raised no objection to the clauses. Cf. Chattis Nominees Pty Ltd v. Norman Ross
Homeworks Pty Ltd [(1992) 28 NSWLR 338] at 343 (Cohen J).

However this effect was only produced when the plaintiff did in fact use an invoice with a Retention-of-Title clause printed on the back. It is of no avail that the purchaser knew what the vendor's ordinary course was in a case where a vendor did not follow the ordinary course. Metropolitan Engineering's knowledge of the course of business would have no affect unless the clause was in fact incorporated in a particular agreement for sale. The clause was not incorporated simply by stating on the front of the invoice that a clause set forth on the reverse side applied; unless there was a clause on the reverse side, this statement was meaningless and can have no effect. In the rare cases such as Invoice 583 where there was no clause on the reverse side title passes in accordance with [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/s22.html) and [23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/s23.html) of the [Sale of Goods Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/). This conclusion is not critical for the outcome of the proceedings.

Invoice 592 dated 26 September 1995 related to 20 sheets of steel of various sizes up to 3.489 tonnes for $US80,630. This steel was described as "A516 GR60
HIC Plate." Invoice No. 598 dated 26 October 1995 related to seven pieces of sheet steel which were sold for $US69,920. This steel was described as "A264
Stainless Steel Clad Plate". Both invoices had the Retention-of-Title clause on the reverse side, and are unpaid.

The steel in these three invoices, like all steel supplied by Associated
Alloys under the orders given at the end of May 1995, was used in the fabrication of pressure vessels, heat exchangers and columns for Lucky
Goldstar. The total cost incurred by Metropolitan Engineering to Associated
Alloys for steel plate for this contract was $408,121.76. A small part of the steel plate remains with Metropolitan Engineering as offcuts; but these cannot be of significant economic value and the plaintiff makes claim to them. Most of the pressure vessels, heat exchangers and columns have been shipped to
Lucky Goldstar by Metropolitan Engineering, although some components, possibly no more than one pressure vessel, remain in Metropolitan Engineering's hands.
The administrators hope to complete the Lucky Goldstar project and realise the advantages of completion, including obtaining payment for work in progress.

Property in the steel plates and in the derived products.

The articles which Metropolitan Engineering has manufactured, referred to as the derived products, are complex. The scale and complexity of the derived products are illustrated by photographs in Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 2. It is not simply a matter of cutting out articles from the steel sheets; far from it. To manufacture pressure vessels, plate is formed into cylinders by rolling, the cylinders are then welded together, the dished ends are welded to the cylinders (and the dished ends, although supplied by Associated Alloys, have been paid for, so that there is no Retention-of-Title). Apertures are cut in the cylinders for application of pipes, nozzles, flanges and steel supports which are attached by welding. Although it is possible for someone with close knowledge of the process to recognise in a pressure vessel so produced some parts of the component steel which was once a flat steel plate supplied by Associated Alloys under one of these invoices, the pressure vessel is an entirely different product to the steel plate. The steel plate has been rolled into cylinders; if it were to be rolled flat again it would not have its original characteristics, having regard to the processes that it had gone through. Each pressure vessel is an aggregation of steel components from a number of sources; there is no good reason for viewing all the other components as accretions to steel supplied by Associated Alloys. Attempts to apportion ownership of the derived product by reference to the weight or value of the components incorporated into it would have very little meaning, as the value of various steel components is not proportional to their weight, and labour costs have been incurred in forming the components and assembling them into the derived product. The labour costs could only be meaningfully allocated to the whole derived product. The components of the derived products vary in complexity; the heat exchangers incorporate much tubing, made of a higher grade of steel and more expensive to work, and many other complex components; but all the derived products are complex. The costs of production are also complex; some costs, such as that of rolling the plate into cylinders, were incurred to outside contractors, some were incurred to subcontractors working in Metropolitan Engineering's works, and some are labour costs of employees. 
The question whether goods which have been used in some manufacturing process still exist in the goods produced by that process, or have gone out of existence on being incorporated in the derived product is, in my opinion, a question of fact and degree not susceptible of much exposition. When wheat is ground into flour it is reasonably open to debate whether the wheat continues to exist; when flour is baked into bread there could be little doubt that the flour does not. Many examples might be encountered or imagined, and each must be addressed separately. Where goods of a homogenous character are mixed co- ownership might be a correct conclusion; but that is a problem of a different kind. There is some discussion in the judgment of Bridge LJ in Borden (U.K.)
Limited v. Scottish Timber Products Ltd [[1981] 1 Ch 25] at 41, addressing "a mixture of heterogenous goods in a manufacturing process wherein the original goods lose their character and what emerges is a wholly new product ...". Goff LJ in Clough Mill Ltd v. Martin [[1985] 1 WLR 111] at 119 said:- "Now it is no doubt true that, where A's material is lawfully used by B to create new goods, whether or not B incorporates other material of his own, the property in the new goods will generally vest in B, at least where the goods are not reducible to the original materials: see Blackstone's
Commentaries, 17th ed (1830), vol. 2, pp 404-405." 
Diverse examples are given in Benjamin Sale of Goods 4th ed [1992] in Note at p241; and see note by Peter Watts at [106 LQR 552.] 
Blackstone's question whether goods are reducible to the original materials is not simply a matter of physics. Other perspectives have to be considered, including the economic perspective. The scraps of leather produced by cutting up a manufactured shoe could not in reality be regarded as the original leather from which shoe was manufactured. The steel which would be produced by cutting up a pressure vessel and flattening out the cylindrical parts would not be the steel which Associated Alloys delivered under the sale; it would be scrap steel.

In my finding, disregarding the offcuts, the steel plate supplied under these invoices no longer exists and Associated Alloys has no property in the derived products. The property in the derived products in Metropolitan Engineering's hands is in Metropolitan Engineering; the property in the derived products which have been delivered to Lucky Goldstar is in Lucky Goldstar.

Observations on the Reservation-of-Title clause.

In my opinion the first subclause does not have continuing effect on title to goods if the goods referred to ("the subject goods/product") go out of existence or pass into the ownership of a third party. The clause must be read as a whole, and the second and fifth subclauses show clearly that it was contemplated that the purchaser might use the goods in a manufacturing or construction process, and that when that happens a different regime is to apply. Overall it is clear that the parties contemplated and the plaintiff gave authority that the defendant would use sheet steel in the manufacture of other goods and dispose of the derived products in an effective way. Involved in this is the conferring of title on Lucky Goldstar. The first subclause is not intended to operate in some artificial way so as to attempt to maintain title in goods which have become an accretion to other goods, or have been incorporated in a new product, or have gone out of existence in some other way.

In my opinion the second and third subclauses deal with resale by the purchaser of the goods in the condition in which they were delivered. The subclauses do not deal with resale of goods after they have been used in some manufacturing or construction process; that is dealt with separately in the fifth subclause, and the provisions of the second subclause in terms operate "pending resale or utilisation in any manufacturing or construction of process". What is required to be done, that is keeping goods separate, properly stored, protected and insured could not be done if they had been used in a manufacturing or construction process.

The third subclause relates to proceeds of sale under the second subclause, and does not relate to proceeds dealt with by the fifth subclause.

The fourth subclause relating to appropriation gives rise to no question requiring decision because both vendor and purchaser treated the only relevant payment as appropriated to the same invoice.

The fifth subclause gave rise to the more important questions debated in these proceedings. Retention-of-Title clauses take many forms and none of the reported cases of which I am aware contains a term closely resembling the fifth subclause. The plaintiff did not, in the case as presented, finally claim delivery to it of any steel or derived products. The important questions in the case relate to whether the plaintiff can intervene and receive payments coming due from Lucky Goldstar, or whether the administrators may receive them, use them in the company's business and endeavour to complete its contracts.

Of course the event stated in the opening words of the fifth subclause has happened, that is Metropolitan Engineering has used substantially all the steel in these invoices in a manufacturing process of its own. Metropolitan
Engineering has received large sums from Lucky Goldstar, and will receive further sums as time passes, more goods are delivered and payments are received. However Metropolitan Engineering has done nothing to identify any part of the proceeds as relating to the steel in these invoices, and has done nothing to set aside and hold any part of the proceeds in trust for Associated
Alloys. An agreement to hold proceeds when received on trust could be enforced by compelling Metropolitan Engineering to hold some part of proceeds already received, if they could be identified, in trust, and by compelling
Metropolitan Engineering to hold in trust part of proceeds of the manufacturing process to be received in the future.

The last sentence - "Such part shall be deemed to equal in dollar terms the amount owing by the purchaser to the vendor at the time of the receipt of such proceeds" - is difficult to understand and at first reading appears to yield an absurdity to the effect that the part of the proceeds of the manufacturing process which relates to the goods sold is deemed to equal the amount owing to the vendor at the time of receipt of the proceeds. This would be absurd or on the verge of the absurd if it carried the sense that the amount in truth owing was to be set aside and the amount owing to the vendor was to be supposed to be only the part of the proceeds of the manufacturing process referred to, so that the vendor should receive only that part, whether or not that was more or less than what was otherwise owing. Rather it should to my mind be understood that the last sentence is an attempt to state how the part of the proceeds of the manufacturing process which relates to the goods is to be ascertained, and the sentence means (inverting its order of expression) that the amount owing to the vendor at the time of receipt is to be taken to be the part of the proceeds of the manufacturing process which relates to the goods, and is to be held in trust for the vendor.

It was contended that the trust failed for uncertainty in that the fifth subclause does not say what element it is which is to be used to relate the goods not paid for to the proceeds. In my opinion there is appropriate certainty; with the aid of the last sentence the relevant part of the proceeds is equal to the amount of the debt.

If the plaintiff has any remedies they arise under the fifth subclause. They cannot arise under the first three subclauses because, on my view of the facts, the goods sold and delivered have gone out of existence and the derived products when produced were the property of Metropolitan Engineering only.
Further there is no basis on the evidence on which any particular one of the derived products, whether they have been delivered to Lucky Goldstar or are still in Metropolitan Engineering's hands, can be identified as having been produced from the goods in any one of the three invoices. Nor is there any basis for carrying out any process of apportionment; if such a process were appropriate, the evidence would not enable it to be done.

Is there a registrable charge? 
If the fifth subclause creates a registrable charge, the charge is void as against the Administrators, under subs.266(1) of the Corporations Law. Subsection 262(1) prescribes which charges are registrable including "(f) a charge on a book debt;" with the extended meaning stated in subs.262(4). In my opinion the proceeds of a manufacturing or construction process to which the fifth subclause applies are book debts, both before and after they are received and held in trust. (It was contended that the fifth subclause creates a floating charge within para (a) of subs.262(1), but in my opinion there is no floating charge because there is no authorisation to deal with proceeds in the course of business irrespective of the charge, and no provision relating to some crystallising event which would end that authorisation. See the descriptions of a floating charge collected by Slade J in In Re Bond Worth [[1980] Ch 228] at 266-267.) 
Although the fifth subclause does not literally say so, it obviously contemplates not only that the part of the proceeds to which it refers should be held in trust for the vendor but also that it should be paid over to the vendor. When all the provisions of this subclause are taken together they have the effect that the vendor is given an entitlement to be paid the amount which is owing to it at the time of receipt of proceeds of a manufacturing process in which the goods were used has a right to be paid out of those proceeds, and has an equitable interest in the proceeds until paid. If these arrangements were not created by a term in a contract for the sale of goods they would be unhesitatingly identifiable as an equitable charge over debts due by Lucky
Goldstar to Metropolitan Engineering, charging those debts with the amount due to Associated Alloys and to be discharged by paying that amount.

In In Re Bond Worth Limited [[1980] 1 Ch 228] and Clough
Mill Ltd v. Martin [[1985] 1 WLR 111] extensive consideration was given to whether a charge was created over the goods sold themselves. The present case does not turn on any similar question. See too the circumstances in which an interest in proceeds of sale were held to be a charge discussed by Phillips J in Tatung (U.K.) Limited v. Galex Telesure
Limited & Ors [(1980) 5 BCC 325] at 332 to
In Aluminium Industry v. Romalpa it was held that the purchaser stood in a fiduciary relationship with the vendor which extended to the purchaser's resales of the material purchased and entitled the vendor to a tracing remedy against the proceeds of those sales. That case did not relate to the sale of derived products, and the subject of tracing proceeds of sub-sales is in the present case dealt with expressly by the third subclause. The fact that in the present case the parties dealt explicitly in the fifth subclause with the interests which were to exist in the proceeds of sale of derived products precludes, in my opinion, the application of tracing remedies on general equitable principles; the relationship must be governed by the express agreement. In Romalpa no issue was considered relating to statutory avoidance of an unregistered charge.

Important as it is to resist imposing equitable interpretations on commercial relationships as primary and as well-understood as sales of goods, and to resist introducing into them remedies which turn on complex tests and discretions, where parties expressly cast their rights in terms of equitable interests, as they do in the fifth subclause by invoking a trust, the equitable nature of their relationship must be accepted, and accepted fully, notwithstanding that they have created it as a term of an agreement for the sale of goods. A decision whether in Equity a mortgage or charge exists is made according to the substance and whole circumstances of the parties' relationship. When the fifth subclause is approached in that way it is in my view altogether obvious that it gives the vendor an entitlement to a charge over the proceeds of the sale of the derived goods, because the trust is a trust over the part of the proceeds which equals the amount owing, and it was obviously the parties' intention that when that amount was paid, the trust would cease to exist.

In my opinion subclause 5 is void as against the administrators and cannot now be enforced. The plaintiff is not entitled to any remedy and the proceedings are dismissed.
 * * * 
