

Dennis versus Nrma Matter No 00034/94 [1997] NSWSC 570 (21 November 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
Dennis versus NRMA 
C00034/94 November 1997 
James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
No C00034/94 - DENNIS versus NRMA 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an action for damages for personal injuries brought by the plaintiff, Floyd Arthur Dennis, against the defendant, NRMA Insurance Limited. The defendant was sued pursuant to [s54(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s54.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) as being the liability insurer of the plaintiff's wife, Janice Dennis. 
The proceedings arose out of a motor vehicle accident which occurred at approximately 8 o'clock on the evening of 8 April 1992. It is the plaintiff's case that a Holden Rodeo motor vehicle in which the plaintiff and the plaintiff's wife were travelling was being driven by the plaintiff's wife and not by the plaintiff. The vehicle was being driven in a westerly direction on the Brewarrina road from Walgett towards the Gingie Gingie Aboriginal Reserve, which is about twelve kilometres west of Walgett, where the plaintiff and his wife, both of them aborigines, were living. There was no other person in the vehicle. At a point about 25 kilometres west of Walgett the vehicle left the bitumen roadway and travelled for a distance of about 175 metres while south of the bitumen; the vehicle then completely crossed the bitumen roadway from the south side to the north, travelled some distance while north of the bitumen and ultimately came to rest some distance to the north of the bitumen.
Later in this judgment I will need to consider in more detail the evidence relating to the path taken by the vehicle and the way in which the vehicle travelled.

Both the plaintiff and his wife were ejected from the vehicle and their bodies were found lying some distance from the vehicle. The plaintiff's wife died from injuries received in the accident, without recovering consciousness. The plaintiff himself was severely injured in the accident but survived. The plaintiff said in his evidence, and had said on earlier occasions after the accident, that he had no recollection of the accident and it was not suggested in cross-examination of the plaintiff that his asserted inability to recall the accident was otherwise than genuine.

The proceedings came on for hearing in a Supreme Court Circuit held at
Bathurst. The hearing of the action occupied the whole two weeks of the
Circuit and had not been concluded when the hearing time available at Bathurst expired. The hearing was later concluded in Sydney.

In the hearing liability was disputed on the grounds that at the time of the accident the vehicle was being driven by the plaintiff and not by his wife or at least the plaintiff could not establish that the vehicle was being driven by his wife. It was accepted by counsel for the defendant that if the plaintiff succeeded in proving that at the time of the accident the vehicle was being driven by the plaintiff's wife there was no issue that the other elements of a cause of action in negligence were present, that is that the plaintiff's wife had driven the motor vehicle negligently and that the plaintiff had been injured by reason of her negligence. In the event of the plaintiff succeeding in establishing a cause of action in negligence, the defendant contended that the plaintiff had been guilty of contributory negligence within each of [s74(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s74.html) and s[74](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s74.html)(2)(c) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), that is that the plaintiff was at the time of the accident a voluntary passenger in the vehicle and the plaintiff's wife's ability to drive the vehicle was impaired as a consequence of the consumption of alcohol and the plaintiff was aware or ought to have been aware of the impairment and that at the time of the accident the plaintiff was not wearing a seat belt as required by the
Motor [Traffic
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/). It was conceded by counsel for the plaintiff that, if the plaintiff obtained a verdict, the elements of each of these forms of contributory negligence were established by the evidence. However, the extent of the share of responsibility for the accident which should be apportioned to the plaintiff was strongly contested. The assessment of the damages the plaintiff should recover, if the plaintiff succeeds in obtaining a verdict, is subject to the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/). Some heads of damages claimed by the plaintiff were admitted at the hearing.
However, a number of the plaintiff's claims for damages were strongly contested, including particularly his claims for damages for economic loss and for damages for what may compendiously be described as home care services.

I will now proceed to a consideration of the issues I have to decide. The transcript of the oral evidence at the hearing covers more than six hundred pages and the Exhibits are numerous and in some cases voluminous and in these circumstances I will not attempt the impossible task of summarising all of the evidence. I will refer in this judgment to what I consider are the more important parts of the evidence but in reaching the conclusions I have reached
I have endeavoured to take into account all of the evidence. That I expressly refer to some piece of evidence in some part of this judgment in considering some particular issue does not necessarily mean that I have not taken that piece of evidence into account in considering some other issue, even though I do not expressly refer to that piece of evidence in the part of my judgment in which I deal with the latter issue.

Who was driving the vehicle at the time of the accident? 
This issue is obviously crucial. If the plaintiff succeeds on this issue, then, the other elements of a cause of action in negligence having been conceded, there must be a verdict for the plaintiff. If the plaintiff does not succeed on this issue, then there must be a verdict for the defendant.

There was no direct evidence about which of the plaintiff or his wife was driving the vehicle at the time of the accident. As I have already stated, the plaintiff said in evidence that he had no recollection of what had happened in the accident. He said that the last thing happening before the accident he could recall had occurred a week to two weeks before the accident. The first thing happening after the accident which he could recall was his parents visiting him in hospital after the accident. As I have already stated, no attempt was made by counsel for the defendant to challenge the plaintiff's evidence that he had no recollection of the accident or of the events leading up to the accident. For obvious reasons, the plaintiff's wife was unavailable to give evidence. There was no one else in the vehicle at the time of the accident and there was no eye witness outside the vehicle to the accident.
Furthermore, as I have already stated, both the plaintiff and his wife were ejected from the vehicle in the accident and discovered lying some distance from the vehicle, so that the positions of the bodies of the plaintiff and his wife after the accident did not show, or at least did not unequivocally show, where they had been sitting in the vehicle before the accident, although the positions of the bodies of the plaintiff and his wife after the accident were made an important basis of an opinion by an expert witness about their probable positions in the vehicle before the accident.

In the absence of any direct evidence about who was driving the vehicle, the plaintiff sought to establish that it was his wife who was driving the vehicle by a number of pieces of circumstantial evidence and by expert opinion evidence by a Mr Brown, who described himself inter alia as an accident investigation engineer. The defendant did not adduce any lay evidence on this issue but relied on expert opinion evidence by a Mr Vaughan, who described himself as a consultant in vehicle engineering and traffic safety.

One circumstance relied on by the plaintiff was that as at 8 April 1992 the plaintiff was not a licensed driver, whereas his wife was. The plaintiff gave evidence in examination in chief, in response to leading questions from his counsel presumably asked on instructions, that in December 1991 he had been disqualified from driving for twelve months after having been convicted on a drink driving charge. However, records produced by the Roads and Traffic
Authority disclosed that on 18 December 1990, not 1991, the plaintiff had been disqualified from driving for twelve months after having been convicted of driving with a high range prescribed concentration of alcohol. The period of disqualification imposed on the plaintiff in December 1990 had expired before the time of the accident. However, in December 1990 the plaintiff had also been fined $500 (or perhaps a slightly larger amount), this fine remained unpaid at the time of the accident and no licence had been issued to the plaintiff. Hence, although the plaintiff was not a disqualified driver, nevertheless it was true that at the time of the accident the plaintiff was not licensed to drive a vehicle on a public road in New South Wales, whereas his wife did have such a licence which she had held since 1984.

The plaintiff asserted in his evidence that after he lost his licence he had never driven on a public road, although he had driven around the Gingie
Reserve. He also said that a reason why he had not driven on a public road while he was "disqualified" was that he wanted to get his licence back, that is he did not want to do anything while "disqualified" which would prevent him regaining a licence. He had, however, done nothing about regaining a licence since his disqualification had expired in December 1991. The plaintiff claimed in his evidence that he believed that he had been disqualified from driving in
December 1991 and that his disqualification had been for a period of four years.

Evidence about the vehicle involved in the accident was given by Mr Clem Dodd, who lived at the Gingie Reserve. Mr Dodd gave evidence that in April 1992 he supervised a number of men, including the plaintiff, in carrying out cleaning work around the Reserve. As a supervisor he used a white Holden Rodeo motor vehicle, which he said had been acquired new on behalf of the Barwon
Aboriginal Community about six months before the accident.

Photographs of the vehicle which were admitted into evidence show that the vehicle was a small tip truck, including a cabin and a tray to the rear of the cabin which could be tipped. Along the front of the tray were four vertical posts and at least three horizontal railings, which together constituted a structure which was described in evidence as "the loading boards". The loading boards projected some distance above the level of the top of the cabin. There were also side boards along each side of the tray and back boards at the rear of the tray. It is convenient to refer to this vehicle as "the truck".

Mr Dodd gave evidence that on the morning of 8 April 1992 he had used the truck in the course of his duties as a supervisor, he then drove to Walgett and after he had returned to the Reserve he gave the keys to the truck to the plaintiff's father, George Fernando.

George Fernando gave evidence that as at 8 April 1992 he was living at the
Reserve with his de facto wife, Dulcie Dennis (the plaintiff's mother), the plaintiff, the plaintiff's wife and their children. George Fernando had control of the truck. On 8 April 1992 Clem Dodd brought the keys to the truck to George Fernando at his house.

On the afternoon of 8 April 1992 the plaintiff's wife came to George Fernando and said "father" (her manner of addressing Mr Fernando), can I have the keys?" George Fernando gave permission to the plaintiff's wife to take the keys and the plaintiff's wife took the keys to the truck. George Fernando later heard the truck start up and saw the plaintiff's wife driving the truck in the direction of Walgett. George Fernando said that during the period the plaintiff had been unlicensed the plaintiff's wife had always been the one who drove the truck, when the plaintiff and his wife were together in the truck.

Dulcie Dennis gave evidence that after the plaintiff lost his licence she had seen the plaintiff driving the truck around the Reserve when he was taking rubbish away (that is, not on a public road) but that that was the only time she had observed the plaintiff driving the truck. She had seen the plaintiff's wife driving the truck, with the plaintiff as a passenger. In her evidence in chief Dulcie Dennis said that she had seen the plaintiff and his wife returning from Walgett in the truck, with the plaintiff's wife driving.
However, in cross-examination she agreed that it was usual for the plaintiff, if he went into Walgett, to stay and drink beer in Walgett and that the plaintiff and his wife would come home late after she was asleep, so that she had had no opportunity to observe who was driving the truck when they returned to the Reserve.

Evidence was also given by a number of aboriginals who said that they had observed the plaintiff and the plaintiff's wife on the evening of 8 April .

Before referring to some of the evidence given by these witnesses it is convenient to describe part of the town of Walgett. A principal street in
Walgett is Fox Street which runs in a north/south direction. On the eastern side of Fox Street and moving from south to north are to be found the Oasis
Hotel, then a laneway, then a fish and chip shop, then a Toy World and Sports
Store and then the premises of a business known as Johnsons. There are also some other premises on this side of Fox Street which I have not mentioned.

On the west side of Fox Street and virtually opposite the hotel is a store known as Payless. To the north of the Payless building is a car park referred to as the Payless car park.

Richard Simpson gave evidence that on the evening of 8 April 1992 he drove with his wife and children to Johnsons' store. He parked his vehicle somewhere between the Toy World and Sports Store and Johnsons. While sitting in his vehicle he saw the plaintiff and the plaintiff's wife walk across Fox Street in the direction of the Payless car park. The plaintiff and his wife stopped at the truck which was parked in the Payless car park with its nose to the wall of the Payless building. Mr Simpson said, "first Janice was standing on the passenger's side and Floyd walked around to the driver's side... and stood there for a while and then he walked back to the passenger's side again and that's when I drove off..." 
Mr Simpson was cross-examined about a statement he had made on 20 June 1995 to an investigator retained by the defendant in which he had said "the last thing
I recall seeing as I drove away is both Floyd and Janice standing somewhere near the ute. I have no idea which one of them drove from the scene".

Mr Douglas Haley gave evidence that in April 1992 he was living at the Gingie
Reserve. On the evening of 8 April 1992 Mr Haley drove into Walgett at some time between 7pm and 8pm and parked his vehicle in front of the Payless building. While he was standing in front of his vehicle "I seen Floyd and
Janice walk from the front of the Oasis Hotel jaywalked across the road towards Payless...". The plaintiff and the plaintiff's wife then went around the corner of the Payless building into the Payless car park and Mr Haley lost sight of them. A little later Mr Haley saw the plaintiff walk alone across Fox
Street from the western side to the eastern side and enter the fish and chip shop. A little later again the plaintiff's wife also walked across Fox Street and entered the fish and chip shop. Mr Haley then drove away from the scene and after some delay set out for the Reserve.

On his way home to the Reserve Mr Haley stopped at the scene of the accident which had by that time occurred. He saw the truck lying on its passenger side facing back towards Walgett. He found Janice Dennis about six metres from the truck. He did not see any movement in Janice's body. He found the plaintiff "maybe seven metres or a little bit further" from the truck. The plaintiff was "snoring". Mr Haley reported the accident to the police.

Roderick Ruttley gave evidence that a bit before 8 pm on 8 April 1992 he was standing on the eastern footpath of Fox Street near the fish and chip shop. A man named Arthur Hickey approached him from the south and he and Mr Hickey had a chat. Mr Ruttley was facing south. Mr Hickey had his back towards the fish and chip shop.

Mr Ruttley gave evidence that he saw the plaintiff's wife walk across Fox
Street (apparently from west to east) and enter the fish and chip shop and then saw the plaintiff and the plaintiff's wife leave the fish and chip shop and walk across to the other side of Fox Street. The plaintiff and the plaintiff's wife were talking loudly to each other as they crossed Fox Street and the plaintiff dropped something in the middle of the street. Later Mr
Ruttley heard the truck start. The truck left the Payless car park by a back way, that is by travelling away from Mr Ruttley. Mr Ruttley did not claim to have seen either the plaintiff or his wife enter the truck.

In my opinion the evidence of the witnesses Simpson, Haley and Ruttley is of little assistance in determining who was driving the truck at the time of the accident. However, counsel for the plaintiff placed substantial reliance on the evidence of the next witness, Mr Hickey.

Mr Hickey gave evidence that he lived in Walgett. On the evening of 8 April he was walking in a northerly direction in Fox Street, when he met Mr
Ruttley near Johnsons store. He stopped to speak to Mr Ruttley. Initially Mr
Hickey was facing north as he spoke with Mr Ruttley. However, he heard a noise and turned around "so I see a couple of people walking across the street, like heading west", who were the plaintiff and his wife. According to Mr Hickey the plaintiff and his wife entered the car park and went to the truck, which was parked about half way along the wall of the Payless building, with the front of the truck facing the wall of the building. Mr Hickey continued:- "I seen Floyd, Floyd and his wife. He went to the passenger side and seen him open the door and I see his wife walking round the back of the ute, heading round towards the back of the driver's side.

Q. What did you see then? 
A. Well, they waited there for a while and then the doors slam, and I heard the driver's side door slam, and next minute the motor kicked over, headlights came on, they backed out of the - they backed out, away from the wall.

Q. Now when the vehicle backed out, what did you see then? 
A. I see Floyd with his arm out the window, and then they took off, and after that when they got round the corner you couldn't see them for - they just disappear, and I just kept talking to Rodney.

Q. Now, across the road in the car park, how was the light? 
A. Oh you could make, you know, it was light enough to see you know, figures there walking about".

As at 8 April 1992 Mr Hickey was aware that the plaintiff had lost his licence.

Mr Hickey was cross-examined about whether he had seen Mr Haley on the west side of Fox Street outside the Payless store. In his evidence in chief Mr
Hickey had said of Mr Haley "I hadn't seen him walking". In cross-examination
Mr Hickey said that he had not seen Mr Haley on the west side of Fox Street when he, Mr Hickey, had crossed Fox Street (Mr Hickey had originally been walking north on the western side of Fox Street, before crossing Fox Street to its eastern side) but that about five to ten minutes after he crossed Fox
Street he had seen Mr Haley leaning on the bonnet of his car.

It was submitted on behalf of the defendant that there was a contradiction between Mr Hickey's evidence in chief and his evidence in cross-examination at this point, but I do not accept that there was a contradiction. Mr Hickey's evidence in chief is consistent with his having seen Mr Haley after he had stopped walking and was talking to Mr Ruttley.

Mr Hickey's evidence did vary on whether he had seen Mr Haley's car on the western side of Fox Street. At first he said there was a car which "could've" been Mr Haley's. Then he said he was "certain" that Mr Haley's car was there.

Mr Hickey accepted he was not taking "much" notice of the plaintiff and his wife while they were crossing the street. He did not notice the plaintiff carrying anything or drop anything while crossing the street.

Mr Hickey was particularly cross-examined about previous statements he had made. Mr Hickey had made three previous statements, a statement made in about
November 1993 to a representative of the plaintiff, the version of this statement which was admitted into evidence being undated and unsigned; a statement made to a representative of the plaintiff on 10 February 1994, which was signed; and a statement made to an investigator retained by the defendant on 20 June 1995.

In paragraph 3 of the statement of November 1993 Mr Hickey said that the plaintiff and his wife came out of the hotel. In his oral evidence at the trial he said that he first saw the plaintiff and his wife, when they were about half way across Fox Street.

In paragraph 6 of the statement of November 1993 Mr Hickey said:- "They got across the street and went into the car park. There was only one (1) car parked in the car park, it being a four wheel drive table top vehicle. The vehicle was about fifty (50) or sixty (60) yards from away from where I was. I could see Floyd get into the passenger side of the vehicle and I saw his wife go around to the other side of the car. The car was parked facing the wall of the Payless Supermarket building. I did not actually see Mrs Dennis get into the drivers seat but I saw her walk around to the drivers side of the car. The lighting in the car park was fairly good but I could not actually see Mrs
Dennis on the drivers side because that side of the car was dark. I had an unobstructed view of the vehicle as it was the only vehicle in the car park".

In paragraph 12 of the statement of November 1993 Mr Hickey said:- "I could see Floyd in the passenger's seat as they backed out away from the wall of the Payless building".

In the statement of 10 February 1994 Mr Hickey gave an account generally in accordance with the first statement of November 1993 and with his oral evidence at the trial. However, in paragraph 4 he said that he saw the plaintiff and his wife "walk down the laneway at the side of the Oasis Hotel".
He reiterated in the statement that he saw the plaintiff get into the passenger's side of the truck and that he saw the plaintiff's wife go around to the driver's side and that he could actually see the plaintiff in the passenger's seat as the vehicle started to move. Mr Hickey said in this statement that he had not drunk any alcohol for twenty-four years.

The statement of 20 June 1995 was given to an investigator retained by the defendant. In paragraph 3 of this statement Mr Hickey said that he saw the plaintiff and his wife walk out from the laneway. He said "it was dark and the only lighting was coming from the fish and chip shop. The nearest street light would be eighty to one hundred metres away, north of the T.A.B". In paragraph of this statement Mr Hickey said "I could not see who got into the driver's seat and who got into the front passenger's seat... it was too dark". In paragraph 9 of the statement Mr Hickey said that he had not provided any other person with a statement about the accident.

Mr Hickey conceded in cross-examination that he had not seen the plaintiff and his wife walk out from the laneway. He said that this passage in the statement of 20 June 1995 was "a figure of speech". Mr Hickey accepted that he had said in the statement of 20 June 1995 that "Floyd and Janice definitely did not go into the fish and chip shop at any time", whereas in fact he had no idea whether or not they had gone into the fish and chip shop. Mr Hickey had not provided the inquest into Mrs Dennis' death with any of the information he had subsequently come forward with.

At first Mr Hickey said that he could not remember being interviewed by a representative of the defendant for the statement of 20 June 1995. However, after he had looked at a document containing the statement he remembered some of the circumstances in which he had made the statement. He said that he had been interviewed by an investigator in the presence of an aboriginal liaison officer and later the same day he had signed a statement prepared by the investigator, when the aboriginal liaison officer had not been present. He said that he had been "rushed". "I had a few things I had to do and I sort of wanted to...just get on with what I was doing" It was "close to the truth" that he was prepared to say anything to the investigator so that he could get on with his own business. He said that he had not read the statement of 20
June 1995 right through before signing it and that he had not had a good look at it. He was not given a copy of the statement by the investigator.

In re-examination Mr Hickey said that the nearest street light had been only about forty to fifty metres away and although the light was dim there had been enough light to see the plaintiff and his wife in the car park, both the plaintiff and his wife being known to Mr Hickey. He repeated that he had seen the plaintiff get into the passenger's side of the truck and had seen the plaintiff's wife head towards the driver's side.

I have taken into account the various submissions about Mr Hickey's evidence made by counsel for the defendant, including that it would have been too dark for Mr Hickey to see what he claimed that he had seen; that it was improbable that Mr Hickey as he was talking to Mr Ruttley would have taken much notice of the plaintiff and his wife; that Mr Hickey conceded that some of the things he had said on different occasions about the events of 8 April 1992 were untrue; that Mr Hickey did not come forward with his version at the time of the inquest into Mrs Dennis' death, of which he would surely have been aware; that there are inconsistencies between his oral evidence and the statement of 20
June 1995.

I have concluded, however, that I should accept Mr Hickey's evidence and particularly his evidence that he saw the plaintiff get into the passenger's seat of the truck and that he saw the plaintiff's wife head towards the driver's seat and that he saw the plaintiff in the passenger's seat. I consider that the conduct of the plaintiff and his wife, both of whom were heavily intoxicated, as they crossed Fox Street could well have attracted and held at least some of the attention of some one who was casually chatting; that the car park would have been sufficiently lit to enable Mr Hickey, who knew both the plaintiff and his wife, to distinguish between them, the plaintiff being a much bigger person than his wife; that Mr Hickey's oral evidence was substantially in accordance with the earlier versions he gave in
November 1993 and February 1994; that his statement of June 1995 given to a representative of the defendant, to the extent to which it is inconsistent with Mr Hickey's oral evidence, could be unreliable because of the circumstances in which it was made and the obvious interest of the investigator who compiled the statement to include in it assertions helpful to the defendant. The investigator was not called to give evidence rebutting Mr
Hickey's version of the circumstances in which the statement was made. It is clear that at least much of the language in which the statement of 20 June is expressed was the investigator's and not Mr Hickey's 
I also accept that at the time of the accident the plaintiff was not licensed to drive a motor vehicle on a public road, whereas the plaintiff's wife was so licensed. I accept that at least generally while the plaintiff was without a licence the plaintiff's wife did the driving and the plaintiff was a passenger, while the plaintiff and the plaintiff's wife were in the truck on a public road. I accept that on 8 April 1992 it was the plaintiff's wife, and not the plaintiff, who asked for, and received, the keys to the truck and that it was the plaintiff's wife who drove the truck away from the Gingie Reserve on the trip to Walgett.

The accident was investigated by a police officer named Harris who in April was stationed at Walgett. Constable Harris went to the scene of the accident shortly after 8 pm on 8 April 1992. He saw the truck off the roadway and the bodies of the two persons. The following day he returned to the scene of the accident and made more observations and measurements. When Constable
Harris returned to the scene on 9 April 1992 the truck had already been removed. Another police officer took photographs of the scene of the accident and of the vehicle, which had been taken to some kind of yard. No photographs were taken of the truck at the scene of the accident.

There were admitted into evidence two statement made by Constable Harris for the purposes of the inquest into Mrs Dennis' death, a statement made by
Constable Harris about obtaining blood samples from Mrs Dennis' body for testing and a police traffic accident report together with a sketch of the scene of the accident which were prepared by Constable Harris. The statements, the report and the sketch had been prepared by Constable Harris from entries made by him in his police notebooks.

In his statement bearing the date 5 May 1992 Constable Harris said inter alia:- "3. About 8.10pm Wednesday 8 April 1992 in company with Sergeant Stewart and
Constable Kennedy, I attended a motor vehicle accident 25 kilometres west of
Walgett's levy bank along the Brewarrina Road. On arrival at the scene I saw a
Holden Rodeo Utility Registered Number SCV-868 on its passenger side facing a northern direction. This vehicle was about 13 metres north off the roadway.
The front of the vehicle was near to the old Brewarrina Road, now a dirt track.
On the old Brewarrina Road about 12 metres west of a large wooden post near the front of vehicle Registered No.SCV-868, I saw Janice Dennis laying on her back. Janice did not have any movement other than blinking of the eyelids a few times. About 9 metres from the same post in the north west direction I saw Floyd Dennis. He was laying on his back and appeared to be breathing but with slight difficulty.
 * * * 
After arriving at the hospital steps to revive Janice Dennis were implemented. At 8.45pm that night Janice Dennis was pronounced life extinct by
Dr Dalgety of Walgett Hospital. Floyd Dennis was treated for head injury and broken collar bone. Due to his injuries he was flown out to Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital Sydney in the early hours of Thursday 9 April 1992. The condition of Floyd Dennis on 11 May 1992 was still critical but improving.
Interviewing of Dennis for the time being is not advised by Medical staff treating him at Royal Prince 
Alfred. A blood sample of Floyd Dennis was obtained on 8 April 1992 at Walgett
Hospital. On Monday 11 May 1992 the blood sample unit in Sydney revealed him having a positive result with a reading of 0.216".

In his statement of 23 December 1992 Constable Harris said that on 18 December the plaintiff had told him that he could not remember anything about the accident.

In the sketch Constable Harris drew lines representing the truck leaving the roadway to the southern side of the road, travelling for a distance of 176 metres off the roadway before returning to the roadway and then crossing the roadway at a sharp angle, then travelling off the roadway to the north of the roadway and finally coming to rest lying on its passenger's side facing virtually back towards Walgett in the direction in which it had come. In the police accident report Constable Harris expressed the opinion that the vehicle had rolled approximately three times.

In his oral evidence Constable Harris gave further evidence about what he had observed. He had observed four tyre mark tracks left by the truck crossing the bitumen roadway and continuing for a distance of about eighteen metres from the northern edge of the bitumen, after which there were no more tyre mark tracks. Two of the tyre mark tracks were much heavier than the other two and
Constable Harris expressed an opinion, which was not disputed, that the heavier tracks had been caused by the truck's two nearside tyres and that the truck would have been travelling substantially sideways (with most of its weight on its two nearside wheels) as it crossed the bitumen roadway.

After the tyre mark tracks ended and up to where the truck was found, a distance of somewhere between twenty-one and twenty-eight metres, there was a succession of what Constable Harris variously described as "pits", "ditches" or "dints". They were "very fresh" and in Constable Harris's opinion had been made by the truck.

These pits are not clearly shown in any photograph of the scene of the accident, with the possible exception of the photograph which became Exhibit F in which Constable Harris said he could see one of the pits. Constable Harris said that on average the pits were about ten inches to twelve inches wide.
"Some were dug out of the ground a bit, some were only shallow but they were definite pits that ran in direction to the vehicle".

In his sketch plan Constable Harris indicated by crosses the positions of the pits he had observed. He showed two parallel sets of crosses, in line with notional extensions of the two lines representing the two heavy tyre mark tracks crossing the bitumen roadway. He showed the distances between the more easterly set of pits as being two metres, three metres, twenty metres and three metres and the distances between the more westerly set of pits as being three metres, one metre, six metres and two metres and then a further distance the length of which was not stated.

It should be observed in relation to Constable Harris's sketch generally, that it is a very crude sketch. It was not drawn to scale or even approximately to scale. For example, one line marked as representing a distance of eighteen metres is the same length as another line marked as representing a distance of two metres. The truck could not possibly have crossed the bitumen roadway at as pronounced an angle as Constable Harris's sketch would suggest. Caution would have to be exercised in inferring distances or angles from Constable
Harris's sketch.

Constable Harris said in his oral evidence:- " there could be a number of things on the vehicle that caused those pits, but on - I could be very positive that it's definitely something on that vehicle which made those pits, which trailed to the vehicle. Whether it may be the top corners of the rack here, whether it may be the edge corners of the tray, even the tyres, would definitely cause that sort of pits if it hit the ground, so
I'd be guessing, but any one of those things could have caused the pits".

Constable Harris was asked what had led him to form the opinion that the truck had rolled approximately three times, that is had rolled three times sideways and not head over end. He answered:- "Just a few simple things I suppose. The skid marks, the tyre marks that went from the bitumen off on to the gravel on the side of the road they stopped at a point, approximately 18 metres from the north edge of the bitumen, and then you have your succession of pits or dints in the dirt - whichever terminology you wish to use. If this vehicle continued sliding across the bitumen and continued merely sliding on a dirt road there on the dirt on this side of the road the marks would have still been there and still kept going. And basically either turned approximately three times merely by the number of bits, just visualising a vehicle turning over in that fashion making those pits in the ground".

In cross-examination Constable Harris agreed that he had not observed any debris from the truck, such as broken glass, at any of the points where the truck could have rolled.

Constable Harris said that he had been unable to determine who had been the driver of the truck at the time of the accident.

It was put to Constable Harris in cross-examination that the holes in the ground could have been caused by the truck bouncing, without turning over, but
Constable Harris did not think so. He said, "I don't think it would sit on its side, if that's the first it's turned over. I am no expert".

It was also put to Constable Harris that he had not observed any damage to the truck which would be consistent with the truck having rolled. In reply
Constable Harris said that the windscreen had been shattered and that the tray was "awfully whacked, it's out of whack with the line of the vehicle...which is obviously consistent with it hitting forcibly the ground sometime".

The significance of parts of Constable Harris's evidence will become more apparent, after I have dealt with the evidence of the expert witnesses.

As I have already indicated, Mr Brown of Civil and Forensic Pty Limited, civil structural and accident investigation engineers, gave evidence on behalf of the plaintiff and Mr Vaughan of Rodney Vaughan and Associates Pty Limited, consultants in vehicle engineering and traffic safety, gave evidence on behalf of the defendant. Each of the experts prepared a report which was admitted into evidence, gave oral evidence in chief and was then cross-examined at very considerable length. It was the cross-examination of these experts which was largely responsible for the trial lasting as long as it did. I do not propose to attempt the impracticable task of summarising all of the evidence of these witnesses, all of which I have read more than once and all of which I have endeavoured to take into account. I will simply refer to some of the more salient aspects of their evidence.

Mr Brown's report (Exhibit J) is dated 2 March 1995 but was based on inspections of the scene of the accident and of the truck which had taken place on 28 February 1994. Material provided to Mr Brown included statements taken from various witnesses, including the three statements by Constable
Harris, Constable Harris's Traffic Accident Report and sketch, ambulance and hospital records and photographs taken by the police of the scene of the accident and of the truck.

On 28 February 1994 Mr Brown visited the accident site with Constable Harris and took certain measurements. He prepared a scale plan, showing inter alia what he considered to be the path taken by the truck when it ran off the roadway to the south of the roadway, the path taken by the truck across the roadway, some positions of the truck as it crossed the roadway showing the truck progressively rotating in a clock wise direction around its vertical axis and the final position of the truck on or near an embankment near a culvert under the old Brewarrina road, which runs parallel and to the north of the present Brewarrina road.

In his report Mr Brown noted:- "Const Mark Harris recorded the final position and orientation of the vehicle after the accident. The vehicle came to rest just to the south of the gravel road and approximately 13m north of Brewarrina Road. The vehicle had overturned and was lying on its passenger side...

After the vehicle was removed from the site it was examined by Det Sgt Ian
Hobson of the Physical Evidence Section and Det Snr Const Terence Cunningham of the Vehicle Examination Unit.

Det Sgt Hobson recorded damage to the nearside panels, roof, offside panels and rear tray. He also noted that the front nearside tyre appeared to have rolled off the rim. Photograph 1, attached at the end of this report, was taken by Det Sgt Hobson. It shows damage sustained by the vehicle. Close examination of the photograph also shows damage to the windscreen of the vehicle. This damage is located at the top of the windscreen and in front of the passenger's seat of the vehicle".

Detective Senior Constable Cunningham found no mechanical defects in the truck. He found that the seat belts of the truck were in working order. Mr
Brown said in his report "as both occupants were ejected from the vehicle and travelled a considerable distance it is our opinion that they were not wearing seat belts".

Mr Brown continued in his report as follows:- "We examined the vehicle on 28 February 1994. Since the time of the accident various parts of the vehicle had been removed, stolen or sold. This included the rear tray and the right hand door. Our inspection found damage as reported by Det Sgt Hobson and Det Snr Const Cunningham. We also found damage to the windscreen of the vehicle. Photographs 2 through 4 show the damage to the windscreen in more detail than is evident in Photograph 1. The damage consists of a starburst fracture of the glass. The centre of the starburst is located directly in line with the passenger's seat (see Photograph 3) and near the bottom of the tinted strip along the top of the windscreen. The cracking of the windscreen is extensive and extends to the base of the windscreen in line with the drivers sear. This damage is due to an impact from the inside of the vehicle and is consistent with the passenger's head striking the windscreen during the accident".

In his report Mr Brown then referred to the results of the post-mortem examination of Janice Dennis performed on 10 April 1992. The doctor performing the post-mortem examination found no abnormality in the cranial cavity and in the thoracic cavity he found "stove-in chest, bilateral fractures of ribs and breastbone, lacerated right lung and blood in the pleural cavity". A blood sample taken from her body during the autopsy was tested and showed a blood alcohol concentration of 239 mg of alcohol per 100 mL of blood.

Mr Brown then stated in his report:- "The medical records from Walgett District Hospital record the injuries to
Floyd Arthur Dennis as being: fracture of the left collar bone (clavicle) abrasions to the abdominal wall abrasions to right cheek, temple, and parietal area bruising around the right eye closed head injuries 
While at the hospital a blood sample was taken from Floyd Dennis.

Analysis of this sample indicated a blood alcohol concentration of not less than 0216 mg/100mL".

Mr Brown then proceeded to an analysis of the injuries of the plaintiff and his wife. He said:- "The injuries to each of the occupants of the vehicle are distinct. Floyd
Dennis' predominant injuries were a fractured collar bone and a closed head injury while Janice Dennis' injuries were predominantly to the chest and abdomen.

The closed head injury suffered by Floyd Dennis is consistent with a blunt blow to the head. This could occur due to the head impacting with part of the vehicle or with the ground after he was ejected from the vehicle. Janice
Dennis did not suffer any head injuries. The starburst fracture of the windscreen is consistent with a head strike from an unrestrained person sitting in the passenger's seat. Based on this damage and injury patterns to the occupants the person sitting in the passenger's seat was Floyd Dennis.

An unrestrained driver of the vehicle would be expected to suffer chest and abdominal injuries due to their initial impact with the vehicle's steering column. Janice Dennis suffered severe chest and abdominal injuries. These included fractured ribs, breastbone and a ruptured spleen. These indicate a severe blow to the chest and abdomen. Floyd Dennis did not suffer any significant chest or abdominal injuries. Based on the expected and actual injury patterns to the occupants the person driving the vehicle at the time of the accident was Janice Dennis".

In a part of his report headed "Accident Dynamics" Mr Brown gave his opinion about the course taken by the truck. He said:- "Details of the marks left by the vehicle during the accident are recorded on the sketch plan prepared by Const Harris and on the photographs taken four days after the accident by Det Sgt Hobson. This information and our own measurements have been examined to determine the position of the marks. The location of the marks are shown on Drawing Number 93046-01 (the drawing included in Mr Brown's report).

The vehicle left the road initially on the southern side. In doing so it left wheel marks in the gravel shoulder. Over a distance of about 170m the vehicle rotated clockwise approximately 60 degrees before it returned to the sealed road. When it returned to the sealed road, the vehicle was facing in a north- westerly direction.

The vehicle crossed the sealed road and continued on to the northern road shoulder. From the tyre marks left on the sealed road pavement we are able to access the speed of the vehicle at that time. Our assessment is the vehicle was travelling at 90 km/h as it skidded across the sealed road. The vehicle would have been travelling at a higher speed when it first left the road.

The vehicle continued to slide and rotate about its vertical axis down the northern shoulder towards the depression between the two roads. At the bottom of the depression the vehicle tripped and began to roll. The occupants were injured during the initial stages of this motion when they were propelled towards the front of the vehicle. As a result the windscreen was fractured by head strike. The vehicle came to rest on its passengers side, adjacent to the culvert under the gravel road. During the rolling motion both occupants of the vehicle were ejected from the vehicle. The occupants came to rest on the northern side of the gravel road".

Mr Brown's conclusion in his report was "based on the injuries sustained by the occupants of the vehicle, it is our opinion that Janice Jean Dennis was the driver at the time of the accident".

Mr Vaughan's report was prepared in June 1995. Mr Vaughan was provided with various documentary materials which are listed in his report. He was provided with photocopies of photographs but not with original photographs. He did not inspect the scene of the accident or the truck. He did not communicate with
Constable Harris. He was provided with a copy of Mr Brown's report.

On pages 3 and 4 of his report Mr Vaughan listed the items of damage to the vehicle which were shown in the photocopies of the photographs as follows:- * "the drop side tray tilted substantially upwards at the front and displaced towards the right hand (or driver's) side of the vehicle; the drop sides were dented along the top edges. The tray was reportedly a tipping tray and the photograph presumably showed the tray in its tipping position * the left hand (passenger's side) front mudguard crushed towards the right hand side, with the greatest crush at the front corner; at the front, the mudguard was pushed under the vehicle bonnet * the bonnet slightly buckled in front of the driver at the trailing edge, with the right rear corner of the bonnet below the edge of the right front mudguard: this indicated that the bonnet probably buckled from being pushed slightly towards the right, with the right rear corner of the bonnet constrained by being caught by the right front mudguard * the left headlight and left front turn signals broken * the right headlight appeared to have been damaged * the front bumper bar slightly crushed and displaced backwards, slightly right and slightly upwards at the left front corner of the vehicle; as a consequence of the movement at the left front corner, the bumper bar at the right hand front corner of the vehicle moved to the right * minor panel damage on the air dam under the front bumper bar at the left front corner of the vehicle * the left hand (passenger's side) door crushed slightly and buckled outwards in about the middle of the lower edge: the door was not closed, but was held in a substantially closed position by rope or cord, although there was a gap of perhaps 100 mm to 150 mm between the trailing edge of the door and the door frame. The door was clearly not latched and appeared incapable of being properly closed * the window glass in the left hand door was broken". 
Mr Vaughan noted that Detective Sergeant Hobson had reported that the left front tyre appeared to have rolled off its rim and that Detective Senior
Constable Cunningham had reported that both tyres on the left side of the vehicle were deflated.

Mr Vaughan continued in his report as follows:- "The roof of the cabin showed no obvious signs of damage: an aerial mounting on the roof appeared intact. However, Detective Sergeant Hobson reported damage to the roof, presumably minor damage or damage associated with the left side of the roof. There was no sign of the top of the tray headboard frame behind the cabin having come into contact with the ground.

There were no signs in the photocopies of damage to the right hand side of the vehicle, although Detective Sergeant Hobson reported (unspecified) damage to the `off side panels'." 
With regard to the windscreen of the vehicle Mr Vaughan said:- "It was said in the report by Civil & Forensic Pty Ltd that the windscreen was cracked in a star fracture in front of the passenger's seating position, although this could not be seen in the photocopies of the police photographs.
The windscreen remained in place in the vehicle. Neither Detective Sergeant
Hobson nor Detective Senior Constable Cunningham reported damage to the windscreen.

Mr Vaughan noted:- "No damage or signs of impact to the steering wheel were reported by Detective
Sergeant Hobson or Detective Senior Constable Cunningham".

Mr Vaughan devoted [part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p7) of his report to what he described as "The Crash Dynamics," which he divided into external dynamics (that is the movements of the truck) and internal dynamics (that is the movements of the occupants of the truck). In this part of his report, and elsewhere, Mr Vaughan used the term "yawing", which he defined simply as a vehicle turning about its vertical axis as it proceeded.

In Pt71 of his report Mr Vaughan said:- "According to police, the Rodeo reportedly left the pavement on the left or southern side and left tyre marks about 176 m long on the shoulder before returning to the pavement. It then crossed the pavement at a shallow angle, leaving skid marks about 14 m long. The photocopies of the police photographs of the scene indicated that the vehicle was yawing (turning about a vertical axis) in a clockwise direction as it returned to the pavement.

While not very clear in the photocopies of the police photographs, the tyre tracks appeared to indicate that the Rodeo continued to yaw as it crossed the pavement. The vehicle then travelled down the northern shoulder while continuing to yaw, until it came to rest on its left side about 46 m from where it left the pavement and about 13 m north of the pavement edge.

When the Rodeo first left the bitumen pavement and travelled onto the southern shoulder, it is likely that the vehicle would have experienced a range of vertical, rearward and lateral accelerations from travelling over the relatively rough and sloping shoulder surface. The lateral acceleration would have increased as the vehicle was steered back towards the pavement, and sharply increased as the tyres contacted the bitumen. One effect of this lateral acceleration (combined with some tilting of the vehicle) would have been for the seat belt retractors to have locked.

The lateral acceleration and yawing of the vehicle would have involved the tyres partially skidding sideways initially over the gravel shoulders and then over the bitumen: this would have tended to have slowed the forward motion of the vehicle. The nature of such yawing is that the left rear tyre would have been the first to start sliding; then the left front tyre; then the right rear tyre; and finally the right front tyre; during the yawing action, the vehicle continued to follow a curved path.

By the time the Rodeo had crossed the pavement on to the northern shoulder, it would have yawed through a considerable angle and would probably have been moving substantially side-on, again producing substantially friction forces at the tyres and slowing the forward motion of the vehicle.

There was insufficient information available to me to establish the initial speed of the vehicle. Although the initial speed of the Rodeo was not known, the important effect of the sliding motion on slowing the vehicle can be illustrated. If, for example, the Rodeo had been travelling at 120km/h when it initially left the road to the left, its (by then, sideways) speed when it rolled on to its side would probably have been of the order of 70 km/h if the driver had not braked at any stage, or of the order of 10 km/h if the driver braked only a modest amount (Appendix 1).

When a vehicle is yawing in the manner of the Rodeo, the outside front tyre (in this case, the left front tyre) tends to `dig in': there is a weight transfer to this tyre. At some stage in this process, the left front tyre (and possibly the left rear tyre) caught on a relatively rough part of the terrain and the vehicle rolled about the front left tyre on to its left side. The glass in the left front door window would then have been broken.

It the vehicle had rolled over completely and then subsequently come to rest (as it was eventually found) on its left side, then the cabin would have been very likely to have been severely distorted, as would the headboard frame immediately behind the cabin. The cabin was completely intact and apparently undistorted. The headboard showed no signs of rollover. The damage pattern suggested that the Rodeo only rolled on to its left side, and did not roll over completely.

It was not clear whether or not the Rodeo left hand (passenger's) side door was unlatched when the vehicle was recovered after the crash, although the nature of the damage suggested that the door was probably open when the vehicle rolled onto its side. If the door had been closed during the crash, the ADR 2/00 latch would have almost certainly kept the door closed. It is only in crashes with particular forces on the latch actuating mechanism that
ADR 2/00 latches open: these forces (essentially related to side impacts between vehicles) were not present in this crash.

It is probable that when the Rodeo was yawing and sliding sideways, the left hand door was either open already, or was opened by operating the door handle (either intentionally or accidentally)." 
Under the heading "Internal Dynamics" Mr Vaughan said:- "When the Rodeo initially left the road and travelled on to the southern shoulder, the unrestrained occupants would have been initially shaken about in the cabin by the ride over the relatively rough terrain. This would have tended to move them slightly in their seats, but not moved them any substantial distance in the cabin. The driver, in particular, would have been able to steady him or herself through holding the steering wheel.

As the vehicle started to turn to the left to regain the bitumen pavement, the occupants would have been pushed towards the left hand side of the cabin interior. The sideways force would have been relatively mild while the vehicle was still on the southern shoulder, but combined with the relatively rough terrain would have thrown the occupants around in the cabin. As the vehicle regained the bitumen, the lateral forces pushing the occupants towards the left hand side of the cabin would have risen substantially. Then as the vehicle continued its yawing motion and became substantially side-on to its general motion of travel, the passenger would have been further pushed towards the left hand side of the cabin: towards the door.

As the Rodeo travelled substantially sideways over the relatively rough northern shoulder, the sideways force experienced by the occupants would have been combined with low effective friction between the occupants and the seat surfaces arising from the jolting ride. There would have been a strong tendency for the occupants to have been thrown about in the cabin and against the interior of the left hand door, with the passenger against the door and the driver against the passenger's right hand side.

The left hand door probably then opened, possibly by the passenger trying to grasp a hand hold to stabilise his or her position in the cabin. When the door opened, the passenger would have been the first ejected, followed by the driver.

The vehicle would still have been yawing in a clockwise direction during the ejection phase. The passenger would have been ejected when the vehicle was at a particular yaw angle, while the driver would have been ejected when the
Rodeo had yawed slightly further in a clockwise direction. This in turn would have resulted in the driver coming to rest further in a clockwise position relative to the position of the passenger.

Both occupants were ejected from the vehicle before the vehicle came to rest.
Janice and Floyd Dennis were found some 12 m and 9 m respectively from a post adjacent to the vehicle's resting position. The reported positions of Janice and Floyd Dennis after the crash relative to each other and to the path of the vehicle were consistent with Janice having been ejected first (and hence having been the passenger) and Floyd having been ejected second (and hence having been the driver)." 
In his report Mr Vaughan commented on Mr Brown's report. In regard to what Mr
Brown had said about the windscreen in his report, Mr Vaughan said:- "The report also recorded the results of an inspection of the Rodeo some 22 months after the crash. Comment was made that parts had been removed, stolen or sold. The windscreen was seen to have been cracked with a star fracture high on the windscreen on the passenger's side. This fracture was not evident in the photocopies of the police photographs, and neither of the police officers who inspected and described the vehicle damage after the crash reported windscreen damage. The Civil & Forensic report indicated that the fracture could be seen in the police photographs and that the windscreen fracture was consistent with a head impact on the windscreen. The Civil &
Forensic report was a photocopy, including of the photographs in the report: the star fracture of the windscreen appeared from these photocopies to have been a fracture from a point load.

In regard to Mr Brown's opinion that the pattern of the injuries to the plaintiff and his wife showed that the plaintiff's wife had been the driver Mr
Vaughan said:- "In the analysis of the injuries, the Civil & Forensic report concluded that the windscreen fracture was consistent with a head impact, and commented that Floyd Dennis had a closed head injury and that Janice did not have any head injuries. The report also concluded that the chest injuries suffered by
Janice Dennis were consistent with impact with the steering wheel. From the above injury patterns, the Civil & Forensic report concluded that Janice
Dennis was the driver.

In my view, the injury analysis was flawed.

While it is true that head strikes on windscreens are relatively common for unrestrained occupants, and chest injuries from steering wheel impact relatively common for unrestrained drivers, these types of injuries to unrestrained occupants occur in substantially frontal collision.

There is no evidence that this crash involved a substantial frontal impact: all of the information indicates a substantially sideways skidding and rollover crash. Indeed, the accident dynamics analysis in the Civil &
Forensic report described a rotating motion, the vehicle moving substantially sideways and tripping over. If there had been a substantial frontal collision sufficient to produce the substantial chest injuries from a steering wheel impact, then not only would a windscreen head strike by the unrestrained passenger have been likely, but also a head strike by the unrestrained driver.

Furthermore, head strikes resulting in fractured laminated windscreens typically result in facial and/or scalp lacerations. No such lacerations were reported.

While the photocopies of photographs available to me were indistinct, the nature of the fracture to the windscreen appeared to be that associated with a point load, rather than the distinct pattern associated with a head strike.
The fracture could have resulted from a number of sources. The occupants would have been thrown about in the cabin of the Rodeo with some force before being ejected. Various parts of the body would have come into violent contact with the interior of the cabin (and, of course, any loose objects in the cabin would also have been flying around in the cabin).

If Janice Dennis had impacted the steering wheel with sufficient force to have produced the `stove-in' chest injuries, the steering wheel would have shown ample signs of impact damage. No such damage was reported.

Before the widespread use of seat belts substantially reduced its incidence, ejection from vehicles was a major source of fatal and serious injuries. It was, and is, a myth that it is generally better to be `thrown clear' in a crash than to stay in the vehicle. The injuries suffered by Janice and Floyd
Dennis were consistent with those found in traffic safety research where vehicle occupants have been ejected.

Mr Vaughan concluded:- "On the basis of the information available to me, it was concluded that: the Rodeo was unlikely to have rolled completely over at any stage, but to have rolled only on to its passenger's side the two occupants of the Rodeo were probably ejected through the left side door, which was opened during the crash events.
the passenger was probably ejected first, followed shortly afterwards by the driver: the driver would have been expected to have been found in a clockwise position relative to the passenger the relative positions in which Janice and Floyd Dennis were found was consistent with Janice having been ejected first, and Floyd having been ejected second
Floyd Dennis was probably the driver of the Rodeo".

In his oral evidence in chief Mr Brown said that in the photographs taken by the police officer shortly after the accident, although he could not see the centre of any star burst fracture to the windscreen, he could see cracks in the windscreen on the driver's side which were "extensions" or "the final run" from the star fracture high up on the passenger's side of the windscreen which is clearly shown in a photograph Mr Brown himself took in February 1994 and which he included in his report. Mr Brown also said that cracks in the windscreen shown in the photograph he himself took in February 1994 matched up with the cracks in the windscreen shown in the photographs taken by the police officer in April 1992.

Mr Brown expressed the opinion that the damage to the windscreen had been caused by something hitting the windscreen from within the vehicle. He gave as his ground for this opinion that "the inside surface (of the windscreen) was relatively smooth and uncracked and the outer laminates of the windscreen were cracked so that you could cut your finger on the outside but not on the inside".

Mr Brown expressed the opinion that the vehicle had slid sideways down the embankment to the north of the bitumen roadway, that the vehicle had then tripped and rolled five quarter turns (that is one and a quarter complete revolutions) until it landed on its left side. In forming this opinion he had had regard to Constable Harris's evidence about the pits or pot marks but he admitted "I couldn't positively utilise all the marks that he had recorded. I couldn't explain all of them". He thought part of the rolling had been in an airborne state, which might explain why the left hand side of the vehicle appeared from the photographs to have been more damaged than the right hand side. When asked how the pits could have been caused Mr Brown said "I believe that while the vehicle was inverted... the loading board of the tray punctured the ground (and slightly dragged)". The top of the loading board of the tray projects above the top of the cabin of the truck.

Mr Brown said that he disagreed with Mr Vaughan's opinion that there had been only one quarter turn by the vehicle. He said "if the car was only going to roll over on its side a quarter turn there would have been either tyre marks continually or there would have been a total slide mark at the side of the vehicle continuing. And neither of those two were observed by the police constable and there was no evidence of them left when I was there". What could be observed was that there was a distance of about twenty-eight metres (or perhaps twenty-one metres) between the end of the tyre track marks and the final resting place of the truck.

Mr Brown said in his evidence that he was unable to determine how the occupants were ejected from the truck. He said "...the dynamics of the vehicle movement from the time it stopped making the marks... until it came to rest are unknown". He was then asked "...Can you deduce back from the fact that body A is in a certain position and body B is in another position... in relation to the final resting position of the car, can you deduce from those positions on the ground where they were seated?" Mr Brown replied "No".

For the bodies of the plaintiff and his wife to have reached the positions noted by Constable Harris as a result of a yawing process as advanced by Mr
Vaughan, "the yawing of the vehicle would have had to continue beyond the point where the slide marks stopped in the earth on the northern side of the roadway" and there was no evidence of that. Mr Brown thought that there had only been a small quantity of yawing after the vehicle left the roadway and that most of the further rotation of the vehicle had occurred at or virtually at the final rest position where the vehicle had struck a bank near the culvert under the old road and pivoted.

Mr Brown gave further evidence about the starburst fracture to the windscreen which he had observed in February 1994. He said that the centre of the fracture was 100 to 150 millimetres from the top rim of the windscreen. "The right hand edge of the passenger seat head rest is virtually in line front to back with that crack in the windscreen". Mr Brown thought that the mass of the plaintiff's head would have been sufficient to provide the energy required to break the windscreen. Mr Brown was asked:- "And is the fact that the star burst is slightly to the right of the passenger seated in the seat and the fact that, if you assume he was the passenger in that seat, Floyd has got an injury to the right side of his head, is that a factor to be taken into account?" 
Mr Brown's answer was:- "It just implies that he's slightly rotated with respect to the straight ahead direction of the vehicle at the time of the impact".

Mr Brown disputed Mr Vaughan's view that the left hand door of the vehicle had opened on the grounds that "the damage to the door is inconsistent with being occasioned while the door was latched". There was matching damage to the door and to the door sill, indicating that the damage had occurred while the door was closed and hence adjacent to the door sill of the vehicle. Furthermore, if the door had been open one would have expected substantial damage to the door and this had not been observed.

At the close of his oral evidence in chief Mr Brown was referred to the part of Mr Vaughan's report in which Mr Vaughan had said that the photographs of the vehicle showed a lack of damage to the steering wheel of the vehicle. The following questions and answers were asked and given:- "Q. Is the lack of damage to the steering wheel, determinative of whether a person suffered chest injuries in a frontal collision; in other words, does the steering wheel have to be damaged for a person to injure their chest? 
A. Normally so, yes 
Q. And in addition to that, do you say that there was a frontal collision in this case? 
A. No, not in the normal sense of a frontal collision. There was a frontal - there was a partial frontal collision force involved with the final - the collision with the bank, yes.

Q. Do you still adhere to the view that on the balance of probabilities she sustained chest injuries when she hit the steering wheel in frontal collision? 
A. No, I didn't say that. I just said it could occur.

Q. But whether or not that did occur or not, does that affect your opinion that Floyd was the passenger? 
A. No, it does not".

The cross-examination of Mr Brown was very lengthy and I will not endeavour to refer to all of it.

Mr Brown conceded in cross-examination that he was not sure how the injuries to the plaintiff's wife were caused. He agreed that there did not appear to be any damage to the steering wheel of the vehicle shown in the photographs. He later said in cross-examination "I have come to the opinion that it's most probable that she suffered the injuries after she left the cabin".

In support of his opinion that the plaintiff's injuries had been caused by the plaintiff's head striking the windscreen, Mr Brown pointed to the lack of abrasions to the plaintiff's head, as indicating that the plaintiff had not slid over some surface when he struck his head. If the plaintiff had hit his head on the ground outside the vehicle "there would have been gravel rashing of the external features of his head which was not present according to the medical reports". Mr Brown was referred by counsel for the defendant to notes made by the visiting medical officer listing among the plaintiff's injuries "abrasions to the right cheek, temple and parietal area". However, Mr Brown said that the scale of any abrasions suffered by the plaintiff was important and there was no evidence that the plaintiff had required plastic surgery for abrasions and the plaintiff does not now have any scarring.

In Mr Brown's opinion the fracture to the windscreen of the vehicle could not have been caused by an arm of either occupant striking the windscreen because neither occupant had suffered surface injuries to an arm. Mr Brown thought that the plaintiff's wife's arm fractures could have been caused by her striking any one of a number of objects, including any part of the inside of the cabin, the ground outside the vehicle or a tree or post outside the vehicle.

Mr Brown was cross-examined about frontal forces operating on the vehicle. He said that there had been "minor" frontal force on the vehicle when the damage to the front near side corner of the bonnet had been caused but that this damage had probably been caused right at the end as the vehicle finally turned over on its left hand side, although the damage could have been caused when the vehicle first tripped and commenced rolling. He agreed that by the time of the final turning over on the vehicle's side, both occupants would already have been ejected from the vehicle. However, apart from frontal forces operating on the vehicle "it's possible that there were frontal forces involved in contacts between the persons in the vehicle and the vehicle during its gyrations in the roll over stage of the accident. Although there was no positive evidence, it was possible that during the rolling over the vehicle was gyrating, so that the orientation of the longitudinal axis of the vehicle varied and this could explain why the occupants were apparently thrown out at different times and in different directions".

Mr Brown agreed in cross-examination that the loading boards, on Mr Brown's theory of five quarter turns, could only have made one set of marks in the ground. Mr Brown conceded that none of the photographs of the vehicle showed any damage or marks to the top of the loading boards. It was put to Mr Brown by counsel for the defendant that the marks or pits on the ground were not the sort of marks which might have been left by the loading boards. He replied "we don't have enough information about those marks to be sure about that".

Mr Brown was cross-examined at length about the forces which would have been exerted on the occupants of the truck if the vehicle had turned through five quarter turns, as suggested by Mr Brown. Mr Brown said that one occupant could have been ejected in the second roll (that is the roll between the first and second quarter turn positions) and that the other occupant could have been ejected in the fourth roll (that is the roll between the third and fourth quarter turn positions). Mr Brown said that no one could have been ejected through the passenger's side door or window during the second roll so as to finish up in the known position of either of the bodies. But a person could have been ejected through the driver's side of the vehicle as a result of force which commenced to be applied to the person's body during the first roll, the actual movement of the person's body out of the vehicle occurring shortly after the commencement of the second roll. During the first roll a section of the vehicle would be rising and would exert an upward force on any occupant in contact with that section of the vehicle and when a window became available at the top of the rolling vehicle there would be a potential for that occupant to be ejected through the window. A body ejected through the window would end up some distance forward of the vehicle and at right angles to an axis through the longitudinal centre line of the vehicle at the time of the ejectment.

Mr Brown agreed that, so far as the photographs of the vehicle showed, there was no damage to the internal cabin of the vehicle.

Mr Brown considered that the plaintiff could have suffered his head injuries at some indeterminate time "during the tumbling of Mr Dennis inside the vehicle... from the movement of Mr Dennis within the vehicle relative to the vehicle". The plaintiff's striking of the windscreen was not necessarily associated with external forces on the vehicle itself. In Mr Brown's opinion the forces which caused the external damage to the vehicle were not the forces which caused the plaintiff to hit his head on the windscreen. The velocity of the plaintiff's head at the time it struck the windscreen could have been as low as three metres per second.

Mr Brown confirmed in cross-examination that he could not see the centre of a starburst fracture in the photographs taken by the police in April 1992. He said "it's unfortunate the police didn't go close enough to the windscreen and have the lighting in the right angle".

Mr Brown was cross-examined about his evidence about laminated windscreens and that the damage to the windscreen had been caused from inside the vehicle. Mr
Brown's only ground for his conclusion that the damage had been caused from within the vehicle was based on the damage he had observed to the windscreen.
He said that a laminated windscreen consists of three layers of glass and that when a laminated windscreen is struck "that (inner) layer is deflected away from the impact... it bends, the centre layer bends and the layer on the other side is, because it is bent, it stretches out and fractures..." He said that the outer layer could be fractured, without the inner layer being fractured.
Mr Brown had said in his evidence in chief that in the present case the inner layer of the windscreen was "relatively smooth and uncracked", whereas the outer layer had been cracked so that he could cut his finger on it and Mr
Brown said that this observation supported his conclusion that the damage to the windscreen had been caused from within the vehicle. Mr Brown's evidence about the nature of laminated windscreens generally and the different effects of impacts on the inner and outer layers of a laminated windscreen was strongly challenged in cross-examination by counsel for the defendant.

In re-examination Mr Brown, using a magnifying glass, said that he could see the centre of a starburst fracture in one of the police photographs of the vehicle, with cracks radiating from the centre and that the centre he could see in this police photograph was the same as the centre of the fracture shown in the photograph he took in February 1994. Mr Brown said that the centre of the fracture was in an area which appeared as a whitish patch in the unmagnified police photograph. I then observed the police photograph with the aid of a magnifying glass and formed the conclusion that I could see an area from which a number of cracks in the glass on the windscreen emanated.

Mr Brown was also re-examined by counsel for the plaintiff about damage to the vehicle's front suspension ball joints but on this aspect I prefer Mr
Vaughan's evidence to Mr Brown's evidence and I consider that this damage is of little assistance to me.

In regard to the plaintiff's head injury and the damage to the windscreen, Mr
Brown said that the centre of the fracture to the windscreen was close to the top of the windscreen "and if the vehicle's inverted that would mean that if he (the plaintiff) was falling up through the height of the cabin it would give maximum energy to the strike".

Mr Brown expressed the opinion that if the accident had occurred in the way postulated by Mr Brown and if the plaintiff had struck his head against the windscreen then, even if the plaintiff had been wearing a seat belt, the plaintiff could still have been injured. He said that even where a frontal force is involved, a person's head, with stretching of a seat belt under an impact, can move forward up to 600 mm and that if the victim is tumbling over the restraint provided by a seat belt does not work so well. In further cross- examination Mr Brown said that if the vehicle had not tumbled, the seat belt "may not have" prevented the plaintiff from coming into contact with the windscreen. If the vehicle had tumbled "I was envisaging the vehicle being up side down, that the person restrained by the seat belt was in a position where his body weight could start to slide him out of the lap part of the belt and the sash part of the belt is effectively not restraining him unless it is going directly forward". Mr Brown envisaged the plaintiff slipping out of the seat belt "partially". Seat belts are designed to operate in a frontal direction. The seat belts would not provide any restraint from a sideways movement. Later in his evidence Mr Brown said that there would not be "a firm restraint with the sash part of the seat belt when he was tending to move sideways". Mr Brown was asked:- "Q. But you would expect, would you not, a properly fitted seat belt on a passenger to prevent the passenger in a frontal impact, and as long as nothing was driven back towards him and the cabin wasn't damaged, to prevent his head hitting the windscreen?" 
Mr Brown answered:- "A. Generally I agree, but that's subject to the seat position being sufficiently far back from the windscreen." 
In an attempt to determine whether the damage to the truck's windscreen had been caused by a blow from inside the vehicle or from outside the vehicle, counsel for the plaintiff proposed that a demonstration be held in which Mr
Brown would strike the windscreen of a similar vehicle from inside the vehicle with a mallet and after hearing argument and against the opposition of the defendant, I ordered that such a demonstration be held. However, when a demonstration was held in the yard of the court Mr Brown struck the inside of the windscreen four times with a mallet, without producing any discernible effect on the windscreen. I consider that I should simply disregard the results of this demonstration, especially having regard to the characteristics of the mallet used by Mr Brown and the differences between such a mallet and a human head.

In his oral evidence Mr Vaughan said in effect that he agreed generally with
Mr Brown's evidence about the movements of the vehicle up to the end of the visible tyre track marks to the north of the bitumen roadway. However, he did not agree with Constable Harris's opinion that the vehicle had then rolled at least three times or with Mr Brown's opinion that the vehicle had performed five quarter turns. Mr Vaughan considered that after the end of the visible tyre track marks the vehicle had continued to yaw. As to what had happened to the vehicle after the end of the visible track marks Mr Vaughan said "there are a number of possibilities, none of which I can say absolutely, that one of the possibilities that seems most likely to me is that there was a bouncing motion". When asked how the pits observed by Constable Harris could have been made Mr Vaughan said "there is a degree of speculation... it's conceivable that they are tyre marks... by bouncing as it (the vehicle) goes across".

When asked whether there was anything about the vehicle which could support Mr
Vaughan's explanation of how it had travelled after the end of the visible marks, Mr Vaughan said:- "I guess the only evidence of that particular issue of the bounce, and it's only a very loose relationship, is the dislodging of the tyres from the rim but that may not have been from that at all".

As to the one and a quarter roll over suggested by Mr Brown, Mr Vaughan said "in my view there is no evidence on this vehicle which suggests that the vehicle ever rolled over completely. There is evidence that it rolled over on its left side". If there had been a one and a quarter roll over, Mr Vaughan would have expected more severe damage and more extensive damage. He would also have expected to see debris from the vehicle, and especially glass debris, left on the ground where the vehicle had struck the ground. Mr Vaughan said:- "I do feel it's from the nature of the damage to it that when it fell over or tripped over on that final turn, in my view the only turn, it was not going very fast because the damage is relatively light. If, for example, it had been flipping through the air and landed on that then I would expect much more severe damage.

Q. Severe damage to what area of the truck? 
A. To the left-hand side of the vehicle 
A1 (one of the police photographs) shows relatively shallow damage from the left to the right particularly, left to right near the front of the vehicle.
The left door has again relatively shallow damage and the front portion of the tilting tray has been displaced, probably the whole portion to some extent but particularly the front portion of the tilting tray has been displaced from the left side to the right side and that's what I would expect".

Mr Vaughan said that if the occupants had been wearing the seat belts provided, they would, on Mr Vaughan's "scenario" as to how the vehicle had moved, have remained in their seated positions in the cabin.

Mr Vaughan thought it "highly likely" that the plaintiff's wife's injuries had been incurred outside the vehicle. He was then asked about Mr Brown's explanation of how the plaintiff had suffered his head injuries. Mr Vaughan said "it seems to me to be highly unlikely that the head injury was a resultant consequence of a strike on the windscreen". Mr Vaughan was unable to see a starburst fracture in the photographs taken by the police, even in a blow up which had been made of one of the photographs and even with the aid of a magnifying glass.

Mr Vaughan said that a whitish area shown in the police photographs of the windscreen of the vehicle, which, on the plaintiff's case, obscured in those photographs the centre of the starburst fracture, was not in precisely the same position as the centre of the starburst fracture as shown in the photographs taken by Mr Brown in February 1994.

Mr Vaughan said that if the vehicle had moved as described by Mr Vaughan himself, there would not have been any significant frontal forces such as might have caused the plaintiff's head injuries. If, on the other hand, the vehicle had moved as described by Mr Brown, "well again there are insignificant frontal forces. If indeed the vehicle rolled, as Mr Brown described, the forces concerned are predominantly lateral... they are not frontal to a person inside the vehicle" 
Mr Vaughan said that he was very familiar with laminated windscreens. He said that they consist of two layers of glass, between which there is a layer of plastic which is bonded to the two pieces of glass. He was asked what happens when a human head hits such a windscreen and he replied:- "The head is loosely put as a sphere. Obviously it's not a precise sphere.
It's loosely a sphere and it's relatively rigid but with a relatively soft covering so there is a small amount of give. When the head strikes the laminated windscreen it strikes at presumably a tiny point.. It rapidly becomes a circular area which blows as the impact progresses it within that circular area. Perhaps I will draw a diagram. Within that inner circular area which is the part that is in direct contact with the head, the glass becomes broken into many many many small pieces. So to all intents and purposes that central circular area becomes opaque just because there are some broken pieces. Beyond that immediate area of contact the glass also breaks in a radial fashion, if you like. There are radial cracks, there are circumferential cracks but in that area the glass does not break into very very fine parts. It tends to be much courser so the centre area is a very good indicator of the actual area of contact because that area gets maximum bending. Lots of little bits break off. You get this, effectively, opaque view. It also bulges. The head starts to go through. It can move in that form because the plastic interlayer is flexible, it's pliable, it's quite soft. If you see a laminated windscreen in a severe crash where the windscreen has come out we commonly refer to it as a blanket and it picks up the glass and it picks up like a blanket because it has no rigidity. It just flops and that's because the plastic interlayer is totally floppy and it's just got all the bits of glass hanging off it. In this instance we have the centre bit which is broken into very fine glass starting to bulge. Typically beyond that there is broken glass but in courser bits the further away you get the courser they get. So that's a very rough idea of what I am trying to explain. The central circular bit becomes almost opaque with a great deal of finely broken glasses on both layers." 
Mr Vaughan drew a diagram showing "the general pattern of laminated windscreen breakage with head strike", which was admitted into evidence. If a human head strikes a laminated windscreen the windscreen tends to bulge outwards. Mr
Vaughan said, contrary to Mr Brown's evidence, that if a laminated windscreen is struck, the inner layer of glass, that is the layer closer to the object striking the windscreen, breaks first and is subjected to the greater force.
The plastic interlayer is not rigid and acts as a sort of cushion and accordingly does not transmit force very well to the outside glass layer.

When referred to the evidence given by Mr Brown in his evidence in chief which
I have already referred to, about the inside surface of the windscreen of the truck being "relatively smooth and uncracked", Mr Vaughan said it was unclear to him whether Mr Brown meant "relatively smooth and relatively uncracked" or whether Mr Brown meant "relatively smooth and uncracked". If Mr Brown meant "relatively uncracked" it was unclear what he meant. If Mr Brown meant "uncracked", then Mr Vaughan found it difficult to believe that the starburst fracture shown in Mr Brown's photographs could have been the result of an internal impact.

Counsel for the plaintiff complained that Mr Vaughan had not in his report disputed that any starburst fracture had been caused by a head striking the windscreen but this complaint was not well founded (see p14 of Mr Vaughan's report). Counsel for the plaintiff also complained that Mr Brown had not been cross-examined on this matter. Without ruling on this complaint, I said that
Mr Brown could be recalled by counsel for the plaintiff to give evidence in reply to Mr Vaughan's evidence tending to show that any fracture to the windscreen had not been caused by a human head but Mr Brown was not recalled.

In cross-examination Mr Vaughan said that it was a rare event for a door of a vehicle to open in a crash and said that in his report he had probably over stated the likelihood of that having happened in the present accident, although it remained a possibility. He agreed that if the door of the truck had been opened while the vehicle was yawing, the door would probably have been substantially damaged, whereas the evidence was that the door had not been substantially damaged. In Mr Vaughan's opinion, the bodies had been ejected from the left hand side of the vehicle either through the door but more probably the window, while the vehicle was yawing. Mr Vaughan accepted that it was not impossible, if the vehicle was yawing, that the driver could have been ejected first. A possible mechanism would be that the person in the passenger's seat was pushed against the left hand door and the person in the driver's seat pushed across the passenger and out through the window, the passenger's body acting as a sort of ramp.

Mr Vaughan agreed in cross-examination that the photocopies of the photographs which he had worked with in preparing his report were not as clear as the original photographs. He confirmed that he had not been to the scene of the accident, he had not seen the damaged vehicle, he had not seen the original photographs until at or shortly before the commencement of the hearing and he had not spoken to Constable Harris. It is Mr Vaughan's general practice to rely on information being provided to him by those instructing him. He had telephoned the solicitors instructing him asking for additional information but had not received the information requested before preparing his report.

As to whether the vehicle had bounced, Mr Vaughan said "I can't say certainly that it bounced on its wheels, but it is the only explanation that's consistent with the evidence, in my view". The explanation that the vehicle had bounced was not in Mr Vaughan's report but it occurred to Mr Vaughan a few weeks before the commencement of the hearing when the matter had become active in his mind again. Mr Vaughan rejected the hypothesis of a multiple roll over because in his opinion the damage to the vehicle was not consistent with a multiple roll over and by a process of elimination that left as the only possible explanation of the damage that the vehicle had simply fallen over once on its side, after bouncing.

Mr Vaughan's attention was directed to a distance of twenty metres shown in
Constable Harris's sketch as the distance between two adjacent pits and he agreed that if the vehicle had bounced as he had suggested it had, one would have expected wheel marks within a distance of twenty metres. Mr Vaughan said "I don't know what made those marks (the pits)" but that the mark shown in
Exhibit F could have been produced by a tyre bouncing in soft soil. Mr Vaughan agreed that if the vehicle had bounced as postulated by him the tyres of the vehicle would slide "a little bit". Mr Vaughan agreed that two crosses made by
Constable Harris which were close together were inconsistent with the vehicle having bounced. He also agreed that as the vehicle progressed one would have expected any marks left by the vehicle, if it was bouncing, to have become closer together as the vehicle slowed down but this did not appear from
Constable Harris's sketch.

As to yawing, Mr Vaughan said that the vehicle could still continue to yaw, while it was substantially side on. In the present case both he and Mr Brown were in agreement that the vehicle had set up a substantial yawing before it left the bitumen roadway. For the yawing to have ceased the vehicle would have had to have been subjected to a force which caused it to cease yawing and Mr
Vaughan could not identify any such force. The vehicle had finally come to rest at "a further angle round". Mr Vaughan agreed that, if the yawing had ceased at the point where Mr Brown said it had substantially ceased, then the bodies of the occupants would have been thrown only slightly to the right of the bitumen roadway. Mr Vaughan said that even if the two heavy tyre marks merged with the two light tyre marks somewhere to the north of the bitumen roadway, so that the truck was sliding substantially side on, which Mr Vaughan did not concede, nevertheless that would be consistent with the truck continuing to yaw. The truck could continue to yaw while still travelling substantially side on. If the truck had tripped, as postulated by Mr Brown, that would have increased the yawing.

Mr Vaughan conceded that in the police officer's sketch the police officer had shown the vehicle's final resting place in a straight line from where the vehicle left the bitumen roadway. However, Mr Vaughan said that Constable
Harris's sketch was a very crude free hand sketch not drawn to scale and that
Mr Vaughan did not put any credence on precise angles shown in the sketch. Mr
Vaughan conceded that in Mr Brown's drawing the final resting place of the vehicle was not to the right of extensions of the lines recording the tyre mark tracks.

As regards the damage to the suspension ball joints of the truck, Mr Vaughan said that that was consistent with the vehicle either falling over or rolling over and hence consistent with both Mr Vaughan's explanation and Mr Brown's explanation. Under either explanation a ball joint would have been subjected to a load which it was not designed to carry. With regard to the damage to the vehicle, Mr Vaughan agreed that, on his explanation of what had happened, there should not have been any damage to the right hand side of the vehicle, unless it was transferred damage, and there should not have been any damage to the aerial mounted on the top of the truck. He agreed that the metal mud flap on the right hand rear wheel appeared in a photograph of the vehicle to be bent and that any such damage would not be transferred damage.

Mr Vaughan agreed from an inspection of a photograph of the vehicle that the right hand side of the tray of the vehicle had been pushed to the right of the cabin but said that this could have happened when the truck fell on its left side as postulated by him because the tray was attached to a pivot which could have been damaged and the strength of the tray itself was irrelevant. Mr
Vaughan rejected a suggestion by counsel for the plaintiff that the whole of the observable damage to the bonnet of the vehicle could not have been caused by the vehicle simply falling over on its left hand side.

Mr Vaughan agreed that if a rolling over of the truck had taken place, the plaintiff, if he was in the passenger's seat and unrestrained by a seat belt, could have struck his head on the windscreen. If there had been a rolling over, one could not tell from the positions in which the bodies were found, who came out of the vehicle first. Mr Vaughan was asked "if Mr Dennis was in the passenger's seat and he had a seat belt on and the vehicle rolled over, there is still a possibility, on Mr Brown's roll over theory, that Mr Dennis could still have hit the windscreen, isn't there?" Mr Vaughan replied "it's very unlikely if he was properly wearing a seat belt".

Mr Vaughan was further asked:- "Q. You agree with Mr Brown, do you not, that in terms of the lap sash seat belt, if somebody was upside down and being subjected to downward forces that they could slip out of that configuration of the seat belt and go downwards?" 
Mr Vaughan replied:- "If the vehicle came to rest upside down, yes, but bear in mind we are talking about, as they quite rightly refer to there, the forces of what they call the centrifugal force which are the forces related to the rollover constantly trying to throw you out, throw you away from the point of roll which is up, away from the ground so you have got gravity pulling you down. You have got this force trying to throw you up. The balance varies through the roll. The beginning of a violent roll the forces throwing you up are relatively large.
Towards the end of the roll those forces become lower and gravity becomes relatively more important".

Mr Vaughan further said that "roll over crashes are quite complicated events and the forces can be a bit unpredictable".

Mr Vaughan was cross-examined about whether a brown discolouration on the top parts of the vertical posts of the loading boards was dirt and he agreed that it was possible. Mr Vaughan agreed that the paint had apparently come away from the leading edges of the posts on the driver's side and the passenger's side of the loading boards. He agreed that if there was dirt on the posts and the paint work on the posts was chipped, that would be consistent with the posts having contacted the ground.

Mr Vaughan was cross-examined at some length in an attempt to show that the observable damage to the left hand side of the vehicle was more consistent with the front left hand corner of the vehicle having struck a bank as postulated by Mr Brown, than with the vehicle falling over on its left hand side as postulated by Mr Vaughan.

Mr Vaughan said that if the window of the truck had been up at the time of the accident, it was unlikely that the occupants could have been ejected through the window because the forces generated would not have been sufficient to break the glass in the window. Mr Vaughan had noted in his report that the window glass in the left hand door of the truck was broken and it was suggested in cross-examination that Mr Vaughan had proceeded on the basis that the window had been up at the time of the accident. However, Mr Vaughan said "a window can be broken when it is wound down. Glass gets broken inside doors when they are damaged. I've seen it many times". Mr Vaughan denied that he had made an assumption when he prepared his report that the left hand window of the truck had been up. Mr Vaughan restated his explanation of what had happened to the vehicle as follows:- "Q. And let's go on to another topic, Mr Vaughan. The topic of your theory of the bounce. How do you say a vehicle going sideways all of a sudden goes up in the air? 
A. The vehicle, as I understand it, was going down a slope. It then came to a change of slopeness, I suppose, profile. It then would have proceeded on a relatively uneven piece of ground - it's not a sealed road. There are many possibilities of adding impulses to the suspension at that point. Now, I'm not saying that it's bounced, I'm saying that is a possibility - a strong possibility - that it bounced. As I made the point earlier on, I examined three mechanisms; one of which I discarded very rapidly, which was an aerial single flip. The other two that I considered in more detail, I suppose, but was the multiple roll over by some number of times; whether it's one and a quarter, or three, or whatever, and the alternative where it fell on its side.
Now, as I've said before, and I'll say again, the damage to the vehicle was inconsistent with a multiple roll over. It was consistent with the vehicle falling on its side which is what I understand - which is the position, I understand, it was found in".

Mr Vaughan was asked what in his opinion had caused the vehicle to bounce and he replied:- "Now, if indeed it bounced and it came down - we know - there is evidence of the tyre marks, your Honour, down the batter. It was coming down a slope. That slope then levelled out. It was presumably coming substantially sideways, and
I believe while continuing to yaw, when it came down to the end of that, there was a change of slope that would have increased the forces on the suspension.
Now this slope was also not an even slope, it was not a firm slope, it was soil, and this provides the opportunity for vertical input..." 
When asked how the occupants could have been ejected from the vehicle Mr
Vaughan replied:- "I will attempt to. We have a situation, your Honour, where in my belief both occupants are being pushed left because the vehicle is yawing. I believe that at the end of the slope there was a - most probably a bouncing motion.
Bouncing motion gives vertical impact to the inside of the occupants of the vehicle. They will start to move vertically, or have vertical forces on them, as well as having horizontal forces trying to push them left. In that process it's not at all difficult for a person to be ejected. That sort of process is well established in the literature".

Mr Vaughan agreed that in an enlargement of part of a photograph of the vehicle taken by the police officer in April 1992, there were a number of marks on the windscreen which could be damage to the windscreen, Mr Vaughan particularly referring to two parallel lines near the driver's console. Mr
Vaughan was asked to compare a photograph taken by Mr Brown in February 1994 showing the starburst fracture and the sketch drawn by Mr Vaughan showing what he said were the characteristics of a fracture to a laminated windscreen caused by a head striking it. He agreed that in the photographs taken by Mr
Brown there was "a central approximately circular area of direct head contact, essentially opaque with finely broken glass" He also agreed that there was "outer area cracked with coarser larger fragments of glass becoming larger and more spread out further away from the centre of contact". However, Mr Vaughan would have expected to have seen two things from a head strike which he did not see in the photographs, namely, circumferential cracks and not so many radial cracks.

Mr Vaughan agreed that it was possible that if there was a strike from inside the windscreen the outer layer of the windscreen could bulge and fracture and feel rough. The following question and answer occurred:- 
Q. It is possible that you can have a force which is applied to a laminate windscreen which causes say from the inside, which causes the outside of the laminate to fracture and split to a degree that you could feel the rough surface and you can, as you say, as he said, tend to cut your finger, but the inside may not be so corrugated or so broken up? You agree with that? 
A. I think it's unlikely, but I don't - but I can't say that it's impossible".

In re-examination Mr Vaughan said:- "I seems unlikely to me, your Honour, that in an unrestrained - well, first of all, I think it's likely - quite feasible in an unrestrained situation for any occupant in a rotating or rolling motion to have contacted the windscreen, indeed with the head, or other parts of the body. I think it's unlikely that it could have happened with sufficient force to break the glass".

In re-examination Mr Vaughan said that the damage to the right rear mud flap of the truck could be quite unrelated to the accident.

In regard to the marks to the posts of the loading boards Mr Vaughan said:- "This type of damage, which is extremely superficial damage, it's paint chipping fundamentally, and paint removal is quite common on these types of bodies. They protrude, as I've said earlier, they protrude to either side of the cabin, so they are very susceptible to things like stones and other debris, particularly on unmade roads. They get damaged because they're the bit that first impacts anything coming the other way, any stones that are thrown up. So very commonly that part of these types of bodies gets chipped, paint work gets damaged, and dirt gets onto it because that's exposed beyond the width of the cabin. The structure immediately behind the cabin isn't exposed in the same way because the cabin protects it, and it doesn't have all that sort of markings".

I will now turn to a consideration of what findings I should make on the expert evidence.

As stated by Mr Brown in his report, Mr Brown based his opinion that it was the plaintiff's wife who was driving the truck at the time of the accident, on the injuries sustained by the plaintiff and his wife in the accident. As regards the plaintiff himself, the steps in Mr Brown's reasoning can be stated as follows:- . The plaintiff suffered head injuries in the accident, whereas the plaintiff's wife did not suffer head injuries. . In the accident the windscreen of the truck was damaged so as to produce a starburst fracture in the windscreen. . The plaintiff's head injuries and the starburst fracture in the windscreen were connected, in that both were caused by the plaintiff's head striking the windscreen. . From the position of the starburst fracture in the windscreen it could be inferred that the plaintiff had probably been the passenger and not the driver. 
In his report Mr Brown also relied on the injuries suffered by the plaintiff's wife in the accident. The injuries the plaintiff's wife received included chest injuries. Mr Brown considered that these injuries had probably been caused by Mrs Dennis striking the steering wheel of the truck, from which it could be inferred that she had been driving the truck. However, after Mr
Vaughan had pointed out in his report that no damage to the steering wheel of the truck had been reported, Mr Brown in his oral evidence accepted that the plaintiff's wife had probably not been injured by striking the steering wheel and had probably been injured after she had been ejected from the truck.
However, Mr Brown continued to rely strongly on the nature of the injuries suffered by the plaintiff as indicating that the plaintiff had been a passenger and not the driver.

At the hearing there was no dispute about the first step in Mr Brown's line of reasoning. However, all the other steps were disputed. It was disputed that the windscreen of the truck had been damaged in the accident so as to produce a starburst fracture. It was accepted that Mr Brown had observed and photographed a starburst fracture of the windscreen, when he inspected the truck on 28 February 1994. It was not conceded that this starburst fracture had been caused in the accident on 8 April 1992.

The photographs of the truck taken by the police soon after the accident, at any rate without any enhancement of the photographs and without the aid of a magnifying glass, do not clearly show any centre of a starburst fracture in the windscreen. I accept that the starburst fracture observed by Mr Brown in could have been present at the time the police photographs were taken and yet not be apparent, or readily apparent, in the police photographs, because of the distances and the angles at which the photographs were taken and because of light effects on the semi-transparent windscreen. Although Mr Brown did not claim in his evidence in chief that he could see the centre of a starburst fracture in the police photographs, Mr Brown said in his evidence in chief that in February 1994 he had been able to see cracks in the windscreen which ran from the centre of a starburst fracture and that these cracks matched cracks in the windscreen which he could see in the police photographs taken in April 1992.

In re-examination Mr Brown using a magnifying glass said that he could see the centre of a starburst fracture in one of the police photographs and that the centre of the starburst fracture he could see in this police photograph was the same as the centre of the starburst fracture in a photograph taken by Mr
Brown in February 1994.

Not surprisingly, Mr Vaughan said in his report that in the photocopies of the photographs of the truck Mr Vaughan was working with in preparing his report he could not see a starburst fracture. However, even Mr Vaughan ultimately agreed at the hearing that in an enlargement of part of a photograph taken by the police in April 1992 there were a number of marks in the windscreen which could be damage to the windscreen. Mr Vaughan referred in particular to two parallel lines near the driver's console, which are clearly visible.

In his evidence Mr Vaughan said that a whitish area shown in the police photographs of the truck, which it had been suggested on behalf of the plaintiff was partly responsible for obscuring in those photographs the centre of the starburst fracture, was not in precisely the same position as the centre of the starburst fracture in the photographs taken by Mr Brown.
However, I note that it was not the plaintiff's case that the whitish area appearing in the police photographs precisely corresponded with the centre of the fracture; rather that the whitish patch was part of a light effect on the windscreen operating when the police photographs were taken, which produced the consequence that the centre of the starburst fracture could not readily be seen in the police photographs, even though it was then present.

I consider that I myself with the aid of a magnifying glass can see, at least in an enhancement of part of one of the police photographs, the centre of a starburst fracture. That the windscreen was "shattered" in the accident is supported by the evidence to that effect by Constable Harris. There is no evidence of the truck's windscreen being damaged otherwise than in the accident.

I consider that I should find that the windscreen of the truck was damaged in the accident so as to produce the starburst fracture observed by Mr Brown on February 1994.

It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that the plaintiff's head injuries and the starburst fracture to the windscreen were probably connected. The damage to the windscreen was high on the windscreen, suggesting that it could have been caused by the head of one of the occupants of the vehicle impacting on it. There was no evidence of any other cause of the damage to the windscreen. In particular, there was no evidence of damage to the interior of the cabin of the truck and no evidence of any other injury to either of the occupants which might have been caused by some other part of the body of either occupant impacting on the windscreen.

Mr Brown said that the absence of evidence of the plaintiff having suffered abrasions in the accident rendered it less likely that the plaintiff could have suffered his head injuries in striking the ground outside the vehicle, because head injuries suffered in this way would be likely to have been accompanied by abrasions. When it was pointed out to Mr Brown that the plaintiff had in fact suffered some abrasions in the accident, Mr Brown said that what mattered was "the scale" of the abrasions and that the plaintiff had not received any surgical treatment for abrasions and had not suffered any scarring.

Mr Vaughan disputed that the starburst fracture, if it was present, had been caused by the plaintiff's head striking the windscreen. His principal grounds for this opinion were:- . Head injuries to an occupant of a vehicle as a result of the occupant's head striking the windscreen occur only in substantially frontal collisions. . The nature of the damage to the windscreen was not in accordance with "the general pattern of laminated windscreen damage with head strike" as shown in a diagram drawn by Mr Vaughan and as explained by Mr Vaughan in his evidence. . The injuries to the plaintiff's head could have been otherwise caused, for example when the plaintiff was ejected from the truck. 
A further matter according to Mr Vaughan was that, so far from Mr Brown's evidence that the inside surface of the windscreen was relatively smooth and uncracked and the outside surface cracked to such an extent that it would cut a person's finger, supporting the plaintiff's case, it militated against the plaintiff's case as indicating, when regard was had to the nature of laminated windscreens, that the damage to the windscreen had been caused by an impact with some object from outside the windscreen.

As to the first ground, it is clear that in many cases where an occupant's head strikes a windscreen this happens because some frontal force operating on the vehicle has arrested the forward movement of the vehicle but the occupant's head has continued to move forward thus impacting with the windscreen. However, I accept Mr Brown's evidence that if in the present case the vehicle was rolling and the occupants unrestrained by seat belts were tumbling around inside the vehicle while it was rolling, the plaintiff could have hit his head on the windscreen, independently of any external frontal force being applied to the vehicle. Indeed in re-examination Mr Vaughan conceded that, if, contrary to Mr Vaughan's opinion the, vehicle was rolling in the accident, it was quite likely that an unrestrained occupant would contact the windscreen with his head. In re-examination Mr Vaughan shifted his ground to saying that, if that happened, it was unlikely that the occupant's head would strike the windscreen with sufficient force to break it. Mr Brown, on the other hand, had given evidence that the plaintiff's head could have broken the windscreen, if it was travelling at a velocity of as low as three metres per second and I accept this evidence by Mr Brown.

As to the second ground, Mr Vaughan was asked by counsel for the plaintiff to compare the photograph taken by Mr Brown in February 1994 showing the starburst fracture and Mr Vaughan's sketch showing "the general pattern of laminated windscreen breakage with head strike". Mr Vaughan agreed that the photograph showed two of the features of "laminated windscreen breakage with head strike", namely a central opaque area with finely broken glass and an outer area with coarser larger fragments of glass. However, Mr Vaughan said that he would have expected to have seen two other features of "laminated windscreen breakage with head strike", namely circumferential cracks and not so many radial cracks. The principal matter relied on by Mr Vaughan was what he asserted was the absence of circumferential cracks. Counsel for the plaintiff sought to persuade me that with the aid of a magnifying glass circumferential cracks could be seen around the centre of the starburst fracture in Mr Brown's photograph. In my opinion, it is difficult to say with confidence, even with the aid of a magnifying glass, that circumferential cracks can, or cannot, be discovered in Mr Brown's photograph and I would not be prepared to hold that there are not circumferential cracks in the photograph.

As regard laminated windscreens and the effect of an impact on a laminated windscreen, I accept that Mr Vaughan has greater expertise than Mr Brown. Mr
Brown's evidence to the effect that the outer layer of the laminated windscreen was more cracked than the inner layer does tend to support the defendant's case, rather than the plaintiff's case that the windscreen was cracked by the plaintiff's head striking the windscreen from inside the vehicle. However, Mr Vaughan conceded that it was not impossible, although unlikely, that the conditions observed by Mr Brown could have resulted from an application of force from inside the windscreen.

I conclude that the plaintiff's head injuries and the starburst fracture to the windscreen were connected, in that both were caused by the plaintiff's head striking the windscreen.

I accept that, the preceding steps in Mr Brown's reasoning having been accepted, it can be inferred that the plaintiff was probably the passenger and not the driver. The centre of the starburst fracture was virtually in line with the right hand edge of the passenger's seat head rest, thus rendering it more probably that the plaintiff was the passenger.

Mr Vaughan based his opinion that it was the plaintiff, and not his wife, who was probably the driver of the truck, on the positions of the bodies of the plaintiff and his wife after the accident. In broad outline, Mr Vaughan said in his report that after the vehicle crossed the bitumen roadway it continued to yaw, that is rotate in a clockwise direction as it proceeded forward, that this yawing tended to force the occupants of the truck to their left, that on the rough ground to the north of the bitumen roadway there was less friction between the occupants' bodies and the truck, that the left hand door of the truck was opened, that the passenger being on the left hand side of the cabin was ejected first, that the vehicle continued to yaw and the driver was ejected second and that the position of the bodies with the plaintiff's body clockwise from his wife's indicated that the plaintiff had been the second person ejected and accordingly had been the driver. Mr Vaughan conceded that even if the truck had travelled in the manner suggested by him, it was not impossible that the driver could have been ejected first, for example by the person in the passenger's seat being pushed against the left hand door and the person in the driver's seat being pushed across the passenger out through the left hand window, the passenger's body acting as a sort of ramp.

In his oral evidence Mr Vaughan said that in his report he had overstated the likelihood of the left hand door of the truck having opened, although it remained a possibility, and he said that the occupants of the vehicle had more probably been ejected through the open left hand window. There was in fact strong evidence that the left hand door of the truck had not been opened in the accident.

In his oral evidence Mr Vaughan advanced the possibility that after the truck had reached the end of the visible tyre track marks to the north of the bitumen roadway the truck had "bounced", that is bounced on its wheels without turning over, except that it had made a final quarter turn on to its left side.

The process of reasoning by which Mr Vaughan had formed his opinion about how the truck had travelled after the end of the visible tyre track marks, an opinion which was essential to his conclusion that the plaintiff was probably the driver, was stated by him in his oral evidence. Three possibilities had occurred to Mr Vaughan, namely, (1) that the truck had performed a single aerial "flip" (2) that the truck had rolled over a number of times (3) that the truck had bounced and then fallen over one quarter turn on to its side. Mr
Vaughan quickly rejected the first possibility. He then rejected the second possibility, mainly on the ground that it was not consistent with the damage to the truck. He thus arrived at the third possibility by a process of elimination, although he also considered that the damage to the truck was consistent with the third possibility. Mr Vaughan disavowed that he was saying definitely that the truck had "bounced"; that the truck had bounced was merely the most probable possibility.

Mr Brown had said that after the end of the visible tyre track marks the truck had rolled through five quarter turns. Mr Brown said that he could not explain how the bodies had been ejected from the truck, although in cross-examination he offered possible explanations. In his opinion, one could not deduce from the positions of the bodies, who had been the driver and who had been the passenger. Mr Vaughan conceded that if the vehicle had not travelled in the manner suggested by him but had rolled as suggested by Mr Brown, one could not tell from the positions in which the bodies were found who had come out of the vehicle first.

It is impossible to say with any certainty how the truck travelled after the end of the visible tyre track marks. However, I have decided that I should prefer Mr Brown's evidence.

In assessing the conflicting evidence of Mr Vaughan and Mr Brown, it is relevant to bear in mind that Mr Brown took a number of steps to investigate the accident which Mr Vaughan did not take. Mr Brown inspected the scene of the accident, inspected the truck and spoke to Constable Harris. None of these steps were taken by Mr Vaughan. Mr Brown also inspected the original police photographs. Mr Vaughan worked from photocopies of the photographs, which he conceded were not as clear as the original photographs. When preparing his report Mr Vaughan requested additional information from the solicitors instructing him but this information was not provided. One respect in which Mr
Vaughan was hampered by his lack of materials was that he had to determine what damage the vehicle had suffered in the accident, partly on the basis of what he could see in the unclear photocopies of the photographs of the vehicle taken by the police.

Mr Vaughan rejected the possibility that the truck had rolled over, largely because in his opinion there was insufficient damage to the truck. However, on the basis of evidence including certain evidence by Mr Dodd which I accept, I am satisfied that contrary to the findings or assumptions made by Mr Vaughan, the vehicle was damaged in the accident in ways which could not have been caused by a single quarter turn and which were not taken into account by him, including damage to the right rear mud flap, damage to the aerial on the top of the truck and damage to parts of the outside vertical posts of the loading boards.

If the vehicle had bounced on its wheels, as suggested by Mr Vaughan, I consider that there would have been some sliding or dragging of the wheels each time the vehicle hit the ground, which should have left tyre marks observable by Constable Harris. Instead, Constable Harris noted that the visible tyre track marks ended more than twenty metres before the final resting place of the vehicle. It would seem unlikely that the pits as described by Constable Harris could have been made by a bouncing vehicle. On the other hand, it is fair to observe that Mr Brown was unable to offer an explanation of all of the pits marked on Constable Harris's sketch.

The explanation that the vehicle had bounced was rejected by Constable Harris.
Constable Harris considered that the vehicle had rolled approximately three times. Mr Vaughan treated, and I would treat, Constable Harris's explanation as being much closer to Mr Brown's explanation than Mr Vaughan's. It is true that Constable Harris denied any expertise, that his investigation of the accident was in some respects deficient and that his sketch of the accident was very crude. However, he was a police officer investigating an accident and he had the advantage, denied to either expert, of seeing the vehicle and the bodies in situ shortly after the accident. No objection was taken to any of his evidence and I consider that I can properly give his evidence some weight.

Having regard to the pieces of circumstantial evidence (including Mr Hickey's evidence) I said earlier in my judgment I accepted and having regard to the conclusions I have reached about the expert evidence, I am satisfied that the plaintiff has proved on the balance of probabilities that his wife was driving the vehicle at the time of the accident and hence I find a verdict for the plaintiff.

As I stated earlier in this judgment it was conceded by counsel for the plaintiff that, if the plaintiff obtained a verdict, I should hold that the plaintiff had been guilty of contributory negligence within each of paragraphs and (c) of [s74(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s74.html) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), that is that at the time of the accident the plaintiff had been a voluntary passenger in the truck and his wife's ability to drive the truck had been impaired as a consequence of the consumption of alcohol and the plaintiff was aware or ought to have been aware of the impairment [(s74(2)(b))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s74.html) and that the plaintiff had not been wearing a seat belt as required by the
Motor [Traffic
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/).
Accordingly, the only issue to be determined by me in relation to contributory negligence is to what extent the damages recoverable by the plaintiff should be reduced having regard to the plaintiff's share in the responsibility for the damage.

It was common ground between counsel that each of the respects in which the plaintiff had been contributorily negligent made a separate contribution to the plaintiff's overall share of the responsibility for the damage but that I should simply determine a single figure as representing the plaintiff's total share of responsibility.

As regards [s74(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s74.html) of the Act analysis of a sample of blood taken from the plaintiff's wife during the autopsy showed a blood alcohol concentration of 239mgs per 100ml of blood, that is between four and five times the legally permitted limit. No expert evidence was called by either party about the effect on a person's ability to drive a vehicle of the consumption of a quantity of alcohol which would produce such a reading. However, the hearing proceeded on the basis that
I could accept that the blood alcohol reading showed that Mrs Dennis had been heavily intoxicated and that her ability to drive a vehicle had been seriously impaired. The path taken by the truck in leaving the roadway, travelling off the roadway for a distance of about 175 metres, crossing the roadway at a sharp angle and then travelling off the roadway again itself strongly suggests that the ability of Mrs Dennis to control the vehicle was seriously impaired.
Apart from the evidence of Mrs Dennis's blood alcohol concentration, there was evidence by witnesses who saw the plaintiff and his wife in Walgett after they had left the hotel, which would support a finding that Mrs Dennis (and the plaintiff) were then heavily intoxicated. For example the plaintiff and his wife "looked intoxicated" to Mr Simpson.

I find that the plaintiff and his wife were together when they were drinking (a finding supported by evidence in a statement by Matthew Dodd and indeed conceded by counsel for the plaintiff) and after they had left the hotel and that the plaintiff was well aware or ought to have been well aware that his wife was heavily intoxicated and that her ability to drive a vehicle was seriously impaired.

As regards [s74(2)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/tr186/s74.html) of the Act the truck was fitted with seat belts of the lap/sash type and the seat belts were found after the accident to have been in working order. Mr
Brown said in his report that as both occupants had been ejected from the vehicle and had travelled a considerable distance from the vehicle, they could not have been wearing the seat belts at the time of the accident and it was accepted throughout the hearing that neither occupant of the vehicle had been wearing a seat belt.

In the case of a failure to wear a seat belt, it is necessary to inquire whether, if the plaintiff had been wearing a seat belt, he would nevertheless still have been injured or whether if he had been wearing a seat belt he would not have been injured or would have been injured less severely. Although the plaintiff suffered other injuries as well, his most serious injuries were his head injuries. I have found that the plaintiff sustained his head injuries when his head struck the windscreen, while the vehicle was rolling.

Mr Brown gave evidence that in his opinion the plaintiff could have injured his head by striking the windscreen, even if he had been wearing seat belt. Mr
Brown said that seat belts are designed to restrain an occupant's body from moving forward in the vehicle, particularly when a frontal force is applied to the vehicle but even in such circumstances, with the stretching of the belt under an impact, a person's head can move forward up to two feet or 600 millimetres. Furthermore, when a vehicle is rolling and the occupant's body is tumbling inside the vehicle, the restraint from the seat belt is not as effective. Mr Brown also gave evidence that the sash part of a lap/sash seat belt would not firmly restrain a wearer, if the wearer was moving sideways in the vehicle.

Mr Vaughan was asked in cross-examination the following question and gave the following answer:- "Q. Now, if Mr Dennis was in the passenger's seat and he had a seat belt on and the vehicle rolled over, there is still a possibility, on Mr Brown's roll over theory, that Mr Dennis could still have hit the windscreen, isn't there? 
A. It's very unlikely if he was properly wearing a seat belt".

In my opinion, it is highly probable, though not quite certain, that the plaintiff would not have suffered his head injuries if he had been wearing a seat belt. The plaintiff must have suffered his head injuries when his head moved forward in relation to the vehicle, not sideways, in order for him to make contact with the windscreen of the vehicle. This is precisely the kind of movement which seat belts are designed to restrain. There was no damage to the interior of the cabin and no part of the front of the interior of the cabin was forced back towards the plaintiff. The plaintiff's head would have had to travel the full usual distance between the seat and the windscreen in order for his head to make contact with the windscreen. I leave open a possibility that the plaintiff might still have been injured even if he was wearing a seat belt, because even if he had been restrained by a seat belt it is just possible that he might have tumbled in the rolling vehicle so that his head made contact with the windscreen.

I consider that some of the plaintiff's other injuries (apart from his head injuries) would have been caused when he struck the ground after having been ejected from the truck and he would not have been ejected from the truck if he had been wearing a seat belt.

It was agreed that the apportionment of the responsibility for the damage should be made under common law principles, that is that I should compare the culpability of the plaintiff and that of his wife and that I should compare the relative importance of their acts in causing the damage.

Counsel for the defendant submitted that I should find that the plaintiff's share of responsibility was "much greater than 50 per cent". Counsel for the plaintiff suggested a figure of 35 per cent. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that there was some overlap between the two forms of contributory negligence in that the consumption of alcohol played an important part in both.

I accept that the driver of the vehicle, Mrs Dennis, was grossly intoxicated and grossly negligent. Her inability properly to control the vehicle continued over a distance of more than 200 metres. Where the accident happened
Brewarrina Road is a straight flat road and poses no problems for a competent driver. I also accept that Mrs Dennis was the only licensed driver and had control of the keys to the vehicle and if, after leaving the hotel, the plaintiff wished to return to the Reserve he had little alternative but to travel with his wife in the truck.

On the other hand, that his wife was grossly intoxicated and unfit to drive a vehicle should have been quite obvious to the plaintiff. I accept evidence by
Dulcie Dennis that it was usual for the plaintiff, if he went into Walgett, to stay in the town and drink and then come home to the Reserve late at night and
I infer that when the plaintiff left the Reserve to go into Walgett on the afternoon of 8 April 1992, he knew that it was very likely that he and his wife would drink at Walgett and become intoxicated and that one of them would then drive the truck home. According to evidence by Matthew Dodd, which I accept, Matthew Dodd met the plaintiff in the hotel on the evening of 8 April and, noting the plaintiff's condition, offered to drive the plaintiff home, an offer which the plaintiff rejected. I have found that it was highly probable, though not completely certain, that if the plaintiff had been wearing a seat belt he would not have suffered his head injuries.

In my opinion I should find that the plaintiff's share of responsibility for the accident was 50 per cent.

Damages 
The plaintiff an aboriginal was born on 6 August 1959 in Walgett. He was accordingly thirty-two years old at the time of the accident and is now thirty-eight years old. The plaintiff's life expectancy and what would have been the plaintiff's life expectancy if he had not been injured are matters to which I will have to return.

The plaintiff left school at about the age of sixteen, without obtaining a school certificate. He married his wife, Janice, in 1984. There were six children of the union, all of whom are still alive and whose ages presently range from twenty-one to eleven.

After leaving school the plaintiff had some casual jobs labouring and driving tractors or trucks. Between 26 January 1984 and 17 October 1990 the plaintiff was continuously employed by Telecom. At the time of the accident the plaintiff was doing some work at the Gingie Reserve as part of a "work for the dole programme".

I have already discussed the evidence about the happening of the accident. The plaintiff was rendered unconscious in the accident. He was taken by ambulance to Walgett District Hospital, where his condition was stabilised. On 9 April the plaintiff was flown by air ambulance to the Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital in Sydney and admitted to that hospital. A CT scan taken while the plaintiff was in the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital showed diffuse cerebral oedema. While in the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital the plaintiff suffered from aspiration pneumonia and required a tracheotomy and assisted positive pressure ventilation. On 15 May 1992 the plaintiff was discharged from the Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital and admitted to the Dubbo Base Hospital. On 26 May 1992 the plaintiff was transferred to the Lourdes Hospital at Dubbo to undertake rehabilitation and he remained at this hospital for several months, much of it in a wheelchair.

After the plaintiff was discharged from Lourdes Hospital he moved to Orange, with some of his children. The plaintiff was referred to the Orange Health
Service at the Orange Base Hospital for rehabilitation and came under the care of a rehabilitation team headed by Dr John Morgan. By the time Dr Morgan prepared a report on the plaintiff dated 19 August 1994 Dr Morgan had been seeing the plaintiff for more than a year in a rehabilitation programme being conducted at the Orange Base Hospital.

The plaintiff was referred by a social worker in the Commonwealth
Rehabilitation Service to the Bathurst Brain Injury Rehabilitation Programme, a unit of the Bathurst Base Hospital, as an outreach patient for long term support and case management. A formal rehabilitation plan was approved but its goals were not achieved. The Programme last had contact with the plaintiff on February 1996.

The plaintiff continues to live in Orange with two of his children. The plaintiff has not worked since the accident. He has been receiving a disability pension.

The principal injuries suffered by the plaintiff as a result of the accident can be summarised as follows:-
Closed head injuries, causing some permanent brain damage.
Right sided hemiparesis, affecting the plaintiff's right shoulder, right arm and right leg.
A right brachial plexus injury, that is damaged nerves in the plaintiff's right shoulder also involving spinal discs C5 and C6.
Fractured left clavicle.
Bruising and abrasions.
A low lumbar back injury.
Partial hearing loss of about 11 per cent in his left ear.
Diplopia (double vision) amounting to 70 per cent loss of vision in one eye.
Keloid scar on the neck
Frontal lobe damage producing constriction of emotion and depression..
Sexual impotence (inability to achieve an erection).

In his evidence in chief the plaintiff said that his complaints and symptoms as a result of the accident included double vision when he used his left eye, partial deafness in his left ear, headaches, neck aches, some restriction in moving his neck to the right, numbness in the right shoulder and arms, some restriction of movement and loss of strength in the right arm, pain between his neck and right shoulder, feelings of depression, that after shopping "when
I get home I know I've forgot something and I have to go all the way back to get the thing I forgot", being "afraid to go outside and people see me the way
I am", difficulty in speaking clearly, inability to feel and express emotions, embarrassment and irritation from his scar, feeling "cranky" when unable to do things, inability to lift objects above the level of his shoulders, problems with his balance including falling over and being unable to climb a ladder, pain in his low back, numbness on the whole of his right side, walking with a limp on his right leg, inability to walk on uneven ground and inability to run, numbness and cramps if he sits for a long time, sexual impotence, inability to drive a motor vehicle, inability to work, and an inability or reduced ability to perform some household tasks.

As regards the plaintiff's orthopaedic injuries Dr P R Burgess, orthopaedic surgeon, in his report on 18 July 1996 said:- "As stated before, this man has had a profound head injury which appears to affect his balance and has resulted in a change in his speech and cognitive functions and a somewhat difficult to define neurological deficit on the right. He also appears to be suffering from a post-traumatic capsulitis of the right shoulder and the low lumbar injury with lumbar spondylitis and incipient right sciatica.
 * * * ..The injury to his neck, which seems to affect the brachial plexus and the shoulder, has robbed him of a major part of the function of the right arm equivalent to 45% permanent loss of efficient use of the right arm at or above the right elbow. It is unlikely that he will improve...
 * * * 
With regard to his back he appears to be suffering from a low lumbar disc injury with incipient right sciatica and this makes him unfit for any kind of labouring work and in particular, any kind of prolonged sitting, standing, stooping, constant bending or heavy lifting, and he is in danger of the right sciatic nerve irritation worsening, sufficient for him to be considered for a laminectomy for nerve root decompression. His back problem therefore represents a 20% permanent impairment of his back and a 10% permanent loss of efficient use of the right leg at or above the right knee due to the nerve root irritation, with a guarded prognosis.

As regards the plaintiff's orthopaedic injuries, most of these are on the plaintiff's right hand side and the plaintiff is and always has been left hand dominant.

Dr W H Wolfenden consultant neurologist, said in his report of 16 August :- "Psychometric testing is needed from a psychologist to delineate more completely the defects in his mental and cognitive functioning. It would appear to me however that he has significant impairment in memory and probable frontal lobe damage disturbing his ability to show emotions. Brain damage also produced weakness of the right arm and leg and these limbs remain clumsy and his balance poor because of brain damage. I believe that he has become depressed because of these defects as well as the tragedy of his wife's death and I believe that his inability to have an erection is also due to brain damage.

He worked as an unskilled laborer and he is certainly no longer able to do this because of the weakness in his right arm and the disorder with his balance. He has no other skills at all and it seems to me most unlikely that he will ever do any form of useful work again. His working life, family life and general enjoyment of life have all been severely affected".

Dr Alex Gilandas, psychologist, concluded in his report of 13 July 1996:- "In summary Arthur Dennis Floyd is an individual of estimated at low-average premorbid intelligence who displays the following deficits
Impaired coordination in the right hand
Visuomotor slowing
Impairment of word finding fluency
Impairment of attention/concentration
Impairment of verbal recent memory
Impairment of delayed recall
Depression.

The above pattern of deficits is diagnostic of brain damage and is consistent with his severe head injury. There is also medically documented damage to his left ear and left eye with double vision.

His symptomatology is directly related to his accident of 8.4.92.

Prognosis is guarded due to the passage of almost 5 years without restitution to this premorbid state. Also there has been no improvement since my previous assessment two years ago and there has even been further deterioration.

He is no longer viable on the open labour market." 
Counsel for the plaintiff relied on reports by Dr John Allsop, a consulting physician, to the defendant's solicitors, as being generally consistent with the reports obtained from doctors retained by the plaintiff's solicitors.

The plaintiff's solicitors also arranged for him to be seen by Dr Hugh Jolly, psychiatrist. Dr Jolly saw the plaintiff on 12 May 1995 (Dr Jolly's report of May 1995) and on 17 July 1996 (Dr Jolly's report of 24 July 1996).

Dr Jolly furnished a further report dated 18 August 1997 in which, as requested by the plaintiff's solicitors, he expressed opinions on the plaintiff's needs for future care. I will need to refer in detail to the report of 18 August 1997, when I deal with the plaintiff's claim for damages for the cost of future care.

Dr Jolly's two earlier reports are fairly diffuse documents and largely consist of an account, often verbatim, of what the plaintiff told Dr Jolly when Dr Jolly interviewed the plaintiff. In his first report Dr Jolly concluded:- "There is a significant degree of brain damage, permanent. There is strong evidence of frontal lobe damage, resulting in constriction of affect and a difficulty handling feelings, particularly depression. A very significant degree of `emotional pain and suffering' is evident, although I cannot diagnose superimposed psychiatric illness...." 
There was no challenge by counsel for the defendant to most of the plaintiff's evidence of his symptoms and complaints or to most of the opinions in reports by doctors who examined him. Of the doctors only Dr Jolly was required to attend for cross-examination. However, it was submitted by counsel for the defendant that I should not accept some of the plaintiff's evidence and certain opinions expressed by Dr Jolly about the extent to which the plaintiff's injuries and especially his brain damage had incapacitated, and would continue to incapacitate, the plaintiff from caring for himself. I will deal with these issues when I deal with the plaintiff's claim for damages for the cost of home care.

At this stage of this judgment I will observe, as was submitted by counsel for the defendant and is obviously correct, that, while the plaintiff has some permanent brain damage, it is not nearly as severe as the brain damage suffered by some accident victims. For example, the plaintiff is able to use public transport. On any view, he is able to perform a number of household tasks. The plaintiff has been able to communicate with the various doctors who have interviewed him. At the trial the plaintiff gave evidence lucidly, coherently and with comprehension of the questions he was being asked.

Counsel for the defendant also pointed out that the plaintiff suffers from conditions which are unrelated to the accident. The plaintiff has hepatitis B.
I am satisfied that, notwithstanding the plaintiff's own evidence, he had contracted hepatitis B and had been told that he had hepatitis B in about
December 1991, that is before the accident. The plaintiff has high blood pressure. Records of the Aboriginal Medical Service in Walgett showed that he was being treated for that condition in 1991, that is before the accident. The plaintiff had open heart surgery when he was sixteen and has atrial fibrillation.

Apart from these unrelated health conditions, I am satisfied, as was submitted by counsel for the defendant, that in the period leading up to the accident the plaintiff was drinking heavily. Evidence for this conclusion include his conviction for driving with a high range prescribed concentration of alcohol in December 1990, his blood alcohol reading on 8 April 1992 and the history given to a number of doctors. I reject evidence given by the plaintiff that in the period leading up to the accident he was merely "a casual drinker" or "a week-end drinker".

Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff should be awarded damages for the past medical expenses, future medical expenses, non economic loss, past economic loss, future economic loss, the cost of past domestic care and the cost of future domestic care. It was agreed that damages for past medical expenses should be $58,618.55. The plaintiff's claim for damages for future medical expenses, as propounded by counsel for the plaintiff in his written submissions and as modified in his oral submissions, was not disputed, subject to my determining the plaintiff's life expectancy. So far as damages for non economic loss is concerned, both counsel suggested figures as representing the proportion which the plaintiff's case bore to a most extreme case and the figures suggested by counsel were not far apart. The other heads of damages claimed, that is past economic loss, future economic loss, the cost of past care and the cost of future care were strongly disputed.

It is appropriate that I make some assessment of the plaintiff as a witness on matters relating to damages. The credibility of the plaintiff as a witness hardly arose on the issues of liability and contributory negligence, because, as I have said, the plaintiff said that he had no recollection of the accident and it was not suggested in cross-examination that he had. I have said that there was little challenge in cross-examination of the plaintiff to most of the plaintiff's evidence about his symptoms and complaints, apart from his evidence about the extent to which he said he had been incapacitated and would be incapacitated from caring for himself, including doing ordinary household tasks. However, there was other evidence given by the plaintiff which is relevant to one or more of his claims for damages and which was challenged, including, for example, his evidence about his job at the Gingie Reserve, his consumption of alcohol before the accident and what medical conditions he has had which are unrelated to the accident. I have concluded that the plaintiff was by no means always a reliable witness on such matters. Among the pieces of evidence given by the plaintiff which I have decided I should reject are his evidence that he was disqualified from driving at the time of the accident, as distinct from merely being a unlicensed driver, that he had been disqualified in 1991 and not 1990 (so that a one year disqualification would still have been in force at the time of the accident) and that he had been disqualified for four years; that he had not been aware before the accident that he had hepatitis; that he had not taken the drug Renitec for high blood pressure before the accident; that he had worked Mondays to Fridays in his job at the
Gingie Reserve; that before the accident he had been merely a "casual" drinker. The above examples are given merely by way of illustration.

The issue of what is the plaintiff's probable life expectancy is relevant to all his claims for future damages and is an issue which I have to resolve.

In his calculations of the damages claimed on behalf of the plaintiff counsel for the plaintiff simply adopted from the Tables of life expectancies for the population generally a period of thirty-nine years as being the life expectancy of a person aged thirty-eight years. Counsel for the plaintiff conceded that it might be appropriate in assessing the various heads of damages to make some discount or a larger than usual discount to allow for the contingency that the plaintiff might have a lower than normal life expectancy.

In his calculations of the damages which should be awarded, if the plaintiff obtained a verdict, counsel for the defendant used a much lower figure of sixteen years as being the plaintiff's life expectancy. This figure was derived from a table showing the expectation of life at birth for male aborigines in western New South Wales (1984-1987) as being 543 years. This table is included in a publication Overview of Aboriginal Health Status in New
South Wales by Neil Thomson and Norma Briscoe, which was admitted into evidence. Apart from this publication, counsel for the defendant also relied on - 
Evidence about the health conditions the plaintiff has which are unrelated to the accident, including hepatitis, a heart condition and high blood pressure and - 
Reports by Dr Zelman Freeman, consultant physician.

In his first report of 7 July 1995 Dr Freeman concluded:- "He (that is the plaintiff) has a number of factors which may reduce his life expectancy owing to the risk of stroke from atrial fibrillation and potential coronary artery disease".

In a second report of 26 July 1995 Dr Freeman noted that he had been sent a number of articles on aboriginal health in Australia, including an article on the impact of tobacco smoking and alcohol consumption on aboriginal mortality in Western Australia. Dr Freeman continued:- "You asked me to comment upon the plaintiff's mortality in the light of this material. This man was a heavy drinker up to the time of the accident but has now ceased to drink. He was also a heavy smoker until that time but apparently has given up.

As noted in the reports which you have sent both of these risk factors contribute to a shortening of life in Aboriginals. The alcohol often causes premature death from accidents and latter from coronary artery disease. Upon cessation of smoking in white males the risk drops by 50% in 2 years and slowly over the next 15 years reverts to the risks of a non smoker. Possibly the same applies to Aboriginals.

Other risk factors which may affect this man's mortality are that he has atrial fibrillation, a condition which carries an up to 2% risk of a cerebral emobolus and stroke. The family history of diabetes is also a risk factor for the development of premature coronary artery disease. This risk is made worse by his weight gain of 6-1/2 stones since 1992.

On the basis of these factors rather than on his aboriginality I think this man's life expectancy may well be reduced possibly of the order of 10 years less than the usual".

In a third report of 13 October 1995 Dr Freeman explicitly addressed the question "regarding the life expectancy of this man if he had not given up smoking cigarettes and drinking alcohol." Dr Freeman concluded:- "Whilst it is difficult to quantify this man's overall life expectancy I would estimate that his life span if he had continued to smoke and drink would have been diminished by 15 years".

Dr Freeman's reports are of limited assistance in determining the plaintiff's actual life expectancy. The two factors to which Dr Freeman gave special attention were the smoking of tobacco and the drinking of alcohol and the opinion he gave in his third report about the plaintiff's life expectancy was his opinion about what life expectancy the plaintiff would have had if he had continued smoking and drinking. I accept that since the accident the plaintiff no longer drinks alcohol and no longer smokes. Dr Freeman's opinion about what would have been the plaintiff's life expectancy if he had continued smoking and drinking (as he would be likely to have done if he had not been injured in the accident) will be relevant to the plaintiff's claim for future economic loss.

Two publications dealing with Aboriginal health were tendered by counsel for the defendant and admitted into evidence. One was the Overview, which I have already referred to. The other was "Australia's Health 1994", being a fourth biennial report of the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. During closing addresses I required counsel for the defendant to refer me to such parts of these exhibits as he wished to rely on. Counsel referred me only to part of Chapter 5 in the Overview, which is headed "Mortality", from p13 to p18. I have read pages 13-18 of the Overview. On page 13 the authors state inter alia:- "For Aboriginal males living in western New South Wales in 1984-1987, the expectation of life at birth was 543 (years), about 19 years less than that of the total male population of New South Wales in 1986." 
On page 14 the authors state:- "After adjustment is made for differences in the age structures of the
Aboriginal and total Australian populations, the death rate of Aboriginal males living in western New South Wales in 1984-1987 was 36 times that of the total Australian male population".

On page 17 of the report the authors said:- "For Aborigines living in western New South Wales in 1984-1987, the major cause of death, for both males and females, was disease of the circulatory system... Overall, death rates from these diseases, including ischemic and other heart disease, were 44 times higher than expected for males and 35 times higher for females....The second most frequent cause of death, for males and females, was the ...group `External causes of injury and poisoning' (including motor vehicle and other accidents, suicide and self-inflicted injury, and homicide and injury purposely inflicted by others)." 
I am satisfied that the material in Chapter 5 of the Overview establishes that male aborigines living in western New South Wales (I would regard Walgett as being in western New South Wales) have as a class a lower life expectancy than the population generally. It is deeply regrettable that this is the case, but
I consider that this circumstance must be reflected in the damages awarded to the plaintiff, so that the damages awarded to him properly compensate him, but no more than properly compensate him, for his future damage.

It is not possible simply to apply any of the figures in Chapter 5 of the
Overview, so as to arrive at a figure for the plaintiff's life expectancy. All of the figures in the Overview are for periods in the 1980's and it is likely that life expectancies for the population generally and for aborigines have undergone some change since. The table from which counsel for the defendant took the figure of 54 (or 543) years shows expectation of life at birth, whereas the plaintiff is now thirty-eight years old. Infant mortality is high among aborigines and an aborigine who has reached the age of thirty-eight years has a higher life expectancy than a newly born aboriginal child. Figure on page 16 of the Review, which counsel for the defendant referred to in argument, simply shows the number of deaths per one thousand of population at various ages among the total population and among aborigines.

I have already pointed out that Dr Freeman's reports are of limited assistance in determining the plaintiff's actual life expectancy. In any event, it would not be permissible, in order to arrive at the plaintiff's life expectancy, simply to aggregate(i) Dr Freeman's opinion based upon factors specific to the plaintiff which limit his life expectancy and (ii) the findings of the authors of the Review, because there is some overlap between those factors specific to the plaintiff on which Dr Freeman relied and the causes of death applying to aborigines generally which are noted in the Review.

It is not possible to arrive at a finding for the plaintiff's life expectancy by a process of calculation from the evidence. I consider that the plaintiff has a somewhat lower life expectancy than normal life expectancy because of his medical condition and because of his aboriginality. I accept that he no longer smokes tobacco and drinks alcohol and is unlikely to resume doing so. I find that the plaintiff's life expectancy is thirty-two years (that is up to age seventy).

Future Medical Expenses 
The plaintiff claimed damages for future medical expenses on four items. The claims made in counsel for the plaintiff's written submissions were modified during his final address. Counsel for the defendant in his closing address conceded all of the plaintiff's claims as modified, except insofar as a claim depended on the plaintiff's life expectancy being as long as thirty-nine years. In the light of the positions adopted by counsel in their final addresses and my finding that the plaintiff's life expectancy is thirty-two years, I assess damages for future medical expenses as follows:- 
Batteries for hearing aid for thirty-two years $7 x 845 (multiplier for thirty-two years at 5 percent) $5,915.00 
Cost of plastic and reconstructive surgery for keloid scar on neck $2,250.00 
Future surgery (Dr Burgess's reports) 
Acromioplasty at shoulder $4,641.00 
Discounted by 1/3 $3,094.00 
Excision Arthroplasty $4,125.00 
Discounted by 1/3' $2,750.00 
Laminectomy of low back $12,052.00 
Discounted by 1/2 $6,026.00 $11,870.00 
Cost of spectacles for thirty-two years $4.80 x 845 $4,056.00 $24,091.00 
Non-Economic Loss 
I have already listed the plaintiff's injuries and disabilities and summarised the plaintiff's evidence about his symptoms and complaints. In assessing damages for non-economic loss I take into account the conclusions I have reached and which I will state in a later part of this judgment about the extent to which the plaintiff has been incapacitated and will continue to be incapacitated from caring for himself, including performing household tasks.

It was common ground that the maximum amount which could be awarded as damages for non-economic loss was $250,000, being the measure of damages to be awarded in "a most extreme case". Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that I should award $200,000, on the basis of the plaintiff's case being 80 per cent of a most extreme case. Counsel for the defendant submitted that I should award between $150,000 and $175,000, on the basis that the plaintiff's case was between 60 per cent and 70 per cent of a most extreme case. I consider that I should award $175,000. I do not accept all of the plaintiff's evidence about the extent to which he has been incapacitated by the accident.

Past Economic Loss 
The plaintiff has not worked since the accident. Counsel for the defendant conceded that the plaintiff has had no residual earning capacity since the accident. A suggestion faintly made during the hearing that the plaintiff might have been able to earn income as an artist, for example by painting eggs, was not pressed. Apart from the concession, I would have found that the plaintiff has had no residual earning capacity. Accordingly, the only question under this head of damages is what would have been the plaintiff's earning capacity if he had not been injured.

In written submissions counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff should be awarded damages at about the rate of Social Security benefits (agreed at $150 per week) for a period of one year from the time of the accident and that thereafter up to the time of the hearing the plaintiff should be awarded damages on the basis of being continuously employed by
Telecom (Telstra) at the rates payable from time to time to an employee of
Telecom having the classification the plaintiff had at the time he resigned in
October 1990. These rates rose gradually from $401 net per week to $430 net per week. The total amount claimed as damages for past economic loss was $106,212. Counsel frankly conceded that he was putting his client's case at its highest. Counsel for the defendant submitted that I should award no damages for past economic loss.

It is a difficult task determining what would have been the plaintiff's earning capacity if he had not been injured.

In favour of the plaintiff it was pointed out that the plaintiff had some qualifications in that he held "tickets" to operate some kinds of equipment, such as cherry pickers and borers; that he had had casual jobs labouring and driving tractors and trucks; that he had been continuously employed by Telecom between January 1984 and October 1990; that he had attained the position of a communications officer Grade 1 with Telecom; that he had resigned from Telecom on his own accord because of "family problems... with the wife. I was having an affair sort of thing"; that at the time of the accident he was working at the Gingie Reserve helping keep the Reserve clean and functional, as part of the work for the dole programme; that as a married man with a dependent wife and children he would have had an incentive to work.

In support of the defendant's case, counsel for the defendant pointed out that by the time of the accident about a year and a half had elapsed since the plaintiff had last worked for Telecom; that, apart from the job at the
Reserve, the plaintiff had not worked since resigning from Telecom; that there was no evidence that in the period leading up to the accident the plaintiff had done anything about looking for other work or paying the fine which had been imposed on him and thereby regaining his driving licence. Possession of a driving licence might have assisted the plaintiff in obtaining and carrying out work.

As to the job at the Reserve, which the plaintiff himself described as "working for the dole", I accept the submissions made by counsel for the defendant that it was a rather casual arrangement and that the plaintiff's evidence that he worked five days a week on the programme should be rejected.
No records for the programme were produced. The plaintiff's father did not think that the plaintiff was even on the programme. On the day of the accident, which was a working day, Mr Dodd, who was the supervisor of the programme, stopped work in the early afternoon. The plaintiff's mother saw the plaintiff and his wife in Walgett on the morning of the day of the accident and in the mid afternoon of that day the plaintiff and his wife departed for
Walgett.

I also accept a submission by counsel for the defendant that in the period leading up to the accident the plaintiff was drinking heavily. Some of the work which the plaintiff said in evidence he would have sought, such as truck driving and farm work, would, if obtained by the plaintiff, very likely have been casual work only.

I have concluded that I should assess damages for past economic loss on the basis that the plaintiff would not have obtained any real employment for one year from the date of the accident and thereafter at the rate of about half the weekly wage for the time being of a communications officer Grade 1 employed by Telecom (Telstra), up to the time of the hearing. The damages so assessed are as follows.
 April 1993 - 8 April 1994 52 weeks at $200 $10,400 April 1994 - 8 April 1995 52 weeks at $205 $10,660 April 1995 - 8 April 1996 53 weeks at $210 $10,920 April 1996 - date of judgment - approx 84 weeks at $215 $18,060 $50,040 
Future Economic Loss 
As in the case of past economic loss, it was conceded by counsel for the defendant that the plaintiff had no residual earning capacity, so that the issue became simply what would have been the plaintiff's earning capacity if he had not been injured.

Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff should be awarded damages at the rate of remuneration as at the trial of a communications officer Grade 1 employed by Telecom (Telstra), for the period up to the plaintiff attaining the age of sixty-five years, less a discount for contingencies which counsel accepted should be higher, though only 21/2 per cent higher, than the usual discount.

Counsel for the defendant submitted that damages should be awarded at the rate of $200 per week but only for the period up to the plaintiff attaining the age of fifty-four years, with a discount for contingencies of 25 per cent.

The matters which I have referred to in dealing with the plaintiff's claim for damages for past economic loss are also relevant to the claim for damages for future economic loss. I have decided that I should adopt the figure of $215 per week, that is about half the wage of a communications officer Grade 1 employed by Telecom (or Telstra), in assessing damages for future economic loss.

Counsel for the defendant submitted that if the plaintiff had not been injured he would not have continued working until he was sixty-five, because he would have died before attaining that age. However, it is not possible to accept counsel's submission that the plaintiff would have died at age fifty-four, which, as I have already stated, was an age taken by counsel for the defendant from the Overview and was the expectation of life at birth of male aborigines in western New South Wales 1984-1987. Counsel for the defendant then sought to rely on Dr Freeman's opinion that "whilst it is difficult to quantify this man's overall expectancy I would estimate that his life span if he had continued to smoke and drink would have diminished by fifteen years", submitting that, if the accident had not happened, the plaintiff would have continued to smoke and drink.

I have concluded that, rather than attempting to fix what would have been the plaintiff's life expectancy if the accident had not happened, I should simply take into account in fixing the overall discount for contingencies the risk that the plaintiff if he had not been injured would have died before attaining the age of sixty-five years. I also take into account the plaintiff's health conditions which he would have had even if he had not been injured, including hepatitis, heart trouble and high blood pressure, which might have affected the plaintiff's earning capacity otherwise than by shortening his life expectancy. I have decided to allow a discount for all contingencies of 20 per cent.

Accordingly I allow damages for future economic loss at $215 per week for twenty-seven years, less a discount for contingencies of 20 per cent, producing a figure of $134,676.

Past and Future Care 
In both the original particulars under Pt33t8A of the Supreme Court Rules filed on 3 March 1995 and the amended particulars filed on 16 July 1997 the plaintiff made a claim under Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer (Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer <case>; [(1977) 139 CLR 161)] for the cost of both past and future care at the rate of five hours a day seven days a week, that is thirty-five hours a week, less the deduction of six hours referred to in s72of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/). In the particulars under Pt33r8A reference was made to assistance allegedly received from the Bathurst Brain Injury Rehabilitation Programme and the plaintiff's relatives. The same claim, that is that the plaintiff had a need for services for thirty-five hours a week less any statutory deduction, both for the past and for the future, was pressed by counsel for the plaintiff in his final submissions at the hearing.

At the hearing counsel for the defendant submitted that I should find that the plaintiff had a need for care services only at the rate of three hours a day, that is twenty-one hours a week, less any statutory deduction, for the period from 8 October 1992 to 18 August 1994 but that thereafter the plaintiff's need for care services did not exceed six hours a week and hence no compensation should be awarded by reason of subs(4) of [s72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).

It was common ground at the hearing that the provisions of [s72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) which were to be applied in the present case were the provisions in force as at 8
April 1992 and not the provisions inserted in the Act by later amending Acts.
Accordingly, the first four subsections of the form of [s72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) to be applied are in the following terms:- "(1) An award of damages shall not include compensation for the value of services of a domestic nature or services relating to nursing and attendance which have been or are to be provided to the person in whose favour the award is made by a member of the same household or family as the person, except in accordance with this section.

No compensation shall be awarded unless the services are provided, or are to be provided, for not less than 6 months and may be awarded only for services provided or to be provided after the 6 month period.

No compensation shall be awarded if the services would have been provided to the person even if the person had not been injured by the motor accident.

No compensation shall be awarded unless the services provided or to be provided are not less than 6 hours per week and may be awarded only for services provided or to be provided after the first 6 hours".

It was common ground that the statutory deduction of six hours per week under ss(4) of [s72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) applied to the plaintiff's claim for damages for the cost of past care.

The date 8 October 1992 referred to in counsel for the defendant's submission was the date six months after the date of the accident. Coincidentally, it seems also to have been the date or about the date the plaintiff was discharged from Lourdes Hospital. It was common ground that no damages for care services were to be awarded in respect to the period from 8 April 1992 to October 1992. The date 18 August 1994 referred to in counsel for the defendant's submission was the day before the date of a report from Dr Morgan of the Orange Health Service.

It is quite clear that the evidence from doctors and other health professionals, apart from the evidence of Dr Jolly which I will deal with separately, would not support a claim of the magnitude of the claim made on behalf of the plaintiff. Dr Morgan is a specialist in rehabilitation and headed the rehabilitation team at the Orange Base Hospital. Dr Morgan's first report on the plaintiff is dated 12 May 1993. In his report of 19 August 1994
Dr Morgan recorded his findings on an examination of the plaintiff. He noted:- "I have seen him for over a year in a rehabilitation capacity at the Orange
Base Hospital".

Dr Morgan added:- "Floyd misses his wife deeply following the accident and says they were close.

They have six children aged 9, 11, 13, 14, 16 and 17 two of whom have now left home.

Floyd has decided some time ago that his main aim in life at the moment is to look after the house and his family.

He does most of the cooking and the housework and shopping etc." 
Dr Morgan concluded:- "Floyd strikes me as being reasonably "on the ball" and he has certainly proved himself to be quite capable of running a house, looking after children, cooking and keeping himself reasonably fit".

As indicated earlier in this judgment, the plaintiff was referred to the
Bathurst Brain Injury Rehabilitation Programme in 1993 for ongoing support and case management.

A rehabilitation plan drawn up by the Programme for the plaintiff included "manage household duties" - "3hpw" (that is three hours per week). This plan was approved, subject to an immaterial exception.

In a later report of 20 June 1995 from the Programme the social worker stated that the goals of the plan had not been achieved and that contact with the plaintiff had been "limited and unproductive". The author of the report stated that "assistance with housework has not started for reasons I am unclear. I arranged for Mr Dennis's sister-in-law to clean his house....but it hasn't eventuated".

In a final report from the Programme of 22 May 1997 a social worker wrote:- "Unfortunately Mr Dennis is no longer a client of the Brain Injury Program. My last contact with Mr Dennis was 19/2/96. This was after a period of minimal contact with Mr Dennis due to a series of `no shows' for appointments...

Your letter dated 8/5/97 would seem to be indicating a need for a current medico legal report. My initial response to this was to make an appointment for Mr Dennis to see Dr Lahz, but I have since been informed that Dr Lahz is unable to do a Medico Legal report. The appointment has now been cancelled. I apologise for any confusion this may have caused.

I am sorry we are unable to assist you any further with Mr Dennis's case".

Dr Wendy Roberts, clinical psychologist of Mentor Psychological Consultants, said inter alia in paragraph 11 of a very thorough report of 17 August 1995:- "I note a claim is made for future care and assistance at the rate of 5 hours per day into the future. Mr Dennis told me that he manages to look after his 4 children on his own without assistance, except for needing to catch a taxi home from the shops with the shopping and his son mows the lawns and does the gardening. I see no reason why this arrangement should not continue and would think that provision for assistance with garden maintenance of perhaps 1 to 2 hours per week would be reasonable, but do not believe that assistance beyond that is needed, based on his current information. However, I would agree that he did need more assistance initially after the accident due to the fact that he had a number of children to look after, and given the extent of his physical injuries, and sequelae.

With respect to Mr Dennis's cognitive skills and ability to look after himself, I believe that he is largely capable of doing this without assistance other than specified, but has required rehabilitation assistance to reach this point. He is likely to need provision for ongoing periodic monitoring by the brain injury team to ensure that he remains functioning as independently as possible".

Dr Allsop said in his report of 4 November 1994:- "He said that he does not get too angry with his children who are getting on fairly well at school. The children help with the housework. He mows the lawns using a push mower. He does not drive and has no licence. He goes to the shops. He watches television and reads the paper occasionally. He goes to school to collect his children. He cooks the meals. He grills food and occasionally roasts".

Dr Bryan in a report of July 1995 said:- "It seems apparent that he suffered a significant head injury from which he still has some continuing problems. However, he appears to be reasonably able to handle daily activities and certainly was looking after himself and his children and he had made his way to Sydney without any great difficulty".

It is apparent that over an extended period the plaintiff had fairly consistently told doctors and other health professionals that he was generally able, with only limited assistance, to look after himself, his home and such of his children as were living with him and that doctors and other health professionals who had expressed an opinion on the subject had formed the opinion that any need the plaintiff had for care services was much less than that claimed on behalf of the plaintiff.

At the trial the plaintiff gave brief evidence in chief and was then stood down, on the basis that he could give little evidence on the issue of liability, that is who was driving the truck, and to enable Mr Brown and Mr
Vaughan to give evidence on the issue of liability. The plaintiff did not resume giving evidence until Wednesday 20 August, the eighth day of the trial.
On the morning of 20 August I was informed by counsel for the defendant that at 4 pm the previous day the defendant had been served with a report by Dr
Jolly dated 18 August 1997, in which Dr Jolly had expressed opinions about the plaintiff's needs for care services, to the effect that the plaintiff reasonably required care services at the rate of five hours a day. Counsel for the defendant opposed the plaintiff being permitted to rely on the report, on the grounds of the late service of the report and that Dr Jolly was not a rehabilitation expert and was not qualified to express an opinion on the plaintiff's needs for care services. I ruled that the plaintiff should be permitted to rely on the report, on the grounds inter alia that Dr Jolly was sufficiently qualified to express an opinion, that Dr Jolly's opinion was within the claim made in the plaintiff's particulars, that the defendant had been on notice of the claim made in the plaintiff's particulars and that the defendant had had an opportunity, which it had exercised, to investigate that claim and that I could cure any prejudice by making orders for costs or adjournments.

When the plaintiff resumed giving evidence on 20 August he gave evidence relevant to the claim for the cost of care services, including evidence that he lived on canned food, that most of the time his son Floyd opened the can, that it was his son who peeled any vegetables, that it was his son who wrote out shopping lists, although the plaintiff himself did the shopping; that the plaintiff could catch public transport on his own, although when he came to
Sydney his brother picked him up "because I don't know my way around there"; that the plaintiff's son does most of the washing because he can hang out clothes better than the plaintiff; that the plaintiff's sister-in-law does the ironing; that his two sons and he do the cleaning "we all pitch in and do our share"; that washing, cleaning windows, shampooing carpet and moving furniture were all difficult for the plaintiff; that the plaintiff's sister-in-law comes over to help "maybe once or twice a week"; the plaintiff mows the lawns, although his son starts the motor. The plaintiff was then asked the following question and gave the following answer:- 
Q. So, on a daily basis if you add up the time that you need other people to help you do the things that you've mentioned like the making up the shopping list, doing the housework, doing the lawns, doing house repairs, taking you from place to place when necessary, if you added up all the hours each day that you need help, how many hours would you say? 
A. I'd say four, four and a half hours".

Dr Jolly had not been asked to express, and had not expressed, any opinions about the plaintiff needs for care services in his reports of 17 May 1995 and July 1996. Some time during the week before the trial started the plaintiff's solicitor told Dr Jolly that he would need to obtain an opinion from Dr Jolly on the plaintiff's need for future care. In a letter of instructions dated 18 August 1997 the plaintiff's solicitor informed Dr Jolly that the plaintiff resided with two of his sons, aged eighteen years and fifteen years, and that the plaintiff's other four children had left home and resided in Bourke or Walgett. Par (c) of the instructions was in the following terms:- "(c) Floyd and his two sons share the housework. Floyd instructs that he is slow in attending to domestic activities such as washing up, vacuuming and laundry. He is unable to prepare a sophisticated meal and essentially they live out of tin cans. Floyd anticipates that he will require assistance in the order of three to four hours per day with domestic activities. He also reports that he is forgetful and needs to be reminded to do things. Essentially his sons provide this assistance at the present time and Floyd is apprehensive about his future once his sons complete their secondary schooling and move away".

Dr Jolly was asked to provide a short supplementary report touching upon the plaintiff's future care needs. A copy of the amended particulars under Pt33r8A was enclosed with the letter of instructions.

In his report of 18 August 1997 Dr Jolly, after summarising his instructions, said:- "I should point out that I am well aware that I have not specifically addressed `future care needs' in either of my reports. Indirectly I have, of course...regarding Mr Dennis' ability to cook, provide and prepare meals for the children etc. I had always suspected that Floyd Dennis senior was less competent capable and organised than he told me at face-to-face consultation:
I talked with Floyd junior on one occasion, and deduced that the children's view was that they ran the house, and protected their father. Mr Dennis has told me - so many times - how he lives `for the children' so to speak. Very soon - one would anticipate - there will be no children at home. Currently, at least (through his eyes) he is in some sort of routine. But left increasingly to his own devices, I have very significant concerns for this man's mental health, ongoing.

I am told that Mr Dennis is `unable to prepare a sophisticated meal', despite his history to me that he can, and I make the assumption that he can't. I know he is forgetful...I passed the time of day with him, in Bathurst last week, and it was evident that he couldn't remember seeing me in the past. Several reports Bathurst Brain Injury Rehabilitation, Dr John Morgan for example) attest to memory difficulties. There is also the motivation and affective problems which flow on from the frontal lobe damage...all these adversely affect Mr Dennis' ability to lead a normal life...
 * * * 
But what Floyd Dennis needs is going to need is a `minder'...a person, either sort of `grand parental' and endowed with much common sense, or someone with proper nursing training. On the presumption that Mr Dennis comes to live alone (which he surely will do, unless his sexual problems have been overcome)
Dennis will need someone to come in, to check on living conditions and safety, for example that no appliances are left on and the dwelling is rendered safe through regular maintenance. Also, that shopping will have to be planned, checked that it is carried out, that Mr Dennis maintains a standard of nutrition, that he doesn't get depressed, that he motivates himself to engage in occupational therapy, etc etc.

I note the claim on behalf of Mr Dennis `...for future care and assistance...(to) continue into the future at the rate of five hours per day...' A need for five hours per day puts Mr Dennis into what the undersigned rates as `moderate' need category, based on a certain empirical scale which flows from many years of clinical and forensic experience. He certainly needs, say, three hours a day...an hour and a half twice a day, to maintain proper watch. In addition, Mr Dennis has to be transported around from time to time.
He needs help with housekeeping and handyman activities in and around the home. If his inability to look after himself is commensurate with the degree of brain damage, and continuing physical handicap, five hours per day is a very reasonable claim".

In his oral evidence Dr Jolly was asked to assume the truth of the evidence the plaintiff had given (which I have summarised) and on that basis Dr Jolly said that he believed that the plaintiff needed assistance. In his oral evidence Dr Jolly said that the plaintiff had made a commitment to his children, that it seemed that the plaintiff had become increasingly isolated and that if all the plaintiff's children left home the plaintiff's depression would be likely to deepen and he would pay less attention to self care and the plaintiff would need someone to come in for some part of the day to make sure that the plaintiff maintained a routine. As to the plaintiff's history Dr
Jolly said:- "..I think I have to go on in answering my question to offer a clinical assumption, if you like, which is that whilst Mr Dennis told me one series of things face to face, my clinical experience told me that that was not necessarily true and I believe that the assumptions that you put to me or the assumptions you asked me to make based on Mr Dennis' evidence bear that out so from that point of view trying to be sequential and logical, yes, he has had a need and has had a continuing need".

I accept that for some time after he was discharged from Lourdes Hospital the plaintiff had a need for care services. Counsel for the defendant was prepared to concede a need for care services at the rate of three hours a day, that is twenty-one hours a week, less the statutory deduction of six hours a week, for the period from 8 October 1992 to 18 August 1994. I do not consider that the plaintiff's need exceeded what counsel for the defendant was prepared to concede and I will allow damages for that period, as conceded by counsel for the defendant. However, I do not accept that from 19 August 1994 onwards the plaintiff's needs for care services have exceeded six hours per week. I will state my reasons for this conclusion.

I do not accept all of the evidence the plaintiff himself gave at the trial in support of his claim. I repeat my earlier conclusion that the plaintiff was by no means always a reliable witness. The evidence the plaintiff gave in support of his claim was inconsistent with what he had earlier told a number of doctors and other health professionals and I do not consider that I should infer that these persons had put words into the plaintiff's mouth or had misunderstood the plaintiff. Dr Morgan, a rehabilitation expert, had had the advantage of seeing the plaintiff for over a year "in a rehabilitation capacity". The figure of four to four and a half hours which the plaintiff gave in his evidence was higher than the figure of three to four hours he had recently given his solicitor. Even if the plaintiff's evidence about his particular needs were to be accepted at face value, the plaintiff would not, in my opinion, require care services at the rate of four to four and a half hours a day, seven days a week.

I do not accept Dr Jolly's opinions about the amount of care services required by the plaintiff, at least so far as the past is concerned. As I have found that I do not accept all of the plaintiff's own evidence at the trial, an important basis for Dr Jolly's opinions is removed or at least seriously weakened.

Dr Jolly was asked to prepare a report "touching upon Floyd's future care needs" and his report is mainly, although not exclusively, directed to the plaintiff's future needs.

Dr Jolly's opinions depend on what the plaintiff had previously told other doctors and health professionals, and indeed Dr Jolly himself, about his ability to care for himself and his home, being untrue. In his own earlier report of 17 May 1995 Dr Jolly had said:- "Mr Dennis usually gets up around 5.30 in the morning...that's pretty early, I ask? `I'm used to it, see'. He has a shower, and prepares breakfast for the children. He acknowledges the disadvantage of his right arm (again without my asking a question) but tells me `I want to do it...not be dependent upon someone else...' The family will breakfast on cereal and toast, and when he can Mr Dennis cooks a fried egg or spaghetti for them. The children make their own lunches, and he has them make their beds...after the family has gone out to school, he'll do a bit a vacuuming and washing, and other housework. When I ask directly, he indicates that he tries to iron, using his left hand. Having finished the housework, he might sit and watch television. `Donahue', Oprah
Whitney', and `Young and Restless' (or is it `Bold and Restless' he asks)'. He might also go for a walk down town...he tries to walk, and watches what he eats `So I don't get too overweighted...'" 
With regard to the plaintiff using his left hand to do the ironing, it is to be noted that the plaintiff is left handed and it would be natural for him to use his left hand.

The basis on which Dr Jolly formed the opinions stated in his report of 18
August 1997 is, in my view, unsatisfactory. Dr Jolly did not see the plaintiff; instead he relied on a brief letter from the plaintiff's solicitors. According to Dr Jolly that letter received from the plaintiff's solicitors confirmed what Dr Jolly had "always suspected" (although he had never expressed his suspicion in a report) that the plaintiff was less capable than the plaintiff had told Dr Jolly face to face in consultation. Dr Jolly recalled that he had talked to one of the plaintiff's sons (Floyd junior) on one occasion and on the foundation of his conversation with the plaintiff's son Dr Jolly `deduced' that "the children's view" was that "they ran the house and protected their father". The plaintiff's son, Floyd junior, who is eighteen years old, was not called to give evidence in the proceedings.

Dr Jolly did not independently arrive at the figure of five hours a day. He was supplied with a copy of the particulars under Pt33r8A in which a claim for the cost of care at the rate of five hours a day is made and in his report Dr
Jolly said that five hours a day is "a very reasonable claim". The figure of five hours a day approved by Dr Jolly exceeds the figure of three to four hours a day given by the plaintiff to his solicitors and the figure of four to four and a half hours a day given by the plaintiff in his evidence.

A very large part of Dr Jolly's justification of the figure of five hours a day is that the plaintiff requires the services of a "minder", who Dr Jolly considers should visit the plaintiff three hours a day, that is for an hour and a half twice every day, seven days a week, "to maintain proper watch" on the plaintiff. I regard a provision of such magnitude for the services of a "minder" as quite unreasonable, while two of the plaintiff's teenage children have been living with him. Indeed, the need for such a minder is based on "the presumption that Mr Dennis comes to live alone", a contingency which has not yet happened.

I consider that both in his reports and in his oral evidence Dr Jolly was disposed to endeavour to assist the plaintiff. One sign of this in his reports is the tendency to use florid language, for example in his first report Dr
Jolly states that the plaintiff suffered "catastrophic" injuries and that his "physical integrity is shattered".

Even apart from my particular criticisms of Dr Jolly's evidence, although I held that Dr Jolly was sufficiently qualified to express opinions about the plaintiff's needs for care services, I would not regard him as being as well qualified as, for example, Dr Morgan and accordingly I would consider that I should give greater weight to Dr Morgan's opinions.

In my opinion, the plaintiff has not established a need for care services for more than six hours a week from 18 August 1994 up to the present and, as it was common ground between counsel that [s72(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) applied to the claim for past care, I award damages of only $19,715 for the cost of past care, consisting of care at the rate of fifteen hours a week at the agreed rate of $13.55 per hour between 8 October 1992 and 18 August 1994.

As regards the claim for damages for the cost of future care I propose to defer making a decision, because I would like to receive further submissions generally on this claim, which was only lightly touched on in argument at the hearing and which seems to me to raise a number of questions 
I would also like to receive submissions on any outstanding questions of interest and costs.

Summary 
While not yet making any final orders, I summarise the conclusions I have reached in this judgment as follows:- 
There should be a verdict for the plaintiff 
The plaintiff's share of responsibility is 50 per cent 
Damages 
Past medical expenses $ 58,618 
Future medical expenses $ 24,091 
Non economic loss $175,000 
Past economic loss $50,040 
Future economic loss $134,676 
Past care $19,715 * * * 
