

Regina versus Dodd; Regina versus Kavinmethavee Matter Nos Cca 60374/97; Cca /97 [1998] NSWSC 261 (30 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
REGINA versus JOHN CHARLES DODD 
REGINA versus PRACHAYA KAVINMETHAVEE /97; 60582/97 June 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Newman J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeals against sentence (Christie DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60374/97; 60582/97 
DELIVERED: 30 June 1998 
HEARING DATE: 19 June 1998 
PARTIES: Regina versus John Charles DODD; Regina versus Prachaya KAVINMETHAVEE 
JUDGMENT OF: Spigelman CJ, Newman J, Sperling J 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT (Dodd): P R Zahra 
APPELLANT (Kavinmethavee): T L Buddin SC 
RESPONDENT: R F Sutherland 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT (Dodd): George Sten & Company 
APPELLANT (Kavinmethavee): The Director, Legal Aid Commission of NSW 
RESPONDENT: Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: Appeals allowed 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - conspiracy to import trafficable quantity of heroin - whether <case> of [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) (Cth) applicable, held not - sentences excessive - applicants re-sentenced. [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) (Cth) [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Cth) 
Asciak [(1989) 43 A Crim R 256] 
Bernier (CCA, 19 May 1998, unreported) 
Kelly [(1993) 30 NSWLR 64] 
No. of pages: 26 
REGINA versus John Charles DODD 
REGINA versus Prachaya KAVINMETHAVEE 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: These applicants both pleaded guilty to indictments containing an identical charge, namely, that, between 1 January 1996 and 22 March 1996, at Sydney and elsewhere, each conspired with the other, Lyle Patrick Doniger, Jane Dawson McKenzie, Deborah Letitia Spinner and divers others to import into Australia prohibited imports to which <case> of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) applied, to wit, narcotic goods consisting of a quantity of heroin, being not less than the trafficable quantity of heroin. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/s233.html) (cb) makes it an offence to conspire to import any prohibited imports to which the section applies. By subs(2), the section applies to narcotic goods.

Section 235 (2) prescribes penalties for offences against <case>. Where the prohibited import consists of narcotic goods in excess of the commercial quantity for that substance, the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life.
Where not less than the trafficable quantity is involved, but less than the commercial quantity, the maximum penalty is (except for cannabis) a fine not exceeding $100,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding twenty five years or both. The prescribed trafficable quantity of heroin is 2 grams. The prescribed commercial quantity is 1.5 kilograms.

As an exception to the maximum penalty for importing a trafficable quantity of narcotic goods, the maximum penalty is reduced to a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years or both, if the court is satisfied that the offence was not committed by the person charged for any purposes related to the sale of, or other commercial dealing in, those narcotic goods. The policy behind this provision is that a much less serious view is taken where the drug is imported for personal use and will not, therefore, go into the market and harm others.

The trial judge sentenced the applicant, Mr Dodd, to imprisonment for twelve years with a non-parole period of nine years. He sentenced Mr Kavinmethavee to imprisonment for a period of six years with a non-parole period of four years.

Both applicants seek leave to appeal against sentence.

Facts in common to both applications 
Mr Dodd was addicted to heroin. On the findings made by the sentencing judge,
Mr Dodd and Mr Kavinmethavee met in early 1996. In February 1996, Mr Dodd, using a false name, made reservations for four persons to fly to Thailand and return. A couple of days later he made a further reservation in his own name to fly to Thailand and return. Mr Dodd was apparently to meet Mr Kavinmethavee in Thailand. The plan was that Mr Kavinmethavee would facilitate the purchase of heroin in Thailand and the other persons involved would act as couriers to bring the heroin into Australia. Two of the persons initially engaged as couriers reneged, leaving Mr Doniger and Ms Spinner as the prospective couriers at that stage. In March 1996, Mr Dodd approached a Mr McKenzie, which led to Mr McKenzie's wife Ms Dawson McKenzie, being engaged as a courier. Mr
Dodd and the three prospective couriers flew to Thailand on the same day but on different flights. Mr Dodd met up with Mr Kavinmethavee in Bangkok. They went to a place in the provinces where arrangements were made to purchase a quantity of heroin for $6,000. Mr Dodd returned to Sydney. He supplied Mr
Kavinmethavee with a further $3,000. Mr Kavinmethavee arranged for the purchase of a further quantity of heroin. On 22 March 1996, heroin was placed in condoms. The three prospective couriers concealed condoms of heroin in their bodies. Mr Kavinmethavee and the three prospective couriers then prepared to fly back to Sydney. However, they were apprehended at Bangkok airport. Mr Kavinmethavee told the authorities there that he knew the others were carrying heroin, but he did not confess to his own involvement at that stage. The three prospective couriers were arrested and have subsequently received sentences of death in Thailand, commuted to fifty years imprisonment.
Mr Kavinmethavee was allowed to return to Sydney. He arrived in Sydney on 23
March 1996, where he was apprehended by the Australian authorities. He confessed to his part in the conspiracy. He offered and provided assistance in relation to the apprehension of Mr Dodd. On 24 March 1996, Mr Dodd was also arrested.

Mr Kavinmethavee continued in custody from 23 March 1996 until sentenced by
Christie DCJ on 24 July 1997. Mr Dodd continued in custody from 24 March 1996 until sentenced at the same time.

On 2 December 1996, Mr Dodd was sentenced to two and a half years imprisonment for another offence (supplying a prohibited drug), committed before he was arrested in March 1996. The sentence was specified as commencing on 2 December
A minimum term of one year was fixed. That sentence was still current at the time of Mr Dodd's sentence which is now the subject of the present application for leave to appeal.

Application for leave to appeal by Mr Dodd 
The application specifies the following grounds.
 "Ground 1: That his Honour improperly admitted into evidence the judgment on sentence of the co-conspirators, Deborah Spinner, Jane McKenzie and Lyle
Patrick Doniger of the Criminal Court of Bangkok as relevant to the sentence of the applicant.

Ground 2: That his Honour allowed himself to be influenced by the sentences imposed on the co-conspirators.

Ground 3: That the sentence imposed is manifestly excessive.

Ground 4: That his Honour failed to attach appropriate weight to the subjective factors of the applicant's case on sentence.

Ground 5: That in the circumstances of the applicant's case, his Honour erred in setting the non-parole period at 75% of the head sentence.

Ground 6: That his Honour failed to consider the application of the principle of totality." 
Ground 6 was not pressed.

Ground 1: That his Honour improperly admitted into evidence the judgment on sentence of the co-conspirators, Deborah Spinner, Jane McKenzie and Lyle
Patrick Doniger of the Criminal Court of Bangkok as relevant to the sentence of the applicant.

Ground 2: That his Honour allowed himself to be influenced by the sentences imposed on the co-conspirators.

I can deal with these grounds together. They should be rejected.

There is nothing in the remarks on sentence to suggest that Christie DCJ treated the judgment otherwise than as evidence of the harm caused to others by Mr Dodd's conduct, which was a legitimate use of the evidence. I do not read Asciak [(1989) 43 A Crim R 256] as precluding use of such evidence in that way.

Ground 3: That the sentence imposed is manifestly excessive.

The applicant's submissions were directed to specific aspects of the judge's remarks on sentence. These were dealt with under the following headings.

Objective seriousness: The roles of the conspirators.

The motive.

The scale of the conspiracy.

Drugs intended for own use: relevance of <case>.

I will cover these points. But, first, I need to review an aspect of the evidence given at the sentencing hearing and the judge's findings in relation to it.

Mr Dodd's evidence was that he was to take one-third of the heroin and the balance was to be divided amongst the couriers. He said his share of the heroin was for the personal use of himself and his wife. He said the couriers were all heroin users and he expected they would do likewise. He denied that he had ever offered Ms Dawson McKenzie cash for her services.

Mr McKenzie gave a very different account. It was as follows. Mr Dodd had first agreed to pay $8,000 cash on delivery at Sydney. Later, Mr Dodd had said there would be a delay in payment because he had to "move the gear" first. In that conversation, Mr McKenzie had said they needed the money to buy a car. In response to that, Mr McKenzie had said that his wife might take 1 oz of heroin in lieu of the cash, to which Mr Dodd said, "OK". Then, immediately before the departure for Thailand, Mr McKenzie had asked for an increase to $10,000 or $12,000 or 2 oz of heroin, in the cash or heroin to be received by Ms Dawson
McKenzie. Mr Dodd had responded that there would be at least 1 ½ oz of heroin in it for Ms Dawson McKenzie. She had agreed to that loose arrangement.

The judge accepted Mr McKenzie's account of these conversations. He rejected
Mr Dodd's denial that cash was never mentioned and Mr Dodd's denial that the
McKenzies said they needed the money for a car.

The applicant invoked <case>. The trial judge rejected that argument. He did so on the ground that the applicant had outlaid the expenses for the trip and had engaged the three Australian nationals as couriers. On the hearing of this application, counsel for the applicant conceded that <case> did not apply because (he said) there could be no assurance that some at least of the heroin - which was to be kept by the couriers on the applicant's own case - would not end up in the market.

I doubt that either reason makes <case> inapplicable on the facts of this case. But I agree that the subsection was inapplicable. On Mr McKenzie's account of events, Ms Dawson McKenzie was first to be remunerated in cash from a sale of the heroin by Mr Dodd and, later, in heroin or possibly in heroin.
If she were paid in cash from sale of part of the heroin, <case> could not operate. If she were paid in heroin, whether she sold it to buy a car or used the heroin herself, she would, in effect, have bought the heroin from Mr Dodd with her services as a courier, and that would be dealing in heroin within the meaning of the subsection. So, either way, <case> would not apply.

I can now return to the headings under which the applicant's case is put on this aspect of the application. The submissions are as follows.

Objective seriousness: The roles of the conspirators.

It was submitted that the applicant did not represent the stereotypical case of principal and organiser; and that he was more of a joint venturer with other participants.

A problem with this argument is that, if true, it makes all the participants principals, including the applicant, and equally responsible as such. But the argument fails, in any event, for lack of a foundation in fact. On the sentencing judge's findings, the applicant was the organiser. He funded the operation. He had the organisational role. Others were recruited by him and were to be remunerated by him, whether in cash or kind.

The motive 
Next came the question of motive. It was said that the applicant wanted the heroin for his own use and that of his wife; and that the couriers wanted their share for their own use. The implication was that the applicant was not motivated by profit or greed but by his addiction.

The applicant has the benefit of a finding by the sentencing judge that the applicant was addicted "and needed the heroin for his own use". The judge recognised that this was a relevant point and so it was, but the applicant cannot press the argument further. The judge rejected the applicant's evidence that Ms Dawson McKenzie was only ever to receive a share of the heroin, in favour of Mr McKenzie's evidence that Mr Dodd was told that she was in the operation to buy a car. Whether she was to receive cash or heroin, whatever was earmarked for her remuneration was going to be sold into the domestic market on this evidence. As to the other two couriers, the applicant's asserted belief that the couriers were in the operation only to obtain heroin for their own use was discredited by the judge's findings concerning the true arrangement with Ms Dawson McKenzie The appellant cannot look for a finding of fact by this court which is inconsistent with the view formed by the sentencing judge concerning the credibility of witnesses. The facts as found will not sustain an argument that the applicant intended the heroin to be exclusively for the personal use of those involved.

The scale of the conspiracy 
Next, it was said that the amount of heroin involved was small for a trafficable quantity offence, relative to what is commonly encountered in cases such as this. That is true. The quantity was not much more than 10% of a commercial quantity. The sentencing judge recognised the point.

Drugs intended for own use: relevance of <case> 
Next, it was submitted that a large part of the heroin was unlikely to go into the domestic market. The implication was that harm to others would be limited.
Therefore, it was argued, there should have been a closer relationship to the maximum sentence under <case> than to the maximum sentence under <case>.

The argument must be rejected. It is a backdoor way into <case>. The section does not apply where part of the drug imported is to be used personally and part sold into the market: Kelly [(1993) 30 NSWLR 64.] In any event, on the facts of this case, the applicant cannot be taken to have established that more than one-third of the heroin to be imported would have been withheld from the domestic market for the personal use of himself and his wife. The balance was about 75 g of pure heroin, which was comfortably within the trafficable range.

The most that can be said for the argument is that, to some extent, it augmented the point that the quantity of heroin involved was small for a trafficable quantity offence. There is no reason to suppose his Honour missed that point.

Comment 
It is not shown that the sentencing judge made any material error in relation to any of these topics. However, the applicant has the argument that aspects of the facts have been identified which tend towards minimising the extent of the criminality involved. They are to be taken into account in considering whether the sentence was manifestly excessive.

Here I take in Mr Dodd's grounds 4 and 5.

Ground 4: That his Honour failed to attach appropriate weight to the subjective factors of the applicant's case on sentence.

Ground 5: That in the circumstances of the applicant's case, his Honour erred in setting the non-parole period at 75% of the head sentence.

Ground 4 
The sentencing judge nominated a starting point for the determination as a head sentence as "ranging between eighteen and twenty years". In consideration of the plea of guilty, he said he would take the lower end of that range, namely, eighteen years imprisonment. His Honour then reduced eighteen years to twelve years pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Cwlth).
His Honour fixed that as the sentence, and specified a non-parole period of nine years.

I refer to the appellate decisions which have settled the principles applicable to cases of this kind and the range of sentences reasonably available to a sentencing judge. Unfortunately, cases of this sort are so common that it would be wasteful to review the authorities every time. I will not do so.

It is necessary to recognise the following objective features of the case. The offence was a serious one. Mr Dodd's involvement was that of the organiser and principal. As such, he recruited others who became involved in the enterprise with very serious consequences to them. The amount of heroin to be imported was, however, relatively small for a trafficable quantity, and the applicant was motivated by his addiction rather than by profit or greed. Mr Dodd was forty years of age or thereabouts at the time of the sentence. He had a significant criminal record but mostly for relatively minor drug offences. The sentencing judge believed this was his first attempt at illicit importing of a narcotic drug.

The applicant's trial was to follow that of his co-accused. When his co- accused pleaded guilty on the second day of his (the co-accused's) trial, the applicant immediately pleaded guilty. That was during the week prior to the date fixed for the applicant's trial. Whilst the plea of guilty was scant evidence of remorse in these circumstances, it did save the community the cost of a contested hearing.

Having regard to the maximum sentence for the offence, the objective and subjective features of the case (including the plea of guilty and other subjective features recorded in the remarks on sentence, which I have not reviewed and which are non-contentious), the considerations mentioned in [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s16a.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) and the case law to which I have referred, I am of the opinion that a notional head sentence of eighteen to twenty years, reduced to eighteen years for the plea of guilty, was manifestly excessive.

In particular, a reduction from between eighteen and twenty years to eighteen years for the plea of guilty was manifestly inadequate, particularly since there was no other allowance for subjective considerations. But it is the excessive eighteen years notional head sentence, after allowing for all relevant objective and subjective considerations, which is the more important point, irrespective of any particular and otherwise identifiable error.

Comment 
The reduction by one-third made by the sentencing judge pursuant to <case> was orthodox. It allowed for the absence of remissions in New South Wales. That yielded the sentence of twelve years imposed.

It is at this point that the best comparison can be made with the range of sentences sanctioned by the authorities for various degrees of criminality involved in offences relating to a trafficable quantity of narcotic drugs. A sentence of twelve years in the present case does not comply.

Ground 5 
At first, the sentencing judge mistakenly fixed a sentence under the
Sentencing Act as being for a minimum term of nine years and an additional term of three years, having found there were no "special circumstances" for altering the provisional statutory formula. The finding made the relationship between the minimum and additional terms mandatory on the judge's erroneous assumption that the NSW legislation applied. When the error was pointed out, his Honour reframed the sentence in terms of a head sentence of twelve years and a non-parole period of nine years. In consequence, his Honour had failed altogether to exercise his discretion under the Commonwealth legislation as to what should be the appropriate non-parole period, as he was required to do.

There is then a further point. The non-parole period set by the sentencing judge was 75% of the head sentence. That conformed with the provisional formula under the NSW legislation for a minimum and additional term, but it was excessive for a non-parole period under the Commonwealth legislation on the authorities. Something between 60% and 66 2/3% is now regarded as the norm for the latter purpose: Bernier (CCA, 19 May 1998, unreported).

Principle of totality 
Ground 6 is not pressed but it is necessary to examine what the sentencing judge did pursuant to the principle of totality.

The applicant was in custody from the time of his arrest on 24 March 1996 to the date on which he was sentenced, 24 July 1997.

On 3 December 1996, the applicant was sentenced in the Local Court to a term of imprisonment of one year and six months, including a minimum term of twelve months, commencing on 3 December 1996.

His Honour said he would take into account the period in custody pending trial until 3 December 1996, but not thereafter. The reasoning behind this approach was apparently that, if credit were given for time in custody after 3 December , the applicant would not serve any of the earlier sentence which would have been true.

The applicant had been in custody for eight months and ten days until 3
December 1996. His Honour specified that the applicant's sentence should commence on 14 November 1996. That was eight months and ten days prior to 24
July 1997. The effect was that the applicant would have served about seven and a half months in prison before his Honour's sentence commenced on 14 November .

It is unnecessary to comment on his Honour's method. The result is not discordant with the proper application of the principle of totality.

Result 
The sentence imposed was manifestly excessive and was vitiated by error in the respects I have mentioned. It must be set aside.

We were invited to re-sentence the applicant rather than remit the matter to the District Court for re-sentencing.

A potential complication was introduced in the form of fresh evidence that Mr
McKenzie died some months after the date on which the applicant was sentenced.
Post mortem examination revealed venous puncture wounds. That evidence was relied on as going to the credit of Mr McKenzie in that Mr McKenzie said in his evidence that he had not used heroin for a long time. The fresh evidence does not, however, carry any weight. Mr McKenzie could have gone back to heroin in the meantime or he could have been injecting some other substance, possibly methadone. No heroin was found in his body. Methadone was.

It is practicable to re-sentence the applicant on the findings made by his
Honour.

Having regard to all the considerations to which I have referred in evaluating the sentence imposed, including the principle of totality, together with some additional material tendered on appeal - and without the necessity to record the steps in the process of assessment - I would propose a head sentence of ten years imprisonment with a non-parole period of six years and six months, to commence on 24 March 1996.

Application for leave to appeal by Mr Kavinmethavee 
As mentioned earlier, the sentence in this instance was six years imprisonment with a non-parole period of four years.

I refer to my earlier resume of the facts in common to both matters.

The points advanced in support of the application were as follows.

Error concerning the sentences received by the couriers in Thailand.

I have rejected this argument.

Error in failing to exercise court's discretion in fixing a non-parole period.

I have upheld this argument in relation to Mr Dodd. Exactly the same situation arises in relation to this appellant.

Error in failing to make reasonable allowance for subjective considerations.

The sentencing judge commenced with a notional head sentence of about ten years in this instance, before taking subjective considerations into account.
That was reduced to nine years for the plea of guilty and for assistance rendered to the police. The nine years was reduced to six years pursuant to s
G. A non-parole period of four years was fixed in the same way as in the case of Mr Dodd's sentence.

Mr Kavinmethavee made a full confession to the authorities on arrival at
Sydney. Although he at first pleaded not guilty at his trial, once his record of interview was ruled admissible, he changed his plea to guilty. That was at the beginning of the second day of his trial. It is unlikely that a case could have been made against Mr Kavinmethavee if he had not confessed to his role in the affair.

The information supplied by this applicant materially contributed (at least) to the apprehension of Mr Dodd. Indeed, so far as the evidence discloses, it provided the basis on which Mr Dodd was apprehended.

The allowance of one year for all subjective considerations, including the two
I have mentioned, was grossly inadequate.

Sentence manifestly excessive 
Mr Kavinmethavee's role was that of an intermediary in procuring the heroin in
Thailand. In that regard he played a very active part, including the procuring of an additional quantity of heroin when requested to do so. His level of criminality was higher than that of a bare courier. As against that, the quantity of heroin involved was, as I have said, small for an offence involving a trafficable quantity of the drug.

Subjective considerations included the following. The applicant was a Thai national. He had no known convictions. So far as the evidence disclosed, this was his first involvement in crime of any kind. He was not an addict. His motivation can only have been financial gain. It was said that he wanted to return to Thailand to visit his ailing mother. That was still only a matter of money, although his motivation was not so base as that of those who engage in this sort of criminal conduct purely out of greed. Then there was his confession, his plea of guilty and his assistance in relation to Mr Dodd, for which he was entitled to a substantial discount.

The sentence imposed was manifestly excessive, having regard to these considerations.

Result 
The sentence should be set aside and the applicant should be re-sentenced.

I have regard to the objective and subjective considerations mentioned above and to other subjective considerations recorded in the remarks on sentence which are non-contentious and need not be reviewed. I have regard to the authorities to which I made reference in the case of Mr Dodd. I have regard to the considerations mentioned in <case>. There is no need to specify the steps in the process by which I assess an appropriate sentence.

In my view, the appropriate sentence in this instance is a head sentence of four years, with a non-parole period of two and a half years, commencing on 23
March 1996, that being the date on which he was taken into custody.

Orders 
I propose the following orders in relation to the application by John Charles
Dodd:
Leave to appeal against sentence.
Appeal allowed.
Sentence quashed.
Applicant sentenced to ten years imprisonment with a non-parole period of six years and six months, commencing on 24 March 1996.

I propose the following orders in relation to the application by Prachaya
Kavinmethavee:
Leave to appeal against sentence.
Appeal allowed.
Sentence quashed.
Applicant sentenced to four years imprisonment with a non-parole period of two and a half years, commencing on 24 March 1996.

REGINA versus John Charles DODD 
REGINA versus Prachaya KAVINMETHAVEE 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: I agree with both the reasons and orders of Sperling J in both matters. 
REGINA versus John Charles DODD 
REGINA versus Prachaya KAVINMETHAVEE 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I agree with both the reasons and orders proposed by Sperling J in both matters. * * * 
