

Langton versus Independent Commission Against Corruption and 2 Ors Matter No /98 [1998] NSWSC 100 (8 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 April 1998 
BRIAN JOSEPH LANGTON versus ICAC (INDEPENDENT COMMISSION AGAINST CORRUPTION) and THE STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES and THE SPEAKER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF NEW SOUTH WALES /98 April 1998 
Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
Name: Brian Joseph Langton versus Independent Commission Against Corruption & 2 Ors 
Proceedings No: 30027/98 
Coram: Sperling J 
Date/s of Hearing: 2 April 1998 
Date of Judgment: 8 April 1998 
Catchwords: 
Administrative law - declarations - principles applicable to the exercise of discretion whether to make a declaration as to a matter the subject of an administrative inquiry when the inquiry is not complete. 
Remedies - declarations - principles applicable to the exercise of discretion whether to make a declaration as to a matter the subject of an administrative inquiry when the inquiry is not complete. [Independent Commission Against Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) 
Forster versus Jododex Australia Pty Limited <case>; <case>; [(1991-2) 175 CLR 564] 
University of New South Wales versus Moorhouse <case>; [(1974-1975) 133 CLR 1] 
Johnco Nominees Pty Limited versus Albury-Wodonga (New South Wales) Corporation <case>; [(1978) 142 CLR 1] 
Metropolitan Water Sewerage and Drainage Board versus Judges of the Industrial 
Commission of New South Wales [[1981] AR 305] 
Rohner versus Scanlan (Drummond J, 18 August 1997, unreported) 
Greiner versus Independent Commission Against Corruption [(1992) 28 NSWLR ]

Aristodemou versus Temby and Independent Commission Against Corruption (Grove
J, December 1989 unreported) 
Donaldson versus Wood (Hunt CJ at CL 15 September 1995, unreported) 
Morgan and Wanless versus Independent Commission Against Corruption (Sperling
J, October 1995 unreported) 
BMI Ltd versus Federated Clerks Union of Australia [(1983) 51 ALR 401] 
Counsel for the Plaintiff: J C Kelly SC 
Solicitors: Chalmers Marx 
Counsel for the First Defendant: A B O'Sullivan 
Solicitors: J Feneley, Solicitor to the Commissioner 
Counsel for Second Defendant: S Gageler 
Solicitors: I V Knight, Crown Solicitor 
Counsel for Third Defendant: - 
Solicitors: M W Mackrell, Norton Smith & Co 
No. of Pages: 23 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
By summons filed on 25 March 1998, the plaintiff, the Honourable Brian Joseph
Langton, claims relief against the three defendants to the summons, namely, the Independent Commission Against Corruption (hereafter "the Commission"), the State of New South Wales and The Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of
New South Wales.

The relief claimed includes declarations sought in par 1 and 11 of the summons and an order sought in par 12 of the summons. Those paras of the summons are as follows: "1. A declaration that upon the proper construction of the Guide to Members'
Entitlements Facilities and Services, Parliament of New South Wales,
Legislative Assembly, dated October 1993, ("the Guide"), air travel warrants are transferable between members of the Legislative Assembly where one member elects to surrender additional warrants to meet the costs of an air charter notwithstanding that any member who elects to surrender additional air travel warrants to meet that cost does not travel on that air charter.
A declaration that payments of the sum of $2,109.72 and $3,694.28 made by the plaintiff to the second defendant in or about February 1995 and on 17
March 1998, respectively, are repayable by the second defendant to the plaintiff as payments exacted under colour of office.
An order that the second defendant pay the said sums of $2,109.72 and $3,694,28 to the plaintiff together with interest under section 94 of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) (as
Amended)." 
On 26 March 1998, I dismissed an application by the plaintiff for an interlocutory injunction restraining the Commission from proceeding with an aspect of a current investigation into the use of travel warrants by members of Parliament, including the plaintiff. On the same date, I made orders by consent which, so far is relevant, included an order that the question posed by Prayer 1 of the summons be decided separately and before any further trial of the proceedings. I fixed the hearing of the separate question for 2 April .

On 2 April 1998, Mr Kelly SC appeared for the plaintiff. Mr O'Sullivan of counsel made a submitting appearance for the Commission. Mr Gageler of counsel appeared for the State of New South Wales. Mr Mackrell, solicitor, made a submitting appearance for the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly.

Mr Kelly SC read part of an affidavit sworn by the plaintiff's solicitor on 24
March 1998 and tendered certain of the exhibits to that affidavit. Mr Gageler tendered other exhibits to the affidavit. That was the evidence. It was as follows.

The plaintiff is a member of the Legislative Assembly of the Parliament of New
South Wales and also Minister for Fair Trading and Minister for Emergency
Services.

The document "A Guide to Members Entitlements Facilities and Services" referred to in par 1 of the summons (hereafter "the guide") was in evidence.
It is, on its face, a publication of the Legislative Assembly of the
Parliament of New South Wales.

On 19 March 1998, the Commission commenced a public hearing in relation to its
Operation 122. Pursuant to [section (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/s30.html) of the [Independent Commission Against Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/), the
Commissioner announced the general scope and purpose of the hearing. He said: "The Commission is investigating the conduct of certain members of the
Parliament of New South Wales in relation to claims for travel allowances and other matters in respect of the period from 1990 to date. The purpose of this investigation is to determine matters referred to in [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/s13.html) of the [Independent Commission Against Corruption
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) (1988) as amended.

At the conclusion of the investigation, a report will be prepared and information disseminated to any proper authorities, including the presiding officers of the Parliament of New South Wales. The Commission will thereafter monitor the response of any findings and recommendations which it may make." 
In an opening address, counsel assisting the Commission submitted that it would be open on the evidence, or might be open on the evidence, to find that certain conduct by the present plaintiff, and perhaps the conduct of others as well, was corrupt conduct within the meaning of the Act. The asserted conduct of the plaintiff was described by counsel assisting the Commission as a misuse of travel warrants issued to members of Parliament.

As outlined, the case against the plaintiff was said to include breach by the plaintiff of the conditions on which travel warrants were issued as specified in the guide. In particular, it was asserted that the use by the plaintiff, for charter flights, of travel warrants supplied by other members of
Parliament who did not fly on those flights was in breach of the conditions.
Counsel assisting the Commission said that the plaintiff did not appear to have acted honestly and that, on one view of the evidence, the plaintiff had acted dishonestly, fraudulently and criminally in a way that constituted corrupt conduct under the Act.

It is the plaintiff's case, as argued before the Commission, that the guide has been misconstrued and that nothing done by him has involved breach of the conditions, properly construed, on which travel warrants were issued. He denies any implication of dishonest, fraudulent or criminal conduct and any corrupt conduct in this respect.

The evidence does not disclose the course of the Commission's investigation in
Operation 122 beyond 19 March 1998 or the stage it has now reached. In the absence of evidence, it would ordinarily be assumed that a state of affairs shown to exist as at 19 March 1988 continues, and that the investigation remains on foot. It would be closing one's eyes to reality, however, if I did not take note of what is public knowledge, namely, that the public hearing which was commenced on 19 March 1998 has concluded and that the Commissioner has not as yet made a report as the Commissioner said in his opening statement that he would do at the conclusion of the investigation. All that presently matters in this respect is that the Commission has not as yet published any determination concerning the plaintiff's conduct arising from the Commission's investigation in Operation 122.

I return to the summary of the evidence tendered before me. On 17 February , the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly wrote to the plaintiff, propounding the construction of the conditions which was subsequently advanced by counsel assisting the Commission in his opening address. In that letter, the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly sought reimbursement of a sum of $2,109.72 concerning certain charter flights, by cheque made payable to "The
Legislature". I assume that the plaintiff paid that amount as requested. It is one of the sums referred to in pars 11 and 12 of the summons. Following further correspondence with the plaintiff's solicitor in a similar vein but in connection with other charter flights, a further cheque in the sum of $3,694.28 was sent by the plaintiff, through his solicitor, made payable to "The Legislature". That is the further sum mentioned in pars 11 and 12 of the summons.

Counsel for the plaintiff opened his argument before me with the submission that the only matter for decision under the separate question which had been specified in the order made on 26 March 1998 was the proper construction of the guide.

I disagree. Prayer 1 of the summons seeks a declaration. The question posed by that prayer is whether the declaration sought should be made. Declarations are a form of discretionary relief. In appropriate circumstances the Court may decline to exercise its jurisdiction to make a declaration. Put another way, the determination of Prayer 1 in the summons involves a question anterior to the proper construction of the guide. That is the question as to whether the
Court should, in the circumstances of the case, entertain the question of construction posed by Prayer 1 of the summons.

Three decisions of the High Court are in point. In Forster versus Jododex
Australia Pty Limited <case>; [(1972) 127 CLR 421], the Supreme Court of New South Wales had made a declaration at the suit of a certain company that it was the holder of an exploration licence, validly renewed in relation to certain land. The declaration was made notwithstanding that an application by another person was then pending before a mining warden for authorities to enter the same land to explore for minerals. But for the declaration it would have fallen to the mining warden to decide the question determined by the declaration.

McTiernan J agreed with Mason J. He upheld the declaration. He did not discuss discretionary considerations relating to the grant of declaratory relief.

Walsh J, said (at 427): "It was contended, also, that in the circumstances of the case, a proper exercise of the discretion of the Court required it to decline to make any declaration. This question has caused me considerable difficulty. Applications had been made by the appellant for authorities to enter certain land. It became the duty of the warden to deal with those applications in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/s50.html) and other relevant provisions of the Mining Act, 1906 , as amended, (the Act). The warden had initiated an inquiry into the matter of the applications and Jododex had notice of that inquiry. It had become owner of part of the subject land, as well as being the holder of an exploration license, the validity of which is now in contest between the parties. In my opinion, there is no reason to doubt that in the proceedings before the warden, if they had continued without any intervention by the Supreme Court,
Jododex would have had the opportunity to raise and to debate the question whether the provisions of the Act precluded the grant of the authorities to enter, by reason of the fact that Jododex was, as it claimed, the holder of an exploration license, validly granted to it and validly renewed.

In my opinion, when a special tribunal is appointed by a statute to deal with matters arising under its provisions and to determine disputes concerning the granting of rights or privileges which are dependent entirely upon the statute, then as a general rule and in the absence of some special reason for intervention, the special procedures laid down by the statute should be allowed to take their course and should not be displaced by the making of declaratory orders concerning the respective rights of the parties under the statute. In other words, I think that it will ordinarily be a wise exercise by the Supreme Court of the discretion which it has under <case> of the Equity
Act to decline to undertake the tasks which have been committed by the
Parliament to a specialized tribunal." (The section referred to was the forerunner of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75.html) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) which provides for declarations.) 
Gibbs J, with whom Stephen J agreed, (at 437-8) cited with approval the following passage from Russian Commercial and Industrial Bank versus British
Bank for Foreign Trade Ltd [(1921) 2 AC 438], 448: "The question must be a real and not a theoretical question; the person raising it must have a real interest to raise it; he must be able to secure a proper contradictor, that is to say, some one presently existing who has a true interest to oppose the declaration sought." 
Gibbs J went on to say (at 438-9): "The question whether the Court should make a declaration which would have the effect of deciding a question in issue in pending proceedings may often be of some difficulty. It is of course important that the proceedings in the present case were not pending in an ordinary court. However, there were some obvious reasons why a judge should hesitate before intervening when the matter was about to come before the warden. It was, of course, possible that the warden would give effect to the contention that Jododex held a valid exploration license and would therefore refuse to grant any authority to enter to the appellant. The warden might have declined to grant the appellant's applications for some other reason. Moreover, if it were ultimately held that
Jododex's contention ought to fail, the proceedings before the warden would have been delayed and the appellant would have been put to additional cost and inconvenience. On the other hand, to determine the existence of the right which Jododex sought to establish, it was necessary to ascertain the true meaning and effect of a statutory provision and of an instrument in statutory form. These were pure questions of construction such as would appropriately be decided in the Supreme Court. They were difficult questions, and apparently rights of considerable value depended on the answers to them. When all these conflicting considerations are weighed, it seems to me that it cannot be said that it was not a proper exercise of judicial discretion to proceed to make a declaration in all the circumstances of the case." 
There was no difference in principle between Walsh and Gibbs JJ. The case turned on the emphasis given to various aspects the case bearing on the exercise of discretion of the trial judge. They both obviously regarded
Forster as a borderline case. Both justices recognised, as a consideration against the exercise of jurisdiction, that the Parliament had invested the responsibility of deciding the primary question in a special tribunal, and took that as their starting point.

The considerations which Gibbs J regarded as over-riding that consideration were, first, that the point involved a pure question of construction of a statute and of an instrument in statutory form such as would appropriately be decided in the Supreme Court; secondly, that the questions of construction were difficult; and, thirdly, that rights of considerable value depended on the answers. Impliedly, Gibbs J recognised that the Supreme Court was better qualified than a mining warden to decide the construction questions involved.

The present case is distinguishable on a number of grounds. First, the document to be construed is not a statute or an instrument in statutory form which was apparently seen as the proper province of the Supreme Court of the state to construe.

Secondly, the tribunal in the present case is well qualified to decide the construction point. The [Independent Commission Against Corruption Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) provides by Schedule 1, par 1, that a person is not eligible to be appointed as the Commissioner or as an assistant commissioner unless he or she is qualified to be appointed a judge of the Supreme Court of a state or territory or of the Federal Court, or as a justice of the High Court, or is a former judge. This Court should also take judicial notice of the fact that the present Commissioner, who is in charge of the relevant investigation, is a former judge of the Supreme Court of New South Wales and a former Chief Judge of its Commercial Division.

Thirdly, whilst the plaintiff's reputation is at risk, no rights of the usual kind, such as arose in Forster, are in dispute in the present case. The distinction was recognised in Ainsworth versus Criminal Justice Commission <case>; [(1991-2) 175 CLR 564.] It was the reason why certiorari and mandamus did not run in that case.

Lastly, it is to be noted that Gibbs J's determination was that it could not be said that to proceed to make the declaration was not a proper exercise of judicial discretion in all the circumstances of the case. Having regard to the principles applicable to an appeal against the exercise of a judicial discretion, Gibbs J's determination did not imply that the Supreme Court would, in his opinion, have been wrong to decline to exercise its jurisdiction or that he would have made the declaration if he had been the trial judge.

In University of New South Wales versus Moorhouse <case>; [(1974-1975) 133 CLR 1], a declaration was made that the University had authorised any breaches of copyright that may have occurred without proof of actual or threatened breach of copyright. The appeal was allowed. Gibbs J, with whom McTiernan J agreed, said (at 10), after referring to an English decision: "Many other examples may be found in the books of cases in which a declaration has been refused because it was claimed in relation to circumstances that had not occurred and might never happen. There is no doubt that a declaration may be an appropriate remedy in an action brought by an owner of copyright to assert his rights, but a declaration will as a general rule not be made for that purpose unless it is established either that an actual infringement has occurred or that the defendant intends to take action that will amount to an infringement.

The declaration made in the present case rested purely on the basis of hypothesis." 
In Johnco Nominees Pty Limited versus Albury-Wodonga (New South Wales)
Corporation [(1977) 1 NSWLR 43], Street CJ cited the passage to which I have referred in the judgment of Gibbs J in
Forster. In the same vein, he also cited a statement by Mason JA in Salmar
Holdings Pty Ltd versus Hornsby Shire Council [(1971) 1 NSWLR 192], 201 in which Mason JA referred to "the longstanding policy that the courts should not become involved in the determination of academic or hypothetical questions".

The decision closest to the present case is Jackson versus Slattery [(1984) 1
NSWLR 599.] Slattery J of this Court was appointed by letters patent, issued under the [Special Commissions of Inquiry Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/scoia1983341/), to inquire into and report to the Governor in relation to certain conduct in office by a former Minister for Corrective Services. Declarations were sought in this Court with the objective of limiting the ambit of the inquiry. The applicant's case turned on the proper construction of the letters patent.

The analogy with the present case will be apparent. The plaintiff in the present case seeks declarations as to the proper construction of the conditions relating to travel warrants as a basis on which to contend that any finding that certain conduct engaged in by the plaintiff was corrupt conduct within the meaning of the Act would be in excess of jurisdiction.

The Court of Appeal refused to make the declarations sought. Hutley JA gave the judgment which is presently relevant. (Samuels JA agreed with his decision and with his reasons for decision.) There was a privative clause. Hutley JA considered the position apart from that factor. He said (at 607): "Even if there were no private clause, this Court, in my opinion, should not give any remedy. Not only had the Commissioner not prepared his report, but submissions of counsel for one of the claimants had only begun and counsel assisting the Commission had not even been heard. All the Commissioner had done was state the unacceptable [to them] proposition that he was going to prepare his report in accordance with the views he had formed as to the proper construction of the Act and of his Commission. The fact that the judgments of this Court may have the effect of firming his opinions must be ignored for this purpose. He had given an indication that in the performance of his duties, he had come to certain legal views at that stage of the proceedings.
It may be that he had indicated a firm view which was unlikely to be affected by further argument, but no judge has a final view until he publishes his judgment or, in the course of a trial, gives a ruling on a relevant matter; for example, the admission or exclusion of evidence tendered. It is, on the face of it, a bold proposition that the declaratory jurisdiction is available in circumstances of this kind." 
After distinguishing a New Zealand case, Hutley JA went on to say (at 607): "Until the report is delivered to the Governor, I would have thought that any issue as to the correctness of its contents was purely theoretical and it is accepted that the courts should not make declarations on theoretical issues (Johnco Nominees Pty Ltd versus Albury-Wodonga (New South Wales) Corporation [[1977] 1 NSWLR 43] at 53 per Street CJ) after an extensive review of authority.
Until the report is presented to the Governor, the declaration is in relation to a speculative event. An indication of the future operation of a
Commissioner cannot be assimilated to a kind of threat which justifies a quia timet declaration" 
His Honour then referred to a body of law relating to the strong reluctance of the courts to interfere in relation to committal proceedings which his Honour obviously regarded as analogous. His Honour said (at 607-8): "This Court has also pointed out in relation to committal proceedings that the hearing of those proceedings should not be punctuated by proceedings for declarations and judges, in their discretion, should refuse to hear proceedings brought while the committal proceedings are in progress: ACS v
Anderson [[1975] 1 NSWLR 212]; Smith v
Commissioner of Corrective Services <case>; [(1978) 142 CLR 1] at 24 that where proceedings before magistrates were wrongly brought or conducted contrary to statute, there was power to make a declaration. Only if the statements by the Commissioner that he intended to proceed according to his conception of the proper construction of the statute would amount to a decision to proceed contrary to law is a declaration proper." 
Although Forster was not cited the approach was substantially the same in principle.

Further authorities concerning prerogative relief in relation to committal proceedings are collected in Ritchie's Supreme Court Procedure at page .2; and, concerning the Court's declaratory jurisdiction, in Aronson &
Dyer: Judicial Review of Administrative Action at pages 890 to 891.

Metropolitan Water Sewerage and Drainage Board versus Judges of the Industrial
Commission of New South Wales [[1981] AR 305] is a further illustration of the general reluctance of the courts to intervene, by the exercise of their declaratory jurisdiction, in proceedings before another tribunal: particularly, per Moffitt P at 309.

A recent decision of the Federal Court of Australia should be mentioned. In
Rohner versus Scanlan (Drummond J, 18 August 1997, unreported), the applicants for a declaration had been refused visas on the ground that the persons nominated as their respective spouses were of the same sex. If the limitation of the term "spouse" imposed by the relevant regulation was invalid, the argument was that "spouse" in the regulation would include a partner of either sex. The validity of the limiting provision was impugned by reference to the [Sex Discrimination Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sda1984209/), the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunities Commission Act 1986, and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It was common ground that, if two levels of review provided for in the code were first exhausted, the applicants could bring the point before the Court for determination and that, at those levels of review, the point could not be taken. The respondents argued that the Court should refuse to make a declaration as to the validity of the limiting provision until the applicants had exhausted the procedures for review prescribed by the code.

Understandably, the court had little difficulty in exercising its power to make a declaration, thereby avoiding the need for two intermediary reviews which could not resolve the point.

The case is noteworthy in that the course taken was seen by Drummond J as needing to be distinguished from the statement of principle by Walsh J in
Forster which I have quoted, namely, the statement of a general rule that determinations by special tribunals of matters arising by statute and within the province of such tribunals should be allowed to take their course in the absence of special reasons for intervention.

In Ainsworth (supra) a declaration was made that the appellants had been denied natural justice, and in Greiner versus Independent Commission Against
Corruption [(1992) 28 NSWLR 125] a declaration was made that the applicant had not engaged in corrupt conduct.
Those decisions are not in point because, in each case, the proceedings before the respective tribunals were finalised when the proceedings for declaratory relief were instituted.

I should add that what I have said does not relate to the grant of an order in the nature of prohibition for denial of procedural fairness. An application for such an order (albeit refused) was entertained, for example, in
Aristodemou versus Temby and Independent Commission Against Corruption (Grove
J, 14 December 1989 unreported), Donaldson versus Wood (Hunt CJ at CL 15
September 1995, unreported) and Morgan and Wanless versus Independent Commission
Against Corruption (Sperling J, 31 October 1995 unreported). There is no question of a denial of procedural fairness in the present case.

In deciding whether the Court should exercise its jurisdiction to determine the application for a declaration in this case, I have regard to the following considerations in the light of the foregoing authorities: 
The Independent Commission of Corruption Act 1988 creates a concept of corrupt conduct otherwise unknown to the law (s 7). It is defined by the Act (ss 8 and 9). The Act constitutes the Commission (s 4) and invests it with the function of investigating and determining whether corrupt conduct has occurred (s 132). No other agency has that function. The courts do not have that function. The procedures of the Commission by way of inquiry, determination and report are not yet completed in the present case. The case is within the general rule propounded by Walsh J in Forster and the approach taken enunciated in Jackson. A declaration should not be made in such a case in the absence of special reason for intervention.

By force of the statute in the present case, the Commission is necessarily constituted by a person with high legal qualifications. The Commissioner presiding over the present inquiry is, by qualification and experience, particularly well qualified to construe a written instrument, including the determination of any legal question which may arise in relation thereto. There is no reason for taking the determination of the construction point out of the hands of the tribunal because this Court is better suited to make the determination. It is not.

The construction point does not involve a pure question of construction of a statute or of an instrument in statutory form, especially appropriate to be decided by the Supreme Court on that account, as in Forster.

The question of construction does not involve rights of considerable value of the kind under consideration in Forster. A finding of corrupt conduct does not involve legal rights at all, although damage to reputation may warrant the making of a declaration if such a finding is made contrary to law or if there has been a denial of natural justice in the course coming to such a result: Ainsworth (supra) and Greiner (supra).

The question of construction of the guide posed by Prayer 1 of the summons is hypothetical, in the way that and similar expressions have been used in the authorities. A determination that the conditions relating to travel warrants are to be construed in the manner advanced by the Clerk of the Legislative
Assembly in correspondence and by counsel assisting the Commission in his opening address has neither been made nor threatened. Counsel assisting the
Commission does not speak on behalf of the Commission in an opening address or at all. The Commissioner might construe the conditions as the plaintiff says they should be construed. The Commissioner might have already done so without having yet published his report with his determination in that regard.
Depending on the course or further course of the inquiry, the Commissioner might find it unnecessary to decide the construction question at all. I intentionally refrain from spelling out how that might arise.

Insofar as the declaration is sought in aid of the claim for reimbursement of moneys paid, the amounts involved are not substantial. Nor is it apparent that there is any need at this stage of the proceedings for reimbursement for the plaintiff to have a determination of his claim for a declaration. Further, the Court's discretion is to be exercised having regard to the effect which making the declaration would have were the Court to decide the construction point in favour of the plaintiff. It would be wrong to have regard merely to the plaintiff's objective in seeking the declaration. In any event, it would be closing one's eyes to reality not to recognise that the plaintiff's primary objective in seeking the declaration at this stage is to pre-empt the possibility of an adverse determination against him by the Commission in the present inquiry, to the extent that the declaration sought might serve that purpose.

Having regard to the foregoing considerations, I do not regard it as appropriate for the Court to exercise its jurisdiction to determine the construction point by deciding the plaintiff's claim for declaratory relief in par 1 of the summons.

I emphasise that I have not decided the proper construction of the guide in the respects posed by Prayer 1 of the summons. Nothing in this judgment should be construed as implying any opinion on my part on that matter. I have formed none.

The submissions made by counsel for the State of New South Wales included a submission that a declaration should not be made for lack of a proper contradictor: see Ainsworth and Johnco as cited earlier in this connection; also BMI Ltd versus Federated Clerks Union of Australia [(1983) 51
ALR 401](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281983%29%2051%20ALR%20401 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 413-4. The submission rested on the fact that the Commission and the
Speaker had made submitting appearances. Counsel for the plaintiff did not accede to this submission. Since I have found it inappropriate to decide the construction point on other grounds, the argument need not be resolved.

For the reasons I have given, Prayer 1 of the summons is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
