

John Harvey versus International Sports Services P/L [1996] NSWSC 186 (11 June )

JOHN HARVEY versus INTERNATIONAL SPORTS SERVICES PTY LTD /96 
TUESDAY 14 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for provisional liquidation of a small private company. The company appears to have three shareholders, Mr Harvey, who holds one-third of the shares, and Messrs Michael and O'Gorman, who hold the balance.

The company was only formed last year, but has been continually in problems and there has been infighting between the directors, including the holding on both sides of a series of very suspect meetings from which they have tried to gain some advantage.

For the last six months the Michael/O'Gorman faction seems to have been in de facto control and there is a problem in Mr Harvey finding out just what is going on.

The company went into administration towards the end of 1995, though whether that was valid or not will probably never be known. The administration was terminated and there was some fancy form of equitable assignment of debts to a corporation, "The Litigation Support Group Pty Ltd", which seems to be part of a scheme whereby that corporation would be trustee of some unit trust, certain creditors would take units in the trust and perhaps get paid in due course.
Its full ramifications are not clear, partly because any relevant records are in an office in West Burleigh Heads in Queensland controlled by a man, who may or may not be a director, who has gone overseas.

The court does not appoint a provisional liquidator merely because someone makes an application for it. The court looks to see whether the assets are in jeopardy, whether there is a risk to the rights of the creditors or the members and as to whether the company is under adequate and competent management. It seems to me on the history of this company to date that no-one could be very happy about any of those matters.

On the other hand, it must be made clear that the company does not appear to be trading at the moment and that it may well be that its major asset is a debt owed by Mr Harvey to the company. If that is so, then the chances of the company under the Michael/O'Gorman management being able to recover such debt in the name of the company would appear to me to be slim. This is because it is likely that any solicitor who is instructed to pursue Mr Harvey will have his or her retainer challenged.

That fact alone would tend towards the wisdom of appointing a provisional liquidator. Again, if, as Mr Harvey suggests, the so-called creditors are really also debtors, and the Michael/O'Gorman faction has done a deal with them behind Mr Harvey's back, that is another reason for appointing some independent management.

The court is often reluctant to appoint a provisional liquidator because of the considerable cost. Sometimes that cost cannot be avoided. In the instant case, the plaintiff has given an undertaking as to damages. As Mr Hansen, solicitor for the defendant, pointed out, Mr Harvey's worth may be a bit suspect, but there was no cross-examination on this and I believe I should not assume, until the contrary is demonstrated, that the undertaking is worthless.

Mr O'Brien has been put forward by the plaintiff as the provisional liquidator. Mr O'Brien is well known to the court as a man of competence and integrity. Mr Hansen says that merely because the plaintiff has nominated Mr
O'Brien his client would be uncomfortable. I can understand this. It may be that the next gentleman on the list will not wish to accept the appointment, but I think that it is probably best, without reflecting in any way on Mr
O'Brien's integrity or suitability generally, to appoint the next gentleman on the list this time because under the "swings and roundabouts" system used by judges in appointing liquidators Mr O'Brien's turn will come in due course.

The next person on my list is Mr Javorsky of Pannell Kerr Forster, of level 6, York Street, Sydney. Therefore, subject to Mr Javorsky accepting the appointment, I will make an order that he be appointed provisional liquidator of the company.

I note that the plaintiff by his counsel gives to the court the usual undertaking as to damages, which I have accepted as the price for appointing the provisional liquidator.

I make order 3 in the notice of motion filed 8 May 1996, substituting Mr
Javorsky's name and I stand the summons over to the Registrar's 11 o'clock list on 11 June 1996. Costs are reserved.
 * * * 
