

Great China Metal Industries Co Ltd versus Malaysian International Shipping
Corporation Berhad [1996] NSWSC 267 (12 July 1996) 
GREAT CHINA METAL INDUSTRIES CO LTD versus MALAYSIAN INTERNATIONAL SHIPPING
CORPORATION BERHAD /93; AD 4/91 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, CLARKE, SHELLER JJA 
CATCHWORDS: ADMIRALTY - breach of contract of carriage negligence - damage to cargo - "perils of the sea" - difference between United States/Canadian conception and Anglo/Australian conception - loss by peril of the sea not precluded where heavy weather reasonably foreseeable - The Xantho [(1887) 12 App Cas 503] 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
The respondent's ship was engaged by the appellant to carry a cargo of aluminium can body stock from Sydney to Keelung late in 1989. During the course of the journey, the cargo was damaged.

The appellant sued the respondent in admiralty to recover damages for breach of contract of carriage and negligence. It alleged that the respondent was in breach of its obligations under Article III Rules 1 and 2 of the Hague Rules.
In its defence, the respondent referred to Article IV Rule 2 in so far as it provided that the carrier should not be responsible for loss or damage arising out of negligence in navigation, perils of the sea or insufficiency of packing. The appellant asserted in reply that the damage was caused by the negligence of the respondent both in the loading and navigation of the ship.

Carruthers J found that the damage to the cargo was occasioned by "perils of the sea". In arriving at this conclusion, his Honour said that the court had to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the proximate cause of the damage to the plaintiff's cargo was a specific fortuitous accident or casualty of the seas rather than some other cause such as the ordinary action of the wind and waves and wear and tear. His Honour also found that the appellant failed to discharge its onus of proving that the respondent was in breach of Article III, that there was any negligence on the part of the ship or that the ship was not seaworthy.
 
HELD . The term "peril of the sea" does not apply to damage or wear and tear resulting from the natural and inevitable action of the wind and waves. But loss by peril of the sea is not limited to loss resulting from extreme and unexpectedly violent weather, nor does the reasonable expectation of violent weather preclude fortuitous damage to cargo from being regarded as loss resulting from a peril of the sea.

The Xantho [(1887) 12 App Cas 503] per Lord
Herschell.
The United States-Canadian conception of a "peril of the sea" is that it involves an event of an extreme nature or a consequence of some irresistible force. It is not necessary, according to the Anglo-Australian conception, that the loss or cause of the loss should be extraordinary. It is the damage to cargo that is the focus of consideration. Thus, even if heavy weather conditions were reasonably foreseeable, damage resulting from such conditions may still be damage resulting from perils of the sea.

Canada Rice Mills Ltd versus Union Marine and General Industrial Limited [[1940]
AC 55] per
Lord Wright; Shipping Corporation of India versus Gamlen Chemical Co (Australasia)
Pty Limited <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 142] at 168 per Mason and Wilson JJ.
It is generally necessary to consider whether any negligence on the part of the ship was demonstrated, to determine whether the damage resulted from perils of the sea. The two issues cannot be considered in isolation. Liability will depend on whether a reasonable shipowner, in the respondent's position, would have foreseen that the voyage being undertaken involved a risk of damaging the cargo and, if so, what it would have done in response to the risk.
It was open to the trial judge on the evidence to conclude that the damage to the cargo was caused by a peril of the sea. The appellant did not establish any of the matters which would have defeated the perils of the sea exception.

ORDER 
Appeal dismissed with costs 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Sheller JA. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons for those orders. I will add only some brief observations upon one point which was argued for the appellant. It concerns a difference in approach to the "perils of the sea" exception in the Hague Rules as between Australian and English courts, on the one hand, and North American courts on the other.

The relevant immunity, conferred upon the carrier, relates to loss or damage to cargo arising or resulting from perils of the sea.

When it is asserted that the immunity applies, the possibility that the loss or damage arose or resulted from other, or concurrent causes, will ordinarily arise for consideration. In a case such as the present the most obvious alternative possibilities, favourable to the cargo interests, are unseaworthiness, or negligence in the loading or stowage of cargo. The possibility of act, neglect or default of the master in the navigation or in the management of the ship is the subject of another immunity.

As was pointed out by Mason and Wilson JJ in Shipping Corporation of India
Ltd versus Gamlen Chemical Co. A/Asia Pty Ltd ((1980) <case>; [147 CLR 142] at -166), there is a difference between the Anglo-Australian conception of "perils of the sea" and the United States-Canadian conception.

In that case Stephen J reserved his opinion on whether an event or circumstance can qualify as a peril of the sea if it is foreseeable and could have been guarded against. His Honour's reservation, which was not shared by the other members of the court (see Gibbs J at 149, Mason and Wilson JJ at 166 and Aickin J at 168), may have reflected a preference for the North American approach, for reasons of policy of the kind he gave in Port Jackson
Stevedoring Pty Ltd versus Salmond & Spraggon (Aust) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1978) 139 CLR 231] at 258 - 260. Perhaps his Honour considered that the law, as developed in England, reflected "the interests of great fleet-owning nations".
However, the High Court has held that the law on this matter is the same in
Australia as in England.

The approach taken by Carruthers J at first instance in the present case was orthodox, and reflected English and Australian authority. It is the damage to cargo which is the focus of consideration. To use the words of Lord Herschell in The Xantho [[1887] 12 App Cas 503] at 530, such damage arose directly from the action of the sea; it was not due to wear and tear nor to the operation of any cause ordinarily incidental to the voyage and therefore to be anticipated. Nor, on the findings of Carruthers J, did the damage result from unseaworthiness or negligence of a kind which would take away the carrier's immunity.

In Canada Rice Mills Ltd versus Union Marine and General Industrial Ltd [[1941]
AC 55] at 67 - 69 Lord Wright, delivering the judgment of the Privy Council in a Canadian appeal, rejected the North American view, saying: "The view of Sloan JA seems to be that there was no peril of the sea because, in his opinion, the weather encountered was normal, and such as to be normally expected on a voyage of that character, and that there was no weather bad enough to endanger the safety of the ship if the ventilators had not been closed. But these are not the true tests ....." 
His Lordship then went on, in the passage quoted by Sheller JA in his reasons, to explain that, even though the incidence and force of a storm is not exceptional, damage to cargo resulting from the storm may be damage resulting from perils of the sea.

It was well open to Carruthers J to make a finding of loss or damage arising or resulting from perils of the sea, and the appellant has not demonstrated that this Court should reverse that finding.
 
CLARKE JA: I agree with the reasons and orders of Sheller JA.
 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
In late 1989 part of a cargo of aluminium can body stock on the ship Bunga Seroja, bound from Sydney to Keelung for delivery to Great China Metal Industries Co Limited (GCM), was damaged. GCM sued the shipowner, Malaysian International Shipping Corporation Berhad (MIS), in admiralty to recover damages for breach of the contract of carriage and negligence. The contract was evidenced by a bill of lading dated 5 October 1989 and was subject to the Hague Rules. The trial judge, Carruthers J, found that damage was "undoubtedly occasioned" to the consignment during the voyage but was satisfied that it arose or resulted from perils of the sea. Accordingly he entered judgment in favour of MIS. This is an appeal by GCM from that decision.

BACKGROUND FACTS 
The Bunga Seroja was built in 1972 as a conventional cargo ship and converted in 1983 to a cellular container ship. She was of 10,812 gross registered tonnage and capable of carrying 574 twenty foot equivalent units (TEU's). The subject cargo was shipped in ten 20 ft FCL containers said to contain "40 cases of aluminium can body stock in coils alloy". In fact the method of packing was not in cases but by fixing each coil to a pallet. Four were stowed to a container. The containers were packed by Strang International Pty Limited, which was the shipper named in the bill of lading as agent for Comalco Aluminium Limited. Property in the goods duly passed to GCM.

Each coil weighed about 5 tonnes so that a fully loaded container weighed over tonnes. The coils were strapped with steel bands and wrapped with aluminium sheeting to avoid water damage. After four coils had been placed in a container, timber dunnage was nailed to the floor of the container to avoid lateral movement. However in extreme weather conditions it was possible for coils to jump vertically due to the pitching, rolling, and, particularly, pounding of the ship. Once one coil jumped, all the coils in the container were at risk of damage. The method of packing was consistent with normal well established practice for world wide voyages. Carruthers J was not satisfied that there was any insufficiency of packing within the meaning of Article IV
Rule 2 (n) of the Hague Rules.

At the time the Bunga Seroja was engaged in the MISC Australia/Asia service.
The section of the voyage was Sydney/Melbourne/Burnie/Fremantle/Keelung. The
Master, Captain Gurcharan Singh, had begun his seagoing career in 1978 as a scholarship cadet with MIS, taken his first command in May 1988 and served consistently as a master until January 1991 when he was appointed MIS's marine superintendent.

MIS's administrative structure for the loading and discharge of containers onto and from its vessels on the Australian coast can be described briefly.
The central planner was based in Melbourne and co-ordinated the loading and discharge of vessels in Australian ports. Terminal planners were located at container terminals on the Australian coast. All planners had available to them sophisticated technological facilities. Basically, cargo planning was shore based, because of the high degree of efficiency required to manage a fleet of container vessels. Information relevant to stability arrangements was distributed and co-ordinated between the central planner, the terminal planners and the ship. When the ship was in port, liaison took place by telephone or personally. Of course the ultimate responsibility for the stability of the ship remained with the master.

In the early hours of 3 October 1989 the Bunga Seroja berthed at the Port
Botany terminal. The subject cargo was loaded into the hold at Bay 5, in which containers were stacked five high in tiers. At 2400 on 4 October the ship sailed for Melbourne where she berthed on the evening of 6 October. After discharging and loading, in the afternoon of 8 October she departed for
Burnie. Before leaving Melbourne the crew received a weather bulletin verifying a gale warning for the southern oceans.

Carruthers J found that the ship encountered heavy weather on the passage to
Burnie, with winds reaching gale to strong gale force. At 2105 on 8 October four containers above deck in Bay 9 were damaged and one container was swept overboard. Early on 9 October the ship berthed at Burnie and at 2148 on the same day, after discharging and loading, sailed for Fremantle. Carruthers J described the first part of this section of the voyage as follows: "Having entered Bass Strait she set a course of 281deg.T to cross the Great
Australian Bight. Captain Singh anticipated bad weather during the voyage and whilst crossing the Bight the ship received weather bulletins confirming gale warnings. As there is no land mass between the South Pole and the southern
Australian coast, a storm in the `Roaring Forties' will cause a strong swell to come from the west-south-west. Although during the transit of the Bight by the Bunga Seroja the wind generally came from that direction, nevertheless, as one would expect, the wind changed direction from time to time.

The weather deteriorated and the ship was rolling and pitching very heavily and pounding frequently to high seas and very heavy swells. She was shipping seas frequently on deck. It was not possible to take soundings due to the dangerous seas and for the same reason Captain Singh would not permit members of the ship's crew to go on deck in order to check the lashings.

Captain Singh attempted generally to maintain the course of 281deg.T and to keep the sea about two points on the port bow. He constantly adjusted the course and speed to maintain the ship in the most comfortable position in the prevailing conditions. He was concerned, amongst other things, to avoid a rolling pattern which could develop into synchronisation which would put the ship at risk of rolling right over. Indeed, despite the precautions which the master was taking, the ship's deck edge was at times immersed - the deck edge immersion angle being 22.6deg..

The charts which were upon the bridge at the relevant time were not available for production at the hearing. A copy of the relevant deck log book was, however, available. It discloses that as from 13 October the ship was proceeding at reduced speed and on manual steering. The log contains frequent entries such as the following: `Various courses as per master's order to reduce excessive pounding and rolling'.

The critical range for the ship's engines (which range is to be avoided) is 59 to 72 rpm. Captain Singh resolved that he would, accordingly, reduce the ship's speed to about 84/85 rpm. This seemed (according to his evidence) the only viable option available to him. The effective speed of the ship at those revolutions was about 8 knots. The cruising speed of the ship under normal conditions is 19 knots at 118 rpm." 
In evidence Captain Singh described the problems he faced and how he approached them. He explained that he could not go at full speed at any time without risk that the ship would break up. Accordingly he reduced speed. He also altered course to try and find "the best medium that I think where I can sort of ride the storm - the swell I am sorry, the swell so I can ride the storm reduce the pitch and also at the same time also help me reduce the swell. By doing that I kept changing the speed of the ship and this is indicated by the RPM's, revolutions per minute of the propeller and having to do that and having to look at the situation and with the wind and sea condition changing through the period".

He said that the wind was not coming consistently from one direction but generally from the south, west, south-west direction "but it kept going aft so there could be an incident where I could be happy on a certain course and I am lying very comfortable then all of a sudden, you know, I find that I am not." 
He did not want to get into "a synchronised movement". All this was going on right from the start of the voyage. Captain Singh said: "In between we had some good experience where I would say the water still rough but bearable to what we had experienced and on occasions like that when it was safe we put the ship in a safe turn her around and go out on deck, have a look every day. I think we did, for the first two days we were able to do that, spend some time going out but towards the 12th onwards the weather and the wind was tremendous. It was not good and safe to send any men, any of the seamen out, anybody out there because we would extremely endanger their life and chance of an accident or of being swept overboard.

So during this period of reducing and alteration of courses this was done at my discretion. I would spend time, considerable time was spent on the bridge throughout this period and when you felt you tried and when you got a certain course where you were comfortable you stayed on that." 
Carruthers J found that by 14 October the wind had reached force 11 on the
Beaufort scale. For this number the wind is described as "violent storm" and the sea criterion as "exceptionally high waves ...... the sea is completely covered with long white patches of foam lying along the direction of the wind.
Everywhere the edges of the wave crests are blown into froth. Visibility affected." On 14 October, according to his Honour, the wind began to change from westerly to west south-west, eventually becoming south-westerly. The
Master said that thereupon he changed course to about 270deg.T to keep the weather about two points on the port bow, thus making the ship as comfortable as possible in the prevailing conditions. By the afternoon the vessel had reached the south-west corner of Australia and was maintaining a course of approximately 281deg.T, before altering course to round Cape Leeuwin.
Carruthers J said: "The deck log records that at 1600, the wind was west-south-west at force /11. The ship was proceeding at reduced speed and maintaining hand steering.
At 1715 (when the wind was force 10) it was noticed that a 40 container at the bottom of the above deck stow in bay six had buckled on one side and the door had come apart. In addition, a tie-rod had come away. The container was seen to move about in its position. At 1745 the tie-rods parted on another container at the bottom of the same stow and one of the door panels came apart. The ship's speed was reduced further. At 1835 the two damaged containers at the bottom of bay six collapsed. As the containers in the above deck stow in bay six were stacked in three tiers and secured with turn- buckles, tie-rods and bridge fittings, they fell forward in tandem. Three containers were immediately washed overboard and by 2200 a total of eight 40 containers had gone overboard. Captain Singh described, in evidence, how the above deck containers were pounded by the seas which were shipped on board.

Damage was also observed to have been occasioned to one container in the hold of bay six and three containers in the hold of bay five, including one of the containers which is the subject of these proceedings. By reason of the configuration of the containers in the hold it was not possible for the ship's personnel to examine the other containers in the hold of bay five.

Independently of the damage occasioned to the containers, structural damage was caused to the ship by the heavy weather." 
On the evening of 15 October the ship berthed at Fremantle. Upon arrival
Captain Singh forwarded MIS at Kuala Lumpur a report relating to the loss and damage which had occurred. Upon inspection it was found that the contents of two of GCM's containers were damaged. In one, stowed in the fourth tier from the top of the hold, two coils were damaged. On 14 October the crew had observed that this container was damaged. The other container, stowed in the top tier in the hold, contained three damaged coils. The ship proceeded to
Keelung where it arrived on 2 November. The contents of two further containers, one stowed in the second tier, and the other in the top tier, were found to be damaged and were a total loss. GCM's claim was for the loss of or damage to the contents of four containers.

PLEADING 
In its statement of claim GCM alleged that, in breach of its duty to deliver the goods in the same good order and condition as when shipped, MIS delivered part of the consignment in a damaged condition and that the damage was caused by MIS's breach of its obligations under the Hague Rules, particularly Article
III Rules 1 and 2 which, relevantly, bound the carrier, before and at the beginning of the voyage, to exercise due diligence to make the ship seaworthy and properly man, equip and supply the ship and, "[s]ubject to the provisions of Article IV" properly and carefully to load, handle, stow, carry, keep, care for and discharge the goods carried.

In its defence MIS relied upon Article IV Rule 2 in so far as it provided that the carrier should not be responsible for loss or damage arising or resulting from (a) act, neglect or default of the master or servants of the carrier in the navigation or in the management of the ship, (c) perils, dangers and accidents of the sea and (n) insufficiency of packing.

ISSUES AT TRIAL 
MIS did not dispute that the contents of the containers had been damaged in its custody. Carruthers J said that its case was quite simple. Upon departure from Burnie the vessel was in every respect fitted for the contemplated voyage, bearing in mind the anticipated weather conditions. His Honour said: "It was submitted that the proximate cause of the damage to the plaintiff's cargo was a specific fortuitous accident arising during the voyage by reason of the excessive weather conditions. It was contended that by reason of the pounding of the ship one or more coils in each of the four subject containers jumped vertically, thereby leaving scope for the other coils within the container to move and thereby suffer damage." 
GCM's response as spelled out in its outline of submissions, which his Honour set out, fell under the following heads:
The heavy weather encountered was not a peril of the sea because it was not merely foreseeable but expected; see The Tuxpan [(1991) AMC 2432] at 2438;
Charles Goodfellow Lumber Sales Limited versus Verreault [(1971) 1 Ll LR ] at 188-189;
MIS had failed to prove that it could not have guarded or had taken all steps to guard against such heavy weather;
MIS negligently failed to reduce the metacentric height (GM) which, both at the commencement of and during the voyage, was too large and not in accordance with the Master's instruction. This step could and should have been taken to counter the expected weather and to lessen damage. Failure to take this step made the ship unseaworthy;
MIS had not proved that it had navigated the vessel at a speed and course appropriate to the conditions so as to protect the cargo, particularly having regard to the absence of the preferred GM;
MIS had failed in load planning to carry out the Master's instructions and thereby had failed to discharge its obligations under Article III Rule 1 of the Hague Rules.

In dealing with these submissions his Honour said: "In a case such as the present, it is generally necessary to consider whether any negligence by the carrier has been demonstrated, to determine whether the carrier has established that the loss or damage arose or resulted from perils of the sea. In other words, the two issues cannot generally be considered in isolation. Every peril of the sea case must turn on its own particular facts.
Whether or not a peril of the sea has been demonstrated is generally an inference to be drawn from the evidence. There must, of course, be some element of the fortuitous or unexpected to be found somewhere in the facts and circumstances causing the loss. However, it is not the weather by itself that is fortuitous, it is the particular damage occasioned to the cargo due to the weather, which is something beyond the ordinary wear and tear of the voyage.
See NE Neter and Co Limited versus Licenses and General Insurance Co Limited [[1944] 1 All ER 341], at 343 per Tucker J (as he then was).

Thus, in the present case the Court must be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the proximate cause of the damage to the plaintiff's cargo was a specific fortuitous accident or casualty of the seas rather than some other cause such as the ordinary action of the wind and waves and wear and tear. The defendant will have failed to discharge the onus upon it if it does no more than adduce evidence of facts which are equally consistent with the hypothesis that the damage arose or resulted from the inevitable action of the sea as with the supposition that the damage resulted from the peril of the seas." 
His Honour then dealt under discrete headings with the stability issue and the ship's course and speed. He rejected the argument that the Master's preferred
GM was not achieved as supporting the contention that there was negligence and/or a breach of Article III Rule 1 which defeated the perils of the sea exception. He was unable to conclude that any deficiencies in the conduct of the ship or care of her cargo by Captain Singh had been demonstrated.

Carruthers J said "the evidence satisfies me that, bearing in mind the anticipated weather conditions: when the Bunga Seroja sailed from Burnie she was fit in all respects for the voyage; the defendant properly and carefully loaded, handled, stowed, carried, kept and cared for the subject cargo; there was no neglect or default of the master or other servants of the defendant in the management of the ship or cargo; and 
I am satisfied that the damage to the subject cargo was occasioned by perils of the sea, in that, the pounding of the ship by reason of the heavy weather caused the coils within the container to be dislodged and thereby sustain damage." 
GROUNDS OF APPEAL 
GCM argued its appeal under a number of heads, both factual and legal. Some of these overlapped. Broadly, Carruthers J was said to have erred in finding that the heavy weather encountered was a peril of the sea, and in finding no negligence on the part of the ship. GCM attacked many of his Honour's findings and submitted that the weather encountered was both accurately forecast and anticipated by the ship and that his Honour * applied the wrong test of causation; * wrongly held that GCM had the onus of proving negligence; * wrongly concluded that negligence was determined by reference to whether the conduct in question was acceptable to the Master; * erred in finding that no suggestion was made or could be made that the ship was unseaworthy at any stage of the voyage and on departing Burnie the ship was fit in all respects for the voyage; and * should have held that MIS had neither carefully nor properly loaded or carried the cargo and was in breach of Article III Rule 2. 
NOTICE OF CONTENTION 
In reliance on Article IV Rules 2 (a) and (n) the respondent contended that the damage to the cargo arose or resulted from an act or default of the Master or of its servants in the navigation or management of the ship or from insufficiency of packing.

CAUSATION TEST 
By proving, in reliance upon a clean bill of lading duly endorsed or otherwise, that the goods were shipped sound and that they were delivered damaged, GCM made out a prima facie case of liability or a case from which a breach by MIS of its obligations under the contract of carriage would be inferred. In considering whether the perils of the sea exception exculpated MIS, Carruthers J, GCM submitted, applied the wrong test. His Honour said that the court must be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the proximate cause of the damage to the plaintiff's cargo was a specific fortuitous accident or casualty of the seas rather than some other cause such as the ordinary action of the wind and waves and wear and tear (my emphasis). In March versus E & MH Stramare Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506] at 509, Mason CJ said: "In philosophy and science, the concept of causation has been developed in the context of explaining phenomena by reference to the relationship between conditions and occurrences. In law, on the other hand, problems of causation arise in the context of ascertaining or apportioning legal responsibility for a given occurrence. The law does not accept John Stewart Mills' definition of cause as the sum of a conditions which are jointly sufficient to produce it.
Thus, at law, a person may be responsible for damage when his or her wrongful conduct is one of a number of conditions sufficient to produce that damage: see McLean versus Bell [(1932) 147 LT 262] at 264 per
Lord Wright; Sherman versus Nymboida Collieries Pty Limited <case>; [(1963) 109 CLR 580] at 590-1, per Windeyer J." 
The use of various epithets to identify a cause sufficient at law to engender liability, though understandable, has not proved helpful and in many cases leads to confusion. Windeyer J discussed the uncertainty of nomenclature in
National Insurance Company of New Zealand Limited versus Espagne <case>; [(1961) 105 CLR 569] at 590 and following, referring at 592 to the maxim in jure non remota causa sed proxima spectatur and Lord Bacon's famous paraphrase of it: "It were infinite for the law to consider the causes of causes, and their impulsions one of another; therefore it contenteth itself with the immediate cause, and judgeth of acts by that, without looking to any further degree".

In March versus E & MH Stramare Pty Limited, at 515, Mason CJ said that the cause of a particular occurrence is a question of fact which, in the words of
Lord Reid in Stapley versus Gypsum Mines Limited <case>; [[1953] AC ] at 681, "must be determined by applying commonsense to the facts of each particular case". The majority of the other members of the court agreed. If, applying that test, the loss or damage, in the present case, arose or resulted from perils of the sea (as Lord Herschell pointed out in the Xantho [[1887] 12
AppCas 503] at 508, the words "dangers and accidents of the sea" cannot have a narrower interpretation), neither the carrier nor the ship was responsible. If, on the other hand, the loss or damage arose or resulted in whole or in part from the carrier's negligence, the loss did not fall within the exception. Read as a whole, I am not persuaded that Carruthers J approached the matter any differently.

ONUS OF PROVING NEGLIGENCE 
A shipowner does not enjoy the protection of the exception "perils of the sea" where the loss is caused by the shipowner's negligence or that of its servants or agents save in so far, relevantly, as protection is given under para (a) of Article IV Rule 2; see Scrutton on Charterparties and Bills of Lading, 19th ed, at 448. However if the loss apparently falls within the exception, the burden of showing that the shipowner is not entitled to the benefit of the exception, on the ground of negligence, is upon the person so contending. In The Glendarroch [[1894] P 226] at 231 Lord Esher MR said: "When you come to the exceptions, amongst others, there is that one, perils of the seas. There are no words which say `perils of the sea not caused by the negligence of the captain or crew.' You have got to read those words in by necessary inference. How can you read them in? They can only be read in, in my opinion, as an exception upon the exceptions. You must read in, `Except the losses by perils of the sea, unless or except that loss is the result of the negligence of the servants of the owners.' 
That being so, I think that according to the ordinary course of practice each party would have to prove the part of the matter which lies upon him. The plaintiffs would have to prove the contract and the non-delivery. If they leave that in doubt, of course they fail. The defendants' answer is, `yes; but the case was brought within the exception - within its ordinary meaning.' That lies upon them. Then the plaintiffs have a right to say there are exceptional circumstances, viz., that the damage was brought about by the negligence of the defendants' servants, and it seems to me that it is for the plaintiffs to make out that second exception." 
The plaintiffs' declaration stated the bill of lading and alleged non- delivery. According to his Lordship, strictly speaking, it could not properly state anything about negligence, because negligence was immaterial. The shipowner's plea followed the terms of the exception construed in their ordinary sense, that the loss was a loss by perils of the sea. The replication was " ....... true there was a loss by perils of the sea within the prima facie exception; but that was brought about by the negligence of your servants - ie, by your captain and crew." 
In Gamlen Chemical Co (Australasia) Pty Limited versus Shipping Corporation of
India Limited [(1978) 2 NSWLR 12] at 23-24
Samuels JA, adopting what Lord Esher said, affirmed that the proper sequence of pleading must follow the burden of proof. If the carrier proves the damage falls within the exception it is then open to the cargo owner to meet the exception by proving negligence on the part of the carrier, or of those for whose fault the carrier is responsible. In the High Court (Shipping
Corporation of India versus Gamlen Chemical Co (Australasia) Pty Limited <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 142] at 168) Mason and Wilson JJ agreed with Samuels JA that the correct sequence of pleading was set out in the judgment of Lord Esher. Gibbs and Aickin JJ concurred. See also per Stephen J at 153. The appellant's submission in this case that the onus lay on the respondent, contrary to what
Carruthers J held, should be rejected.

PERILS OF THE SEA 
Wear and tear resulting from the natural and inevitable action of the winds and waves is not a loss resulting from a peril of the sea. But that does not mean that loss by peril of the sea is limited to loss the result of extreme and unexpectedly violent weather. Nor does the reasonable expectation of violent weather on a particular voyage preclude fortuitous loss to the cargo, when the vessel encounters such weather, being regarded as loss resulting from a peril of the sea. In each case the question is whether the accident should reasonably have been foreseen and, if so, whether steps should reasonably have been taken to prevent it.

In the Xantho at 509 Lord Herschell explained the meaning of the term "perils of the sea" as used in marine policies and bills of lading. At 509, speaking first of a marine policy, his Lordship said: "I think it clear that the term `perils of the sea' does not cover every accident or casualty which may happen to the subject-matter of the insurance on the sea. It must be a peril `of' the sea. Again, it is well settled that it is not every loss or damage of which the sea is the immediate cause that is covered by these words. They do not protect, for example, against that natural and inevitable action of the winds and waves, which results in what may be described as wear and tear. There must be some casualty, something which could not be foreseen as one of the necessary incidents of the adventure. The purpose of the policy is to secure an indemnity against accidents which may happen, not against events which must happen. It was contended that those losses only were losses by perils of the sea, which were occasioned by extraordinary violence of the winds or waves. I think this is too narrow a construction of the words, and it is certainly not supported by the authorities, or by common understanding. It is beyond question, that if a vessel strikes upon a sunken rock in fair weather and sinks, this is a loss by perils of the sea. Any a loss by foundering, owing to a vessel coming into collision with another vessel, even when the collision results from the negligence of that other vessel, falls within the same category." 
Some discussion followed about whether the words "perils of the sea" occurring in a bill of lading, or other contract of carriage, must receive a different interpretation from that which is given to them in a marine policy. At 510 his
Lordship said: " ....... in the case of a bill of lading you may sometimes look behind the immediate cause, and the shipowner is not protected by the exception of perils of the sea in every case in which he would be entitled to recover on his policy, on the grounds that there has been a loss by such peril. But I do not think this difference arises from the words `perils of the sea' having a different meaning in the two instruments, but from the context or general scope and purpose of the contract of carriage excluding in certain cases the operation of the exception." 
His Lordship cited with approval from the judgment of Willes J in Grill v
General Iron Screw Collier Company [[1866] LR 1 CP 600] at -612: ".......I may say that a policy of insurance is an absolute contract to indemnify for loss by perils of the sea, and it is only necessary to see whether the loss comes within the terms of the contract, and is caused by perils of the sea; the fact that the loss is partly caused by things not distinctly perils of the sea, does not prevent its coming within the contract.
In the case of a bill of lading it is different, because there the contract is to carry with reasonable care, unless prevented by the excepted perils. If the goods are not carried with reasonable care, and are consequently lost by perils of the sea, it becomes necessary to reconcile the two parts of the instrument, and this is done by holding that if the loss through perils of the sea is caused by the previous default of the shipowner, he is liable for this breach of his covenant." 
In Hamilton Fraser and Co versus Pandorf and Co [[1887] 12 AppCas 518] at 527 Lord
Herschell said that the contention that those losses only were losses by perils of the sea, which were occasioned by extraordinary violence of the wind or waves, put too narrow a construction on the words. In Canada Rice Mills
Limited versus Union Marine and General Insurance Company Limited [[1941] AC ] at 68 and following, Lord Wright, after referring to Lord Herschell's speech, said: "Where there is an accidental incursion of seawater into a vessel at a part of the vessel, and in a manner, where seawater is not expected to enter in the ordinary course of things, and there is consequent damage to the thing insured, there is prima facie a loss by perils of the sea. The accident may consist in some negligent act, such as improper opening of a valve, or a hole made in a pipe by mischance, or it may be that seawater is admitted by a stress of weather or some like cause bringing the sea over openings ordinarily not exposed to the sea or, even without stress of weather, by the vessel heeling over owing to some accident, or by the breaking of hatches or other coverings. These are merely a few amongst many possible instances in which there may be a fortuitous incursion of seawater. It is the fortuitous entry of the seawater which is the peril of the sea in such cases. Whether in any particular case there is such a loss is a question of fact for the jury. There are many deck openings in a vessel through which the seawater is not expected or intended to enter and, if it enters, only enters by accident or casualty.
The cowl ventilators are such openings. If they were not closed at the proper time to prevent seawater coming into the hold, and seawater does accidentally come in and do damage, that is just as much an accident of navigation (even though due to negligence, which is immaterial in a contract of insurance) as the improper opening of a valve or other sea connection. .......... On any voyage a ship may, though she need not necessarily, encounter a storm, and a storm is a normal incident on such a passage as the Segundo was making, but if in consequence of the storm cargo is damaged by the incursion of the sea, it would be for the jury to say whether the damage was or was not due to a peril of the sea. They are entitled to take a broad commonsense view of the whole position. How slight a degree of the accidental or unexpected will justify a finding of loss by perils of the sea is illustrated by Mountain v
Whittle [[1921] 1 AC 615], where a houseboat, the seams of which above the water line had become defective, was towed in fine weather and in closed water in order to be repaired. A powerful tug was employed and this caused a bow wave so high as to force water up into the defective seams. `Sinking by such a wave' said Lord Sumner at 630, `seems to me a fortuitous casualty; whether formed by passing steamers or between tug and tow, it was beyond the ordinary action of wind and wave, or the ordinary incidents of such towage.' In the same way storms at sea may be frequent, in some cases seasonal, like typhoons in the China seas, a ship may escape them, and they are outside the ordinary accidents of wind and sea. They may happen on the voyage, but it cannot be said that they must happen. In their Lordships' judgment, it cannot be predicated that where damage is caused by a storm, even though its incidence or force is not exceptional, a finding of loss by perils of the sea may not be justified." 
As the Canadian Supreme Court in Charles Goodfellow Lumber Sales Limited v
Verreault, Hovington and Verreault Navigation Inc [[1971] 1 Lloyd's Rep ] at 189-90, Lord Wright's judgment should not be read as being in conflict with the law stated by Lord Herschell in the Xantho. Not every loss or damage of which the sea is the immediate cause is covered by the words "perils of the sea". In NE Neter and Co Limited versus Licences and General
Insurance Co Limited [(1944) 1 All ER 341] at 343
Tucker J, as he then was, said after referring to the Xantho amongst other cases: "I think it is clearly erroneous to say that, because the weather was such as might reasonably be anticipated, there can be no peril of the sea. There must, of course, be some element of the fortuitous or unexpected to be found somewhere in the facts and circumstances causing the loss, and I think such an element exists when you find that properly stowed casks, in good condition when loaded, have become stoved in as a result of the straining and labouring of a ship in heavy weather. It is not the weather by itself that is fortuitous; it is the stoving in due to the weather, which is something beyond the ordinary wear and tear of the voyage." 
Mr King, who appeared for GCM, invited this Court to apply the view, adopted in the United States and Canada, that a peril of the sea involves an event of an extreme nature or a consequence of some irresistible force. However in
Shipping Corporation of India versus Gamlen Chemical Co (Australasia) Pty Limited at 165-6 Mason and Wilson JJ said that: "the question whether the carrier is entitled to rely upon Article 4 rule 2 to protect him from loss or damage will require to be answered by reference to all the circumstances of a particular case. While this would be so irrespective of the exception upon which the carrier relied, it is particularly so in the case of perils of the sea, a term which is apt to cover such a wide range of mishaps at sea. There is a difference between the Anglo-
Australian conception of `perils of the sea' and the United States-Canadian conception. According to the latter, `perils of the sea' include losses to goods on board which are peculiar to the sea and `are of an extraordinary nature or arise from irresistible force or overwhelming power, and which cannot be guarded against by the ordinary exertions of human skill and patience': The Guilia (1914) 218F 744, adopting Story on Bailments, s512 . In the United Kingdom and Australia it is not necessary that the losses or the cause of losses should be extraordinary (Carver, Carriage by Sea, Vol , 12th ed (1971), s161; Skandia Insurance Co Limited versus Skoljarev <case>; [(1979) 142 CLR 375] at 386-7.) Consequently sea and weather conditions which may reasonably be foreseen and guarded against may constitute a peril of the sea.

What is important for present purposes is that Story's description of `perils of the sea' exclude losses which could be avoided by the carrier's skill and prudence. Despite the broader concept of `perils of the sea' which prevailed in the United Kingdom and Australia a similar result was achieved in cases in which the loss or damage to the goods brought about by the action of the sea would not have occurred but for negligence on the part of the carrier or those for whom he was responsible. It was held, looking beyond the proximate cause, that the effective cause of loss was the carrier's negligence and that accordingly he could not take advantage of the `perils of the sea' exception in the bill of lading (the Xantho; Hamilton Fraser and Co versus Pandorf and
Co.) The United States decisions turn on a narrower conception of `perils of the sea' whereas the English decisions turn rather on the issue of causation, looking more to the requirement that the exception is for loss or damage which results from or arises from `perils of the sea'. But in each case the decisions give effect to the language of the bills of lading that constituted the contract of carriage." 
Despite the appellant's arguments I am not persuaded that there is any basis upon which we should take an approach different to that stated by Mason and
Wilson JJ and applied by Carruthers J.

I think with respect that Carruthers J was right when he said that in a case such as the present "it is generally necessary to consider whether any negligence by the carrier has been demonstrated, to determine whether the carrier has established that the loss or damage arose or resulted from perils of the sea." In other words, the two issues cannot generally be considered in isolation. Not surprisingly, the availability to a carrier of the perils of the sea exception may be determined by application of the words of Lord Reid, when considering foreseeability as an element of negligence, in Overseas
Tankship (UK) Limited versus The Miller Steamship Co Pty Limited (The Wagon Mound <case>; [[1967] 1 AC 617] at 643-4: "If a real risk is one which would occur to the mind of a reasonable man in the position of the defendant's servant and which he would not brush aside as far-fetched, and if the criterion is to be what that reasonable man would have done in the circumstances, then surely he would not neglect such a risk if action to eliminate it presented no difficulty, involved no disadvantage, and required no expense." 
See also Wyong Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47-8. In my opinion the liability of MIS turned upon whether a reasonable shipowner, in the position of MIS, would have foreseen that the voyage being undertaken involved a risk of injury to the cargo and, if so, what it would have done in response to the risk by the exercise of what
Story called the carrier's skill and prudence. Accepting that, on the voyage in question, the weather encountered was not unexpected, did GCM do all that was reasonable to protect the cargo from injury? 
ARTICLE III RULE 1; SEAWORTHINESS 
In Gilroy Sons & Co versus WR Price & Co [[1893] AC 56] at 63 Lord
Herschell said: "Seaworthiness is thus defined by Lord Cairns, in [Steel and Craig versus State
Line Steamship Co [[1877] 3 AppCas 72] at 77]: `That the ship should be in a condition to encounter whatever perils of the sea a ship of that kind, and laden in that way, may be fairly expected to encounter in crossing the Atlantic,' or in performing whatever is the voyage to be performed." 
In Smith Hogg & Company Limited versus Black Sea and Baltic General Insurance
Company Limited [[1940] AC 997] at 1004 Lord Wright discussed the inter-relationship between a carrier's obligation under Article III Rule 1, to make the ship seaworthy and to man, equip and supply her, a carrier's negligence and a carrier's immunity under Article IV Rule 2 (c) for loss or damage arising or resulting from perils of the sea, in the context both of marine insurance and carriage of goods by sea, and said: "In carriage of goods by sea, unseaworthiness does not affect the carrier's liability unless it causes the loss ....... the shipowner will in the absence of valid and sufficient exceptions be liable for a loss occasioned by negligence. Apart from express exceptions, the carrier's contract is to deliver the goods safely. But when the practice of having express exceptions limiting that obligation became common, it was laid down that there were fundamental obligations, which were not affected by the specific exceptions, unless that was made clear by express words. Thus an exception of perils of the sea does not qualify the duty to furnish a seaworthy ship or to carry the goods without negligence; see Paterson Steamships Limited versus Canadian Co- operative Wheat Producers Limited [[1934] AC 538.] From the nature of the contract, the relevant cause of the loss is held to be the unseaworthiness or the negligence as the case may be, not the peril of the sea, where both the breach of the fundamental obligation and the objective peril are co-operating causes. The contractual exception of perils of the sea does not affect the fundamental obligation, unless the contract qualifies the latter in express terms.

To consider these rules, in relation to unseaworthiness, I think the contract may be expressed to be that the shipowner will be liable for any loss in which those other causes covered by exceptions co-operate, if seaworthiness is a cause, or if it is preferred, a real, or effective or actual cause." 
His Lordship quoted from the last edition of Carver's Carriage by Sea, revised by Judge Carver (4th ed) published in 1905. While unseaworthiness might never be the sole cause of loss and was invariably, or almost invariably, only one of several co-operating causes, it was enough if it was "a" cause. At 1005 his
Lordship said: "In this connection I can draw no distinction between cases where the negligent conduct of the Master is a cause and cases in which any other cause, such as perils of the seas, or fire, is a co-operating cause .......... The question is the same in either case, it is, would the disaster not have happened if the ship had fulfilled the obligation of seaworthiness, even though the disaster could not have happened if they had not also been the specific peril or action." 
The appellant submitted that a cause of the damage to the cargo was the unseaworthiness of the vessel.

FINDINGS OF FACT 
Under a number of headings GCM challenged some of the trial Judge's findings and submitted that this Court should itself make findings. As I understand the appellant's argument, the submissions were directed to showing that the ship was unseaworthy, the cargo was improperly stowed, the weather was not so severe as claimed and, on that account, did not amount to a peril of the sea, and the ship was negligently navigated.
 
A. Weather and Sea Conditions 
In the passage I have quoted from his judgment Carruthers J remarked that as there was no land mass between the South Pole and the southern Australian coast, a storm in the "Roaring Forties" would cause a strong swell to come from the west south west. "Although during transit of the Bight by the Bunga Seroja the wind generally came from that direction, nevertheless, as one would expect, the wind changed direction from time to time." His Honour described the swell as "very heavy". When asked to indicate the level of the swell at its maximum point, the Master said "about 10 metres". The deck log suggested a swell of up to 9 metres. Mr King submitted that from 12 to 15 October the swell was consistently from south west, not west south west, and generally at 7 metres and, contrary to the Master's evidence, never 10 metres, and that the wind was "consistently westerly with variations south and north by four points only." The submission about the direction of the swell accords with the log but his Honour was speaking generally and did not suggest otherwise. In my opinion it is of no consequence that his Honour's observations were general and not particular. The deck log for 14 October 1989 entirely supports what his Honour said about the wind direction for that day. For earlier days Mr King's description may be marginally more accurate. The difference is of no significance to the outcome of the appeal. 
Carruthers J said: "By 14 October the wind had reached force eleven on the
Beaufort scale, which describes the wind as a `violent storm'." His Honour set out the sea criterion for force eleven on the scale and observed that force twelve is a hurricane. Mr King submitted that the seas were in conformity with wind direction from west reaching "high" only on three occasions (two on 12
October and one on 14 October) but never reaching "exceptionally high". His
Honour never suggested they did. For the period from 0900 to 1600 hours on 14
October 1989 the deck log recorded 10/11 on the Beaufort scale combined with such remarks as "high seas and very heavy swells, shipping seas frequently on main deck", "very rough seas and very heavy south west swell 8 - 9 metres high" and "frequently shipping seas forward". The point made is inconsequential.

Carruthers J found, correctly on the evidence, that the vessel was shipping seas frequently on deck. He said that it was not possible to take soundings due to the dangerous seas and for the same reason Captain Singh would not permit members of the ship's crew to go on deck in order to check the lashings. Mr King submitted that the failure to take soundings was not explained by heavy weather as in similar conditions on 8 October soundings were taken. There was evidence in the form of the Master's report to MIS of 15
October 1989 that the lashing was checked on 12 October 1989 but not on 13 or October. In a passage I have already quoted the Master said that from 12
October onwards the weather and wind were tremendous and it was neither good nor safe to send anybody out on deck because their lives would be endangered.
This seems eminently reasonable. Any inconsistency in the Master's evidence was not taken up with him in cross examination. It was open to the trial judge to make the finding he did.
 
Mr King submitted that the description of seas on 14 October did not support the ship's estimate of wind strength on the Beaufort scale. Captain Kirkland, MIS's expert, said: "The vessel was in heavy weather conditions from 11 October onwards. On the th she started losing containers over the side. That seemed to be when she was in her worst weather-wise - she appeared to be suffering most at that time with wind force 10 to 11 and vessel rolling and pitching and pounding heavily in high seas and very heavy swell. It would appear to me that the cargo could well have shifted any time from the 11th onward, up to severe weather conditions on the 14th." 
Captain Singh said in evidence: "I think the maximum point we had about ten metres of a swell coming onto us and then we pitched into the sea. At that point, juncture, the sea that height of pitch just flew past the whole ship and I was on the bridge, that is what one hundred metres from where the ship actually plunged in and just went past us without even getting wet really. So that was one of the serious points and at one juncture I think we have recorded we rolled 25 degrees and at that juncture the edge of the ship actually was parallel to the sea. The deck edge was immersed by water ......." 
No questions were put to the Master about the accuracy of the ship's estimate of the wind strength.

In his report of 15 October 1989 the Master stated that on 14 October the ship rolled up to 35deg. at times. Mr King submitted that this was inconsistent with log readings which referred to "max roll" as 25deg. on 14 October. The
Master was cross examined about this and adhered to his statement in the report. A reading of his evidence does not cause me to doubt the explanation he gave for the omission of the 35deg. roll from the log. In any event the occurrence of the greater roll was not mentioned in the trial judge's conclusions. This was put as one in a summary of what Mr King described as "the more obvious exaggerations as to weather by the Master." These alleged exaggerations also included that the swell reached 10 metres, that seamen did not go out onto the deck from 12 October onwards, that the Master feared the ship would turn over, that the deck was immersed on the worst occasions during the storms, that the Master was unable to sound tanks after 11 October and that the ship adopted various speeds and courses to Master's orders from 0100 on 11 to 15 October. No questions were put to the Master that he had exaggerated the weather conditions. Questions were put to him about the speed and course of the vessel at various times.

Not content with the above, Mr King submitted that the deck log on 14 October overstated the severity of the weather. To support this Mr King asserted that the log was not written up properly or appeared to have been written up later from working logs and that various matters were not recorded. Some questions were put to the Master about the keeping of the deck log. No questions were put to suggest that the deck log exaggerated the severity of the weather. Mr
King said that the judgment revealed significant errors on this issue and that his Honour failed critically to examine the Master's assertions as to the weather states and quoted long extracts of the evidence without scrutinising it and in some respects gave greater emphasis to the peril than the Master himself. There is nothing to suggest that the trial judge did not carefully and completely consider the evidence before him. I would reject this submission.

B. Navigation 
Again bereft of any evidence or cross examination beyond the workings of some undisclosed hand in producing tables for the appeal, Mr King submitted that the Master's assertion that the vessel's normal cruising speed was 118 RPM equivalent to 19 knots was wrong and that the vessel's normal cruising speed was 95.46 rpm at 15.87 knots, and that his assertion that he reduced his speed from 10 to 14 October from the normal speed of 118 RPM and 19 knots to about 85-88 RPM range to prevent foundering was "demonstrably false". The following is part of Mr King's written submission: "The Master also asserted that he could not reduce the speed further than the -88 RPM range because that would put him in his `critical range' of 59-72
RPM, whereas it was both theoretically and practically possible for him to proceed in that range (as he did for eight hours after the loss of containers overboard on 14 and 15 October - 65.3 RPM from 200 on 14 October and 61.9 RPM from 0000 on 15 October, see the engine log); further, the vessel's manual made it clear it could have achieved 8 knots at 45 RPM at slow ahead and higher speeds up to 59 RPM; Singh's answer(s) in cross examination are obviously false in two respects, namely that slow ahead is 45 RPM, not 40 RPM, and 1600 on 14 October was well before the watches referred to in the engine room log; in short, Singh's explanation for not sailing at reduced speed is unsustainable and was designed to obfuscate the fact that he did not appreciably reduce speed until after the stow fell and the storm began to abate." 
Questions were put to the Master about use of the vessel's engines within the critical range. However there is no reason why the Master's explanation of the average RPM appearing in the engine room log should not be accepted and no basis upon which this Court could or should make the findings suggested. It would amount to a finding that the Master quite deliberately put the lives of the crew and himself and the safety of the vessel at risk in order to maintain the owner's schedule.

GCM submitted that his Honour erred in accepting the Master's evidence that he constantly adjusted the course and speed to maintain the ship in the most comfortable position in the prevailing conditions and that on 14 October when the wind commenced to change from westerly to west-south-west, eventually becoming south-westerly, the Master changed course from 281deg.T to 270deg.T to keep the weather about two points on the port bow, thus making the ship as comfortable as possible in the prevailing conditions.

The deck log for 14 October 1989 showed the true course at 0400 as 281deg.T.
That course was not shown again on the log but at 0600 and thereafter there were entries which included the expression "various courses as per Master's orders" and references to reduced speed, the maintenance of hand steering and the reduction of excessive pounding and rolling. In evidence Captain Kirkland said of the entry "various courses as per Master's orders to reduce heavy pounding and rolling of vessel": "So obviously the Master has found it necessary to just keep manoeuvring the ship to the weather irrespective of what course he is heading for, he is just riding the weather out".

GCM submitted that on 14 October the ship changed course from 281deg.T to reduce the pressure on the cargo from the forward movement of the vessel driving into the seas, only after the containers were noticed to come loose at about 1715 hours and then reduced speed only at about 2000 hours. The Master's evidence was that he changed course at 2400 hours during the evening of 13
October. The log entries did not support this evidence.

In cross examination the Master agreed that from 11 October through to at least 1200 on 13 October the ship pursued a course of 281deg.T. The cross examiner pressed on the Master the proposition that good seamanship required him "to turn the vessel into the seas". He was asked "Captain, you would agree with me, would you not, that by heading into the seas with the vessel on 13
October 1989 would have reduced the effect of the weather upon the cargo which the vessel was carrying?" The Master disagreed. He did agree, generally, "that in substance the vessel has continued from 1200 on 13 October 1989 more or less on a course of towards the true course of 281deg.". After referring to what occurred on 12th and 13th the Master said: "Then after on 14th the course was 270deg., that direction". Again it was put to him that "It is generally common knowledge that by turning a vessel into the seas it reduces the stresses to which the vessel and the cargo are subjected." The Master said he would be putting his vessel under more stress by such a course. The Master also said that up to approximately "the DR [dead reckoning position] on 14th", deg. true was still the general direction. The DR was shown at 0400 hours.
He emphasised that that was "generally" the direction. There followed this question and answer: "Q. Yes. Now Captain, at noon on the 14th of October 1989 would you agree that it is apparent that in substance from 1600 on 13th of October 1989 the vessel has in essence continued on a course of true 281 degrees? A. I agree up to
Beyond that I think the vessel was not on exactly 281. It was more towards the direction of maybe 270, within the range, but give or take 10 degrees I agree generally in that direction." 
I think what the Master meant is plain enough when one considers the prevailing conditions at the time. The accuracy of what he said was not challenged in the cross examination. Nor was the suggestion that good seamanship required him to turn the vessel into the seas pressed.

Somebody on behalf of the appellant attempted, from the DR's, to reconstruct the vessel's course on a chart. This led to a submission as follows: "it is clear he did change course to approximately 265deg. on 14 October ....... but in response to the obvious damage to deck cargo, not to prevent cargo loss. In conclusion, it is probable that there were no course changes until after the containers were first noted to move on deck, by which time damage had occurred or begun to occur." Something like this was put to the Master. He denied it and Carruthers J accepted his denial. It was open to his Honour to do so.

Mr King next submitted that if the notation in the deck log "various courses to Master's orders" meant that between 0100 on 11 October and 1600 on 15
October the Master was personally adjusting the course changes to minimise the effects of wind, sea and swell, "(t)he Master was continually on the bridge for four days and fifteen hours, which was unsafe and highly unlikely (and unnecessary)." No cross examination was directed to the Master to suggest any inaccuracy in what the log recorded. The Master was questioned about what he conceded was an obvious error in one of the entries recording the position by dead reckoning in the log on 12 October 1989. He gave this evidence: "Q. Are you able to explain why in signing the entries, that is signing on the th of October 1989 in respect of entries certified to be correct you didn't pick up the obvious error? A. It is obvious that during that period I was more concerned at the weather that I have at hand and attending to the manoeuvring of the ship and keeping myself to sea and I did not infer so much that detail over there. I mean going through things, spending all the time on the bridge for the last few days. I mean an error like that could slip through you." 
This answer was not challenged. Commonsense would indicate what the Master meant. The trial Judge accepted his account and no ground has been shown for disturbing that finding.

Carruthers J observed that the Master was concerned, amongst other things, to avoid a rolling pattern which could develop into synchronisation and put the ship at risk of rolling right over. Mr King submitted: "Synchronisation was said to be some evidence of peril ....... but was highly unlikely (it usually occurs in following seas) and could have been averted by a slight alteration of course and speed; this was an obvious exaggeration by the Master (given that the swell direction was south west and the vessel's heading was 281deg.
true) or evidence of a disabling want of knowledge on his part". This attack on the credit worthiness and the competence of an experienced master mariner was never put to him nor was such evidence led from the experts the parties called. It is not properly put as an argument on appeal and can be ignored.

Carruthers J found that "despite the precautions which the Master was taking, the ship's deck edge was at time immersed - the deck edge immersion angle being 22.6 deg.." Mr King submitted that this was a problem in still water not when a vessel was moving with waves washing over the side. These are propositions unsupported by any evidence and were not put to the Master in cross examination. For like reason they can be ignored.

With reference to the Master's account of "pounding" Mr King submitted that this did not indicate a peril of the sea but the fault of the ship itself and that pounding referred to the vessel proceeding so uneasily and quickly as not to ride the seas, but to slam into the mass of water below. It indicated a vessel travelling with difficulty and too fast for the seas as indicated by the Master's own evidence (even if exaggerated). None of this was put to the
Master nor was there any evidence to support the proposition. The Judge's findings were based on the evidence unlike the submissions which ignored it.

C. Stowage 
GCM submitted that * MIS failed to load and handle the goods carefully during loading operations at Sydney and before delivery at Keelung; * MIS had failed to stow or ensure that the cargo was properly stowed or to check, and if necessary, repack the goods in the containers; * the 40 ft containers overstowed on the forward deck presented a wall to the oncoming seas and placed all cargo in the hold under excessive stress when the cargo could and should have been stowed elsewhere; * the cargo should have been stowed so as to reduce risks of movement of the pallets and coils and not stowed in forward hold No 2 or high in the hold; * MIS did not have in Australia, and especially at Burnie, any sound system of cargo planning, such that the Master's preferences for stability were taken into account or given sufficient weight; and * MIS had failed to move fuel and ballast during the voyage to reduce the rolling period.

At the trial counsel for GCM started his cross examination of Captain Singh before the short adjournment on the morning of 3 June 1992 and continued it for the rest of that day and into the next day until after the short adjournment. Some questions were directed to the way the containers were arranged in Bay 5 and on the deck. No questions were put to suggest that the cargo was not otherwise properly stowed, that 40 ft containers overstowed on the forward deck presented a wall to the oncoming seas and placed all cargo in the hold under excessive stress when the cargo could and should have been stowed elsewhere, and that the cargo ought not to have been stowed in a forward hold or high in the hold.

Before the trial Judge the appellant did not submit that, except so far as it touched upon the issue of stability, the containers were incorrectly stowed.
Its expert, Captain Fairbairn, conceded that the way that Bay 5 was stowed did not go beyond the parameters of acceptable seamanship. There was no evidence that the stowage of the containers in the vessel was inadequate or inappropriate and no suggestion that the goods should have been repacked. So far as the alleged failure to move fuel and ballast during the voyage was concerned, the evidence was that the ship's rolling period was satisfactory.
The appellant's case below and on this appeal was that the GM was too large.
His Honour held that it was within acceptable parameters and rejected the argument that the failure to achieve the Master's preferred GM amounted to negligence. If that be right, nothing turned on the system of cargo planning.
 
D. Unseaworthiness 
The appellant submitted that, on departing Burnie (and all Australian ports), the GM, which is the distance between the centre of gravity and the metacentre of the vessel, was too large. The equilibrium of the vessel is stable when the metacentre is above the centre of gravity. This is described as a positive GM. A vessel is described as tender if there is little or no positive GM. The vessel is then easily heeled over and slow and sluggish in returning to the upright. A vessel with a large GM is described as stiff, and is hard to incline but when forcibly heeled over an excessive righting movement is brought into operation which brings the ship upright in a violent manner making the motion uncomfortable for those on board and stressing the hull unnecessarily; Nicholls, Seamanship and Nautical Knowledge, 24th ed, at 355-6. The cargo when loaded should be distributed to produce a condition between the two extremes so that the ship will be "of good behaviour" at sea. There was no evidence of the GM when the vessel left Sydney. When she left Melbourne it was 1.31 metres and when she left Burnie 1.27 metres. Carruthers J rejected the appellant's submission that the GM was too large. His Honour said: "Most of what was said on behalf of the plaintiff insofar as the ship's GM is concerned was based upon a misapprehension that Captain Singh had given an instruction at each port to the planners, via the chief officer, that steps were to be taken in the loading of the ship to achieve his preferred GM. The evidence does not support such a proposition.

The IMO load line requirements specify a minimum GM for the Bunga Seroja of .3. However, the defendant has a standard requirement that a ship may only sail in such a condition that upon arrival at the destination port she will not have a GM of less than 0.5. Thus, because fuel is consumed on passage, the
GM upon departure must exceed 0.5. With regard to the Bunga Seroja, Captain
Singh said, `With respect to the ship having been there, I found that a GM of .8 to 0.9, the ship reacted in a very comfortable state, so I endeavoured to achieve nothing less than 0.9 if permissible.' 
Customarily, Captain Singh would instruct the chief officer to inform the terminal planners of his preferred GM. It should be stressed that the preferred range of 0.8 to 0.9 is Captain Singh's subjective assessment. In his subjective assessment, when the ship has a GM within that range, she has a very comfortable roll period. Another master of the same ship may prefer a different GM.

It would, of course, be quite impracticable for the master of any ship in the container trade to insist or expect that the central and terminal planners could achieve the preferred GM at any particular port. The crucial question is whether, when the ship is ready to sail, the GM is acceptable to the master by reference to proper standards of seamanship and the safety of the ship and her cargo for the contemplated voyage." 
Although there was no evidence of the stability calculations when the Bunga
Seroja left Port Botany, his Honour was satisfied that they complied with the
Master's requirements. His Honour said: "By that I mean that although the GM is particular may not have been his preferred GM, it was within the parameters acceptable to him for the projected voyage. The same may be said of the GM at Melbourne and Burnie. Indeed there is no evidence before me to suggest that there was any failure on the part of
Captain Singh to comply with the proper standards of seamanship in departing
Burnie with a GM of 1.31. In Captain Fairbairn's view this GM meant that the ship was `relatively stiff' (transcript at 235). One must be careful not to convert this categorisation of the GM into one that the ship was too stiff.
Captain Kirkland stated that in his view the ship was not too stiff with the effect that she was rolling too quickly.

The criticism which was made of the defendant is not calling the central planner or any of the terminal planners was not, in my view, well-founded.
With the exception of Port Botany, the stability calculations were tendered in evidence. As I do not accept that the planners were under an obligation to achieve Captain Singh's preferred GM, it was not necessary for them to be called to justify their relevant loading programme, which achieved a GM which was acceptable to the master.

Thus, insofar as it is a discrete argument that the master's preferred GM was not achieved, to support the contention that there was negligence and/or a breach by the defendant of Art III r 1 to defeat the perils of the sea exception, it is rejected." 
In addition to its submission that the GM was too large, GCM submitted that no stability calculations were done at Sydney and that the stability calculations at Burnie were erroneous. At the trial the only challenge made to the stability of the vessel was that the GM was too large. The matter not having been raised at the trial, the appellant cannot now argue that the stability calculations were erroneous.
 
The appellant called no evidence to suggest that the GM of 1.27 was unacceptable. The respondent's expert evidence was that the vessel was not too stiff. The Master's evidence was that a GM of 1.27 was acceptable. The appellant's expert said that the vessel was relatively stiff but did not suggest it was unsafe or dangerous or that the Master should not have sailed with a GM of 1.27 and conceded that the stowage was within the parameters of acceptable seamanship and that there had to be compromises. Nor was there any evidence that in the conditions in which the vessel found itself, a reduced GM would have made any difference to the outcome. For the reasons Carruthers J gave the submission that the GM was too large and hence the ship unseaworthy or improperly stowed should be rejected.
 
GCM further submitted that the Master and crew were not adequately instructed as to the use of the ship's operation manuals. The Master was never cross examined about this assertion which was not put at the hearing and cannot now be put.

GCM also submitted MIS had failed to prevent water entry to two of the containers through the hatches in No 2 hold from which it could be concluded that the hatch was cracked or broken and hence unseaworthy. This was another new point on the appeal. The only evidence about seawater damage to the coils was that it was likely to have occurred after the container was damaged and unlikely to have occurred whilst the container was under deck. There was no evidence of damage to the hatch covers.

E. Structural Damage 
Mr King challenged his Honour's finding that structural damage was caused to the ship by heavy weather. He not only challenged the existence of structural damage, despite this being listed in the deck log, but submitted that the loss of the port anchor was "explained by the negligence of the crew in failing to tie it down properly on departing Burnie." He said that the words in the third officer's report "compression bar missing" was consistent with both negligence and unseaworthiness on departing Burnie. Mr King seemed unperturbed by raising such a point which was not taken at first instance nor ever suggested to any witness. I would reject these submissions.

Summary of Proposed Findings 
Mr King submitted that the following facts stood out: "(a) The Master tried to give the impression that between 11 and 14 October he reduced speed significantly and to the limit of the ship's engines, this was simply untrue in both respects.

The Master did not in fact reduce his RPM's (cf speed through the water) until after the containers on deck became obviously unstable on 14 October; the excessive speed prior to that time probably caused the ship to pound and roll excessively against the westerly seas directly in the vessel's path.

Maintaining the owner's itinerary and not the preservation (see Article
III, rule 2) of the appellant's cargo of the Bunga Seroja was the Master's principal concern on the voyage to Fremantle.

The Master tried to give the impression that from 11 to 15 October he was continuously on the bridge manoeuvring the ship through storms, when in fact the ship pursued a consistent course of 281deg. true direct for Fremantle the whole period, and it is highly unlikely he was on the deck throughout that period.

The vessel changed course after the containers on deck at Bay 5 came loose to the course he should earlier have been on to best weather the swell, seas and wind, namely about 265deg.-270deg..

The navigation and management of the ship with respect to carrying and preserving the cargo was negligent and in breach of Article III, rule 2." 
For reasons which I have stated already I would reject the submission that findings should be made consistent with any of these paragraphs.

CONCLUSION 
In the trial Judge's view the respondent had established to the requisite degree that the damage to the subject cargo was occasioned by perils of the sea. The pounding of the ship by reason of the heavy weather caused the coils in the four containers to be dislodged and thereby damaged. No argument the appellant has put in this Court persuades me that his Honour erred in this conclusion. Accordingly to succeed the appellant had to show that his Honour erred in not finding that the respondent's negligence or breach of Article III or the ship's unseaworthiness was a co-operating cause. 
Carruthers J concluded that the evidence did not demonstrate any breach by the defendant of the provisions of Article III Rule 1 or Rule 2. I agree with this conclusion. The evidence did not establish that MIS did not properly or carefully stow or carry the cargo or that the respondent, its servants or agents, were negligent, in navigating the ship or in failing to establish a sound system for loading the ship.

The appellant's appeal against the finding that the ship was unseaworthy because the GM was too large also fails. No other basis for saying the ship was unseaworthy was available to or made out by the appellant. Accordingly the respondent was not shown at any relevant time to have failed to exercise due diligence to make the ship seaworthy.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs. It is not necessary to resolve the issues raised by the notice of contention.
 * * * 
