

Port Line Ltd versus Lacey [1996] NSWSC 303 (26 July 1996) 
PORT LINE LIMITED V LACEY /96 DDT 104/96 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA, BEAZLEY JA 
CATCHWORDS: JURISDICTION OF DDT - APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVEDEX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL AGAINST DECISION BY DUST DISEASES TRIBUNAL DISMISSING APPLICATION FOR DECLARATIONS THAT DUST DISEASES TRIBUNAL HAD NO JURISDICTION AND/OR WAS NOT FORUM CONVENIENS - urgent hearing of primary claim desirable - Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538] at 565 discussed - approach to be taken in Court of Appeal - no error in trial judge's approach.

ORDERS 
Application dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: This is an application for leave to appeal from an interlocutory decision by his Honour Judge Maguire in the Dust Diseases Tribunal, delivered on the 22nd of this month, by which he dismissed an application by the defendant in proceedings brought under the Dust Diseases Tribunal Act.

The proceedings had been commenced by statement of claim, and that statement of claim had been served pursuant to the Rules, outside the jurisdiction. The relevant rule was r 1A of Pt 10 of the Supreme Court Rules, which permitted originating process to be served outside Australia in a number of cases, two of which were relied upon by the plaintiff in the proceedings.

The defendant sought to have the statement of claim set aside, or alternatively or additionally a declaration that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction over the defendant, and again alternatively or additionally, a declaration that New South Wales was an inappropriate forum for the hearing of the case.

It has been said by the High Court of cases of this kind that: "Although there will be cases where the primary Judge may conclude he should give detailed reasons explaining why the local forum is or is not a clearly inappropriate one, ordinarily it will be unnecessary for the primary Judge to do more than briefly indicate that, having examined the material in evidence and having taken account of the competing written and oral submissions, he or she is of the view that the proceedings should or should not be stayed on forum non conveniens, that is clearly an inappropriate forum, grounds." (Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538] at 565 per Mason CJ, Deane J, Dawson J and Gaudron J.) 
Judge Maguire referred to considerations of that kind in the reasons that he gave, and to a considerable extent his reasons conform to the admonition of the High Court. In the course of giving his reasons he confined himself to summarising in very brief form the five grounds relied on in argument by the defendant in support of its application, then commenting on them equally briefly and then stating his decision.

The proceedings before us are an application for leave to appeal against Judge
Maguire's decision. Taking into account what I have already quoted from the
High Court in Voth concerning what a primary Judge should do in most cases of this kind, it seems reasonably clear that a Court of Appeal, hearing an application for leave to appeal against such a decision, should adopt a similar approach bearing in mind that the hearing is at the appeal level and that it is of an application for leave to appeal.

Usually the approach to applications for leave to appeal in this Court is for the Court to consider whether there is an arguable error of sufficient importance, either from the point of view of the parties, or from the point of view of the ordinary administration of justice, to warrant the Court of Appeal taking the matter up and hearing it as a full appeal.

Taking that consideration together with what I have already said about cases of the present kind, what the applicant for leave had to do was to show the
Court that in Judge Maguire's dealing with the case there was some error of principle or misunderstanding of the facts before him, or some error in the way in which he dealt with the material before him, that made it desirable in the interests of justice that leave to appeal be granted.

Counsel for the claimant defendant before us did not dispute that the trial
Judge correctly stated on p 4 the of his reasons the five matters which were the essential submissions put to him. The criticisms made in this Court of what the trial Judge said in regard to those basic submissions eventually came down to criticisms under two headings.

One went to jurisdiction, and it was said that because Judge Maguire had made a remark, which I will come back to in a moment, about "damage", he had indicated that the plaintiff before him had not suffered any damage in New
South Wales, and that this finding necessarily destroyed any basis for jurisdiction of the kind which the plaintiff was asserting.

The other point which was pressed as showing error on the part of the trial
Judge concerned his heading "E", being the fifth of the summarised submissions, which dealt with the defendant's assertion that it had demonstrated that the proceedings, if allowed to go ahead in New South Wales, would be oppressive or vexatious.

In regard to the jurisdiction point, what was relied on by the claimant defendant was his Honour's sentence saying, "It is not contradicted that the plaintiff suffers no damage in New South Wales". However that sentence must be considered together with various matters that were before his Honour, and of which his Honour was well aware, and along with the sentence which follows it, which was, "However, that circumstance must be examined beside the fact that the negligence alleged occurred in New South Wales".

By that sentence it seems clear that the Judge was referring to both the allegation he mentioned, and the evidence which was before him supporting the allegation. The allegation upon which the plaintiff intended to rely at the trial was that he had been exposed in a vessel of the defendant, when that vessel was present in New South Wales, to particles of asbestos in the atmosphere in a confined space, where he inhaled them over a number of days, which the claimant's counsel told us was in the vicinity of 160.

Thus the allegation, which was supported by evidence in an affidavit of the plaintiff that was before his Honour, was that through the unsafe system created by the defendant employer of the plaintiff, he had been exposed within
New South Wales to the inhalation of particles of asbestos, and that he suffered damage, and if his allegation is correct, causally he suffered damage which is going to cause his death, as a result of negligence in New South
Wales.

That being the position indicated by the sentence of his Honour that I have quoted, together with the other materials that were before him, it seems quite clear that the jurisdiction point taken here by the claimant cannot succeed.

The other main heading of the argument this morning concerned what can be put under the heading of "Oppressive or Vexatious". In dealing with the defendant's argument before him on that score Judge Maguire said: "I see nothing oppressive or vexatious about commencing proceedings in a jurisdiction which offers the plaintiff his only hope of success." 
It was submitted that this showed error on the part of his Honour, indicating that he applied an inappropriate test.

The sentence however bears a simpler and less criticisable meaning. The Judge does not appear, upon a reading of the full six pages of his reasons, to have been purporting to state or indicating any test in the sentence I have just read. Rather he is making a statement of fact by way of reflection upon the situation in which the plaintiff was placed at the time when the Judge was dealing with the application, namely that the plaintiff was bringing proceedings in the only jurisdiction which offered the plaintiff the prospect of a hearing and a decision, which the plaintiff would hope would be in his favour, before he died.

The undisputed evidence before the trial Judge was such that the conclusion was well open to him that at the date when he was deciding the application before him, New South Wales was the only jurisdiction where the plaintiff's case could be heard before he died.

As to the principle upon which the Judge operated in deciding the question, referred to in Voth in very summary form, as the "clearly inappropriate forum" question, the trial Judge had referred at p 2 of his reasons to that case, and the whole structure of his judgment makes it evident that he was carrying out what the High Court had said was the ordinarily appropriate approach to applications of the kind then before him.

Having heard the counsel for the claimant here at some length on the "clearly inappropriate forum" ground, nothing appears to the Court from the trial
Judge's reasons to lead the Court to think that in approaching the question of the "clearly inappropriate forum" his Honour applied any wrong principle or misunderstood or misapplied or neglected any of the materials before him.

The claimant quite forcefully presented to this Court the matters which I have no doubt he presented equally forcefully before Judge Maguire, concerning the various inconveniences to the defendant resulting from the plaintiff's case being heard in the Dust Diseases Tribunal of New South Wales.

In considering this application for leave it is not this Court's task to do again the task that was carried out by Judge Maguire. The task is to see whether Judge Maguire made a mistake of the kind I have mentioned, or whether it appears from the result he arrived at, that that result is so clearly inappropriate in the interests of justice that he must have made some mistake in arriving at it. Nothing of that kind appears.

That being so, and endeavouring to comply with the High Court's injunction so far as it applies to appeal courts, the Court is of the view that the application should be dismissed.

The application is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
