

David Jones (Australia) Pty Limited versus "p" and Anor Matter No 30062/96 [1997] NSWSC 347 (29 August 1997) 
David Jones (Australia) Pty Limited versus "P" & Anor /96 August 1997 
Abadee J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division /96 - DAVID JONES (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED v "P" & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal by David Jones (Australia) Pty Limited ("the plaintiff") pursuant to <case> of the Anti Discrimination Act 1977 ("the Act") against a decision of the Equal Opportunity Tribunal ("the Tribunal") given on 21 May 1996. The appeal lies on a question of law only. The powers of this Court on such an appeal are to be found in <case> of the Act. 
The case raises on appeal a number of difficult issues concerning not only the issue of discrimination in work on the ground of disability but also issues as to the mode of assessing compensation under <case> of the Act.

Having regard to some of the matters argued on the appeal, it is appropriate to make some general introductory observations about the nature of the appeal with which I am concerned.

The findings in relation to the award(s) of compensation, (and which are challenged) are not accompanied by any reasons at all. There is a wealth of authority on the obligation to provide reasons and the rationale for that obligation with respect to both courts and tribunals: Soulemezis versus Dudley
Pty Limited [(1987) 10 NSWLR 247.] Failure to state reasons or adequately state reasons may constitute error of law. The requirement to give reasons in the ordinary courts ordinarily extends to the giving of reasons for an award of damages: Beale versus Government Insurance
Office of New South Wales (CA 2 April 1997, unreported) where there was also discussion by Meagher JA as to the need for statutory administrative tribunals to provide reasons. As to obligation of the Tribunal to give reasons (s 117 aside), this is now clearly established by the decision of Simpson J in
Absolon versus NSW Technical & Further Education Commission (27 May 1997, unreported).

If the reasons given are inadequate, error of law may be established and the powers of this Court may be invoked including remitting the decision to the
Tribunal: <case> of the Act. In the circumstances of the present case, for reasons which will appear, were I to reject the appeal in relation to the substantive issues of whether the plaintiff was properly found to have unlawfully discriminated, I would in any event exercise my powers under s (3), allow the appeal in relation to the order for compensation made by the
Tribunal under <case>(b), and remit the assessment of compensation to the
Tribunal to be properly assessed in accordance with <case>(b)(i) of the Act.
Such remission would not be necessary, were I to allow the appeal on the substantive issue of whether the Tribunal's findings of unlawful discrimination were open in law, and order that the complaint to the Tribunal be dismissed.

The proceedings before the Tribunal (P. O'Shane, Chairperson, M. Alt, and J
Strickland) involved a complaint of discrimination on the ground of disability in employment by the plaintiff company. The complaint was brought by the first defendant. The second defendant is the Tribunal. It has filed a submitting appearance, save as to costs.

The Tribunal made orders that the name of the now first defendant and the actual description of her physical impairment not be published. I was requested to make similar type orders. It seemed to me appropriate to make such orders, the making of which was not opposed. I have made an order prohibiting the disclosure of any information or the doing of anything which may lead to the identification of the first defendant in the proceedings.

Against this background I now return to consider the appeal.

Grounds of Appeal: 
On 21 May 1996, after a two day hearing the Tribunal found the first defendant's complaint substantiated and ordered the plaintiff to pay to the first defendant the amount of $31,600 by way of compensation for loss of income from 1 March 1994 to that date, and a further amount of $2,000 for pain and suffering caused by the plaintiff's conduct. The orders were made pursuant to <case>(b)(i) of the Act after the Tribunal had held an inquiry into the applicant's complaint.

The appeal is from the whole decision of the Tribunal. An order is sought dismissing the complaint of the first defendant. Further, an appeal is also brought against the awards of compensation.

The grounds ultimately argued and relied upon in support of the appeal may be briefly summarised. Firstly, it is claimed that the plaintiff was denied procedural fairness in the proceedings below in several respects; secondly, that the Tribunal erred in law in finding that the plaintiff had discriminated against the first defendant, thirdly, there was no basis in the evidence for certain findings of fact; fourthly, that the second defendant erred in law in so far as it found that the first defendant was not a casual employee. Other grounds of appeal argued and advanced claimed errors of law in relation to findings that the claimant had suffered compensable pain and suffering and loss of income.

The Hearing Before the Tribunal: 
I now summarise in a general way the first defendant's case as asserted in her
Points of Claim and before the Tribunal. In doing so I should state that whilst some of the allegations did not in the result end up being really in dispute before the Tribunal, others were very much in dispute.

The first defendant claimed that from March 1991 to April 1994 she was employed on a casual basis in the restaurant of the plaintiff's store at
Campbelltown. In February 1994 she learnt that she had contacted Hepatitis C and advised her supervisor. She was taken off the roster. Subsequently, she inquired about returning to work. She was advised by the plaintiff's Personnel
Manager that because of her medical condition she could not work in the restaurant section of the store and to take six weeks off. On 19 April 1994 she contacted the Personnel Manager and inquired if any work was available in the store. She was told that no work was available as the store had just employed five new casual staff. The first defendant alleges that she was also told by the Personnel Manager that if she did continue to work he would be compelled to inform first aid staff she had Hepatitis C, but that once such action was taken it would be around the store. Very much in issue was whether the Personal Manager, a Mr Garstang told the first defendant that if that action was taken it would be around the store. There was no finding of fact by the Tribunal in favour of the first defendant, that these words were used by him.

At the hearing the first defendant verbally stated to the Tribunal what was its grounds of defence. A number of concessions were made by the plaintiff.
These may be summarised as follows: It was conceded that the first defendant had Hepatitis C; that Hepatitis C is a disability for the purposes of the Act; that the first defendant was "moved" from the restaurant area and was denied further work in the restaurant area because she suffered from the disability
Hepatitis C. It claimed that such action was taken pursuant to the provisions of the [Public Health Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pha1991126/) and [Food Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/) and
Regulations thereunder (particularly [Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s30.html) of the Food (General) Regulation as it then was as at that time, and upon the advice of the company doctor. The plaintiff company asserted that it was under no obligation to provide any further work because the first defendant was a casual employee, that because she was unable to work as a casual worker in the restaurant there was no longer any legal requirement to afford her alternative work in other sections of its store. It admitted that it was prepared to offer work to her, but subject to a condition that the first aid staff in the store be informed of the complainant's condition. That step it was said was taken on the advice of the company medical officer, allegedly in order to comply with its obligations under <case> of the Occupational Health and Safety Act and in order to discharge its common law duty of care to its first aid staff. It claimed that the information was to be limited to information being given to the first aid staff "on advice" to protect their health, safety and well being. Further, the plaintiff stated that it relied upon the provisions of <case> of the Anti Discrimination Act 1977.

In relation to its defence, counsel for the now plaintiff employer also indicated to the Tribunal that after the conversation on 19 April 1994, a specific offer of employment had been made to the first defendant in August
This offer was to attend for training in order to work elsewhere in the store, and in order to work a shift that had been rostered in the weekend.
Accommodations were allegedly offered, but it was claimed that the first defendant failed to attend the store or failed to even inform the store she would not be working and that there was no further communication with it other than through the Anti-Discrimination Board. Counsel for the plaintiff stated that since August 1994, the "respondent has and continues to hold out an offer of casual work to the complainant".

There is nothing to indicate that before the Tribunal the plaintiff sought to also rely specifically in terms upon the provisions of <case> of the Act, ("Public Health") or in terms upon the provisions of <case> to the effect that there was no unlawful discrimination because by law the first defendant was unable to carry out the inherent requirements of the particular employment: <case>(a): Commonwealth of Australia versus Hon W. J. Carter [(1996) EOC 92-863] (a case dealing with the provisions of <case> of the [Disability Discrimination Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/dda1992264/) (Cth) a general counterpart of <case> of the Act).

Whether the plaintiff may have also had available to it arguments or "defences" based on <case> need not be considered. No argument was advanced to me by reference to it, or by reference to Carter.

On appeal the plaintiff sought to also rely upon <case> - Public Health being a specific statutory exception to Part 4A ("Discrimination on the Ground of
Disability").

Findings of the Tribunal: 
Some of the findings made are challenged or brought into question on appeal and I shall identify these when dealing with the findings of fact made by the
Tribunal.

The Tribunal found that the first defendant commenced work with the plaintiff in March 1991 and worked with it as a casual employee until February 1994. It found that in February 1994 she was working an average of twenty five hours per week in the restaurant. (This is a finding challenged by the plaintiff, who alleged that the first defendant worked an average of 20.25 hours per week). In February 1994 the respondent informed her supervisor at work that she had contracted Hepatitis C, "an infectious disease". The concession that it was an illness constituting physical impairment for the purposes of the Act was noted. Significantly the Tribunal found that Hepatitis C was a scheduled medical condition under the [Public Health Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pha1991126/) and by reason of its nature, as well as by law, the respondent was precluded from continuing to work in a food preparation area. I would here add that there did not appear to be dispute that such included working in the restaurant where she had been employed weekly for some three years. Indeed, the case appears to have been conducted on that basis; since the first act of discrimination relied upon by the first defendant allegedly involved a refusal to transfer her to another floor or another area, outside of the restaurant. The findings of the Tribunal make it clear that the food preparation area included the restaurant, and the case before it was dealt with upon that basis.

On appeal it was accepted before me that between February 1994 and May 1996 the first defendant continued to suffer from the Hepatitis C medical condition (which was not work caused or work related) and was suffering from it as at the time of hearing. Further, it was accepted, or initially so, that during that period she was unable by law to work as a casual employee in the restaurant. This position appears to have been in accord with the way the parties conducted the matter before the Tribunal and the approach of the
Tribunal as reflected in its reasons.

The Tribunal also found that in February 1994 the first defendant informed her supervisor at work advising her that she wished to be transferred to another floor. In relation to this last finding, on appeal the plaintiff conceded that on 28 February 1994 the first defendant requested of her immediate supervisor (Ms Mitchell) and Mr Garstang, that she wished to be transferred out of the restaurant to another section. In fact on appeal it was not disputed that when the first defendant met with Mr Garstang and her restaurant supervisor on 4
March 1994, she confirmed that she had Hepatitis C, that Mr Garstang said he would ring head office for advice, and that the first defendant asked whether if she could not work in the restaurant, she could work in another department.

The Tribunal found that instead of arranging to transfer the applicant to another floor, Mr Garstang went into what could be described as "panic mode".
It is not clear whether this last quoted remark is a finding of fact, or comment, however, it is one challenged as being not open, reflects a denial of procedural fairness in relation to its making, and otherwise reflective of error.

The Tribunal found that Mr Garstang knew nothing about Hepatitis C and had no guidelines or procedures to assist him in what was described by the Tribunal as "an exceptional and serious situation". Indeed, it found, or at least emphatically observed that it was "appalled" at the apparent lack of procedures and guidelines. This finding is also disputed and I deal with it below.

The Tribunal also found that Mr Garstang rang head office, spoke to the company nurse who apparently spoke to Dr Skapinker, the company doctor. Dr
Skapinker gave evidence. The nurse did not.

There was some dispute about the nature of the advice given by Dr Skapinker.

The first defendant claimed and there seemingly is no dispute on this point, that on 8 March 1994 when she contacted Mr Garstang he informed her that she should take six weeks off. Mr Garstang claimed that this was the advice he received from head office. At that stage he also thought he asked for advice as to what Hepatitis C was. The Tribunal found as a fact that on scant information, Dr Skapinker did not advise that the first defendant should be stood down from duties altogether.

The Tribunal accepted that at the time of ceasing to work, Mr Garstang advised the first defendant to contact him at the end of the period (6 weeks) at which time he would further consider her working arrangement. Towards the end of that period it found that the first defendant did contact Mr Garstang. She apparently saw him, according to the undisputed evidence, on or about 19 April and enquired about work. He said that in the recent past he had engaged about five or six casuals and that there was no work available for her. These matters were found not to have been denied by the plaintiff company. I would add that, albeit there was no specific finding to this effect, it does not appear to have been disputed by the plaintiff that on 17 April, a person was transferred from the restaurant to the music department, although the circumstances of such transfer, or the basis of such were not explored in the evidence.

No findings of fact were made as to the circumstances under which any of the five or six casuals had been employed, as to what they were asked or disclosed in their applications for employment, as to what sections of the store they were employed in, upon what weekly rosters, or whether they were even moved from one department to another. No evidence was led as to wages paid to them, or as to average rostered hours worked. Nor was there exploration as to the positions or jobs they were actually employed in, or as to what award conditions. There was no direct evidence as to the hiring of casuals in other sections of the store in late February or early March 1994.

It is significant that the Tribunal whilst having made a finding that Mr
Garstang did not place her in another part of the store, did not make a finding that this was because she had Hepatitis C. Next, the Tribunal found that the first defendant was told that if she were to return to work it would be on the condition that he informed the first aid staff that she had
Hepatitis C, a condition that she would not accept. This is the specific finding made. No finding as I have said, was made that Mr Garstang further said that if the first aid staff were told then it would get around the store that the first defendant had Hepatitis C. The Tribunal made no other specific findings on this question. Her evidence when told of the condition, was that she felt like she would be humiliated. She also said that she did not wish to return to work if the first aid staff were to be informed. (Ex A p 16).

The Tribunal appears to have rejected the plaintiff's submission that it had a common law duty of care to tell the first aiders of the first defendant's condition, or more specifically had a duty of care to do so under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pha1991126/s15.html) of the Occupational Health and Safety Act 1983.

The Tribunal also found that there was no further contact between the parties until sometime in August 1994, after complaint had been made to the Anti-
Discrimination Board, when the first defendant was contacted by Ms Koziki, the store manager about the possibility of some work, she being asked to come to see her that day. The first defendant claimed she could not. Ms Koziki was called. There was conflict as to what was said. The Tribunal stated that it had considerable difficulty in accepting Ms Koziki's version of the facts. The
Tribunal found it was not satisfied on that evidence that the plaintiff was ready and willing to employ the complainant in some other capacity within the store and "that it remains so ready and willing". [my emphasis]. This appears to be a finding of fact not capable of challenge on appeal.

The reference to some other capacity within the store would in turn further suggest that the Tribunal was referring to some position or job other than within the restaurant and provides further support for the view that the case was conducted upon such basis before the Tribunal.

The Tribunal rejected arguments advanced by the respondent regarding the complainant's work performance.

In relation to the award of compensation, that is for $31,600 for loss of income from 1 March 1994 to 21 May 1996 and $2,000 for pain and suffering, no reasons were given for either of such awards. There is no explanation for the calculation of the sums in the reasons for judgment, in submissions to the
Tribunal prior to reasons or in the transcript. Both findings are challenged as not being open, both on the basis of the absence of reasons in relation to them, as well as on other basis. It is claimed that the compensation awarded in relation to the two heads reflects error of law and of fact, and is excessive. Indeed, it was submitted that it was not open to award compensation at all.

On Appeal: 
On appeal the first defendant argues that the Tribunal found in effect two acts of discrimination on the basis of physical impairment. These have been summarised by the first defendant as being firstly, that by refusing to transfer the first defendant to another area of the store she was treated less favourably than other employees and secondly, that by imposing a condition on her continued employment, she was subject to a condition to which no other employee was subject.

Perhaps regrettably, not only did the Tribunal not make a specific finding in terms as to what was what I will refer to as the first act of discrimination, but it also did not make further findings as to whether the found discrimination was discrimination upon a specific identifiable ground falling within <case> (discrimination against an applicant for employment) or discrimination against an employee (s 49D(2)), (both or either) as was inter alia asserted by the first defendant on appeal. In this situation the casual nature of the employment argument also becomes relevant, particularly in the light of the relevant award which on appeal it is agreed to be applicable to the casual employment of the first defendant in the restaurant. On appeal it was agreed between the parties that the first defendant worked for the plaintiff as a casual under the Restaurant etc Employees' Retail Shops
Award ("the Restaurant Award"). It is not disputed that the grounds of discrimination or and may be different depending upon whether <case> applies or <case> applies: see also <case>.

The first defendant submitted that in relation to the first act of discrimination she relied upon the provisions of <case> upon the basis that there was "a permanent part time continuing employment relationship". A difficulty with such argument is the Tribunal's finding of casual employment.
Indeed, as the plaintiff submitted there was no continuing employment relationship, because the first defendant was a casual employee. The
Restaurant Award itself distinguishes between full time and part time and casual employment. The first defendant was apparently a weekly casual. As to the meaning of casual employment and further when the employment of a casual ends or is concluded: cf Neill versus Cameron & Anor [[1977] AR ] where (at 508) reference was made to the casual employment coming to an end each week under the Shop Employees (State) Award, at the end of the period for which she was paid, and a new casual employment commencing at the beginning of the succeeding period. In Reed versus Blue Line
Cruises Limited (Industrial Relations Court of Australia, 26 November 1996, unreported) Moore J when considering the meaning of casual employment in the context of the words "engaged for a short period of time" referred to characteristics of casual employment as including an election by the employer to offer employment on a particular day or days and, when offered, the employee can elect to work, with another characteristic being the absence of certainty about the period over which the work will be offered. He also considered that casual employment involved the offer of employment for a limited time on the basis that it could be accepted or rejected but in circumstances "where it would be expected that further employment of the same type would or might be offered and accepted but there was no certainty about the period over which it would continue to be offered". [my emphasis].

These matters would tend to support the plaintiff's submission that <case> would not or could not apply, that no act of discrimination occurred within the meaning of that section, and further, that when the first defendant was no longer able to work in the restaurant there was no longer any legal requirement, on the plaintiff to provide the first defendant with a different job outside the restaurant and/or under a different award. Further, the plaintiff submits that even were the employee not a casual one, the contract of employment in effect became terminated by reason of the statutory prohibition contained in Regulation 30 of the [Food
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/). It was also claimed there was no unlawful act of discrimination at all, or, further or alternatively, that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s54.html) in any event did not render anything done by the employer unlawful. Indeed, it was submitted that by law she could not perform her job, and thereafter in any event she could not be considered, as was put on behalf of the first defendant, to be a "continuing employee" in that position. It argued that if a case fell within the general exception of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s54.html) then there was nothing unlawful done by the employer. Further, it was argued that the first defendant could not in the event in effect avoid the operation of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s54.html) by asserting in the circumstances an obligation to transfer her to a different job or type of work to that which she had been employed in but became precluded by law from continuing to do.

The plaintiff further submits that the first defendant's cause if it arises at all, did so under <case>, and would be limited as a matter of law, to the "second" alleged act of discrimination found, that being that the employer imposed an inappropriate condition in terms on which it was prepared to offer employment to the first defendant under <case>. It was said that such an approach was clearly consistent with the Tribunal's approach to the case (Ex
A, p 84.4). I consider such submissions generally, to be correct.

In relation to the second act of discrimination, the first defendant submits that both or either of ss 49D(1) or 49D(2) could apply. However, a difficulty with such argument is not only the absence of findings but also that <case> makes a distinction between discrimination against an applicant for employment and discrimination against an employee. In saying this I am not to be in any way suggesting that there can never be discrimination against a casual employee. It appears to me <case> clearly postulates that there may be such discrimination, depending upon the circumstances. There is no reason to read the language of the section otherwise as being capable in law of also dealing with discrimination against casual employees.

The question arises whether in the circumstances I should not remit the matter to the Tribunal to be heard and determined in the light of the matters raised on appeal including as to quantum, for further findings to be made. I am conscious of the expense in doing so at the same time being conscious of the importance of the matters to the parties, and the possibility of a miscarriage of justice were I to endeavour to make findings. I am also conscious of the that it is not for me to find facts but to deal on appeal with questions of law. However, no party has submitted (for obvious reasons) that I should remit the matter under <case>(a) for further findings to me made particularly in relation to the issues of alleged discrimination.

In relation to the findings, a number of matters should be stated. For the purposes of the appeal, the matter has been argued upon the basis that the
Tribunal in effect found the two acts of discrimination referred to.

The matter has on appeal been fully argued on its merits in respect of both acts of discrimination. No point has been taken that in view of the submissions of the first defendant before the Tribunal that it was not in the event open to the Tribunal to find any second act of discrimination in relation to the imposition of the condition. Commendably the matter has been argued by the parties on its merits.

The first defendant's submissions in her final address to the Tribunal are revealing, in indicating how her case was being advanced. In Ex A (p 75) the discrimination was stated as having occurred in February 1994. The act of discrimination was when she was not in fact "offered work in other areas of the store". The less favourable treatment she received was not being offered transfers to other areas (p 76). At (p 80) this was made even more explicit "... the complainant's case is clear the act of discrimination complained about is the act that happened when the employer failed to offer her employment in other areas of the store, and/or failed to offer training whatever was required to give her that work". Interestingly the Tribunal commenced the award of compensation for financial loss from the end of
February 1994, a finding consistent with argument advanced by the first defendant before it. I would add that there were no findings nor evidence led as to the plaintiff hiring any casuals generally or in particular in February
In relation to the second act so found, it was asserted by the first defendant that (at 77) the submission was in terms "... the complainant is not saying that the fact that Mr Garstang said that he would have to disclose her condition to various people is an act of discrimination" by which
I take it to mean the first aid people as found by the Tribunal. [my emphasis]. Further, in relation to the first act of discrimination in her submission (30 June 1997) Ms Langley argued at (p 2) "Here the only requirement necessary of the employer to accommodate the physical impairment of this particular employee would be to transfer the employee to another section within the store". [my emphasis].

I mention these matters for several reasons particularly having regard to the issues on appeal. It is quite clear that the first act of discrimination was made in the context of it being common ground as I have mentioned above that the first defendant was precluded as a matter of law from working in the restaurant, and was seeking transfer to other and different employment in a section or floor of the store outside of the restaurant where she was not prohibited by law from working. So much appears clear from the findings.
Indeed, the first defendant's submission was that she "accepted the [Food
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/) (Ex A )". It was perhaps belatedly and somewhat faintly suggested on appeal that the alternative and different work could or should have been furnished even within the restaurant. However, the reasons clearly show that this was not the way the case was fought. The reasons of the Tribunal show that the first defendant's argument related to transfer "to another floor". Indeed, in any event there was no evidence that alternative employment, not precluded by the [Food Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/) [Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s30.html), was in any event available to the first defendant in the restaurant under the
Restaurant Award, or that she even sought it from the plaintiff. What she sought was a transfer from the restaurant.

Unfortunately, before the Tribunal no attention was paid by the parties to what was the employment or job in which the first defendant was employed in the restaurant in her three years of employment prior to February 1994, nor as to what were the nature or duties of such position or job as such casual employee in the restaurant. No findings were made by the Tribunal in relation to these matters. No award(s) that might touch upon her employment were tendered before the Tribunal.

As I have indicated on the appeal, it was accepted by both parties that I could have regard to two awards that were put before me. The first award is the Restaurant Award and the second, the Shop Employees (State)
Award (the "Shop Employees Award").

It was agreed between the parties that the first defendant was at all material times employed under the Restaurant Award and not the Shop Employees
Award and the appeal before me was argued upon such a basis. However, there is no agreement in terms as to the employment classification in which the first defendant was employed under the Restaurant Award. Ms Langley for the first defendant, took me to the only evidence on the subject being a letter from the plaintiff to the Anti Discrimination Board on 1 September 1994 to be found in Ex A p 109. That letter (and the truth of the plaintiff's assertion in it is not challenged) states that the first defendant was employed "as a casual waitress at the Campbelltown store". Absent express agreement as to this, it has not been submitted that I should remit the matter to the Tribunal for a finding of fact on this point, or that I should not act upon the assumption that such was her job or position as a weekly casual in the restaurant was other than as a casual waitress. What in fact was her job and duties properly pertaining to such would ordinarily be a question of fact:
Commissioner for Government Transport versus Royall <case>; [(1966) 116 CLR 314] at 315.

Although the first defendant had initially submitted that at all material times she was employed as a shop/sales assistant and that such was her job, the further concession that she was employed under the Restaurant Award, in any event does not support such a view. Indeed, there is no such position of shop assistant in that Award, albeit a position described in the Shop
Employees Award: cf "[Part
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/index.html#p100) - Monetary Rates Table 1" which gives a description of different jobs or positions under that Award.

The Restaurant Award, it may be observed, provides that employees shall comply with reasonable requests to transfer or change jobs within the award structure - clause 8. [my emphasis]. The employer could request it.
There is no obligation to comply with any request from an employee. Again as I have indicated, there is a definition of casual employee to be found as meaning an employee engaged otherwise than as a full time or part time employee. The finding by the Tribunal that the first defendant was a casual employee would as I have said preclude any argument to the contrary, including the first defendant's argument that the employment relationship was in the nature "a permanent part time continuing relationship". Next, clause 30 Part B gives a description of different award employees and different rates of pay.

It has thus emerged more clearly on appeal that the first defendant was then employed as a casual waitress in the restaurant working a weekly roster with terms and conditions of employment governed by the Restaurant Award only, and that she was not employed as a shop assistant in the restaurant or elsewhere. Further on appeal, it has become more apparent that any "movement" from her job in the restaurant (where it was found that the first defendant was statutorily prohibited from working) would involve working elsewhere in the store, presumably with different roster hours of work depending upon the plaintiff's need and the first defendant's availability in a different employment classification, and in a differing capacity or job, falling within the terms of the Shop Employees Award. A movement to another store section or department thus would involve going to a different job and different type of work to that in which she had been employed in the restaurant.

On appeal a number of other concessions of fact, apart from those earlier referred to were made. It was conceded by the plaintiff that the first defendant worked as a casual and was only engaged in the restaurant. This concession was not disputed. It is also conceded that there was a "routine necessarily about engagement in the restaurant" despite the first defendant being employed as a casual or in effect a weekly roster. Further, it was conceded that on 28 February the first defendant requested her immediate supervisor Ms Mitchell and Mr Garstang "that she wished to transfer out of the restaurant to another section". This last concession was not disputed and is consistent with the Tribunal's findings.

The statutory provisions and the law: 
Section 49D of the Act is a general provision that deals both with discrimination against applicants for employment on the ground of disability, and against actual employees on the ground of disability. What is unlawful discrimination, may vary according to whether the person is an applicant for work or an employee. In the instant case as I have said, the Tribunal whilst finding that the first defendant was a casual employee did not make any findings as to whether the unlawful discrimination was discrimination under s
D(1) or <case>, both or either. Next, in relation to the complaint of the first defendant it did not in terms make a finding of fact as to what the first act of unlawful discrimination was nor identify the relevant statutory provision supporting the unlawful act. In respect of the second act of discrimination, the relevant section of the Act said to support that it was an unlawful act is likewise not identified.

Section 49D(1) to (4) is in the following terms: "49D. (1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person on the ground of disability: in the arrangements the employer makes for the purpose of determining who should be offered employment; or in determining who should be offered employment; or in the terms on which the employer offers employment.

It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the ground of disability: in the terms or conditions of employment which the employer affords the employee; or by denying the employee access, or limiting the employee's access, to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training, or to any other benefits associated with employment; or by dismissing the employee; or by subjecting the employee to any other detriment 
Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to employment: for the purposes of a private household; or where the number of persons employed by the employer, disregarding any persons employed within the employer's private household, does not exceed 5; or by a private educational authority.

Nothing in subsection (1) (b) or (2) (c) renders unlawful discrimination by an employer against a person on the ground of the person's disability if taking into account the person's past training, qualifications and experience relevant to the particular employment and, if the person is already employed by the employer, the person's performance as an employee, and all other relevant factors that it is reasonable to take into account, the person because of his or her disability: would be unable to carry out the inherent requirements of the particular employment; or would, in order to carry out those requirements, require services or facilities that are not required by persons without the disability and the provision of which would impose an unjustifiable hardship on the employer." 
Section 49D of the Act is a provision found in "Part 4A, Division 2 -
Discrimination in work". In Carter's case the Federal Court speaking of the broadly comparable provision in the [Disability Discrimination Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/dda1992264/) the
Federal Court said (at p 77,060): "Where in Division 1 of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/dda1992264/index.html#p2), the Act deals with discrimination in employment, the objective of the Act is not to dictate what requirements an employer may or may not properly impose in respect of any particular employment. Rather it is to ensure that person with disabilities are treated equally with persons without disabilities in respect of access to employment which is within the capacity of the disabled person to perform notwithstanding the disability. Therefore, where a disabled person has the capacity to do the work, the Act has as one of its objectives the elimination of any requirement imposed by an employer which operates as discrimination against that person on the ground of that person's disability".

The Court also cited with approval a passage from the decision of Street J from Davis versus Western Suburbs Hospital <case>; [(1941) 42 SR 26] at 31 that beyond the elimination of discrimination against persons on the ground of a disability it was not an object of the Act to deprive an employer of the right to decide what his needs are, and that it was for the employer to fix duties of the position and to prescribe his own needs. To some extent the
Courts observations and discussion in Jamal are to similar effect, see particularly the views of Mahoney JA in that case.

Where an employer discriminates, whether directly or indirectly against an employee or potential employee on the ground of disability in respect of any of the specified acts in <case> (in the case of applicants for employment) or in <case> in the case of an employee, such conduct is by force of the section, unlawful and unless the perpetrator (discriminator) falls within an exception within <case>, within one of the particular exceptions in Part 4A or one of the general exceptions in Part 6 of the Act, the conduct remains unlawful.

There is no requirement that an intention or motive to so discriminate be established: Waters versus Public Transport Corporation <case>; [(1991-1992) 173 CLR 349.] An employer may unlawfully discriminate against a person with a disability by imposing a requirement which involves no intention to discriminate. The relevant section only requires that the conduct be established as an objective fact. Further in Waters McHugh J, at 413, appears to have approached the provisions of <case> of the Act (Acts done under statutory authority) upon the basis that in order to fall within <case> the alleged discrimination has to demonstrate that its conduct has occurred pursuant to an actual requirement of an Act and that it was necessary for it to pursue such course of conduct. It may be difficult for a plaintiff such as the present one, to establish these matters where there are but general provisions of legislation such as <case> of the Occupational Health & Safety Act, a provision dealing with an employer's responsibility to ensure health safety and welfare of their employees) cf: Carter; Burrows versus NSW Commissioner for Police [(1994) EOC 92-654.] 
Where, after considering the evidence the Tribunal is satisfied that the acts of an employer constitute a breach of the section or is unlawful discrimination against an impaired person, the Tribunal will need to determine whether the prima facie unlawfulness of the acts is "neutralised" by provisions of the Act. The plaintiff does not accept any breaches of the Act or unlawful discrimination Specifically in the instant case the plaintiff also sought to rely upon the provisions of <case> of the Act as neutralising or exempting the conduct complained of (the identity of which will be discussed in due course) from the operation of the prohibitions in <case> of the Act. I have already mentioned that the plaintiff has on appeal also sought to rely upon <case>, a provision not in terms argued before the Tribunal and <case>(a) or (b). In the instant case the provisions of <case>(a) are in addition specifically relied upon to support the plaintiff's attempt to rely upon <case> of the Occupational Health & Safety Act. In addition, <case>(b) is also specifically relied upon to support an entitlement to rely upon the provisions of the [Food Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/) and particularly [Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s30.html) of the Regulations made under that Act.

Regulation 30 of the Food General Regulations at the time in February 1994 (albeit later amended in March 1995) provided as follows: "Notifiable Diseases etc 
A person who is suffering from: a medical condition listed under Category 2, 3 or 4 of Schedule 1 of the [Public Health
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pha1991126/) ...; or ...........
 must not handle food for sale or any receptacle, package, utensil, appliance, article other thing used in the handling of food".

In Category 3 of Schedule 1, scheduled medical condition found in the [Public Health
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pha1991126/) as at
February 1994 there was also to be found "Hepatitis C". Although no findings were made in terms as to how Hepatitis C might or may be passed on by a person with that condition, presumably as the Regulation would suggest, the
Legislature at the time of its passing considered there was a risk it might be passed on by a sufferer engaged in an activity falling within the terms of [Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pha1991126/s30.html) of the [Food
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/).

It is these provisions relied upon by the Tribunal as imposing a statutory obligation on the first defendant working in the restaurant as a casual employee. The finding is consistent with the conclusion that her position in the restaurant fell within the regulation and was the subject of a statutory prohibition. She was prevented by the general law, not by the employer as such, from working in the restaurant. On appeal it was not contested that a job as a casual waitress in a restaurant fell other than within the terms of the regulation. Indeed, the first defendant's case in relation to the first act of discrimination accepts the finding of the Tribunal, of the existence of statutory prohibition.

The first defendant has adverted to the fact that she voluntarily told her employer that she had Hepatitis C. That is commendable, but one should not overlook the obligation imposed on her under [Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s30.html) as it then was. Reference might also be made to the provisions of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s11.html) of the [Public Health
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pha1991126/) itself.
In one sense in the instant case it is as if the first defendant was telling the employer that she could not continue to work in her job as a casual employee (waitress) in the restaurant. There is no need to consider whether she was in effect therefore terminating the casual contracted employment, whether it was terminable in any event at the end of one week, having regard to its casual nature, or whether it was being terminated because it was in the subject of frustration by her having the found medical condition of Hepatitis
C. The fact is she could not continue to work in the job in which she was employed. Indeed, one might also add she could not even in a different job work in other sections of the store in work excluded by the same [Regulation .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pha1991126/s30.html) 
Carter's case is also authority for the proposition that the Act does not seek to abrogate the common law duty of care. Indeed, the first defendant acknowledges that the plaintiff employer had the statutory or common law duties including providing information and instruction in relation to inter alia viruses including Hepatitis C. In Carter's case the matter of the employer's common law duty of care, and reliance upon provisions such as the Occupational Health and Safety Act were considered as bearing upon whether the complainant would be able to perform an inherent requirement of the employment in the sense explained in the Commonwealth counterpart of <case>. In Carter the Commonwealth did not rely upon the general exempting counterparts of <case> (infectious diseases) or <case> (acts done under statutory authority etc). That said Carter does not suggest that in the applicability or otherwise the Occupational Health and Safety Act provisions can only be relied upon, if at all, by reference to a provision such as <case>. Nor does the decision in Waters as applied in Burrows necessarily lead to such a conclusion. 
The scope and operation of the specific exception in <case> may in some cases be able to accommodate or operate as to permit reliance upon a relevant provision of the Occupational Health and Safety Act or other statute or regulation subject to such meeting the test stated in Waters by McHugh J at 413. There, his Honour's reasons indicate a difficulty in meeting the strict requirements of <case> where reliance is founded on general provisions such as <case> or <case> of Acts such as the Occupational Health and Safety
Act: see also Burrows. In this case the plaintiff on appeal also relies upon the general exception in <case>, if it otherwise needs to.

In my view once the first defendant by law was unable to work in her position in the restaurant because of her Hepatitis C condition then there was no unlawful discriminatory conduct of the employer, even statutory exceptions apart. The law does not require or impose a duty or obligation in terms of the first act of discrimination allegedly found. The failure if one may call it such to "transfer" was not an unlawful act of discrimination.

Further or alternatively, in the circumstances the plaintiff had in any event brought itself within the exception contained in <case> and for this additional reason it did not do anything unlawful.

As I have said, before the Tribunal the first defendant's counsel said that "she accepts the [Food
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/)"; that the first defendant was not seeking the employer's contravention of the Act but rather that she wanted "other work", that the employer should have "done everything in its powers to offer her a transfer". Clearly the complaint is not that there was discrimination in removing the first defendant from her employment as a casual in the restaurant, but rather that of there being a failure to transfer, create new employment or to provide suitable employment in work not prohibited by law. As I have said there was no such unlawful discrimination in the plaintiff failing to do these things.

In my view there is nothing in <case> to suggest that it is a further condition for the operation of the statutory exception that an employer should further, or alternatively, provide suitable employment or work to a casual employee, who is by law unable to do the work he/she is employed to do. Nor do I see how the first defendant can in the circumstances of this case avoid the consequences of the legal prohibition by claiming some duty on the part of the plaintiff to provide a different casual job in another section or department of its store. Further or alternatively, in my view any breach of the section, or unlawful discrimination, if any, (and I do not consider there was) would have been answered by the provisions of the Act": <case>. Thus in my view it cannot be said in this case, that any failure to employ "or transfer" the first defendant in a new and different job, or to provide other suitable but different work, constituted an act of unlawful discrimination. As I have also said, <case> cannot be relied upon to create any positive duty to transfer to another job in another section or department of the plaintiff' store. Nor can the consequences of such in this case be avoided by the first defendant's claim of discrimination in failing to transfer to create a new position.

As to <case>, it is not necessary for me to decide whether the plaintiff would also have been further or entitled to rely upon <case> dealing with public health, to establish that there was no unlawful discrimination, upon the basis that if the [Food
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/) [Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s30.html) applied, then <case> in turn applied, independently of any need by the plaintiff to have recourse to [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s54.html)
Nor is it necessary to consider for the same reasons the extent to which the employer may further or alternatively, rely upon [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s54.html) invoking not the [Public Health
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pha1991126/) and [Food
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/) and its regulations, but rather [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fa198957/s15.html) of the Occupational Health and Safety Act.

My conclusion in relation to the alleged first act is that the first defendant in my view failed to establish any statutory breach or unlawful discrimination and further or alternatively, if she had such was "neutralised" by the provisions of <case> of the Act. In the circumstances of this case there was no unlawful discrimination in the plaintiff's failure to transfer the first defendant.

To conclude it was not open to the Tribunal to find the first act of discrimination and it was in error in doing so.

Second Act of Discrimination: The "Condition": 
I now turn to consider the second condition.

As I have said on appeal the first defendant also sought to support her case by reference to a second act of discrimination found by the Tribunal. The second act relates it is said to the imposition of an unreasonable condition of employment.

No submission has been advanced by the plaintiff in specific terms, that the
Tribunal misdirected itself when determining that the condition itself constituted discrimination within the meaning of the Act. This said, the finding that there was an act of discrimination involved in it, is challenged.
The Tribunal said (at 84): "The Respondent (the plaintiff herein) attempts to take a virtuous stance in relation to that issue but the Tribunal rejects the Respondent's arguments on that point. Indeed, it is the view of the Tribunal that that condition in itself constituted discrimination within the meaning of the Act. No other employee, it may be surmised in the absence of evidence to the contrary was engaged on such a basis and further it is the view of the Tribunal that there would be no need for such information to be passed onto the first aid staff until such time as the need to know arose if it ever did". [my emphasis].

The above passage, raised a question as to whether the stated reasoning supports the conclusion that the condition in itself constituted discrimination. There is a clear difference between an inference on the one hand and surmise on the other hand: cf Luxton versus Vines [(1952) 85 CLR ]
at 358; Holloway versus McFeeters <case>; [(1956) 94 CLR 470.] Ordinarily an inference can be drawn from facts, found, not from surmise. I would also observe the words "in the absence of evidence to the contrary" whilst appearing in the reasons for decision in (Ex A p 84) are not to be found in the reasons for decision commencing at p 90 which appears to be the signed "decision". No explanation for the difference appears. No specific point has been raised in relation to these differences.

It seems to me appropriate to observe that this case is one to be considered against the background that there had in fact been disclosure by the first defendant that she had Hepatitis C and that in fact the plaintiff, Mr
Garstang, the Restaurant Supervisor Ms Mitchell and the "2 IC" Ms Shannon were aware of the first defendant having Hepatitis C. In the case of the first two persons, the first defendant had told them. Ms Shannon's evidence was that she was told by the employer upon the basis she was "2 IC" in the restaurant, where the first defendant had worked and upon a need to know basis. She had roster involvement. The point to be made is that some "senior" employees at the plaintiff's store actually knew of the first defendant's condition. The case was not one where such persons did not have the information at all. It was known to some. The plaintiff however, was seeking permission of the first defendant to give this information to another limited class of person, the first aid staff, on the advice of the company doctor. Presumably, her permission was being sought to avoid a possible claim or allegation of breach of confidence, (not of discrimination), if the information were given without her authority, to the first aid staff.

When dealing with the "condition" issue, the second act of discrimination appears on analysis properly to be considered in the context of <case> rather than <case>. The first defendant's cause of action in relation to the second act of discrimination is limited to the complaint that the employer imposed an inappropriate condition in the terms on which it was prepared to offer employment to the first defendant, a view also consistent with the approach to the case Ex A p 84. See the words "engaged on such a basis" in the reasons at that page.

On the other hand it is also interesting to observe that the plaintiff later in August 1994 made an unconditional offer of "work" outside the restaurant; without "condition". These matters stated it nevertheless falls for me to consider whether the Tribunal erred in law in holding that the so called condition sought to be imposed in April 1994 constitutes discrimination.

Two reasons appear to have been given by the Tribunal for holding that it was an act of discrimination. Firstly, it was surmised that no other employee was engaged on such a basis; and secondly, there was no need for such information to be passed on to the first aid staff "until such time as the need to know arose, if ever it did" (what ever such may in terms mean). The Tribunal did not suggest or find that if the first aid staff were told of the information there might be a breach of confidence by them involving an unauthorised or improper leakage of private information given to them. As to the first reason,
I have already indicated the difficulty with such finding. The finding indicates that there was no actual evidence to support it. Next, there is no evidence as to the basis on which persons were engaged and/or in terms of revealing potentially infectious medical conditions generally, including
Hepatitis C. Next, in relation to the second matter, senior staff were aware of her condition. Further there was no evidence elicited to support the view that there was no need for information to be passed on. The only unchallenged evidence was the company doctor's to the contrary. Presumably the company was not prepared to breach a confidence without the first defendant's permission, or put its first aid staff at risk by not telling them in accordance with medical advice from the company doctor. The situation confronting it was a difficult one concerning use of confidential information. Once the company was aware of her condition and obtained medical advice, the matter of telling the first aid staff who might be called on, to provide first aid to the first defendant in a variety of circumstances including why such person might be at risk of contracting Hepatitis C was clearly one of proper concern. Presumably if the information were passed on to the first aid staff, or was otherwise contained in first aid or personal records of the first defendant, the information would have been required to be treated in confidence. That said, there is a distinction between an issue of confidentiality and one of discrimination.

However, in making the above observations it is appropriate to add that the company doctor's view or advice cannot of itself be decisive on the issue of discrimination or unlawful conduct: see Waters' case.

In my view in the circumstances of this case, <case> aside, for reasons given, I do not consider that it has been established there was a second act of unlawful discrimination or breach in relation to the condition sought to be imposed, or that it was open to the Tribunal to hold that there was discrimination or statutory on the evidence or for the reasons stated.

However, if I be wrong in such a view then I consider that despite acting on advice of the company doctor the plaintiff further or alternatively, failed to establish an exception falling within <case> of the Act, based on a need to comply with <case> of the Occupational Health & Safety Act. Thus, if there was a prima facie unlawful discrimination in relation to the condition, s 54 was not available to answer it. The plaintiff's assertion that the imposition of the condition permitting telling the first aid staff who might be foreseeably involved in treating the first defendant on a first aid basis, was required as a matter of law by <case> should not be accepted: see
Waters (at 413); Burrows (at 77,448) and Carter. The "necessary" element was not met or satisfied. The company doctor's view cannot be decisive of that issue either. I see no error in the Tribunal's decision implicitly rejecting the employer's argument based on <case>. This said, I see some potential conflict from its duty of care to its employees (the standard is not a low one) from including a responsibility to prevent accidents, and the fact that the law of negligence, (as well as <case> of the Occupational
Health & Safety Act) which does not with an appropriate degree of certainty allow an employer to know in advance by way of taking of precautions what it should or should not do, or know until after the event whether it is liable to an injured plaintiff.

Thus to sum up my views in relation to the second act of discrimination in my opinion the imposition of the condition was not an unlawful act of discrimination or one open to be found in the circumstances. However, if I be in error in this view the plaintiff's argument based on <case> of the Act by reference to <case> of the Occupational Health & Safety Act nevertheless, should be rejected.

I turn to a number of matters that have been raised and which I will briefly deal with.

It has been argued before me that the Tribunal in effect denied the plaintiff procedural fairness in a number of respects. Firstly, it refused an adjournment when it ought to have done so, secondly, it refused to permit it to call witnesses on the issue of the first defendant's work record, thirdly, in not acting upon the uncorroborated evidence of Dr Skapinker, fourthly, in finding that Mr Garstang went into "panic mode" when told by the first defendant that she had Hepatitis C and finally, the statement that the
Tribunal was appalled at the apparent lack of procedures for management of the respondent.

Despite my earlier conclusions, I shall deal with these matters briefly.

I deal with the first matter of the failure to grant an adjournment. In my view the Tribunal put in place a timetable to ensure that both the first defendant and the plaintiff would be well on notice of each other's case prior to the hearing of the matter. Orders were made. The first defendant (the claimant before the Tribunal) was in blatant breach of the Tribunal both in terms of filing her points of claim and "statements of evidence". No excuse for such was furnished. The orders were made in September 1995 after the hearing was fixed for May 1996. The first defendant was in clear and blatant breach of the orders including not filing an affidavit in relation to the matter until the morning of the hearing. No appropriate explanation for such breaches was provided by the first defendant.

Although the matter of the failure to grant an adjournment is raised in connection with a claim of denial of procedural fairness, it seems to me that the matter should perhaps be more appropriately viewed as raising the question as to whether the Tribunal erred in law in refusing to grant an adjournment:
Sali versus SPC Limited <case>; <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 294]; Cohen v McWilliam & Anor [(1995) 38 NSWLR 476] (application for adjournment to enable a new issue to be raised notwithstanding non compliance with court rules, procedures and directions).
As to breaches of directions and possible consequences: see also SPCC versus A.
I .S. Pty Limited [(1993) 29 NSWLR 487] at 495. I see no reason why the principles discussed in those cases should not ordinarily apply to, and be implemented by a body such as the Tribunal.

Had I been satisfied that the plaintiff had established a case of prejudice in consequence of the first defendant's non compliance with the Tribunal's directions and the failure to grant an adjournment in the circumstances stated, this would have reflected an error of law, however, the ground advanced was in terms formulated. At the end of the day I do not consider that the ground is made out. This is because as I stated during argument no prejudice was shown to have been actually suffered by the plaintiff.

Next, the plaintiff attacks the finding of Mr Garstang going into "panic mode" in terms of reflecting denial of procedural fairness. It submits it is a finding not open on the evidence, that it was not a matter in issue, was not put to him or raised in cross-examination, or mentioned for the first time until the reasons for decision. The reference to "panic mode" was not required for the purposes of decision making, has a potential for adversely affecting his reputation or career. It is the type of observation that may itself provoke an appeal and in my view it was unwarranted, unjustified and not supported by the evidence.

Next, as to the Tribunal's observation about being "appalled at the apparent lack of procedures and guidelines", the plaintiff justifiably in my view complains that this too was a finding not justified by the evidence, nor a matter relevant or in issue. Indeed, it submits it was also one mentioned for the first time in the reasons for judgment, and was unwarranted and potentially unjustifiably damaging to its commercial reputation. I agree that it was not open to make such a finding or to make the observation in the circumstances. There is no evidence to support it. In any event I would note in passing that there was no dispute in relation to information furnished to the Board by the plaintiff on 30 November 1994 (Tab 8 of the President's
Report, AB p 122) that there had been no previous cases of Hepatitis C of an employee reported to the company (by which I take it to mean prior to the instant case). On appeal the first defendant conceded that there was no evidence "of what guidelines or procedures should have been in place". None was led by the first defendant. The content of such was not stated by the
Tribunal. It is also difficult to see the relevance of the remarks to the matter in issue or the basis for the comment. The unnecessary remarks were not called for or required for the purposes of decision making.

Next, there is no procedural unfairness associated with dealing with the views of Dr Skapinker, the plaintiff company doctor. The complaint asserting such should be rejected.

Finally, I do not accept that the plaintiff was precluded from calling witnesses on any issue.

However, despite these remarks, some looseness of language and unhappy phrasing of some of the Tribunal's thoughts, I see no basis for concluding that these additional matters jointly, severally or in the alternative in this case reflect a denial of procedural fairness or otherwise raise a question of law reflective of error.

Compensation: 
In my view the plaintiff has shown error in relation to the orders for compensation. Even had I dismissed the appeal in relation to the findings (both or either) of unlawful discrimination I would nevertheless still have allowed the appeal against the award(s) of compensation and remitted the case to the Tribunal for assessment, had it been necessary to do so. Questions have arisen on appeal as to the proper approach to the matter of assessment of compensation under the Act.

The Tribunal awarded the first defendant $2,000 for pain and suffering and a further sum of $31,600 for "loss of income" dating from 1 March 1994 until 21
May 1996. I have already referred to the fact that the Tribunal did not in awarding compensation make any apportionment between the two found acts of discrimination, and that the award for loss of income dates from the first act of discrimination. I have held that neither of the two acts of discrimination were open to be found. If I be wrong in such view and for example, there was for example, but one act of discrimination, quantum would need to be again considered, for that reason.

The plaintiff challenges both findings, complaining of absence of reasons, and of error and in any event that the awards on their face reflect error of law or fact, and were in any event excessive and wholly disproportionate for any loss or damage caused by the plaintiff's conduct in relation to either or both acts of discrimination found.

The parties failed to provide assistance either in terms of evidence or more significantly in submissions. That said the Tribunal was nevertheless, still obligated to give proper reasons for its awards of compensation.

In my opinion in this case the failure to give reasons of itself would in any event require that the appeal be allowed on the issue of the compensation awards and that the matter would require a remittal to the Tribunal for assessment: <case>: Soulemezis; Beale; Absolon. The basis for the awards under both of the heads is not revealed by the evidence and was the subject of considerable dispute before me. The relevant legal principles applicable to the determination of compensation also has been the subject of extensive debate.

Leaving aside the absence of reasons, there are difficulties in determining the basis of the award for $2,000. Competing arguments were put to me that I regard as being unsatisfactory in terms of resolving the matter.

An award for injuries to feelings is not automatically to be made whenever unlawful discrimination is proved or admitted. There must be evidence of compensable loss to found an award of compensation under <case>. Injury must be proved though it will often be easy to prove in the sense that no Tribunal will take much persuasion that the anger distress and affront caused by an act of discrimination has injured the applicant's feelings: Ministry of Defence v Cannock & Ors [(1994) IRLR 500.] 
Challenge is also made to the award of compensation of $31,600 for loss of income. Again no reasons were given for such a finding. It was a large sum awarded until the day of the hearing, and for a period in excess of two years.

How the sum of $31,600 was arrived at is not clear. The plaintiff and the first defendant have put forward different methods of calculation. Both parties rely heavily upon Ex A, pp 123-124. It is difficult to see how, absent reasons, the Tribunal arrived at its calculation. Although the Tribunal made a finding that the first defendant was working an average of 25 hours per week in February 1994, neither party suggested a figure approximating $31,600 based on a 25 hour working week either on a gross or net calculation. The first defendant on the materials also worked overtime. How such matter was factored into the award one does not know. Indeed, the plaintiff asserts that the
Tribunal was also in error in find 25 hours was the working period and submits that it should have been a finding of 20.25 hours per week. Next, it is common ground that the finding reflects gross figures and not net loss or after tax income. In my view the financial loss needed to be calculated in any event on an after tax or net loss: see Bennett & Anor versus Everitt & Anor [(1988) EOC 92-244] at p 77,285; Cannock. The common law cases in the field of tort also support the after tax approach.

Next, on its face the sum of $31,600 appears to be excessive. There was no evidence that after March 1994 the first defendant sought any employment in work at all, in work for which she was qualified, or in work not precluded to her by the application of the public health and food laws. She appears to have been fully compensated on the basis of a total weekly loss for over two years.

In my view, despite the submissions of the first defendant, unstated error in approach both in law (and in fact) can be discerned particularly in the award for loss of income. The assessment of compensation (including for "financial loss" to use the terminology employed by the Tribunal) should be treated in the same way as an action in tort: Allders International Pty Limited v
Anstee & Ors [(1986) EOC 92-157.] Such an approach appears to have been accepted by McHugh JA in Australian Postal
Commission versus Dao & Ors [(1985) 3 NSWLR 565] at -605; and by Einfeld J in Bennett & Anor at p 77,280-1. The assessment of compensation should accord with common law principles relating to actions for tort: see also in the United Kingdom, Cannock's case.

However, in the instant case there is a more fundamental difficulty with the finding of $31,600 as being the financial loss. The first defendant had been employed for three years as a casual (waitress) in the restaurant. During that period she was employed under the Restaurant Award and paid under the award. She was subsequently precluded by law from working in her job under that Award. Pre February 1994 earnings in her employment in the restaurant could no longer furnish a basis for computing financial loss, even assuming contrary to my finding, that there was an act of discrimination in not employing the first defendant elsewhere in other sections in the store ie as a shop assistant elsewhere. In that event she presumably would have come under the Shop Employees Award. There is no evidence as to what comparable net earnings would or might have been earnt in different work under a different award, in different departments of the store working different rostered hours.
The point to be made is that when as a matter of law the first defendant could not do her work in the restaurant, her earnings in the restaurant could not provide a basis for computation of earnings in doing work elsewhere in the store including under a different award, where different rates of pay and different rosters would need to be considered. The first defendant also had worked as a casual with the plaintiff for three years.

The first defendant also submitted that principles of mitigation do not arise as a matter of law in assessment of compensation under the Act. This submission should be rejected. Next, it seems to me that the authorities to which I have referred do suggest that principles of mitigation of loss may also arise to be considered in particular cases for consideration by the
Tribunal in a particular case: Allders; Bennett; Cannock.
However, in relation to the plaintiff's offer of work in August, despite the submissions of the plaintiff and my own reservations, as to the Tribunal's finding in relation to the August 1994 "offer" this is a finding of fact raising no question of law: R. J. Brodie Pty Limited versus Pennell <case>; [(1966) 117 CLR 665.] 
There is nothing in the decision of the Court of Appeal in A.I.S. v
Najdovska [(1988) 12 NSWLR 587] that says mitigation of damage principles or for that matter evaluation of chance matters (as to the latter see for eg Norris versus Blake [(1997) 41 NSWLR ]
per Clarke JA at 68-69 and in United Kingdom, in Cannock) cannot as a matter of law be brought into account in determining compensation under the
Act. In fact authorities suggest to the contrary. Whether such should or ought to be in a particular case will be for the Tribunal to determine depending upon the circumstances of a particular case.

I have dealt extensively with the matter of compensation and its assessment under the Act in the event that I was wrong in my views on whether the plaintiff was in breach of the Act, and secondly, because absence of reasons and errors in the mode and assessment of compensation particularly of so called loss of income have been established.

In this case the plaintiff has established that the decision appealed from proceeded upon some error of law or misapprehension of fact. Indeed, even if the precise nature of the error was not discoverable, the amount awarded for loss of income would in any event, appear to be excessive.

I do not propose to make a costs order without further hearing from the parties.

In my view the plaintiff's appeal should be allowed.

The orders that I make are as follows:
That the appeal be allowed.
That the Tribunal's determination and order be quashed.
That the first defendant's complaint to the Tribunal be dismissed.

The exhibits may be returned. I grant liberty to apply in relation to costs.
 --------------- * * * 
