

Video Excellence Pty Limited versus Cincotta Matter No Ca 40201/98 [1998] NSWSC (8 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
VIDEO EXCELLENCE PTY LIMITED versus DOMINIC CINCOTTA 
CA 40201/98 July 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Priestley JA, Sheller JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
HEADNOTE 
This is an appeal against a judgment dismissing proceedings on the ground that the plaintiff/claimant company had been deregistered pursuant to s574 of the
Corporations Law, and accordingly did not exist. The Australian Securities
Commission subsequently reinstated the registration of the company under s574(2). Therefore, at the date of the proceedings of the Court of Appeal, the company was registered. The issue before the Court was to determine the effect of the deeming provision of s574(2).

Held:
Section 75A of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) provides that an appeal before the Court is by way of re-hearing. In an appeal stricto sensu, the position at the date of the trial at first instance is determinative. In an appeal by way of re-hearing, the position at the time of the appeal is determinative. The Court must therefore act on the basis of the position as it presently appears.
By reason of the retrospective operation of s574(2), the claimant/plaintiff is deemed never to have lost its legal personality. It has such personality now. It is, and was, entitled to pursue the proceedings in this Court: Ash Street Properties Ltd versus Pollnow, Supreme Court of New South
Wales, Court of Appeal, Handley JA, unreported, 1 September 1995; Pollnow v
Ash Street Properties Ltd [(1996) 130 FLR 235]; Jekos
Holdings Pty Ltd versus Australian Horticultural Finance Pty Ltd (No 2) [(1995) 1
Qd R 612]; Tyman's Limited versus Craven [(1952) 2 QB 100] at 112-113;
Natural Selection Clothing Ltd versus Commissioner of Trade Marks [(1996) 2 NZLR .]
The trial judge was correct to apply the reasoning in United Service
Insurance Co Ltd versus Lang [(1935) SR 487.] In subsequent cases, proceedings have been struck out as an abuse of process of the court, being proceedings instituted on behalf of a non-existent entity:
Sweeney & Vandeleur Pty Ltd versus BMY Australia Limited [(1993) 11 ACSR ]
at 360; Re Morton; Ex Parte Mitchell Products Pty Ltd <case>; [(1996) 21 ACSR 497] at 514-515.
It was not necessary to decide whether the trial judge was correct in dismissing the proceedings rather than striking them out. However, the power to dismiss under Pt18 r3 of the District Court Rules would not seem to be applicable. The power under Pt26 r5B to strike out, on the other hand, would have been available to His Honour.

Pt26 r5B contains within it an ability of the District Court to permit the reinstatement of the proceedings, in contrast with a dismissal which, under
Pt1 r4 and Pt18 r7 requires the institution of new proceedings. Accordingly, the proper exercise of discretion in circumstances in which the court does not adjourn a matter to await the outcome of any application for restoration to the register would appear to favour a strike out rather than a dismissal.

ORDERS Leave to appeal granted.
 Appeal allowed The order of Raphael DCAJ that the proceedings be dismissed is set aside.
 The notice of motion dated 10 February 1998 is dismissed.
 The claimant should pay the costs of the motion before Raphael 
DCAJ.
 The opponent should pay the costs of the appeal.
 No order as to costs with respect top the cross-appeal for which leave is sought.

JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: By statement of claim filed in the Supreme Court, Video Excellence Pty Limited, the plaintiff/claimant, instituted proceedings against the defendant/opponent. By order made on 18 September 1997, the proceedings were transferred from the Supreme Court to the District Court of New South Wales. 
The plaintiff asserts that it lent money to Keyport Trading Pty. Limited ("Keyport") and that the defendant, a former director of Keyport, had guaranteed the payment of all moneys due and owing by the plaintiff pursuant to a loan agreement between the plaintiff and Keyport. As at 1 April 1994, the statement of claim asserted an amount of $416,000 was owing to the plaintiff.

By a notice of motion dated 13 March 1998, the defendant sought orders in the
District Court that the proceedings be dismissed or alternatively that they be struck out. Orders were also sought by way of security for costs, which matter was resolved and is not before this Court.

The notice of motion came before Acting Judge Raphael on 13 March 1998. The point in issue was a short one. The plaintiff had been deregistered and accordingly did not exist. This occurred pursuant to s574 of the Corporations
Law which relevantly provides as follows: "574 (1)...the Commission may...by notice in writing published in the
Gazette, cancel the registration of the company and, on the publication in the
Gazette of the last mentioned notice the company is dissolved...

If the Commission is satisfied that the registration of a company was cancelled as the result of an error on the part of the Commission, the
Commission may reinstate the registration of the company, and thereupon the company shall be deemed to have continued in existence as if its registration had not been cancelled.

If a person is aggrieved by the cancellation of the registration of a company, the Court, on an application made by the person at any time within 15 years after the cancellation, may, if satisfied that the company was, at the time of the cancellation, carrying on business or in operation or otherwise satisfied that it is just that the registration of the company be reinstated, order the reinstatement of the registration of the company.

On the lodging of an office copy of an order under subsection (3), the company shall be deemed to have continued in existence as if its registration had not been cancelled." 
Pursuant to s576 the property of any company which has been dissolved vests in the Australian Securities Commission.

The claimant was deregistered on 6 July 1994. The statement of claim is dated May 1994, that is before deregistration. The affidavit verifying the statement of claim was sworn on 25 June 1994 once again before deregistration.
However, the statement of claim was filed on 28 July 1994, that is after deregistration.

On 13 March 1998, when the proceedings on the notice of motion were before his
Honour, Video Excellence Pty. Limited was then deregistered. His Honour was informed that an application had been made to the Australian Securities
Commission for reinstatement to the register. However, no decision had then been made by the ASC. No application had been made under s574 (3) to the Court for reinstatement. His Honour concluded: "I have before me a non-existent person and a non-existent person cannot present claims.

The next question to decide is whether the proceedings should be dismissed or the statement of claim should be struck out. No argument has been presented to me on the difference between the two and possibly in this case there is not any, but it is the proceedings which were commenced wrongly and it is my view that the appropriate order is to dismiss the proceedings with an order for costs".

It appears from additional material made available to this Court that on 24
March 1998, the Australian Securities Commission acted to restore the registration of the company.

Accordingly, as at the date of the proceedings in this court the company was registered. No doubt, the Commission exercised its powers to reinstate the registration of the company under s574(2). It is not clear what was regarded as the "error", which could ground the requisite `satisfaction' of the ASC.
There has been no challenge to that decision and the claimant is entitled to a presumption of regularity.

In accordance with the operation of s574(2): "The company shall be deemed to have continued in existence as if its registration had not been cancelled." 
Section 123 of the Corporations Law relevantly provides: "123(1) Subject to this law, on and from the day specified in the certificate under section 121 as the day of commencement of a company's registration under this Division, the subscribers to the company's memorandum, together with such other persons as from time to time become members of the company, are an incorporated company by the name stated in the memorandum.

A company registered under this Division: is capable of performing all the functions of a body corporate; is capable of suing and being sued; has perpetual succession; shall have a Common Seal; has power to acquire, hold and dispose of property." 
The issue before this court was to determine the effect of the deeming provision in s574(2).

When the matter came on for hearing today, counsel for the opponent's attention was directed to the provisions of s75A, specifically subss (5), (6) and (10) thereof of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/): "75A(5) Where the decision or other matter under appeal has been given after a hearing, the appeal shall be by way of rehearing.

The Court shall have the powers and duties of the court, body or other persons from whom the appeal is brought, including powers and duties concerning - amendment; the drawing of inferences and the making of findings of fact; and the assessment of damages and other money sums.
 ......

The Court may make any findings or assessment, give any judgment, make any order or give any direction which ought to have been given or made or which the nature of the case requires." 
By force of those provisions the appeal before this court is an appeal by way of re-hearing. It should also be noted there is no relevant restriction on the right of appeal to this court to be found in [s127](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s127.html) of the [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) .

In an appeal in the strict sense, the position at the date of the trial at first instance is determinative. In an appeal by way of re-hearing the position at the time of the appeal is determinative. The issue has often arisen in the context of a change in the law between trial and appeal. The retrospective operation of a statute is in the same position. This Court must act on the basis of the position as it now appears. By reason of the retrospective operation of s574(2), the claimant/plaintiff is deemed never to have lost its separate legal personality. It has such personality now. It is, and was, entitled to pursue the proceedings in this court.

When these sections were drawn to the attention of counsel for the opponent he immediately appreciated their force and that in an appeal by way of re-hearing the court would have regard to the retrospective effect of the legislation. In any event, there is authority which indicates that the retrospective force of the legislation would have had the consequence which counsel conceded. I refer particularly to Ash Street Properties Ltd versus Pollnow Supreme Court of New
South Wales, Court of Appeal, Handley JA, unreported 1 September 1995, and on appeal Pollnow versus Ash Street Properties Ltd [(1996) 130 FLR 235]; Jekos
Holdings Pty Ltd versus Australian Horticultural Finance Pty Ltd (No 2) [(1995) 1 Qd R 612]; [(1991) 121 FLR 362], and the reliance in that case on the English authority Tyman's Limited versus Craven [(1952) 2 QB 100], especially at 112-113. (See also Natural Selection Clothing
Ltd versus Commissioner of Trade Marks [(1996) 2 NZLR 148).] 
The trial judge applied the reasoning in United Service Insurance Co Ltd v
Lang [(1935) SR 487] especially at 496-497. That authority is plainly applicable in the instant case. At the time that the matter was before his
Honour the plaintiff did not exist and, at the very least, it was appropriate for the court to take no further steps. What happened in United Service
Insurance Company (supra) was described by Sir Frederick Jordan at 497: "It having been ascertained that there is no appellant before us, we can do nothing except refrain from proceeding any further." 
In subsequent cases proceedings have been struck out as an abuse of the process of the court, being proceedings instituted on behalf of a non-existent entity. (See Sweeney & Vandeleur Pty Ltd versus BMY Australia Limited [(1993) ACSR 356] at 360 per Cole J; Re Morton; Ex Parte Mitchell Products
Pty Ltd <case>; [(1996) 21 ACSR 497] at 514-515 per Sackville J).

It is not necessary to decide whether his Honour was correct in dismissing the proceedings rather than striking them out. However, the power to dismiss under
Pt18 r3 of the District Court Rules would not seem to be applicable. The power under Pt26 r5B to strike out would have been plainly available to his
Honour.

By reason of the fact that Pt26 r5B contains within it an ability of the
District Court to permit the reinstatement of the proceedings, in contrast with a dismissal which, under Pt1 r4 and Pt18 r7 requires the institution of new proceedings, the proper exercise of discretion in circumstances in which the court does not adjourn a matter to await the outcome of any application for restoration to the register, would appear to favour a strike out rather than a dismissal. This has the effect that a District Court would be able to grant all necessary relief to a party, without the necessity for appeal to this court.

This appeal being by way of re-hearing, the circumstances being as they now appear, with the retrospective consequences that s574(2) provides, in my opinion the appeal should be allowed.

The costs order made by his Honour with respect to the proceedings on the notice of motion before him was appropriate in the sense that some form of success for the opponent/defendant was called for, even if not the particular order made by his Honour. The costs order made by his Honour, because of the non-existence of the plaintiff at the relevant time, was against a director of the plaintiff. Now that the plaintiff is restored to good health it is appropriate that the costs order below be substituted by an order against the claimant/plaintiff.

The orders I propose are: Leave to appeal granted.
 Appeal allowed.
 The order of his Honour Raphael DCAJ that the proceedings be dismissed is set aside.
 The notice of motion dated 10 February 1998 is dismissed.
 The claimant should pay the costs of the motion before Raphael DCAJ.
 The opponent should pay the costs of the appeal.
 No order as to costs with respect to the cross-appeal for which leave is sought.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree. 
SHELLER JA: I also agree. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The orders of the court will be as I have indicated. * * * 
