

The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Bathurst v
Koffman and Anor [1996] NSWSC 346 (9 August 1996) 
THE TRUSTEES OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH FOR THE DIOCESE OF BATHURST v
KOFFMAN & ANOR /92; CL 329/87 (Central West Registry) August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY P; PRIESTLEY, SHELLER JJA 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - personal injury - school student injured while waiting to catch bus after school - lack of supervision - whether school owed duty of care - causation - Wyong 
Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
The first respondent was a student at a school operated and supervised by the appellant. On 8 December 1983, after school had concluded for the day, he went to catch a bus outside a high school maintained by the New South Wales
Government. At about 3.30 pm he sustained a serious injury to his left eye. He sued the Nominal Defendant appointed under the Government and Crown Suits Act , and the appellant in negligence to recover damages for his injury.

Studdert J held that the high school authority was negligent for failing to provide adequate supervision and control of its students after school hours, and that had proper supervision been provided, the injury could have been avoided. His Honour also held that the appellant owed a duty of care to its students while they waited to catch their buses outside the school, and that it was negligent for failing to provide supervision for the respondent. The
Nominal Defendant did not appeal against this judgment.

The appellant argued that it did not owe a duty of care to the respondent at the time and place where he suffered the injury, or alternatively that the respondent's injury was not caused by a breach of duty by the appellant.

HELD: . If a pupil is injured while the school is supervising or should have been supervising that pupil's activities, the duty of care owed by the school authority depends on the relationship of proximity which itself derives from the fact that the injured person is a pupil. Other necessary ingredients are a risk of injury reasonably foreseeable to a person in the position of the school authority and a failure to do what a reasonable person would have done in response to the risk.

Wyong Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47.
The nature and extent of the duty of the teacher to the pupil is dictated by the particular circumstances of the relationship. Its extent is not necessarily measured or limited by the fact that the final bell has rung and the pupil has left the school grounds. The relationship does not begin and end at definite times each school day.
 (per Mahoney P dissenting) This case turns not upon whether a duty of care existed but upon whether the school had an obligation to do particular things in the interest of the pupil and whether that obligation was discharged.

There existed various dangers or possible dangers incidental to the various courses which the school children travelled between school and home. In general, once the possibility of injury is recognised by the school, it may be obliged to warn the students or parents of these dangers. However, a school is not obliged to provide personal supervision to safeguard children against these injuries. Notwithstanding that the dangers could have been foreseen, there is a limit to what the law imposes upon a school. In this case, the plaintiff's injury was beyond that limit.
If the appellant had provided appropriate supervision of the primary school children, the accident would not have occurred. The respondent's injuries were caused by a breach of the appellant's duty of care.

ORDER 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: The facts are detailed in the judgment of Sheller JA which I have had the advantage of reading. His Honour's statement of them enables me to go directly to the issues raised by this appeal.

The plaintiff Mr Koffman left the school at the end of the school day. He proposed to walk some three or four hundred metres to a bus stop, to board the bus, to ride to the suburb where he was living, to alight from the bus, and walk to his home. He was injured before he boarded the bus; a pupil from another school threw a stick at him and injured his left eye. The issue to be determined is whether his school is liable in negligence for the injury that he suffered.

The appeal has a general importance. The Court is, I believe, entitled to know that in this State there are many students who, in coming to or going from school, follow a similar course. Some students walk home from their school.
Others, like Mr Koffman, walk to a bus stop or railway station, travel to their suburb, and walk home. To the extent to which I shall refer, it is necessary to determine the legal obligation of the school to such pupils.

The plaintiff's case has been laid and laid only in tort: no other case was argued. It was, I think, put effectively in two ways: that, as a matter of general principle, the school was under an obligation to care for the child's safety in the manner to which I shall refer; and that (alternatively) there were in the present case special circumstances which imposed on the school such an obligation. I shall consider each of these in turn.
THE SCHOOL'S GENERAL OBLIGATIONS: 
Mr McAlary QC, for the appellant school, limited his submissions to two: that, at the time when Mr Koffman was injured, the school owed no duty of care to him; and that (if it did) his injury was not caused by a breach of that duty of care. I shall deal with the second matter subsequently.

Mr McAlary based his submission that, at the time of the injury, the school owed the pupil no duty of care upon what he took from the observations of
Stephen J in Geyer versus Downs <case>; [(1977) 138 CLR 91] and from what was said in the decision referred to in that case, Richards versus State of Victoria (1969) VR 136. He submitted that, except in cases in which a school had undertaken a particular duty to care for the safety of a pupil, its duty of care was limited to the period when (as it was conveniently described) the relationship of master and pupil existed. That relationship, he submitted, in principle ceased to exist when the pupil left the school at the end of the school day.

In my opinion, the present problem does not turn upon whether the school had, in the sense in which the term has been used, a duty of care in respect of the pupil Mr Koffman. It is, of course, conventional in Australia to describe the components of a cause of action in negligence as: a duty of care; a breach of that duty; and consequent damage: see, eg, Fleming The Law of Torts (8th ed) at 103. Such a description of the components of the cause of action in negligence is convenient; it directs attention to three matters upon which the court must be satisfied. But, in a case such as the present, the term "duty of care" is apt to lead to confusion. I think it is convenient for present purposes to distinguish between three things: the existence of a duty of care, the obligation to do or not do particular things in the interests of the pupil, and whether that obligation was, in any relevant respect, discharged.
In my opinion, the present case turns, not upon whether a duty of care existed, but upon what (if anything) the school was, at the relevant time, obliged to do for Mr Koffman's safety and whether it did it.

It is no new insight that the requirement that there be a duty of care is, in effect, a limiting factor applied by the law to ensure that an obligation to do things for the safety of a prospective plaintiff is not imposed where, in principle, no obligation is appropriate. It is only if there be no considerations which warrant such a limitation that it is necessary to consider whether, in the particular case, there was an obligation to do particular things in the interest of the plaintiff's safety and (if so) what they are. I shall, in an endeavour to prevent confusion, use the term "duty of care" to refer to this limiting factor and use "obligation" and the like to refer to what (if a duty of care exists) the school was obliged to do in the interests of the pupil.

This view of duty of care as a limiting factor was stated with precision by
Lord Wilberforce in Anns versus Merton London Borough Council <case>; [(1978) AC ] at -2. His Lordship there said: "Through the trilogy of cases in this House - Donoghue versus Stevenson <case>; [[1932] AC 562], Hedley Byrne & Co Ltd versus Heller & Partners Ltd <case>; [[1964] AC 465], and Dorset Yacht Co Ltd versus Home Office <case>; [[1970] AC ], the position has now been reached that in order to establish that a duty of care arises in a particular situation, it is not necessary to bring the facts of that situation within those of previous situations in which a duty of care has been held to exist. Rather the question has to be approached in two stages.
First one has to ask whether, as between the alleged wrongdoer and the person who has suffered damage there is a sufficient relationship of proximity or neighbourhood such that, in the reasonable contemplation of the former, carelessness on his part may be likely to cause damage to the latter - in which a prima facie duty of care arises. Secondly, if the first question is answered affirmatively, it is necessary to consider whether there are any considerations which ought to negative, or to reduce or limit the scope of the duty or the class of person to whom it is owed or the damages to which a breach of it may give rise: see Dorset Yacht case <case>; [[1970] AC ] per
Lord Reid at p 1027. Examples of this are Hedley Byrne's case <case>; [[1964] AC ] where the class of potential plaintiffs was reduced to those shown to have relied upon the correctness of statements made, and Weller & Co versus Foot and Mouth
Disease Research Institute [[1966] 1 QB 569]; and (I cite these merely as illustrations, without discussion) cases about 'economic loss' where a duty has been held to exist, the nature of the recoverable damages was limited: see SCM (United Kingdom) Ltd versus WJ Whittall & Son Ltd [[1971] 1
QB 337] and Spartan Steel & Alloys Ltd versus Martin & Co (Contractors) Ltd <case>; [[1973] QB 27."] (What his Lordship there said has not, I think, been affected by the subsequent examination of that case).

The evolution of duty of care as a component of the cause of action in negligence is of comparatively recent origin. It has been traced in, for example, BH Winfield's article Duty in Tortious Negligence (1934) 34
Columbian Law Review 41 and in MJ Pritchard Scott versus Shepherd (1773) and the
Emergence of the Tort of Negligence (Selden Society (1976)). The development of the law of negligence and of the concept of a duty of care has not followed a single line but, over-simplified, the pleading in negligence initially involved merely the statement of the plaintiff's right, of the defendant's acts and of the injury caused to the plaintiff. The question in such a case was whether the defendant should be held liable in negligence for the acts or omissions which had been pleaded. The concept of duty of care had no role. If
Winfield and Pritchard be correct, the use of the term gradually developed, perhaps initially from the "relationship" cases (where the duty arose from the existence of the relationship of, eg, carrier or bailee: see Winfield at 44 et seq; Pritchard at 15 et seq). The term "duty" came to be used to indicate that the defendant was liable for the acts and omissions pleaded rather than to indicate that there was a separate "duty" component in the cause of action: cf generally Heaven versus Pender [(1883) 11 QBD 503] and Thomas v Quartermaine [(1887) 18 QBD 685]; Winfield at 54-58.

To this point in the development of the tort, liability was decided by the
Court by assessing each factual situation and determining whether, in such a situation, the defendant should be held liable. In Donoghue versus Stevenson,
Lord Atkin - developing what had been done in earlier cases such as Heaven v
Pender and Thomas versus Quartermaine - sought to evolve a verbal formula for determining when liability in tort arises, ie, for determining whether what the defendant had done should result in his being held liable for the damage he had done. His Lordship developed the "neighbour" test: subsequently, in
Australia, the "proximity" test has been developed: see, eg, Jaensch v
Coffey [(1984) 154 CLR 549.] 
But it has, I think, long been recognised that in reality the requirement that there be a duty of care as a condition precedent to liability is in effect a value judgment as to the factual situations in which carelessly caused loss should or should not be recoverable: see generally J Stone Province and
Function of Law (1946) at 181, 182; W Morison A Re-Examination of the Duty of Care [(1948) 11 Modern Law Review 9]; JC Smith and P Burns Donoghue versus Stevenson - The Not So
Golden Anniversary [(1983) 46 Modern Law Review 147.] See generally Minister Administering the [Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) versus San
Sebastian Pty Ltd [(1983) 2 NSWLR 268] The tests proposed for determining whether, in this sense, a duty of care exists are, of course, indeterminate: the "neighbourhood" test and the "proximity" test, if applied to a particular set of facts, do not lead inexorably to the conclusion that a duty does or does not exist. They direct attention to important considerations to be taken into account in deciding this question.
But, in the end, the determination is made by a normative decision of the court.

If there is a duty of care in the formal or technical sense, the defendant has an obligation to take care for the safety of the plaintiff. Where it is accepted that there are no circumstances which "ought to negative or to reduce or limit" the duty otherwise to be imposed upon the defendant, the court must then consider the content of the obligation which is imposed upon him. Merely to state that a defendant has such an obligation solves little. It is necessary to determine what that obligation requires the defendant to do or not to do. (I shall confine myself to the positive expression). It requires the plaintiff's lawyers, in pleading, and the court, in decision, to determine what acts that obligation required the defendant to do. It is his failure to do those acts which is effectively his negligence: see Phillis versus Daly [(1988) 15 NSWLR 65.] 
Such an obligation may be, and often is, multi-faceted: it may require the defendant to do a number of different things, some at one time and some at another. It is for the plaintiff initially and for the court ultimately to select from amongst the things which the defendant has done that which, for purposes of the law, constitutes the breach of the obligation imposed upon it by the law of negligence.

When a school accepts a pupil, it owes to him a duty of care, in the sense that it assumes obligations towards him. Those obligations involve that it do various things: one of them is to take appropriate care for his safety. It is the determination of what that obligation requires the school to do which is here in question.

What that obligation, the obligation of the school to do things for the safety of the pupil, will require to be done will depend upon the circumstances.
Thus, if it is plain to the school that, immediately outside the school premises, there is a busy and therefore dangerous road, the school will ordinarily have an obligation to shepherd pupils of a young age across the road. But if, in the course of walking from school to home, the student has reason to cross a busy road two kilometres from the school, it does not follow that the obligation of the school to take precautions for the safety of the student will involve that it shepherd the student across the road. I do not mean by this that a school may not have some obligations in respect of pupil safety even two kilometres from the school. Thus, if the school was made aware that, at that place, the student was habitually molested, it might arguably have an obligation, inter alia, to draw that matter to the attention of the parents, the police or others. I have referred to these examples to illustrate that what the obligation to take precautions in respect of a pupil's safety will require the school to do will vary according to the circumstances of time, place and otherwise.

In summary, a duty of care in the formal sense arises from the relationship of master and pupil. From that duty of care arises an obligation to take precautions for, inter alia, the pupil's safety. What precautions are to be taken depends, as I have indicated, upon the circumstances, including the time, place and otherwise at which it is suggested that the precautions should be taken.

I have spelled out these matters in perhaps unnecessary detail. But they illustrate the reason why, in my opinion, the matter is not to be determined, as Mr McAlary's argument suggested, by determining whether the school had a duty of care. The problem is one of a different nature. The obligation to take such precautions derives, as Stephen J suggested in Geyer versus Downs, from the existence of the master pupil relationship. In Geyer versus Downs, the pupil was injured prior to the commencement of school hours and prior to the time at which teachers would ordinarily be expected to be present to supervise the children. See 138 CLR at 94-5. When Stephen J said: at 95; that it was open to the jury "to conclude that when the plaintiff was injured there was already owed to her that morning a duty of care on the part of the headmaster, the relationship of schoolmaster and pupil having already come into existence", his Honour was, in my respectful opinion, using "duty of care" not merely in the technical sense to which I have referred, but as indicating an obligation upon the schoolmaster to do such things as were appropriate to care for the safety of the pupil.

I come now to consider what the school was required to do at the time and place of the plaintiff's injury. If one may follow the practical course suggested in Phillis versus Daly: at 71-2; this may be done by identifying what the plaintiff complains should have been done and determining whether its obligation to look to the pupil's safety required that the defendant do it.

In the present case, Studdert J, the trial judge, saw the particular problem as arising from "the propensity for mischief" of children, from the appellant school and the other high school, who gathered at the bus stop and he concluded that the risk "could have been avoided by having a teacher accompany the children over what was a relatively short distance and remain with them until the bus left". He recorded the plaintiff's case to be that the school "was negligent in failing to provide supervision for the plaintiff until he entered the Kelso bus, even though the relevant bus stop was some 300 to 400 metres from the school". It is upon this basis that the appeal was conducted.
I shall consider whether the obligation upon the school involved that it provide such supervision at that bus stop. I do this, as I have indicated, upon a general basis and without reference to the particular circumstances which have been relied upon as creating an obligation in this case.

The problem of determining what an obligation to take care requires to be done is, as in this case, a difficult one. If there be a criterion, ie, a verbal formula for determination of such a matter, it is that referred to by Mason J in Wyong Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47-8. The statement, though well known, warrants repetition. His Honour said: "... it is then for the tribunal of fact to determine what a reasonable man would do by way of response to the risk. The perception of the reasonable man's response calls for a consideration of the magnitude of the risk and the degree of the probability of its occurrence, along with the expense, difficulty and inconvenience of taking alleviating action and any other conflicting responsibilities which the defendant may have. It is only when these matters are balanced out that the tribunal of fact can confidently assert what is the standard of response to be ascribed to the reasonable man placed in the defendant's position.

The considerations to which I have referred indicate that a risk of injury which is remote in the sense that it is extremely unlikely to occur may nevertheless constitute a foreseeable risk. A risk which is not far-fetched or fanciful is real and therefore foreseeable. But, as we have seen, the existence of a foreseeable risk of injury does not in itself dispose of the question of breach of duty. The magnitude of the risk and its degree of probability remain to be considered with other relevant factors." 
The "reasonable man" is, in this context, a synonym for the court itself:
Davis Contractors versus Fareham Urban District Council <case>; [(1956) AC ] at -9 per Lord Radcliffe. Accordingly, it is for the court, taking into account matters of the kind to which Mason J referred, to determine what precaution should be taken.

Special circumstances apart, a school is not in my opinion obliged to provide a member of the staff or otherwise to supervise children who, three or four hundred metres away from the school, will wait to board a bus or other transport to take them to their suburb and so to their home. (I put aside the particular instructions which the school formulated in this regard which limited the obligation of the school effectively to the immediate vicinity of the school; I confine what I say at this stage to general principle). As I have indicated, it is not uncommon for children to walk a considerable distance between school and home or to travel even further by public transport. Dangers or possible dangers of various kinds are incidental to such journeys. A child who walks a kilometre or two from the school to the home will run the risk of injury in crossing a road; he or she will be at risk because of the propensity of a child of the instant age to act impulsively and without thought; there is the risk of injury from climbing fences or trees as children tend to do; and children are apt to be involved in disputes with other children. A school will, of course, recognise these possibilities. Where transport is involved, other risks will exist. But, with respect to those who may think otherwise, I do not think the law requires that a school provide supervision by a staff member to safeguard a child against such injuries.

I do not mean by this, recognising the possibility of injury, the school may not do, or be obliged to do, other things. It may warn children of what they should do; it may warn parents of the dangers incident to what the child is to do; and it may suggest that parents arrange supervision, from the school, the bus stop or otherwise. But personal supervision of the kind here in question is in my opinion not an obligation of the school.

Evidence was given at the trial of school rolls that suggests that there were "several hundred pupils" at the school; counsel suggested there were approximately 230. Some walked home from the school. Some went by a bus which stopped outside the school. Those who went to the bus stop here in question were few; the bus driver said "at the most" only about five. If there was an obligation to supervise the group of children that went to the bus stop in question, there was equally an obligation to supervise the other groups who went from the school in their various ways. In my opinion the obligation upon the school did not involve that it provide supervision for the pupils who walked home, supervision on the bus to prevent, eg, the throwing of objects or other disturbances and their proper alighting, or supervision during their walking from the school to the more distant bus stop.

In coming to this conclusion, I am conscious of the age of the plaintiff (he was twelve years old) and of the high level of the responsibility imposed on those who assume the care of children of that age. But the care of pupils cannot be the sole responsibility of the school to which they are sent, by those who have the care and custody of them. Notwithstanding that dangers can be foreseen, there is a limit to what the law imposes upon a school. The plaintiff's injury was, in my opinion, beyond that limit.

I have considered Mr McAlary's second submission, namely, that failure to provide physical supervision did not cause the plaintiff's injuries. The question of causality was not considered at length in Geyer versus Downs: cf 38
CLR at 105. Reference was made to it in my (dissenting) judgment in this
Court: Geyer versus Downs [(1975) 2 NSWLR 835] at 856-7.
See also Barnes versus Hay [(1988) 12 NSWLR 337] at 355-7.

The relationship between a failure to take a precaution against physical injury of the kind here in question the injury itself is not causal in the "billiard ball" sense. What is involved is a relationship which warrants attribution of blame. In Geyer versus Downs, I said at 856: "Prima facie, where a precaution is directed to, and is apt for, preventing the very kind of injury in question, and it is not taken, that failure may be held to be the cause of the injury, unless the particular facts indicate otherwise: compare the effect of lack of supervision in another context in
Wilton versus Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia; Model Investments Pty Ltd (Third Party) [(1973) 2 NSWLR 644] at 670; [(1974) 2 NSWLR 96]; see generally Vacwell Engineering Co Ltd versus BDH Chemicals
Ltd [(1971) 1 QB 88] at 105,106, and the cases there referred to." 
If the school was obliged to provide supervision at the bus stop, it was because, inter alia, children are apt to throw things at one another and cause injury. It is to prevent that that supervision is required. If that supervision had been provided, it is probable that the present injury would have been avoided. In that context, the necessary relationship is in my opinion established.
LIABILITY IN THE PRESENT CASE: 
It was submitted for the plaintiff that, whatever be the position generally, if a school knows of a particular danger affecting a pupil outside the school, it may be obliged to take precautions against that danger, even to the extent of providing physical supervision. As a general proposition, it cannot be denied that a case may arise in which the school's obligation extends to physical supervision in a case where otherwise they would not be required.
Accordingly, the question in the present case is whether the circumstances were such.

The learned trial judge reasoned carefully to the conclusion that the school had an obligation to provide supervision to and at the bus stop. It is, in my opinion, important to understand how he arrived at that conclusion. First, he fixed the school with notice, or imputed notice, that some children were catching the bus at the relevant stop near the high school. Mrs Keogh "honestly" believed that the school was "not aware of any child going to the high school to catch the appropriate bus". But his Honour concluded that the school authorities "were likely to have been aware or at least ... they ought to have been aware" of the fact. He thought it unlikely that "those responsible for supervising the departure from the Assumption school of its students would not have become aware that there were children going along to the high school after school". His Honour noted that Mr Collins, a master, had been aware that the children were doing so but did not, I think, deem that notice to be notice to the school as such. But his Honour found it "difficult to see" that the teachers supervising the departing students "would not have been aware that the plaintiff and his sister were no longer travelling home by the bus that departed from outside the primary school".

His Honour then considered the implication of this. He said: "Certainly the primary school authorities could not have been expected to supervise all the pupils all the way home. In the case of those children who walked home the school could not have been expected to allocate a teacher to accompany each child on his or her journey. Where then in terms of distance from the school gates is the terminal point of the duty of supervision to be found?" 
His Honour noted that the school booklet provided to "each parent" alerted the parent "to the limits of the period of supervision in the playground" and he set forth the notation. That was in the following terms: "SCHOOL HOURS are from 9.30 am until 3.10 pm. The playground will be supervised from 9.00 am until 3.45 pm. The school will not take responsibility for the children's safety outside these hours unless by special arrangement." 
His Honour added: "That same booklet though is silent about the extent of any supervision afforded to pupils departing from school, whether by bus or otherwise." 
With respect, I find difficulty in limiting what was there said to "the playground". There was, in my opinion, a clear intention to limit the responsibility of the school.

His Honour then noted Mrs Keogh's comment that, had the school known that some pupils were catching the bus at the high school, "some arrangements would have to be made but we were not informed of anything". He concluded that the school did know of the fact but, in my opinion correctly, did not see that as determining the present issue. The issue was, as his Honour said: "Was the relationship of school master and pupil still existing up to that point, temporal and geographical, where this small group of Assumption school children caught the Kelso bus?" 
His Honour did not, I think, conclude that the school had had notice of any such things as occurred on the day in question, eg, the throwing of sticks and stones and the like. But his Honour said: "Whether anything had occurred prior to the afternoon in question which warranted the apprehension that had prompted Mr Ryan's application to the officer of the Education Department to permit him to pick up the Assumption school children first, before proceeding to the high school, or not, nevertheless there was a foreseeable risk that in such a large group of children, particularly from two different schools, involving different ages, there was a foreseeable risk that 'the propensity for mischief' to be expected in such a situation could lead to physical harm being occasioned by one of the primary school children. The risk of such harm could have been avoided by having a teacher accompany the children over what was a relatively short distance and remain there with them until the bus left." 
It was that upon which the judge founded his conclusion. He observed that it happened that Mr Collins was present. He had no "supervisory duty and he did not assume it". But, his Honour concluded, "it would have been practicable for him to have undertaken it". He therefore concluded that there was the relevant obligation of supervision.

It is important to understand the basis on which the judge acted. He based himself upon knowledge that the children went to that bus stop, that they there were together with high school children and that there was a propensity for mischief though there was no evidence that anything untoward had occurred.
At least, his Honour did not found himself upon any such occurrence.

I do not accept that this is a proper basis for concluding that this small group of children had to be supervised by a master until they boarded the bus.
As I have indicated, there were evident dangers incident to the various courses which the children took on their way from school to home. The mere fact of the recognition of danger or possible danger cannot, I think, warrant the conclusion that supervision must be provided. Whether one would regard the risks of, eg, crossing a road, fighting on a bus, or the like, as more serious than a possibility of such a difference between students as would lead to injury need not be determined. Each is a danger. If a duty is to arise from the one, I see no adequate basis why it will not arise from the others, and in my respectful opinion it is plain that it does not arise from such other dangers. If supervision was required to and at this bus stop, it was required for other situations which were evident. I cannot think that the law so requires.

For these reasons I am of opinion that the appeal should be upheld with costs.
If, having regard to my conclusions, it is necessary to deal with other matters, I do not differ from what has been said by Sheller JA.
 
PRIESTLEY JA: I have had the benefit of reading the reasons in draft of
Sheller JA in this appeal. I agree with his view of the facts and the law and with his conclusion.

A great deal of the argument for the appellant turned on the submission that the relationship between the appellant and the student, and hence the duties of the school to the student began and ended at definite times each school day. The opposing argument was that the duties of the school to its students will depend upon the various circumstances of the relationship between them.
Like Sheller JA I think the latter view is clearly right.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
On 8 December 1983 at about 3.30 in the afternoon William Koffman, the first respondent, then 12 years of age, sustained a severe injury to his left eye while waiting to catch a bus outside Bathurst High School, a school established and maintained by the New South Wales Government. At that time, Mr
Koffman was a pupil attending the Assumption Primary School at Bathurst which was controlled, operated and supervised by the Trustees of the Roman Catholic
Church for the Diocese of Bathurst, the appellant.

Mr Koffman brought proceedings against the Nominal Defendant appointed under the Government and Crown Suits Act 1912 and the Trustees to recover damages for his injury. His claims were based in negligence. A claim made in the same proceedings against a third defendant was settled.

The proceedings were heard by Studdert J in the Supreme Court at Bathurst. On November 1992 his Honour gave judgment in favour of Mr Koffman against both the Nominal Defendant and the Trustees in the sum of $150,071.20. On the defendants' cross claims his Honour gave judgment in favour of the Nominal
Defendant against the Trustees in the sum of $50,023.73 and in favour of the
Trustees against the Nominal Defendant in the sum of $100, 047.46. The Nominal
Defendant did not appeal against the judgment but the Trustees did.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
At the time of the accident Mr Koffman was living with his father, his grandmother and his 11 year old sister at Kelso. He had lived there only for a short period, probably since 16 November 1983. During that period he had travelled to and from his home to the Assumption Primary School on a school bus in company with his sister. The school day for the students finished at 3.10 pm. The school bus to Kelso did not leave from outside the primary school in Mitre Street, Bathurst but collected its passengers from a bus stop outside the Bathurst High School in Piper Street which intersects with Mitre Street. The bus stop was approximately one and a half blocks from the entrance to the Assumption Primary School, a distance of some 300 to 400 metres. 
On 8 December 1983 Mr Koffman and his sister left the primary school when school finished and made their way along Mitre Street to the intersection and then down Piper Street to the bus stop outside the high school to wait for the school bus. Mr Koffman and a friend from the primary school climbed a tree near the bus stop while they were waiting for the bus. An older boy told them to get out of the tree and verbal exchanges took place. Mr Koffman and his friend came down from the tree and climbed a second tree, 20 to 30 metres away. From that vantage point they shouted at the person who had spoken to them before but this brought no reaction so they came down from the second tree and climbed back into the first tree. Mr Koffman and his friend called out to pupils on the ground around this tree. Three children wearing high school uniforms came over to the base of the tree and started throwing sticks and rocks at Mr Koffman and his friend. This continued for some five or six minutes until the plaintiff was struck in the left eye by a stick. Mr Koffman then came down from the tree and shortly afterwards was driven to hospital.

JUDGMENT AT FIRST INSTANCE 
Studdert J held that it was incumbent upon the high school authority to exercise reasonable supervision and control of its students while they waited to join the buses immediately outside the school. He was satisfied that there was inadequate supervision afforded by the high school on the afternoon Mr Koffman was injured. He was further satisfied that had proper supervision been provided by the high school the injury to Mr Koffman would have been avoided. Accordingly he found the high school authority negligent. He rejected its allegation of contributory negligence. 
The case against the appellant, as the authority responsible for the conduct of the primary school, was that it was negligent in failing to provide supervision for Mr Koffman until he entered the Kelso bus, even though the relevant bus stop was 300 to 400 metres away from the school. His Honour was satisfied that the primary school authority owed a duty in respect of its students whilst they waited to catch their buses outside the school.

When the school day had finished, the primary school children were lined up in groups depending upon how they travelled home, that is to say, by bus, with a parent or walking. They were forbidden to leave the school by the back lane which gave direct access from one side of the school area to Piper Street. The
Trustees submitted that the discharge of the relevant duty of care by the school authority did not require that the plaintiff be supervised into the bus, involving as such supervision would, the provision of a teacher to accompany the children down to the high school and to wait there with them until the departure of the bus. The authority could not have been expected to supervise all the pupils all the way home.

Studdert J referred to evidence given by Mrs Keogh, the Deputy Principal at the Assumption Primary School at the time of the trial and, in 1983, the senior teacher. She said there was no specific provision made for children catching buses at the high school because, as she explained, there were no children who caught the bus outside the high school. His Honour remarked: "Obviously in this belief Mrs Keogh was mistaken, at least so far as the plaintiff and his sister were concerned in the period after 16 November 1983."
There was evidence that primary school children did catch a school bus or school buses from outside the high school in 1983. The bus driver, Mr Ryan, said there were a number of pupils who did so and Mr Koffman gave evidence to the same effect. His Honour accepted that about five children from the primary school had regularly caught the Kelso bus from outside the high school and had been doing so for some months before the accident. He concluded that the primary school authority either was aware or ought to have been aware that this was happening. One teacher, Mr Collins, himself regularly caught the
Kelso school from outside the high school.

The primary school authority provided each parent with a booklet alerting the parent to the limits of the period of supervision in the playground in the following terms: "SCHOOL HOURS are from 9.30 am until 3.10 pm. The playground will be supervised from 9.00 am until 3.45 pm. The School will not take responsibility for the children's safety outside these hours unless by special arrangement." 
Studdert J observed that the same booklet was silent about the extent of any supervision afforded to pupils departing from school, whether by bus or otherwise. Mrs Keogh said that if she had been informed that some children had to catch the bus at the high school "some arrangements would have to be made but we were not informed of anything." His Honour stated his conclusions as follows: "In the present case........ the bus the plaintiff was to catch was a school bus affording for children, students from the high school and the primary school alike, the method of transport to Kelso. The primary school children who were dependent upon this bus had to join it with a very much larger group of older and bigger children who came from a different school. Whether anything had occurred prior to the afternoon in question which warranted the apprehension that had prompted Mr Ryan's application to the officer of the
Education Department to permit him to pick up the Assumption school children first, before proceeding to the high school, or not, nevertheless there was a foreseeable risk that in such a large group of children, particularly from two different schools, involving different ages, there was a foreseeable risk that `the propensity for mischief' to be expected in such a situation could lead to physical harm being occasioned by [sic ? to] one of the primary school children. The risk of such harm could have been avoided by having a teacher accompany the children over what was a relatively short distance and remain there with them until the bus left. Indeed, since Mr Collins who was the teacher of Grade 5 in 1983 regularly caught this Kelso school bus, it would have been a practicable measure to have required him to provide the necessary supervision. Mr Collins was present when the accident happened but he did not perceive himself as having any supervisory duty and he did not assume it. Had he been given such a role by the Assumption school it would have been practicable for him to have undertaken it, and by the effective assumption of such a role the harm that befell the plaintiff could have been avoided.

I have therefore come to the conclusion that the second defendant did owe a relevant duty of supervision which it failed to discharge and that the plaintiff is entitled to succeed in the action he brings against it." 
GROUNDS OF APPEAL 
Mr McAlary QC, who appeared for the appellant, argued the appeal on two grounds: "(a) that the appellant did not owe any duty of care to the [respondent] at the time and place where he suffered his injury; alternatively, that the [respondent's] injury was not caused by any breach of any duty of care owed to him by the appellant." 
Mr McAlary's proposition under the first head can be stated simply. The appellant's duty of care to Mr Koffman existed only during the time that the relationship of teacher and pupil between the appellant and Mr Koffman existed. Once school for the day had finished and Mr Koffman passed out of the school grounds the relationship terminated so that the appellant owed no duty to Mr Koffman at the time of the accident outside the high school and was not responsible for his injury. This submission was based principally on the language of Winneke CJ in a judgment, with which Adam and Little JJ agreed, in
Richards versus State of Victoria (1969) VR 136 at 138 and 140 and the language of Stephen J in Geyer versus Downs <case>; [(1977) 138 CLR 91] at 93-4. Murphy and Aickin JJ wrote a separate judgment, and
Mason and Jacobs JJ agreed with the reasons expressed in both judgments.

In the first of these cases at 138 Winneke CJ said: "We are of opinion that it is now clearly established by authority that in general a school master owes to each of his pupils whilst under his control and supervision a duty to take reasonable care for the safety of the pupil." 
At 140, after referring to cases in which the requisite duty of care arose out of the pre-existing relationship of the parties, such as the relationship of employer and employee, and independently of the particular conduct alleged to constitute a breach, the Chief Justice said: "Similarly we think that the relationship of school master and pupil is another example of the class of case in which the duty springs from the relationship itself." 
With due respect these statements are unexceptionable. They identify a particular relationship of proximity essential to the existence of a duty of care; see Jaensch versus Coffey (1984) 549 at 584-5 per Deane J. Mr McAlary's submission rested on the language of Stephen J in Geyer versus Downs in which the
High Court reversed a majority decision of this Court setting aside a jury verdict in favour of an eight year old girl who was injured while playing a game in the playground of a school before the daily routine began. At the time the playground was not supervised. The headmaster had given instructions for the school gates to be opened at some time between 8 and 8.15 am. The injured girl arrived at the school at about 8.45 am. Supervision of pupils began at 9 am. The headmaster was aware that by 8.30 am each morning between 100 and 150 girls were in the playground. At 93 Stephen J said: "In those circumstances the failure to exercise any supervision amounted to conduct which the jury might find to have been a cause of the plaintiff's injuries and to have been in breach of the defendant's duty of care owed to the plaintiff if, in fact, any such duty was owed at that hour of the morning, before the formal start of the school day. The question is, therefore, whether that duty was then owed.

The duty which a school master owes to his pupil arises from the relationship between them and its temporal ambit will be determined by the circumstances of the relationship on the particular occasion in question. " 
A little later in his judgment at 94 Stephen J said: "It is for school masters and for those who employ them, whether Government or private institutions, to provide facilities whereby the school masterly duty can adequately be discharged during the period for which it is assumed. A school master's ability or inability to discharge it will determine neither the existence of the duty nor its temporal ambit but only whether or not the duty has been adequately performed. The temporal ambit of the duty will, therefore, depend not at all upon the school master's ability, however derived, effectively to perform the duty but, rather, upon whether the particular circumstances of the occasion in question revealed the relationship of school master and pupil was or was not then in existence. If it was, the duty will apply. It will be for the school master and those standing behind him to cut their coats according to the cloth, not assuming the relationship when unable to perform the duty which goes with it." 
On this passage Mr McAlary based his submission that on any given day the relationship began at a particular time and terminated at a particular time.
Once it had terminated there was no duty. The relationship existed during such time as the school allowed the pupils onto the school premises and during such further times as the school held itself out as able or willing to supervise the pupils.

If a pupil is injured while the school is supervising or should have been supervising that pupil's activities, the duty of care the school authority owes the pupil depends on the relationship of proximity which itself derives from the fact that the injured person is a pupil. Other necessary ingredients are a risk of injury foreseeable to a reasonable person in the position of the school authority and the failure to do what a reasonable person in that position would do by way of response to the risk; Wyong Shire Council v
Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47. The relationship of employer and employee imposes duties of care upon the employer to the employee. The relationship exists from the day the employee is "employed" to the day the employee is dismissed or terminates the employment.
Ordinarily the employer will owe a duty to the employee in the workplace and not for accidents occurring in the employee's home. This is not because the relationship ceases when the employee leaves work for the day but because the duty does not extend to ensuring, for example, that the floor in the employee's bathroom at home is not slippery. Similarly I do not think the relationship of teacher and pupil begins each day when the pupil enters the school ground and terminates when the pupil leaves the school ground.
Undoubtedly however a particular duty of care arises because of the pre- existing relationship.

In my opinion the extent and nature of the duty of the teacher to the pupil is dictated by the particular circumstances. I do not think its extent is necessarily measured or limited by the circumstance that the final bell for the day has rung and the pupil has walked out the school gate. The circumstances of a small country high school located beside a quiet street and a primary school located on a busy highway in a big city may be contrasted. In the first case older children leave the environs of the school in comparative safety. In the second small children emerge from the school into a situation of immediate danger. School buses and parents may arrive late. Major streets have to be crossed and so on. Moreover as happened at Bathurst High School, high spirited children congregate outside the school waiting to be taken home.

THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THIS CASE 
Studdert J found that the school authorities knew or ought to have known that a small group of primary school children were going to catch the bus outside the high school. The school accepted that it was appropriate to supervise the children waiting for the bus outside the school itself. Mrs Keogh accepted that, if she had been informed that children had to go to the high school to catch the bus, some arrangement would have been made. There does not seem to have been any particular problem in doing this. Mr Collins was available for the task. In Geyer versus Downs Murphy and Aickin JJ, after referring to the dictum of Lord Esher in Williams versus Eady [(1893) 10 TLR 41] at 42 relating the duty of the school master to the care a careful father would take of his boys, went on at 102 to say: "This formulation is, however, somewhat unreal in the case of a school master who has the charge of a school with some 400 children, or of a master who takes a class of 30 more children. What may be a useful guide applicable to a village or a small country school cannot be of direct assistance in the case of a large city or suburban school with some hundreds of children attending it. The nature of the duty is more appropriately stated in Victoria versus Bryar [(1970) 44 ALJR 174] where this Court agreed in the description of the duty owed by a teacher to each of his pupils formulated by Winneke CJ in Richards v
Victoria at 138 and 140-1. It is not necessary to set out again the passages thus approved, but the result may be summarised in the following passage at :
 `The duty of care owed by' (the teacher) `required only that he should take such measures as in all the circumstances were reasonable to prevent physical injury to' (the pupil). `This duty not being one to ensure against injury, but to take reasonable care to prevent it, required no more than the taking of reasonable steps to protect the plaintiff against risks of injury which ex hypothesi' (the teacher) `should reasonably have foreseen.'. " 
Their Honours did not limit that duty temporally by reference to the duration on a daily basis of the relationship of teacher and pupil.

I am not persuaded that Studdert J erred in his conclusion that in the present case the appellant was in breach of its duty of care to Mr Koffman when he was injured. Mr McAlary, legitimately, asked rhetorically whether the duty extended to the journey on the bus or in the case of other pupils during the time they spent walking from the school to their homes. The answer must be that this depends upon the circumstances. Ordinarily I would not expect the duty to be so extended. But if the school were aware that a particular bus driver, who transported its children, was a dangerous driver or that on a particular journey older children habitually and violently bullied younger children, the duty may well extend so far as to require the school to take preventative steps or to warn parents. This duty would be founded in the relationship of teacher and pupil.

CAUSATION 
In the alternative Mr McAlary submitted that Mr Koffman's injuries were not caused by any breach of the appellant's duty of care to him. I have no doubt that if Mr Collins had been supervising the children from the primary school in an appropriate manner the accident would not have occurred. His Honour found that it occurred after high school children had been throwing sticks and rocks at Mr Koffman for several minutes. In addition it occurred after Mr Koffman and his friend had been driven once from the tree and then returned to it in circumstances which smacked of confrontation. Appropriate supervision would either have prevented these incidents or alternatively, have resulted in Mr Koffman being told to remove himself from the area of conflict. 
CONCLUSION 
In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
