

Regina versus Pantoja Matter No Cca 60174/97 [1998] NSWSC 565 (5 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
REGINA versus MAXIMO PANTOJA 
CCA 60174/97 November 1998 
Wood CJ at CL, B M James J, Adams J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Barr J 
FILE NO/S: 060174/97 
DELIVERED: 5 November 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 14 August 1988 
PARTIES: Regina versus Maximo PANTOJA 
JUDGMENT OF: Wood CJ at CL, B.M. James, Adams JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT- T L Buddin SC/J S Stratton 
RESPONDENT- R D Cogswell SC/A Pearman (Crown) 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - Andrews 
RESPONDENT- SE O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: 
Criminal law and procedure - appeal against conviction - DNA testing - evidence of matches and of statistical unlikelihood of chance matches - directions to be given by trial judge about DNA evidence - jury experiencing difficulty in reaching agreement - whether improper pressure put on jury to reach verdict - whether proof of motive essential - [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) s38 
NO. OF PAGES: 52 
R versus Maximo Armando PANTOJA 
JUDGMENT 
WOOD CJ at CL: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of James, J. I agree with his reasons and the orders he proposes. 
B M JAMES J: This is an appeal by Maximo Armando Pantoja against his conviction, after a trial in October to December 1996 before Barr J and a jury, on a charge that on 23 October 1992 at St Peters he had murdered his wife Felicitas Pantoja. At the trial the appellant had also been indicted on a charge that on 15 October 1992 at St Peters he had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law Zenaida Trujillo without her consent and in circumstances of aggravation, knowing that she was not consenting. The jury found the appellant not guilty of this charge. Pursuant to the conviction on the charge of murder, Barr J sentenced the appellant to penal servitude for eighteen years, consisting of a minimum term of thirteen and a half years and an additional term of four and a half years. In the event of his appeal against conviction being dismissed, the appellant seeks leave to appeal against sentence. The notice of appeal was filed after the time for appeal had expired but the Crown did not oppose the application by the appellant for an extension of time within which to appeal. 
The trial conducted in 1996 was not the first trial of these charges. At an earlier trial conducted before McInerney J and a jury the jury had found the appellant guilty of the murder charge but had been unable to agree on the sexual assault charge. An appeal was brought by the appellant against his conviction on the murder charge at the first trial and this Court (constituted by Hunt CJ at CL, Abadee J and Hidden J), in a decision which has been reported (R versus Pantoja [(1996) 88 A Crim R 554)], upheld the appeal and ordered a new trial. In the first appeal the leading judgment was given by Hunt CJ at CL, with whose judgment Hidden J agreed.
Abadee J delivered a separate concurring judgment. It will be necessary later in this judgment to refer in some detail to the judgments in the first appeal and particularly the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL.

As I have already stated, the appellant was married to Felicitas Pantoja and
Zenaida Trujillo was his wife's sister. The appellant, his wife, their young children aged three years and eight months, his sister-in-law and other relatives of his wife and sister-in-law, including their brother, two cousins and an uncle, and a family friend all lived in the same house in St Peters.
All of the members of the group were South American Quechua Indians and all of the adults had come to Australia from Peru. The appellant was a leading hand for a cleaning company and all of the adult members of the group worked for the same cleaning company, cleaning business premises at night.

At both trials Ms Trujillo gave evidence of the events giving rise to the charge of sexual assault. At the second trial she said that at about 7.30pm on the evening of 15 October 1992 she was alone in the house at St Peters, apart from the appellant's two young children. She was carrying the younger child, endeavouring to coax him to fall asleep. Suddenly all the lights in the house went out (the inference the jury was invited to draw was that a fuse or a switch in the power box of the house had been pulled). The front door bell rang twice but Ms Trujillo, who was "very scared", did not go to the door.
Someone took hold of Ms Trujillo around her mouth from behind her and demanded to know why she had not opened the door. The intruder pulled the child from Ms
Trujillo's arms and then pushed Ms Trujillo firstly into her bedroom and then into the bedroom of the appellant and his wife. In this bedroom the intruder pushed and punched Ms Trujillo and she fell. She felt something sharp against her neck and the intruder said "if you scream, I'll kill you". The intruder then had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo without her consent. The intruder pulled a chain from around Ms Trujillo's neck, got up and left the room. Ms
Trujillo said she was unable to identify her attacker. She was unable to see who her attacker was because it was dark inside the house and she was unable to give any description of the appearance of her attacker, beyond saying that he was taller than she was and had a rough hand. The Crown alleged that her attacker was the appellant.

At the time she was assaulted, Ms Trujillo was wearing night attire, which she (or at least an interpreter, as Ms Trujillo gave her evidence in Spanish) described as "pyjamas" but which was described elsewhere in the evidence as a nightdress and which it is convenient to refer to as a nightdress. In her evidence in chief Ms Trujillo identified an item of clothing she was shown as being the nightdress she had been wearing on the night she was assaulted.

In the late afternoon of 15 October 1992 the appellant had driven to the Price
Waterhouse building in the city to work there as a cleaner. He had been issued with a card which enabled him to enter the building and to use the lifts inside the building. Each use of the appellant's card was recorded. The records showed that on the evening of 15 October 1992 the appellant's card had first been used at 6.10pm and had then been used continually until 6.59pm.
There was then no recorded use of the card until 8.09pm.

At about 1.30am on 23 October 1992, the day on which it was alleged he had murdered his wife, the appellant had been picked up at his home by a man named
Lima and had been driven to the Qantas Jetabout Building in North Sydney to work there as a cleaner, arriving at about 2.10am. At about 2.50am the appellant gave the card enabling him to enter and move from floor to floor of the building to a fellow worker named Baca-flor. The appellant himself was to use the card of an absent worker named Carro. The next recorded use of Carro's card was at 4.44am. At about 3.20am all the other occupants of the house at St
Peters, apart from Felicitas Pantoja and her children, left for work. At about .50am a man named Sixto Rosales, who was one of the appellant's wife's cousins, on returning home from work, found Felicitas Pantoja lying dead on the floor inside the house. She had been beaten by some blunt instrument and strung by the neck to a doorknob by means of a piece of nylon rope. The Crown case on the murder charge was that at some time after giving his card to Baca- flor the appellant had left the building, gone home, murdered his wife and then returned to work.

The funeral of the appellant's wife took place at the beginning of November
Ms Trujillo gave evidence that the day after the funeral the appellant told her that, her sister having died, she would be responsible for her sister's children and that she and the appellant would be married. A sexual relationship between the appellant and Ms Trujillo commenced the day after the funeral. A witness with expert knowledge of the customs of the Quechua Indians gave evidence that a widower with children might marry his deceased wife's sister but that the minimum period of mourning was three months.

On 14 November 1992 the appellant was taken to a police station. He was interviewed a number of times by the police, some but not all of these interviews being electronically recorded. According to police evidence, in an unrecorded interview the appellant admitted that he had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law on 15 October and he confirmed this in a subsequent interview which was recorded. In another unrecorded interview the appellant, according to police evidence, admitted that he had returned home by bus on 23
October but said that when he had arrived home his wife was already dead and he subsequently confirmed these matters in an interview which was recorded. On November 1992, when the appellant first appeared in a court on these charges, a duty solicitor in making an application for bail told the court that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law, but with her consent, and that the appellant's wife had taken her own life. However, at both trials the appellant denied having had sexual intercourse with Ms
Trujillo on 15 October 1992 and denied having murdered his wife. The appellant said in his evidence at both trials that the admissions he had made to police that he had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo on 15 October 1992 and that he had gone home from work on the night of 23 October 1992, were not true and had been made as a result of his having been physically assaulted by police and fearing that the police would continue to assault him.

It was not disputed by the Crown at the hearing of this appeal, although it had been disputed at the hearing of the first appeal, that evidence which had been given at the trial which tended to show that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law on the evening of 15 October 1992 was relevant, not only to whether the appellant was guilty of the first charge of sexual assault but also to whether the appellant was guilty of the second charge of having murdered his wife. At the second trial the jury was told in the Crown Prosecutor's opening address, in the Crown Prosecutor's closing address and in the summing up by the judge, that evidence that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law on the evening of 15 October could show that he had a sexual passion for his sister-in-law and that such a sexual passion for his sister-in-law could furnish a motive for killing his wife. Before the first trial, as noted by Hunt CJ at CL in his judgment in the first appeal at pp555-556, the Crown had successfully resisted an application by the defence for separate trials "upon the basis that the two crimes were inextricably linked, to the extent that even in a separate trial of the murder charge it would lead evidence of the sexual intercourse between the appellant and his sister-in-law prior to the wife's murder as demonstrating the appellant's passion for her, which in turn was a motive for that murder".

Although at both trials the two charges of sexual assault and murder were linked, the different verdicts reached by the jury on the two charges at the second trial, like the inability of the jury to agree on the first charge at the first trial and the verdict of guilty on the second charge at the first trial, were capable of being reconciled. One possibility which commended itself to both Hunt CJ at CL on the first appeal and to Barr J in his remarks on sentence in sentencing the appellant after the second trial, was that the jury were satisfied that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law on 15 October 1992 but were not satisfied that the sexual intercourse was without the consent of his sister-in-law. As Barr J said in his remarks on sentence, there were obvious reasons for doubting the reliability of some parts of Ms Trujillo's evidence of what she said had happened on the evening of 15 October.

At both trials evidence was admitted of forensic testing, and particularly DNA testing, of vaginal swabs taken from Ms Trujillo and of the nightdress which she said she had been wearing at the time she was sexually assaulted.
Additional testing of these items was done after the first trial and evidence of this additional testing, as well as of the original testing, was given in the second trial.

The evidence of forensic testing which had been admitted in the first trial was conveniently summarised by Hunt CJ at CL in his judgment in the first appeal and the following summary is adapted from his Honour's judgment. Mr
Goetz, a forensic biologist, gave evidence that he had performed blood grouping tests. The tests of the vaginal swabs showed the presence of semen but there was not a sufficient quantity of semen for further blood grouping tests of the type performed by Mr Goetz. Tests of the nightdress showed that the person whose semen was detected on the nightdress had a PGM type of 2-1+, which matched the PGM of the appellant and did not match the PGM of the appellant's brother Amancio Pantoja (who had had a sexual relationship with Ms
Trujillo). Two tests on some blood detected on the nightdress showed that the blood matched Ms Trujillo's blood.

Dr Kessly, a forensic biologist, gave evidence at the first trial that he had used a DNA procedure known as Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) to test the vaginal swabs at two genetic loci known as D2S44 and D17S79. At genetic locus D2S44 Dr Kessly found a match between the appellant and the person whose semen was to be found in the fraction of the vaginal swabs which was designated "vaginal swabs (male)". Dr Kessly said that there was "some suggestion" that there "might" also be a match at genetic locus D17S79 but he could not be sure and the result was inconclusive. Dr Kessly gave explanations for the inconclusive result and it was not suggested that the inconclusive result meant that the appellant had been excluded as having been the person whose semen had been found in Ms Trujillo's vagina. Dr Kessly also tested the semen stain on the nightdress, finding a match between the semen stain and the appellant at both genetic loci.

Dr Gunn, a geneticist, gave evidence at the first trial that he had used a DNA procedure known as Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) to test the semen stain on the nightdress and at a genetic locus known as DQa, he had found a match between the person whose semen it was and the appellant. The vaginal swabs were not sent to Dr Gunn and he did not perform any tests on them.

At the first trial the appellant called evidence from a geneticist, Dr
McDonald. Dr McDonald accepted that Dr Kessly's results provided some evidence of a match at genetic locus D2S44 between the appellant and the person whose semen was in the vaginal swabs but if the semen in the vaginal swabs had been the appellant's he would have expected a match at genetic locus D17S79 as well and such a match had not been obtained. Dr McDonald himself performed tests on the vaginal swabs and was unable to detect any match with the appellant. Dr
McDonald did not perform any tests on the semen stain on the nightdress.

As well as evidence being given of the performance of blood group testing or
DNA testing and the results of such testing, evidence was also given at the first trial of the statistical probability of a match which had been observed having occurred by chance or coincidence. When a match had been obtained in more than one test and the tests were independent of each other, the probability of a combination of matches having occurred by chance was calculated by multiplying the probabilities of chance matches for the individual tests. At p561 of his judgment Hunt CJ at CL gave an illustration of such a procedure :- "Thus, in the present case, Mr Goetz said that one in 12 of the population at large in Australia had the appellant's PGM type of 2-1+ which he found in the semen stain on the nightdress. This figure was derived from a Sydney Red Cross database of 2300 people. Dr Kessly said that one in 6000 of the population matched the DNA he obtained from the semen stain on the nightdress. This figure was derived from another Sydney Red Cross database of 500 people. Dr
Gunn said that one in 11 of the population matched the DNA he obtained from the same source. His database was compiled by the Silbase Scientific Services
Company from 256 people whom it had tested in disputed parentage cases. These three figures were then compounded to produce the statistic that only one person in approximately 792,000 in the general population would have the appellant's combination of types of blood and DNA demonstrated by the testing".

The first ground of appeal in the first appeal to this Court related to the admissibility of evidence of the forensic testing and its results and of evidence of the statistical probability of an observed match or combination of matches having occurred by chance or coincidence . The Court of Criminal
Appeal rejected the submission that evidence of the forensic testing and its results should not have been admitted. At the trial the evidence of the statistical probability of a chance match or matches had been objected to on the ground that the statistics had been taken from databases which had been derived from samples of the population which were unlikely to have included any South American Quechua Indians and there could be differences between the general population and a racial group of South American Indians which had evolved in isolation from other people. The Court of Criminal Appeal rejected this ground for not admitting the statistical evidence. Hunt CJ at CL concluded at p563:- "...if the size of the databases used had otherwise been shown to be statistically valid, I would agree with the trial judge that the Crown was entitled to use the databases derived from the general population. It is simply not practicable to devise a database which took all the circumstances peculiar to this case into account. But the possibility that - by reason of her association with persons of the South American Indian race - the person who had sexual intercourse with the appellant's sister-in-law may have been of that race (which was unlikely to have been represented in the databases used) required a direction to the jury that the chance or coincidence of a match thrown up by the use of such databases would have to be reduced in order to take that possibility into account. Depending upon whether such a possibility was high or low (an issue which was not really examined at the trial), the reduction should be greater or less as the case may be. I do not believe that this would be mere speculation. Juries in personal injury claims are asked daily to adjust actuarial figures to take into account such vagaries as the vicissitudes of life. Notwithstanding the different onuses of proof, I see no relevant distinction, particularly where the jury is directed (as I think they should be) that they are not to approach the issue upon any strictly mathematical basis".

Although the ground on which the statistical evidence had been objected to at the trial was not upheld by the Court of Criminal Appeal, the Court nevertheless held that the statistical evidence should have been rejected on another ground which had not been taken at the trial, namely that no evidence had been led by the Crown to support the statistical validity of the databases used, which appeared to the Court to be derived from very small samples and the Court was "not satisfied by the evidence that the databases used in relation to the DNA testing were of sufficient statistical validity as to warrant the admission of the evidence derived from them" (per Hunt CJ at CL at ). See also Abadee J at 583.

Having determined the first appeal on the ground that the evidence of the statistical probability of an observed match or combination of matches having occurred by chance should not have been admitted because of the unreliably small size of the databases from which the evidence was derived, the Court did not deal with the other grounds of appeal. However, Hunt CJ at CL in two parts of his judgment made comments which he said were relevant to the other grounds of appeal in the first appeal and which are relevant to some of the grounds of appeal in the present case. At p559 his Honour said:- "... it is important to emphasise that a match obtained by any blood tests -
DNA or otherwise - between the suspect and the offender does not establish that the two are the one and the same person. It establishes no more than that the accused could be the offender. However, any blood test which positively excludes the suspect as the offender, if there is a reasonable possibility that the test is correct, must necessarily exclude the suspect completely, notwithstanding that a match has been obtained by other blood tests. 7".

In footnote 7 his Honour said:- "I have assumed that, in the particular case, it is necessary for the Crown to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was not excluded as the suspect, and that the probability of the match having occurred by chance or coincidence is very small. That is certainly what was required in the present case, in that this formed an indispensable intermediate step in this case in the reasoning process towards an inference of guilt: Shepherd <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 573] at 579-580; <case>; [51
A Crim R 181] at 184-185. It will not always be the case that these facts will have to be established beyond reasonable doubt, in which case the words in italics in the text will require modification".

At p564 Hunt CJ at CL said:- "The significance of a match between the blood type or DNA of the offender and the suspect (or accused person) must be clearly explained to the jury: that (as I said earlier) it establishes no more than that the accused could be the offender, whereas any blood test which positively excludes the accused as the offender - if there is a reasonable possibility that the test is correct - must necessarily exclude the accused completely, notwithstanding that there is a match obtained by other blood tests which operate quite differently or independently, and however strong the other evidence in the case may be"22.

In footnote 22 his Honour said:- "Again, I have assumed that the Crown had to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was not excluded as the suspect, and that the probability of the match having occurred by chance or coincidence is very small".

It will be observed that what his Honour said at pp559 and 564 is very similar and there would not appear to be any difference of any substance in the two passages.

At the second trial evidence was given of the same forensic testing as had been the subject of evidence at the first trial. But, as I have already said, evidence was also led of further testing.

Evidence was led at the second trial of DNA tests performed after the first trial by Mr Goetz on the nightdress. DNA recovered from the semen stain on the nightdress was separated in the testing procedure into fractions which were designated, somewhat notionally, as a male fraction and a female fraction and tests were performed at genetic locus DQa and at a set of six genetic loci referred to collectively as the Polymarker. The results of the tests performed by Mr Goetz can be tabulated as follows:- 
Genetic locus 
DQa 
LDLR 
GYPA 
HBGG 
D7S8 
Gc ---|---|---|---|---  
Maximo Pantoja .1, 1.2 
AA 
BB 
BB 
AA 
AC 
Amancio Pantoja .1,4 
AA 
AB 
BB 
AA 
AC 
Zenaida Trujillo ,4 
AB 
AA 
AA 
BB 
AB 
Nightdress - male fraction .1,1.2 
AA 
BB 
BB 
AA 
AC 
Nightdress -female fraction ,4 and weak 1.1.(1.2) 
AB 
AA + weak B 
AA + weak 
B 
BB + weak A 
AB + weakC 
In his report of 1 August 1996 Mr Goetz concluded:- "The male fraction contained DNA that could have come from Maximo Pantoja, but not Amancio Pantoja or Zenaida Trujillo. One person in approximately 21000 people in the general Australian population would be expected to have this DNA profile.

Taking into consideration my previous report of 30 March 1993 where I obtained
PGM results for the semen on the nightgown, the combined PGM and DNA profile for the semen on the nightgown is present in one in approximately 260,000 people in the general Australian population".

As regards the female fraction, Mr Goetz concluded:- 
The female fraction contained a mixture of DNA from at least two individuals.
The major component originated from an individual with the same DNA profile as
Zenaida Trujillo. The minor component could be from a person with the same DNA profile as Maximo Pantoja".

Dr Kessly performed further tests in October and November 1996 on the nightdress and the vaginal swabs at a number of genetic loci. The results of the tests performed by Dr Kessly in 1993 and in 1996 were collected and tabulated in a page of his report of 21 November 1996, which became a separate exhibit at the trial (exhibit "BL") and which also incorporated the results of
Mr Goetz's 1996 tests. Exhibit BL, absent some annotations which were made in the course of the trial, is reproduced on the following page of this judgment.

Dr Kessly found that the DNA profile of the male fraction of the nightdress matched the DNA profile of the appellant but did not match the DNA profile of
Felicitas Pantoja, the appellant's brother or Ms Trujillo. The frequency in the general population of such a DNA profile was 1 in 2000 billion. Dr Kessly found that the DNA profile of the major portion of the material in the female fraction of the nightdress matched the DNA profile of Ms Trujillo and did not match the DNA profile of Felicitas Pantoja. In his report he said that the frequency in the general population of such a DNA profile was 1 in 92,000 billion but in his oral evidence he reduced this figure to 1 in 36,000 billion. Dr Kessly said that there was a minor portion of material in the female fraction of the nightdress which matched the DNA present in the male fraction..

As regards the vaginal swabs, there would appear on a first inspection of the table of Dr Kessly's results to be an absence of a match at a number of genetic loci between the DNA of the appellant and the DNA in the fraction of the vaginal swabs which was designated "vaginal swabs-male". There are, however, matches between the DNA of Ms Trujillo and the DNA (or at least the major portion thereof) in the "vaginal swabs-female". Dr Kessly concluded that both fractions of the vaginal swabs contained a mixture of DNA from more than one individual. In his report of 21 November 1996 he stated the following conclusions about the vaginal swabs:- "(3) The DNA in item 92/655-1bcd (Swabs, male fraction) was a mixture with the vastly predominant portion matching the DNA in items 92/655-1 (Zenaida
Trujillo), and a minor portion which cannot be excluded as matching the DNA in item 92/654-30 (Maximo Pantoja). The minor portion did not match the DNA in item 92/654-54 (Amancio Pantoja).

The DNA in item 92/655-1bcd (Swabs, female fraction) matched the DNA in item 92/655-1 (Zenaida Trujillo), with a very minor portion matching the DNA in item 92/654-30 (Maximo Pantoja) at genetic locus VWA31".

When pressed in cross-examination at the trial about the apparent lack of a match at DQa between the appellant and the vaginal swabs (male), Dr Kessly said:- "If there is an excess of female compared to male DNA present in the sample when you do the PCR reaction, it is quite likely, in fact one would expect, that the DNA that is present in the greater majority, in the greater portion would be amplified in preference to that which is available in a smaller amount. Given that the DNA from the female was present in a greater proportion, I would expect that to amplify preferentially and perhaps mask the presence of any other DNA that might have been present from another source".

The trial judge in his summing-up summarised this part of Dr Kessly's evidence, without objection, as follows:- "Although the fraction of the vaginal swabs tested is described as male, it was apparently constituted by almost exclusively female material, that is what
Dr Kessly says. You remember that the assignment of male or female to a swab is a nominal assignment but something described as "female" might contain male material and something described as "male" might contain female material. A small amount of male material present seems to show up weakly and intermittently but when it does it is capable of matching the DNA of the accused. That is the opinion of Dr Kessly".

At the second trial Dr McDonald, who had given evidence in the defence case at the first trial, again gave evidence for the appellant. A report by Dr
McDonald dated 4 December 1996 was admitted into evidence and this report formed the basis of his oral evidence in chief. Dr McDonald's report was divided into sections.

In section B of his report Dr McDonald commented on Dr Kessly's testing of the vaginal swabs in 1993. Dr McDonald said inter alia of Dr Kessly's tests:- "At D2S44 there appears to be DNA (weak but present) in the male fraction of the vaginal swab which is not that of Zenaida Trujillo but is prima facie consistent with that of Maximo Pantoja. However, there is a lack of corroboration of such finding by an examination of the results at D17S79. One would expect that the probe at D17S79 would distinguish DNA as the probe at
D2S44 did".

Dr McDonald made the further criticisms that neither test had been repeated, that no test had then been conducted by Dr Kessly at any other genetic locus and that the appellant's brother had not been tested.

In section C of his report Dr McDonald reported on DNA testing he had himself performed on the vaginal swabs and the nightdress. Dr McDonald used a method of DNA testing known as Short Tandem Repeat technology (STR), which, he said, was much more sensitive in its ability to detect DNA than the RFLP technology used by Dr Kessly. Dr McDonald tested the vaginal swabs at seven genetic loci which he described as being highly polymorphic. Using the STR technology he produced gels of samples from the vaginal swabs and from the appellant and examined the gels for bands. In his report he said:- "From examining those bands, it was not possible to identify DNA matching that of Maximo Pantoja in the two vaginal swabs at the loci tested. Further, it was not possible to identify any consistent differences of the DNA between the male and female fractions of the swabs.

The reason for this non-identification is that Maximo Pantojas's DNA is not present in the vaginal swabs. In view of the extreme level of amplification to which these tests were subjected casts considerable doubt on the D2S44 results which suggests the presence of readily identifiable DNA. This raises the question that the D2S44 result may have arisen due to contamination during the
RFLP testing.

I did not run any tests relating to Zenaida Trujillo and the vaginal swabs because we were identifying differences between the two fractions of DNA from someone other than the alleged victim".

Dr McDonald tested the nightdress to determine whether any DNA in the nightdress matched the DNA of Felicitas Pantoja. It was part of the appellant's case at the second trial that the nightdress was his wife's, not his sister-in-law's. Dr McDonald reported the results at locus D11S544 as follows:- 
A single band is present which indicates that DNA originates from a person who is homozygous (a single band or one allele). The bands shown in the tests relating to the female fraction of the vaginal swabs, Maximo Pantoja and
Felicitas Pantoja, originate from a person who is heterozygous at that loci.
Accordingly, whoever contributed DNA in the nightdress was someone other than
Maximo, Zenaida or Felicitas".

This conclusion by Dr McDonald, that whoever contributed DNA in the nightdress was someone other than the appellant, his sister-in-law or his wife, which contradicted other expert evidence and all the lay evidence about the nightdress, was made the subject of a strong attack by the Crown on the reliability generally of Dr McDonald's testing.

In section D of his report Dr McDonald opposed the use of statistics to calculate the probability of a match "until such time as you have excluded relatives because the likelihood of them matching any of the markers is necessarily much higher than anybody in the unrelated population".

In section E of his report Dr McDonald commented on Dr Kessly's testing of the vaginal swabs in October and November 1996. Dr McDonald said inter alia:- "The findings in the Polymarker and the DQa tests of 92/655-1 bcd male fraction (vaginal swab) are quite inconsistent with the presence of Maximo
Pantoja's DNA in the sample. If his DNA was present one would expect the presence of his DNA in each of the tests performed. The results indicate that that was not the case".

In his oral evidence Dr McDonald, by way of criticising Dr Kessly's evidence, said inter alia that if an inability to detect any DNA of the appellant at DQa was to be explained on the basis that the vaginal swabs (male) contained only feminine material, why should weak DNA, which could not have come from Ms
Trujillo and was said by Dr Kessly to be consistent with the DNA of the appellant, have been detected at a number of other loci.

In his report Dr McDonald then made various criticisms of distinctions which
Dr Kessly had drawn in reporting on his test results, in which Dr Kessly had claimed to distinguish between bands as being "major" or "minor" or as being "stutters" or "shadows" rather than "real" bands or true alleles or between "major" or "minor" peaks. In this part of his report Dr McDonald did say that "stutters are common in STR testing".

Dr McDonald's conclusions in his report were:- "It is not possible to say that there is any DNA of Maximo Pantoja in the vaginal swabs. The only result that suggests that his DNA is present in the swabs is the RFLP test at D2S44. The further testing by Dr Kessly and our laboratory tends to place this result in greater doubt than before and accordingly should not be relied upon at all.

From perusal of Dr Kessly's Report I am struck by the degree of sharing of bands between the four persons tested. Of the 11 loci tested for Maximo and
Amancio they are identical at 8, which is a 1:64,000 chance. Of the 17 loci at which Zenaida was tested, she was homozygous at 10. Of the loci that all 4
Maximo/Amancio and Felicitas/Zenaida were tested, a remarkable restriction in the number of alleles is apparent.

It would be highly likely that other members of the household and associated social group would also share many bands. In the light of this it is inappropriate to apply a general population database to calculate statistics as so few of the possibilities are available in this cohort to be considered".

The trial judge devoted a considerable amount of his summing-up to the evidence relating to DNA testing. Some of what his Honour said (at pp87-93 of the summing-up) was described by him as "observations and directions of a general nature". Having regard to the importance of this part of the summing- up for the determination of a number of the grounds of appeal against conviction, I will set out this part of the summing-up in full. His Honour said:- 
However, I want first to make some observations and directions of a general nature. You will recall that a comparison of two samples at a particular genetic locus can have either of two results, namely, a match or a mismatch.
Assuming the tests have been properly done so that the results can be relied on, a match shows that the two samples compared could have come from the one person. A mismatch, or exclusion, on the other hand, shows that the two samples could not have come from the same person. If several or many tests are done, it does not matter how many matches there are, if there is so much as a single exclusion. A single exclusion proves that the samples did not come from the same person. That was why the experts told you that in DNA testing of samples one is always looking to exclude the suspect.

Databases are maintained by genetic testing laboratories made up from results of samples they have tested using systems they have tested and are confident produce reliable results.

By reference to such databases the frequency of occurrence of particular results in the population can be calculated. So if two samples match, it is possible to say two things: first, that they could have come from the one person and, secondly, that results like the ones produced occur in the population at a particular rate or frequency. If there is an exclusion, there may be no point in testing at any other locus but if there is a match, that is what is done. If there is another match, the rate of occurrence of the result achieved at the second locus may be calculated once again by reference to a database. Provided the two tests are independent, that is provided the results at one locus do not influence and are not influenced by the results at the other locus, the two individual rates of occurrence can be multiplied together to produce a combined rate of occurrence.

So if the identical results of the first locus occur in the population in, say, one in four people and the results at the second occur in, say, one in ten people, you can say that the combination of the two results occurs at the rate of one in four times ten, that is one in forty, in the population. And if you keep on doing further tests and getting matches, you can keep on multiplying each new rate of occurrence to produce a new combined rate of occurrence. So if you do many tests and the samples always match, although you will never prove that the two samples came from the one person, you will be able to say that the chances of the sample you are considering having come from someone other than the person you are trying to exclude is small. The more matches you get the smaller becomes the chance that the sample came from somebody else.

I shall deal in due course with criticisms made by the defence of results on which the Crown relies but for the moment I am dealing with this topic in a general way. It would be wrong for you to regard the multiplied probability figures to which I have referred as strictly mathematically correct. You should understand the rationale of the technique.

The use of databases in the manner I have indicated assumes that patterns of results distributed through those databases occur at the same frequency in the population generally. Whether they do or not can never be precisely known because it is impossible to test every member of the community. What is sought to be achieved is a high level of confidence in the databases as representing the population generally. The validity of the assumptions made depends on the sizes of the databases used. No attack has been made by the defence on the sizes of the databases used by Mr Goetz, Dr Kessly or Dr Gunn. Even so, the figures produced by this method give an appearance of mathematical exactness that in practice they cannot have. A statistical distribution can only be a statistical distribution. It is not a factual distribution. Let me take an example away from this case.

If you have a test result which is shown to occur at a rate of one in 1000 in the population and if you have a city of 200,000 people, it does not follow that in that city there must be exactly 200 people whose DNA will yield the same result. There may be more or fewer than 200, how many more or fewer you can't say. All you can say is that provided the data base accurately represents the whole population that result will tend to occur at a frequency of one person in 1000 over the whole of the population represented by the data base including the population of that city.

The use of the data base to produce an estimated frequency of occurrence of a particular result or combination of results throughout the whole community assumes a more or less even spread of various possible types of DNA throughout that community.

While that assumption may be statistically valid in the way I have mentioned, however, it may not take account of local variations. If there exists in the community a local group of persons whose DNA is atypical - that is to say not typical - of the general run of the population - and if the DNA of members of that group is not represented by samples in the data base, estimates resting on the data base will need to be treated with caution if the DNA of any member of that group is taken for comparison.

The evidence in this case is that it is not known whether the data bases used by Mr Goetz, Dr Kessly and Dr Gunn contained test results from samples of
Quechuan DNA. Since this is a criminal case and since one may suppose that the population of Quechuan Indians in New South Wales is probably not great, it is appropriate to assume that the data bases used contained no Quechuan blood.
There is no evidence to show that Quechuan DNA is likely to throw up results of the kinds achieved in this case as frequently as or more or less frequently than, New South Wales DNA.

There is some evidence that the accused's family formed part of a wider group of family and friends of Quechuan origin. You will recall that Mr Tadinac's wife was Peruvian; Mr Rivera is Peruvian; several of the cleaners whose names you have heard mentioned and with whom the accused and his family were associated were Spanish speaking and presumably of South American origin. They apparently spent time in each other's company as well as working together in the same industry and may well have formed a close knit social group. A few of them at least had not been in Australia long, for example Miss Trujillo, Miss
Teran. Some of them spoke little or no English, they had common language certainly in Spanish and perhaps in Quechuan. If you think that these people who formed such a discrete social group you will need to recognise the chance that anybody concerned in the circumstances giving rise to the first count may have been of Quechuan stock.

In order to take that possibility into account and in order to take into account the possibility that results of the kinds achieved in the tests on the swabs and nightdress stain occur more frequently in a Quechuan population than in the New South Wales population, you will need to temper the high figures produced from the data bases relied on by the Crown. There is simply no evidence of which I can tell you by what amount or factor you should reduce the figures, that is increase the frequency of a chance match, put before you.

There is a further reason why you should approach the DNA test results with caution. You should bear in mind an observation made by Dr McDonald - and this part of his evidence was not criticised by the Crown - that the results of the tests done in this case show that the people concerned who were blood related carried many genes in common, so that the chances of a match between them at any locus was significantly greater than for people not so related by blood.

You will now realise why I said to you in the first place that you should not approach this evidence on a strictly mathematical basis. Having given you these warnings I should point out to you that the accused does not dispute that his semen was on the nightdress, so you will be able to proceed on the basis that that has been proved.

The DNA test results, however, are still relevant to the questions whether the accused's DNA was present in the vaginal swab taken from Miss Trujillo, whether anybody else's DNA was present in those swabs, and whether Miss
Trujillo's or the deceased's DNA was present in the seminal stain on the nightdress.

I think that it will be clear that the problem of frequency of occurrence in the population of different DNA profiles arises only if the tests produce a match. If they produce an exclusion it does not matter why the suspect's DNA does not match the sample tested. Provided the test result is reliable according to proper professional standards, an exclusion excludes for all time and all purposes. But you are not obliged to look at the DNA evidence in isolation. You should consider its strength in the context of all the other evidence in the case".

It will be noted that in this extract his Honour recorded that at the second trial the appellant did not dispute that his semen was on the nightdress. Even if this concession was made because of the evidence of DNA testing which implicated him, the appellant has not in this appeal contested the admissibility of that evidence, apart from the evidence of statistical probability and the evidence of statistical probability was, for reasons which
I give later in this judgment, properly admitted. At the second trial the appellant contended that the nightdress was not his sister-in-law's but his wife's, so that the presence of his semen on the nightdress was innocuous.

I turn now to the grounds of appeal against conviction. The first three grounds of appeal were dealt with together in argument and it is convenient to deal with them together in this judgment. The grounds are as follows:- "(1) his Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that, in the circumstances of this case, it would have to be satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that there was a match between the DNA of the appellant and the DNA detected on the vaginal swabs and the nightdress alleged to be that of the witness Zenaida Trujillo, before concluding that it was possible that the appellant was responsible for the semen detected; his Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that, in the circumstances of this case, a match between the DNA test results of the appellant and those of the vaginal swabs and the nightdress alleged to be that of the witness Zenaida Trujillo could not in the absence of other evidence, prove beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was responsible for the semen detected; his Honour erred in failing to direct the jury that, if there was a blood or DNA test which positively excluded the appellant as the person responsible for the semen detected on the vaginal swabs and the nightdress alleged to be that of the witness Zenaida Trujillo, and there was a reasonable possibility that the test was correct, the test must necessarily exclude the accused as the offender notwithstanding that a match had been obtained in other tests".

In all three of these grounds of appeal it is alleged that the trial judge failed to give the jury some direction about the DNA testing, which, it was submitted, should have been given. It was conceded by counsel for the appellant on the appeal that directions had been given by the trial judge which partly complied with what was required but it was submitted that the directions given by the trial judge had been insufficient. No application had been made by counsel for the appellant at the trial, who was a senior counsel experienced in criminal matters and who made many other applications at the trial, to correct what were submitted on the appeal had been deficiencies in the directions given at the trial.

As I have already stated, it was accepted by the Crown at the hearing of the present appeal that evidence of the DNA testing of the appellant and of the nightdress and the vaginal swabs was relevant not only to the first count of sexual assault but also to the second count of murder and hence any deficiency in the directions given by the trial judge about that evidence could constitute grounds for quashing the verdict of guilty on the second count.

All of the first three grounds of appeal refer to both the vaginal swabs and the nightdress. However, as I have already noted, the appellant did not dispute at the second trial that his semen was on the nightdress. Accordingly, the trial judge was clearly not required to direct the jury that it would have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there was a match between the DNA of the appellant and DNA detected in the seminal stain on the nightdress, before concluding that it was possible that the appellant was responsible for the semen detected on the nightdress (see ground (1)). Nor was it necessary for the trial judge to give the directions set out in the second and third grounds of appeal, insofar as they relate to the nightdress.

Counsel for the appellant in both his written and oral submissions relied heavily on the judgments given in the first appeal after the first conviction of the appellant and especially on the passages in the judgment of Hunt CJ at
CL at pp559 and 564 which I have already quoted. It was pointed out by counsel that the judgments on the first appeal were not merely judgments in a previous decision of this Court but were judgments in a previous decision of this Court in the very same criminal proceedings. It was submitted that the tests performed on the male fraction of the vaginal swabs by Dr McDonald and by the
Crown's own expert Dr Kessly, if his results were fairly interpreted, had produced a "positive exclusion" or mismatch between the DNA of the appellant and the DNA in the vaginal swabs (male), within the principles stated by Hunt
CJ at CL in his judgment on the first appeal.

The judgments of members of this Court in the first appeal are, of course, entitled to great respect. However, the ground of the decision in the first appeal was that the evidence of the statistical probability of an observed match or combination of matches having occurred by chance should not have been admitted, because of the unreliably small size of the databases from which the evidence was derived and, accordingly, what Hunt CJ at CL said at pp559 and can properly be described as obiter dicta. It is the function of this present bench of the Court to pass judgment on the sufficiency of the directions which were given by the trial judge at the second trial, having regard to the evidence adduced at the second trial and to the way in which the second trial was conducted.

As I have already stated, the evidence at the two trials was not identical.
After the first trial and before the second trial further testing was carried out, evidence of which was admitted in the second trial. This further testing included DNA testing of the nightdress by Mr Goetz and Dr Kessly. This testing showed, to a very high degree of probability, that the male fraction of the seminal stain on the nightdress could have come from the appellant but could not have come from the appellant's brother, who it had been suggested might have been responsible for assaulting Ms Trujillo, or from Ms Trujillo and that the female fraction of the stain on the nightdress could have come from Ms
Trujillo but could not have come from the appellant's wife. At the second trial the appellant did not dispute that his semen was on the nightdress.

At the second trial the appellant suggested that the nightdress on which his semen was present, was his wife's and not his sister-in-law's. The two women were sisters and some evidence was led that the two women wore similar sized clothes and had similar nightdresses. However, in his remarks on sentence the trial judge said "the prisoner's version that the nightdress was the deceased's having been put forward for the first time at this his second trial was incredible". On my reading of parts of the transcript of the second trial,
I consider that the trial judge was well warranted in describing the appellant's version that the nightdress was his wife's as being "incredible".
To refer to only some parts of the evidence at the second trial, Ms Trujillo gave evidence that the nightdress which had been produced to the police and which had been tested was hers and was the nightdress she had been wearing at the time she was assaulted. It was inherently improbable, when it was Ms
Trujillo who was making the allegation that she had been sexually assaulted, that a nightdress belonging not to her but to her sister should have been produced to the police. In my opinion, the concession made at the second trial that the appellant's semen was on the nightdress and the overwhelming evidence that the nightdress was Ms Trujillo's (even apart from the DNA evidence of a match between the female fraction of the stain on the nightdress and Ms
Trujillo and of an exclusion between the female fraction of the stain and the appellant's wife), showing when taken together that the appellant's semen was on Ms Trujillo's nightdress, had consequences for what directions were required to be given about the DNA testing of the vaginal swabs.

Earlier in this judgment I set out the passages at pp559 and 564 of Hunt CJ at
CL's judgment in the first appeal on which counsel for the appellant sought to rely in the present appeal. The two passages are substantially, and even verbally, very similar, except that in the second passage Hunt CJ at CL added the words "and however strong the other evidence in the case may be". However, these words would seem to be implicit in the first passage as well. It was accepted by counsel for the appellant that the trial judge at the second trial had sufficiently directed the jury in accordance with the first part of what
Hunt CJ at CL said in each passage, to the effect that evidence of a match or matches obtained between a suspect and an offender did not prove that the suspect was the offender but only that the suspect could be the offender. Nor was it submitted that the trial judge had failed to direct the jury that a test which positively excluded a suspect as being the offender necessarily excluded the suspect completely as being the offender. However, it was submitted that the trial judge had erred in directing the jury that an exclusion excludes a suspect "provided the test result is reliable", when Hunt
CJ at CL had said that "a test which positively excludes a suspect as the offender... must necessarily exclude the suspect completely... if there is a reasonable possibility that the test is correct". It was submitted that, in referring to the reliability or correctness of the test which had produced a positive exclusion, the trial judge had reversed the onus of proof.

Hunt CJ at CL supported what he said in the text of his judgment at pp559 and by what he said in footnotes 7 and 22, which I have already quoted. In each of these footnotes his Honour said that he had assumed that it was necessary in the present case for the Crown to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was not excluded as a suspect and that the probability of a match having occurred by chance was very small. In footnote 7 his Honour expressly recognised that it would not always be the case that these facts would have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt and when they did not have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt the words in italics in the text ("if there is a reasonable possibility that the test is correct") would require modification. His Honour held that in the present case these facts would have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt, in the context of concluding that "apart from the results of the forensic tests, the evidence against the appellant that he had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law was not strong". I note that in summarising the other evidence against the appellant at the first trial that he had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law, which his Honour regarded as not being strong, his Honour would appear not to have taken into account that the admission by the appellant that he had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo on 15 October 1992 had been confirmed by him in an interview which had been video recorded.

I do not consider that at the second trial the evidence against the appellant that he had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law, apart from the evidence of the results of the forensic tests on the vaginal swabs, was "not strong" or that, if the Crown did not succeed in establishing beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was not excluded as a suspect by the DNA testing of the vaginal swabs, the appellant should be necessarily excluded as being the person who had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo on 15 October
In my opinion, it would have been quite possible for the jury at the second trial properly to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo on 15 October 1992, without having to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was not excluded by the evidence of the testing of the vaginal swabs. It would have been open to the jury at the second trial to reach the conclusion that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo on 15 October 1992, by taking into account that it was not disputed that the appellant's semen was on the nightdress; by rejecting as "incredible" (as the trial judge did) the version put forward for the first time at the second trial that the nightdress was not Ms Trujillo's; by taking into account that the appellant had admitted, in a video recorded interview which the jury had viewed, that he had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo on 15 October 1992 and by concluding, after viewing the video recording, that he had made that admission voluntarily; by taking into account that on 15 November 1992 the appellant's legal representative had told a court that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo on 15 October 1992 but that it had been with her consent, and by being satisfied that what the legal representative had told the court had been said by her after a conference with the appellant and on instructions from the appellant; and by taking into account a number of pieces of circumstantial evidence relied on by the Crown.

I accept that if there was a "positive exclusion" of the appellant as being the person who had deposited semen in Ms Trujillo's vagina, then the appellant would have to be excluded as being the person who had sexual intercourse with
Ms Trujillo, whatever the other evidence implicating him. However, the term "positive exclusion" requires some further consideration.

In his judgment on the first appeal Hunt CJ at CL referred to a test result which "positively excludes" a suspect as being the offender. It seems to me that in his judgment his Honour distinguished between a "positive exclusion" (or mismatch) and a mere absence of a match. At pp559-560 his Honour said:- "Moreover, although DNA profiling may produce an exclusion because the bands do not match, because the lack of such a match depends to some extent upon a subjective interpretation of the test results it is perhaps not an exclusion of the positive nature such as may be demonstrated by the blood substance tests, or (it seems) by the DNA (PCR) at DQ alpha".

It will be observed that his Honour was unsure as to whether the DNA tests at
DQa had produced what could properly be regarded as a "positive mismatch".

At the second trial the issue of whether the DNA tests of the vaginal swabs had produced an exclusion or mismatch at the genetic locus DQa largely turned on whether Dr Kessly's explanation should be accepted, that the material being tested, although notionally called "vaginal swabs (male)", actually contained a large preponderance of material coming from Ms Trujillo, which "masked" at that genetic locus any minor portion which might have come from the appellant. In my opinion, it would be quite possible for a jury, if inclined to accept Dr Kessly's explanation, nevertheless to be left with a doubt about whether they should accept it, having regard to such factors as the formidable complexity of the evidence, the partly subjective nature of the interpretation of the results of DNA testing and the difficulty of eliminating any reasonable doubt in the controversy between Dr Kessly and Dr McDonald. I would not agree that in such circumstances the jury would necessarily have to exclude the appellant as being the person who had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo on 15 October, whatever the strength of the other evidence in the case implicating the appellant.

Furthermore, it seems to me that if a "positive exclusion" (or mismatch) is to have the drastic consequence that an accused person is necessarily to be excluded as a suspect, whatever the strength of the other evidence against him (as distinct from it merely being open to a jury, if they see fit, to use evidence of the results of forensic testing as a basis for finding that the accused was not, or might not have been, the offender), then the mismatch must be truly a mismatch and not merely a non-match. In the present case, I consider that a "positive exclusion", if it was to have the consequence of necessarily entitling the appellant to be excluded as the person who had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo, should be limited to the detection of genetic material in the vaginal swabs, which could not have come from the appellant and which could not have come from Ms Trujillo herself. By this criterion, there was no evidence at the second trial of a "positive exclusion"; only an inability in some cases to detect any material which could have come from the appellant. The jury could have used this inability to obtain a match as a ground for finding that the appellant was not, or might not have been, the person who had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo on October 1992, but they were not obliged to do so, and on the basis of the other evidence in the case could properly have concluded, even beyond reasonable doubt, that it was the appellant who had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo.

I am now in a position to deal expeditiously with the various grounds of appeal.

Ground 1 
The direction which it is alleged the trial judge should have given was clearly not required in relation to the DNA of the appellant and the DNA detected on the nightdress. I am of the opinion that at the second trial, having regard to the other evidence implicating the appellant and the way in which the second trial was conducted, it was not necessary for the jury to be directed that they would have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there was a match between the DNA of the appellant and the DNA in the vaginal swabs before they could conclude that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo on 15 October 1992. I would reject the first ground of appeal.

Ground 2 
No direction was required in relation to the DNA of the appellant and the DNA detected on the nightdress. A direction of this sort was required to be given in relation to the vaginal swabs. I am satisfied that in the parts of his summing-up which I have set out his Honour sufficiently instructed the jury that a match showed that the two samples compared could have come from the same person but that, however many matches are obtained, "you will never prove that the two samples come from the one person", carrying the clear implication that further evidence is required before the conclusion can be drawn that the two samples do come from the same person. No application was made by counsel for the appellant at the trial for any further direction. I would reject this ground of appeal.

Ground 3 
It was conceded that his Honour directed the jury that a single mismatch or exclusion proves that the two samples did not come from the same person. His
Honour directed the jury:- "It does not matter how many matches there are, if there is so much as a single exclusion... an exclusion excludes for all time and all purposes".

The words in italics in Hunt CJ at CL's judgment at pp559 and 564 of the report of the first appeal, on which this ground of appeal is based, namely, "if there is a reasonable possibility that the test is correct", are expressly stated by Hunt CJ at CL in footnote 7 not to be always required and to depend on the assumption Hunt CJ at CL made on the state of the evidence at the first trial, that it was necessary for the Crown to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was not excluded as a suspect. For reasons which I have already given, I do not consider that this assumption was applicable to the second trial and hence the reasoning which led to Hunt CJ at CL's conclusion does not apply to the second trial. I do not consider that at the second trial a direction incorporating the words in italics in Hunt CJ at CL's judgment was required. I would reject the third ground of appeal.

The fourth ground of appeal was:- his Honour erred in failing to exclude the evidence of the statistical unlikelihood of a chance match of the DNA test results of the appellant and those of the vaginal swabs and the nightdress alleged to be that of the witness Zenaida Trujillo".

Evidence of what was said by a witness to be the statistical probability (or improbability) of an observed match or combination of matches having occurred by chance was given by the Crown witnesses Mr Goetz, Dr Gunn and Dr Kessly.
Some of this evidence I have already referred to. A number of the probabilities given were of an enormously high degree of remoteness. The only statistical evidence given by a Crown witness about the male fraction of the vaginal swabs was the evidence given by Dr Kessly based on his 1993 testing, that the frequency in the general population of DNA matching that detected in the vaginal swabs (male) and the appellant at genetic locus D2S44 was approximately one in eighty.

The first appeal to this Court was upheld on the ground that evidence of the statistical probability of an observed match or combination of matches have occurred by chance should not have been admitted. As I have stated earlier in this judgment, the ground on which the evidence of statistical probability was objected to at the first trial, that the statistics had been taken from databases which had been derived from samples of the population which were unlikely to have included any South American Quechua Indians and that there could be differences in the distribution of genetic types between the general population and Quechua Indians, was rejected by the Court of Criminal Appeal on the first appeal. The Court of Criminal Appeal held that the evidence of statistical probability should have been excluded on the different ground, that no evidence had been led by the Crown to support the statistical validity of the databases used, which appeared to the Court to be derived from very small samples and the Court was "not satisfied by the evidence that the databases used in relation to the DNA testing were of sufficient statistical validity as to warrant the admission of the evidence derived from them".

At the second trial, as noted by the trial judge in a part of his summing-up which I have quoted, "no attack (was) made by the defence on the sizes of the databases used by Mr Goetz, Dr Kessly and Dr Gunn". The submission which was put on behalf of the appellant on the present appeal is that the evidence of statistical probability should have been excluded in the exercise of the trial judge's discretion under s135 or s137 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). It was submitted that all the persons living in the house at Summer Hill were South
American Quechua Indians, that the person, whoever he was, who sexually assaulted Ms Trujillo probably belonged to the same racial group, that there was no evidence whether the distribution of genetic differences in the population of Quechua Indians was the same as the distribution of genetic differences in the general population from which the databases used by the experts had been derived and that the results of such genetic testing as had been performed on members of the group of Quechua Indians living at St Peters had shown striking similarities between them.

In my opinion, the submission made on behalf of the appellant is substantially the same submission as was put on the first appeal and rejected by the majority of the Court. As pointed out by Hunt CJ at CL in his judgment in the first appeal, very little can be gleaned from a match between the DNA of a suspect and the DNA of the offender, unless evidence can be given of the probability of such a match having occurred by chance. Hunt CJ at CL said that he agreed with the trial judge at the first trial that, notwithstanding the possibility that the person who had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo was a Quechua Indian, the Crown was entitled to use databases derived from the general population, it not being practicable to devise a database which took into account all the circumstances peculiar to the present case. In my opinion, Hunt CJ at CL was correct and the present Court should hold that the evidence of statistical probability taken from databases derived from the general population was admissible and should not have been rejected by the trial judge in the exercise of any discretion. On the matter of discretion, it is to be noted that Dr Kessly found an exclusion between the appellant's wife and the major portion of the material in the female fraction of the nightdress and that at the second trial, apart from Dr Kessly's evidence of a chance match at genetic locus D2S44 (which was one in eighty), there was no evidence of the statistical probability of any match affecting the appellant and the vaginal swabs.

In his judgment on the first appeal Hunt CJ at CL said that because the person who had had sexual intercourse with Ms Trujillo might have been a Quechua
Indian, directions were required to be given that the probability of a chance match as taken from databases derived from the general population would have to be reduced to take this possibility into account and that the jury should not approach the issue upon any strictly mathematical basis. Directions of these kinds were given by the trial judge in his summing-up in the second trial.

I would reject the fourth ground of appeal.

The fifth ground of appeal was as follows:- "(5) the trial judge erred in not following the procedure required by [s56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s56.html) of the [Jury Act 1977](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/) upon receiving a note (MFI 79) from the jury".

The jury retired to consider their verdicts a few minutes before midday on
Thursday 19 December 1996. The jury continued deliberating until 6pm on 19
December 1996 and were then permitted to separate. The jury resumed deliberating at 9am on 20 December 1996.

At some time shortly before 11.53am on 20 December 1996 the jury sent the trial judge a note in the following terms:- "We the jury regret to inform the Court that after extensive deliberation we have been unable to reach a verdict on either charge. All avenues of deliberation have been exhausted and the jury is unanimous in its belief that further deliberation is futile".

After receiving the note the trial judge said to counsel in the absence of the jury, "there is only one thing I can do and that is to give a Black direction. That is what I will do now". The Crown Prosecutor remarked, "that kind of response is pretty close to being it". The trial judge then said, "but
I am going to send them back. I must do that".

The jury were then brought into the courtroom and the judge gave the jury directions in conformity with the model directions in Black versus The Queen <case>; [(1993) 179 CLR 44] at 51-52, except that, instead of saying "I have been told that you have not been able to reach a verdict so far", the trial judge summarised the contents of the note from the jury. No objection was taken to the trial judge giving a Black direction.

The jury retired again at 11.53am and at 5.40pm on 20 December they returned with their verdicts of not guilty on the first count and guilty on the second count.

It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the terms of the note from the jury were clear and that the judge should have utilised the procedure under [s56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s56.html) of the [Jury Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/), that is the judge should have examined one or more of the jurors and having found that the jury were not likely to agree on a verdict on either count should have discharged the jury. It was submitted that a Black direction was suitable when a jury informed a trial judge that it has not yet been able to reach a verdict but not when a jury has so categorically informed the judge that all avenues of deliberation have been exhausted and that further deliberation would be futile. It was accepted that the trial judge had a discretion as to what course he should adopt after receiving the jury's note but it was submitted that the exercise of the trial judge's discretion had miscarried, because it could be inferred from what the trial judge had said to counsel that he had believed, erroneously, that there was only one course he could adopt and that was to give a Black direction.

I would not infer from the brief recorded remarks of his Honour that his
Honour fettered his discretion by erroneously directing himself that the only course he could adopt was to give a Black direction. In my opinion, the remarks made by his Honour disclose a conclusion reached by his Honour that the only course he could properly adopt in the circumstances was to give a
Black direction. I do not consider that there was any error involved in reaching such a view. The appellant was being tried on two counts. The trial had commenced on 22 October and had continued until 19 December and the evidence was truly voluminous. The jury had retired to consider their verdicts only about twenty-four hours earlier and had been allowed to separate overnight. The note from the jury was the first indication that the jury were having any difficulty in reaching verdicts. The trial judge was not bound to accept what was asserted in a note sent at such a comparatively early stage in the jury's retirement and was entitled to give the jury a further opportunity of reaching agreement. No objection was taken by either counsel to the course adopted by his Honour.

The course adopted by his Honour derives some support from the decision of this Court in R versus Tangye [(1997) 92 A Crim R 545.] In
Tangye the jury had sent a note "unable to reach a decision on the first charge. Where do we go from here?" The trial judge in Tangye examined the foreman of the jury pursuant to [s56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s56.html) of the [Jury Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/) and then gave a Black direction. Hunt CJ at CL, who gave the leading judgment in the Court of Criminal Appeal in Tangye, said:- "There is no doubt that the judge should have given a Black direction and waited to see whether it had any effect before examining the foreman on oath pursuant to [s56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s56.html) of the [Jury
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/)".

I would reject the fifth ground of appeal.

Ground 6 was in the following terms:- "(6) in all the circumstances in which the jury deliberations occurred there is a substantial risk that the verdict on the murder count constituted a miscarriage of justice".

As I have already stated, the jury commenced deliberating just before midday on Thursday 19 December 1996. On the afternoon of Thursday 19 December the trial judge received a note from the foreman of the jury saying that one of the jurors had an examination on the afternoon of Monday 23 December, which could not be put off. The jury were brought into the courtroom (it would seem at about 4pm). The trial judge enquired whether the jury would need an evening meal to be provided and was informed by the foreman of the jury that the jury had already agreed to sit until 6pm and to resume at 9 o'clock the following morning. The trial judge then referred to the note he had received and said that he would organise matters so that the juror did not miss the examination.
The trial judge then said:- "It does raise the question though of how long you might take, how long your deliberations will have to go on next week if you do not sit on Monday afternoon. I think you would understand that if one juror is away for the afternoon, then you must all be away...

I think I should tell you at this stage that the need to sit on Saturday at this stage looks a real possibility especially in view of the contents of the note. We do not need to make any decisions now because we will see how you are going. I want to remain as flexible as we can. I want to fit in with your problems and solve them for you if I can but I am also aware that next Tuesday is Christmas Eve and the longer the case goes into next week, the more likely it is that other tensions may surface, other problems with your members may arise.

I do not know, you see, how long you are likely to need to come to your verdicts. I am only saying that these things may possibly arise and that we may have to make some hard decision, but for the moment let us leave it as it is".

On the following day 20 December, after giving the jury the Black direction, the trial judge told the jury that the juror who had the examination need not be concerned and that, whatever happened, the juror would be able to take the examination.

The question of whether the jury would be deliberating at a week-end had arisen the previous week, when it had seemed possible that the jury would be sent out to consider their verdicts before the week-end of 14-15 December. The trial judge told the jury that he was keeping an open mind on whether the jury would be deliberating at the week-end. The foreman of the jury then said:- "Excuse your Honour, the jury were mostly concerned with whether you would actually not make them go home on Saturday and Sunday because people here actually do work after they have finished jury duty because they have business commitments".

The trial judge then said:- "Yes. It is always possible once a jury retires that they may need to consider their verdict outside the ordinary 10 o'clock to 4 o'clock hours".

Although it is not entirely clear, I would not interpret what the foreman said, as indicating that the jury were opposed to spending some time on
Saturday and Sunday deliberating.

It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that by reason of a combination of circumstances, including the course taken by the trial judge in requiring the jury to continue deliberating notwithstanding their note saying that all avenues of deliberation had been exhausted, the approaching week-end, the fact that the jury would not be deliberating on the afternoon of Monday 23 December and the fact that the next day would be the day before Christmas, the jury had been placed under inappropriate pressure and there was a reasonable possibility that the verdict of guilty on the murder charge had resulted from a compromise.

I do not consider that the circumstances relied on created a real risk of an interference with the jury's freedom to deliberate without pressure being imposed upon them (see Tangye per Hunt CJ at CL at p551). A Black direction was given by the trial judge. The trial judge thereby informed the jury of his power to discharge the jury from giving verdicts, if after further deliberation the judge was satisfied that there was no likelihood of genuine agreement being reached. The Black direction also reminded the jurors of their individual oaths or affirmations and instructed them not to join in a verdict if they did not honestly and genuinely think that it was correct.

On the afternoon of Friday 20 December the jury had available to them the rest of that afternoon for deliberating. As I interpret the remark made by the foreman of the jury the previous week, the jury were not opposed to spending some of the week-end deliberating. The jury would have been able to deliberate on the morning of Monday 23 December. The individual juror who wished to take the exam would have been relieved of any anxiety that he would not be permitted to take the exam. The other jurors would have had Monday afternoon available in which to transact any personal business. The following day
Tuesday 24 December, which was a working day, would have been available for deliberating.

I would reject the sixth ground of appeal.

The seventh ground of appeal was:- his Honour erred in directing the jury that the Crown did not have to prove that the appellant had a sexual passion for Zenaida Trujillo at the time of his wife's death".

In the summing-up the trial judge directed the jury as follows:- "I tell you it is not necessary for the Crown to prove the accused had a motive to commit a crime with which he has been charged. If you are not satisfied about the motive put forward by the Crown, therefore it would not follow that you would have to acquit the accused".

At the next break in the summing-up counsel for the appellant at the trial submitted that in the present case motive was an essential circumstance which had to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. The Crown Prosecutor opposed this submission, saying that "nothing about this case makes it any different to any other murder case where motive is pointed to and it would be a wrong direction... to suggest that the Crown case stood or fell on... whether they (the jury) are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that motive has been established". The trial judge declined to give any further direction.

At a later pause in the summing-up counsel for the appellant at the trial sought directions that the Crown had to prove beyond reasonable doubt each of eight circumstances, including the circumstance that the appellant had had a sexual passion for Ms Trujillo predating 23 October 1992. The trial judge declined to give a direction that the Crown had to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant had had a sexual passion for Ms Trujillo at the time of his wife's death.

In my opinion, the trial judge did not err in declining to give the directions sought. That the appellant had had a sexual passion for Ms Trujillo was only one of the circumstances relied on by the Crown, from the totality of which the jury was asked by the Crown to infer that the appellant was guilty of murdering his wife. In the trial judge's summing-up the trial judge listed many pieces of circumstantial evidence relied on by the Crown. Without being exhaustive, these other pieces of evidence included, evidence of a bad relationship between the appellant and his wife, evidence that the appellant had taken steps to ensure that all the adults who lived in the house at St
Peters (apart from his wife) were out of the house after 3.20am on 23 October , evidence that while at work on 23 October 1992 the appellant gave his card for the Qantas Jetabout Building to Mr Baca-flor so that uses of the appellant's card would be recorded, evidence of a bus driver Mr Ponui identifying the appellant as having been a passenger who boarded his bus at .30am on a morning in the week of 23 October and who alighted near the appellant's home, evidence that the appellant had a scratch on his face when he was seen again at the Qantas Jetabout Building, evidence of ineffectual attempts to make it appear that there had been a break-in at the house at St
Peters and that the appellant's wife had committed suicide, evidence of an admission made by the appellant to the police which had been confirmed in a recorded interview that he had returned home on the night of 23 October and evidence of various lies told by the appellant which the Crown said showed consciousness of guilt, including that the appellant's wife had said that she would commit suicide and that the appellant's wife had in fact committed suicide.

In support of his argument counsel for the appellant referred to R v
Murphy [(1985) 4 NSWLR 42.] In Murphy the Court of Criminal Appeal said that before a jury can infer guilt from motive they must be satisfied that the motive asserted has been proved beyond reasonable doubt (at pp59-60). However, in asserting this proposition the Court of Criminal Appeal expressly relied on the decision of the High Court in Chamberlain versus The Queen (No 2) [(1984) 153 CLR 520], which at the time Murphy was decided was widely, but erroneously, believed to require that in a circumstantial case all the circumstances from which the jury were asked to infer guilt had to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. That this was not the law was established in
Shepherd versus The Queen <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 573.] 
We were referred by counsel for the appellant to the recent decision of the
High Court in Penney versus The Queen (13 August 1998), which has now been reported <case>; [(155 ALR 605).]
In Penney an appeal against a conviction on a charge of attempted murder of the appellant's estranged wife was unanimously dismissed by the High Court, the leading judgment being given by Callinan J. In par26 of his judgment
Callinan J referred to the decision of the New South Wales Court of Criminal
Appeal in Murphy and said that in Murphy the New South Wales Court had accurately summarised the principle stated in Chamberlain. However,
Callinan J went on to hold that the principle stated in Chamberlain was not applicable in Penney, because the relevant evidence in Penney had been relied on, not as proving a motive, but as proving the state of the relationship between the appellant and his wife at the time of her death (see
Wilson versus The Queen <case>; [(1970) 123 CLR 334] especially at 337). More importantly, Callinan J made no reference in his judgment to the High Court's decision in Shepherd, in which Dawson J, after a close examination of the judgments in Chamberlain and with the concurrence of most of the other members of the Court, concluded (at p585):- `The judgments in Chamberlain do not support the proposition that, in a case resting upon circumstantial evidence, the jury may only properly draw an inference of guilt upon facts ... proved beyond reasonable doubt'.

Nor do I consider that in the present case establishing that the appellant had a sexual passion for Zenaida Trujillo at the time of his wife's death was an indispensable intermediate step in a reasoning process towards an inference of guilt.

I would reject the seventh ground of appeal.

The eighth ground of appeal was:- "His Honour erred in granting leave pursuant to s38 of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) for the Crown to cross-examine its own witness Luciano Rosales".

The Crown witness Luciano Rosales, whose full name was Misael Luciano Rosales
Jara, gave evidence in chief that on 23 October 1992 he had gone to work at the Qantas Building at North Sydney, arriving at about ten to four. He said that he did not see the appellant that morning until 6 o'clock, when the appellant came to the floor Rosales was working on. In response to a question from the Crown Prosecutor "how did you get in?" Rosales replied that he had got into the building by using his card. No application was made by the Crown
Prosecutor for leave to cross-examine Rosales on this answer.

In cross-examination Rosales said that "lately", that is lately before 23
October 1992, someone had been letting him into the building, rather than
Rosales himself using his card to gain entry to the building. The following questions and answers then occurred:- "Q. Let us deal with the last few days before the murder. Generally Max opened the door to you? 
A. Yes 
Q. There was nothing unusual or different about the morning of the murder, was there, that you could remember? 
A. Max was a bit different, he wasn't the same as before.

Q. Did he open the door to you - did he open the door as usual? 
A. Yes, yes".

The next time the jury were out of the courtroom the Crown Prosecutor applied, pursuant to s38(1)(c) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), for leave to cross-examine Rosales on his evidence given in cross-examination that the appellant had opened the door of the building to Rosales on the morning of 23
October. In making this application, the Crown Prosecutor relied on a statement in question and answer form which Rosales had made to the police in
November 1992. In this statement the following questions and answers had occurred:- "Q.54. When you first arrived at the building at twenty to four how did you get into the building? 
A. We waited for someone to open the door, I can't remember who let me in.

Q.55. How do you normally get into the building? 
A. Generally Max open the door.

Q.56. Do you know why Max did not open the door on this occasion? 
A. I can't remember if it was Max or Baca-flor that opened the door for us.

Q.57. Can you remember seeing Maximo before five to six this morning? 
A. No." 
Mr Rosales had not given evidence in the committal proceedings or in the first trial.

The trial judge gave a considered judgment, in which he concluded that he should grant leave to the Crown to cross-examine Mr Rosales about his evidence given in cross-examination that the appellant had opened the door of the building to him on 23 October 1992. In his judgment his Honour said that pars(a) and (c) of s38(1), unlike par(b), do not contain any requirement that the circumstances giving rise to the application for leave to cross-examine should have arisen during the witness's evidence in chief. His Honour further held:- "Although sub-ss(4) and (6) make it desirable that the intention to seek leave should be made as soon as possible and should perhaps in the ordinary event be made before the commencement of cross-examination, neither of those sub- sections preclude an application being made after cross-examination has commenced based on circumstances which have become apparent during cross- examination".

In deciding to grant leave to the Crown to cross-examine, his Honour referred to s192 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), which is the general provision in the Act relating to the giving of any leave under the
Act, and placed particular weight on the importance of the evidence about which it was sought to cross-examine the witness, which would have placed the appellant at North Sydney at ten to four on 23 October 1992, the fact that the evidence given in cross-examination had then emerged for the first time and the fact that Mr Rosales had not in the four years since he had made his statement been tested on, or required to recall, what he had said in his statement.

The Crown Prosecutor then cross-examined Mr Rosales and Mr Rosales agreed that he had said in his statement that he could not remember whether it was the appellant or Baca-flor who had opened the door for him and that what he had said in his statement was true.

Mr Rosales was then further cross-examined by counsel for the appellant at the trial. In this further cross-examination Mr Rosales agreed that the door used to be opened for him by either the appellant or Baca-flor, that in the majority of cases it was the appellant who opened the door but that in this particular case he could not remember which of them it was. Counsel for the appellant then continued with his cross-examination of Mr Rosales on other topics.

A number of submissions were made by counsel for the appellant in support of the general contention that the trial judge had erred in granting leave. It was submitted that Mr Rosales was not a generally unfavourable witness, so far as the Crown was concerned, and that leave should not have been granted to cross-examine Mr Rosales on just one part of his evidence which was unfavourable to the Crown, when much of his evidence was favourable to the
Crown. It was also submitted that the trial judge had not taken into account, or had not sufficiently taken into account, that the evidence on which the
Crown Prosecutor sought leave to cross-examine had been given, not in evidence in chief, but in cross-examination. It was pointed out that the Crown had not applied for leave to cross-examine Mr Rosales, when Mr Rosales gave evidence in his evidence in chief that he had used his card to gain entry to the building, which was inconsistent with what he had said in his statement in
November 1992 but which was favourable to the Crown. It was said that there was no evidentiary foundation for the alleged circumstance relied on by his
Honour, that Mr Rosales had at no time in between making his statement in
November 1992 and giving his evidence at the second trial on 29 October 1996, been tested on, or required to recall, the circumstances set out in his statement. The trial judge, it was submitted, had neglected to take into account other matters which he was required by s192 to take into account.

I do not consider that any of these submissions should be upheld.

Although the heading to s38 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) is "unfavourable witnesses", the section itself refers to "evidence" given by a witness and in my view leave can be granted to cross-examine a witness on part only of his evidence if it is unfavourable to the party calling him or inconsistent with a prior statement made by the witness, even though the rest or most of the rest of the witness's evidence is favourable to the party calling him.

I agree with the trial judge that leave can be granted pursuant to pars(a) or of s38(1), even though the evidence on which the application is based (that is the evidence which is unfavourable to the party calling the witness or which is inconsistent with a prior statement by the witness) was given by the witness in cross-examination. That the evidence was given in cross- examination is, of course, an important consideration in deciding whether the trial judge's discretion should be exercised in favour of granting leave. In the present case, it is clear from his Honour's judgment that his Honour was very conscious that the evidence about which leave to cross-examine was sought had been given in cross-examination and that that was a matter which was material to the exercise of his discretion.

It is true that the Crown Prosecutor did not make any application under s38, when Mr Rosales gave evidence in his evidence in chief, which was inconsistent with the prior statement he had made to the police. However, in my opinion, a new and different situation subsequently arose in cross-examination, when Mr
Rosales gave evidence which was different from the evidence he had given in chief and inconsistent with what he had said in his prior statement.

In the context of his Honour's judgment, I consider that his Honour's statement that Mr Rosales had not previously been tested on, or required to recall, what he had said in his statement which he had made four years previously should be understood as simply meaning that Mr Rosales had not as a witness in any court proceedings been tested on or required to recall what he had said in the statement and the trial judge was justified in making this assertion.

As regards s192 of the Act, his Honour referred to s192 in his judgment and his Honour was not required in an interlocutory judgment in a jury trial to list expressly all the circumstances in the present case which fell within any part of s192.

In my opinion, it has not been shown that his Honour erred in granting leave to cross-examine. The evidence by the witness about which leave was granted to cross-examine was important evidence which could have provided the appellant with an alibi. It had been given for the first time by the witness in cross- examination and it was inconsistent with what the witness had said in a formal statement made shortly after the events and four years prior to his giving evidence.

I would reject the eighth ground of appeal.

The ninth ground of appeal was:- "by reason of the accumulation of the matters set out in grounds (1) to (8), the conviction is unsafe and unsatisfactory".

As I have rejected all of the grounds of appeal (1) to (8), I would also reject the ninth ground of appeal.

As I have rejected all of the grounds of appeal, I would dismiss the appellant's appeal against his conviction for the murder of his wife.

The application for leave to appeal against sentence was pressed only faintly, if at all. In his remarks on sentence the trial judge found, and was entitled to find, that the appellant, having taken steps to ensure that all the adult occupants of the house at St Peters would be away from the house, left work on the night of 23 October with the intention of killing his wife and carried out his intention. In his remarks on sentence the trial judge took into account the appellant's favourable subjective circumstances. The sentence his Honour imposed was very similar to the sentence which had been imposed by McInerney J after the first trial and was well within a sound exercise of his Honour's sentencing discretion. I would refuse leave to appeal against sentence.
 - - - - - -IN THE COURT OF 
CRIMINAL APPEAL 
NO 60174/97 
WOOD CJ at CL 
B M JAMES J 
ADAMS J November 1998 
R versus Maximo Armando PANTOJA 
JUDGMENT 
ADAMS J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of James J. Subject to the comments below, I agree with his reasons. I agree with the orders he proposes.

The fourth ground of appeal was that his Honour, the learned trial judge "erred in failing to exclude evidence of the statistical unlikelihood of a chance match of the DNA test results of the appellant and those of the vaginal swabs of the nightdress alleged to be that of the witness Zenaida Trujillo".
James J has set out comprehensively the relevant material in respect of this ground of appeal and I do not need to do so. I do not find the argument persuasive that, because it was not practicable to devise a database which took into account the probability that the semen came from a Quechua Indian, the Crown was entitled to use what it had at its command, namely databases drawn from the general population. If there was available to the jury evidence that enabled it to evaluate the possible ramifications of this omission, then it could consider the appropriate weight to be accorded to the scientific opinions that were expressed. However, in the absence of any such material, I do not see how a jury of lay persons could reasonably be expected to measure the extent of the possible impact on the statistical material that was adduced. I do not think that this highly technical evidence is a matter to which "common sense" can have any meaningful application, whether of the jury or, for that matter, the judge. The direction that they should not approach the issue "upon any strictly mathematical basis" does not, to my mind, deal with the problem: it merely ignores it.

However, having regard to the way in which this issue was fought at trial and the evidentiary context in which this DNA material was adduced, I do not consider that any miscarriage of the trial occurred.

The eighth ground of appeal concerns the application of [s38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) .

The relevant evidence is helpfully set out in the judgment of James J and I need not repeat it. It is clear from the course of evidence that both the
Crown and defence counsel took a tactical approach to this evidence. The Crown was, of course, aware, that the witness was apparently unable to state categorically, from a positive recollection, who opened the door on the crucial occasion. He had said that he had no memory of seeing the accused at the time, but this was not in its own terms a direct statement at all that the accused had not been there. When it is noted that immediately preceding this statement he had said that he could not remember if it was the accused or
Baca-flor who opened the door, this point is emphatically established, to my mind. It was not to be reasonably expected that his memory would have improved in the interim and if the expression had become positive, it was most unlikely to be reliable. The appropriate question for the Crown to ask, on such a crucial matter, was whether the witness could now recall how he had got into the building; this was, at all events, the logically preceding matter. Having, decided to seek the unqualified answer, if he could get it, it seems to me that the Crown deliberately invited the cross-examination that occurred. It seems to me to be most unfair that the Crown should seek to take advantage of an unqualified answer that he knew was unlikely to be true upon the basis that the most he could lose was that the cross-examiner might, on the basis of the statement, bring the witness back to a state of uncertainty. In the result, however (and, no doubt on the basis of instructions) the cross-examiner sought to adduce the evidence in a way that was based upon a positive recollection, building upon the supposition that nothing out of the ordinary happened that night.

I think it would be most unfortunate if counsel, especially prosecuting counsel, thought that [s38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) might be used a device to nullify the effect of a cross-examination where they have themselves proceeded or permitted the evidence to proceed upon a false or unreliable basis. I agree that, in the peculiar circumstances of this case, the learned trial judge has not been demonstrated to have erred in the exercise of his discretion in permitting the further examination by the Crown prosecutor although (with unfeigned respect for his Honour) I do not say that
I would necessarily have come to the same conclusion.

It should be noted that [s38(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) is confined to circumstances in which a witness gives "unfavourable" evidence.
Other paragraphs of the subsection give other grounds for cross-examination, of which para (b) is directly applicable to the circumstances here and which would have permitted the Crown to ensure that this important evidence went to the jury upon an accurate basis. However, as I have said, he did not choose this course. It seems to me that some attention will need to be given in due course to the meaning of "unfavourable" so far as the Crown case is concerned.
The Crown case is, in essence, the truth, wherever that might lead and even if it leads to a reasonable doubt about guilt. I am far from persuaded that merely because a witness declines to give evidence supporting the theory of the facts for which the prosecution contends or, indeed, gives evidence that contradicts that theory or contention, his or her evidence may thereby be regarded as "unfavourable". How can truthful evidence ever be "unfavourable" from the Crown's point of view? In the circumstances of this case, however, there were good reasons for concluding that, if not untruthful (and I do not think that this was ever suggested in the sense of being deliberate) the evidence of the witness as adduced by the cross-examination was doubtful, even if (by parity of reasoning) the evidence adduced in chief by the Crown was also doubtful.

In Penney versus The Queen <case> (unreported 13 August 1998) it was submitted for the appellant that the trial judge had erred in omitting to instruct the jury that, if motive was relied on by the Crown in proof of the charge (of attempted murder), then it must be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Support for this proposition was gained from
R versus Murphy [(1985) 4 NSWLR 42] at 59-60.
Penney was brought to our attention by Buddin SC, for the appellant, after argument had concluded and whilst this Court had reserved its judgment. As is clear from James J's judgment, the same argument as had been put to the High
Court was put to this Court. I respectfully agree with what James J has said about it.

Penney does not advance the appellant's case. Callinan J (with whom the other judges agreed) distinguished Murphy upon the basis that the relevant portion of the summing up "was not dealing with intention or motive as such but was pointing to evidence with respect to the relationship between the appellant and his wife upon which [the jury] for an ultimate conclusion of guilt beyond reasonable doubt", citing the well known passage from the judgment of Barwick CJ in Wilson versus The Queen <case>; [(1970) 123 CLR 334.] I do not read the judgment of Callinan J as endorsing the passage from Murphy.

It seems to me that, especially having regard to the explanation of
Chamberlain versus The Queen (No2) <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 573], no direction along the lines submitted by counsel for the appellant was called for in this case. There may be cases depending upon circumstantial evidence in which proof of motive is an indispensable link in the chain of proof of the guilt of the accused and thus will need to be established beyond reasonable doubt. However, such cases must be rare. This case was certainly not one of them. It is always important to note that the process of reason used to move to a verdict is a matter for the jury. Thus, in some cases it may be necessary to direct them that, if they were of the view that any fact, such as motive, was, so far as they were concerned, an indispensable link in proof of guilt, then they must be satisfied of it beyond reasonable doubt before they could convict. Again, however, I do not think that this was such a case.

Accordingly, I agree with James J that the seventh ground of appeal should be rejected.

ADAMS J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment of James J. Subject to the comments below, I agree with his reasons. I agree with the orders he proposes. 
The fourth ground of appeal was that his Honour, the learned trial judge "erred in failing to exclude evidence of the statistical unlikelihood of a chance match of the DNA test results of the appellant and those of the vaginal swabs of the nightdress alleged to be that of the witness Zenaida Trujillo".
James J has set out comprehensively the relevant material in respect of this ground of appeal and I do not need to do so. I do not find the argument persuasive that, because it was not practicable to devise a database which took into account the probability that the semen came from a Quechua Indian, the Crown was entitled to use what it had at its command, namely databases drawn from the general population. If there was available to the jury evidence that enabled it to evaluate the possible ramifications of this omission, then it could consider the appropriate weight to be accorded to the scientific opinions that were expressed. However, in the absence of any such material, I do not see how a jury of lay persons could reasonably be expected to measure the extent of the possible impact on the statistical material that was adduced. I do not think that this highly technical evidence is a matter to which "common sense" can have any meaningful application, whether of the jury or, for that matter, the judge. The direction that they should not approach the issue "upon any strictly mathematical basis" does not, to my mind, deal with the problem: it merely ignores it.

However, having regard to the way in which this issue was fought at trial and the evidentiary context in which this DNA material was adduced, I do not consider that any miscarriage of the trial occurred.

The eighth ground of appeal concerns the application of [s38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) .

The relevant evidence is helpfully set out in the judgment of James J and I need not repeat it. It is clear from the course of evidence that both the
Crown and defence counsel took a tactical approach to this evidence. The Crown was, of course, aware, that the witness was apparently unable to state categorically, from a positive recollection, who opened the door on the crucial occasion. He had said that he had no memory of seeing the accused at the time, but this was not in its own terms a direct statement at all that the accused had not been there. When it is noted that immediately preceding this statement he had said that he could not remember if it was the accused or
Baca-flor who opened the door, this point is emphatically established, to my mind. It was not to be reasonably expected that his memory would have improved in the interim and if the expression had become positive, it was most unlikely to be reliable. The appropriate question for the Crown to ask, on such a crucial matter, was whether the witness could now recall how he had got into the building; this was, at all events, the logically preceding matter. Having, decided to seek the unqualified answer, if he could get it, it seems to me that the Crown deliberately invited the cross-examination that occurred. It seems to me to be most unfair that the Crown should seek to take advantage of an unqualified answer that he knew was unlikely to be true upon the basis that the most he could lose was that the cross-examiner might, on the basis of the statement, bring the witness back to a state of uncertainty. In the result, however (and, no doubt on the basis of instructions) the cross-examiner sought to adduce the evidence in a way that was based upon a positive recollection, building upon the supposition that nothing out of the ordinary happened that night.

I think it would be most unfortunate if counsel, especially prosecuting counsel, thought that [s38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) might be used a device to nullify the effect of a cross-examination where they have themselves proceeded or permitted the evidence to proceed upon a false or unreliable basis. I agree that, in the peculiar circumstances of this case, the learned trial judge has not been demonstrated to have erred in the exercise of his discretion in permitting the further examination by the Crown prosecutor although (with unfeigned respect for his Honour) I do not say that
I would necessarily have come to the same conclusion.

It should be noted that [s38(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) is confined to circumstances in which a witness gives "unfavourable" evidence.
Other paragraphs of the subsection give other grounds for cross-examination, of which para (b) is directly applicable to the circumstances here and which would have permitted the Crown to ensure that this important evidence went to the jury upon an accurate basis. However, as I have said, he did not choose this course. It seems to me that some attention will need to be given in due course to the meaning of "unfavourable" so far as the Crown case is concerned.
The Crown case is, in essence, the truth, wherever that might lead and even if it leads to a reasonable doubt about guilt. I am far from persuaded that merely because a witness declines to give evidence supporting the theory of the facts for which the prosecution contends or, indeed, gives evidence that contradicts that theory or contention, his or her evidence may thereby be regarded as "unfavourable". How can truthful evidence ever be "unfavourable" from the Crown's point of view? In the circumstances of this case, however, there were good reasons for concluding that, if not untruthful (and I do not think that this was ever suggested in the sense of being deliberate) the evidence of the witness as adduced by the cross-examination was doubtful, even if (by parity of reasoning) the evidence adduced in chief by the Crown was also doubtful.

In Penney versus The Queen <case> (unreported 13 August 1998) it was submitted for the appellant that the trial judge had erred in omitting to instruct the jury that, if motive was relied on by the Crown in proof of the charge (of attempted murder), then it must be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Support for this proposition was gained from
R versus Murphy [(1985) 4 NSWLR 42] at 59-60.
Penney was brought to our attention by Buddin SC, for the appellant, after argument had concluded and whilst this Court had reserved its judgment. As is clear from James J's judgment, the same argument as had been put to the High
Court was put to this Court. I respectfully agree with what James J has said about it.

Penney does not advance the appellant's case. Callinan J (with whom the other judges agreed) distinguished Murphy upon the basis that the relevant portion of the summing up "was not dealing with intention or motive as such but was pointing to evidence with respect to the relationship between the appellant and his wife upon which [the jury] for an ultimate conclusion of guilt beyond reasonable doubt", citing the well known passage from the judgment of Barwick CJ in Wilson versus The Queen <case>; [(1970) 123 CLR 334.] I do not read the judgment of Callinan J as endorsing the passage from Murphy.

It seems to me that, especially having regard to the explanation of
Chamberlain versus The Queen (No2) <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 573], no direction along the lines submitted by counsel for the appellant was called for in this case. There may be cases depending upon circumstantial evidence in which proof of motive is an indispensable link in the chain of proof of the guilt of the accused and thus will need to be established beyond reasonable doubt. However, such cases must be rare. This case was certainly not one of them. It is always important to note that the process of reason used to move to a verdict is a matter for the jury. Thus, in some cases it may be necessary to direct them that, if they were of the view that any fact, such as motive, was, so far as they were concerned, an indispensable link in proof of guilt, then they must be satisfied of it beyond reasonable doubt before they could convict. Again, however, I do not think that this was such a case.

Accordingly, I agree with James J that the seventh ground of appeal should be rejected.
 * * * 
