

Kavalee versus Burbidge; Hyland and Ors versus Burbidge and Ors Matter Nos Ca /95; Ca 40583/95 [1998] NSWSC 111 (22 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1999 
KAVALEE versus BURBIDGE 
CA 40582/95 
HYLAND & ORS versus BURBIDGE & ORS 
CA 40583/95 April 1998 
Mason P, Meagher JA, Handley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: SUPREME COURT EQUITY DIVISION (WINDEYER J) 
FILE NO/S: CA 40582/95; ED 1687/93 
CA 40583/95; ED 4600/89 
DELIVERED: 22 APRIL 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 20, 21 OCTOBER 1997 
PARTIES: 
EDWARD ROBERT HYLAND KAVALEE BY HIS TUTOR ELIZABETH MACEY ANNE KAVALEE V
RICHARD JOHN BURBIDGE & ORS 
ALEXANDRA LARISSA KAITHA HYLAND & ORS V RICHARD JOHN BURBIDGE & ORS 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P MEAGHER JA HANDLEY JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: D P F OFFICER QC/R J H DARKE (KAVALEE) 
N C HUTLEY SC (HYLAND) 
Respondent: 1, 4, 5: R W WHITE/P P WINES , 3: D F JACKSON QC/P LG BRERETON 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: CONNERY & PARTNERS 
GADENS RIDGEWAY 
Respondent: 1, 5, 6: HICKSON LAKEMAN & HOLCOMBE , 3: STACKS THE LAW FIRM : WEAVER GENTLE & HARRISON 
CATCHWORDS: Family provision - notional estate - prescribed transaction - "continued to be, entitled to exercise the power" - "as a result of" - [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), [s22(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html), s[22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html)(4)(a), [ss 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html)-[28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s28.html) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 86 
HEADNOTE 
Family provision - assets transferred to a stiftung - assets distributed according to Memorandum of Wishes - notional estate - prescribed transaction - "continued to be, entitled to exercise the power" - "as a result of" - [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), [s 22(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html), [s 22(4)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html), [ss 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) - [28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s28.html) 
Mr Charles Keith Hyland (the deceased) amassed great wealth from a feather business in Thailand and Vietnam. Commencing in 1972, he took steps designed to limit the capacity of his wife and the children of his marriage to make successful claims on his estate. By a series of transactions the deceased transferred his substantial assets to a stiftung, established under the law of Liechtenstein and named The Gartner Foundation. Expert evidence was given demonstrating that a stiftung has a separate legal personality and is capable of holding assets. Its management may be vested in a Board of
Directors but its effective control rests with its Founder, who normally appoints and removes the Board.

At all material times, the Founders of the Gartner Foundation were firms represented by Mr Yves Defago in their dealings with the deceased regarding the Foundation. Instructions regarding the establishment and operation of the
Foundation were given by the deceased or persons acting on behalf of the deceased to Defago and implemented by him. On 5 March 1987, the deceased executed the last of three Memoranda of Wishes. This was incorporated into a special By-Law on 15 March 1988, pursuant to which the Foundation distributed some of its assets to certain members of the deceased's family to the exclusion of other members of his family.

Upon the death of Hyland in 1989, proceedings were commenced by the excluded members of his family to claw back the estate, combining an administration suit and several sets of claims under the [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/).
Questions for separate determination arose out of those proceedings and were answered by Windeyer J. His Honour held that the assets in the stiftung and distributed by the stiftung to certain family members were not part of the deceased's notional estate for the purposes of the Act.

HELD, allowing each appeal: (By the Court) Defago and the firms that he represented followed the deceased's instructions during his lifetime as a matter of legal obligation.
 (By Mason P, Meagher JA concurring; Handley JA contra) [Section (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) is not confined to acts or omissions that are the operative cause of property becoming held by the deceased's intended disponee. The act of the deceased in executing the Memorandum of Wishes was sufficient to establish the causal link required by [s (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html), even though it was precatory in form and effect.

Fagan versus The Crimes Compensation Tribunal <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 666], considered. (By the Court) The omission of the deceased to direct the Founder to revoke the By-Law resulted in the payment of the bequests by the Foundation as stipulated in the By-Law. The causal link required by [s (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) was established.
 (By Mason P, Meagher JA concurring, Handley JA contra) The deceased's legal power to compel Defago through the Founder to cause the Foundation to deal with its assets as the deceased might stipulate was in effect an entitlement to exercise a power to dispose of the property in the Gartner
Foundation. The continuation of the Founder's power came about "as a result" of the deceased's omission to exercise his concurrent power of disposition and his death. Thus, the requirements of [s (4)(a)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) were fully satisfied.

W.P. Keighery Pty Ltd versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1957) 100 CLR 66], considered. (By the Court) Conduct which diverts assets from entering the actual estate disadvantages "the estate" as much as a directive that assets are to be paid out of the estate. Thus, the requirements of [s (a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s26.html) were satisfied.

ORDERS 
The following orders were made in each appeal:
Appeal allowed.
Amend the answers to questions 12 and 13 so that the questions and answers read: 
Question 12:- 
Did the deceased enter into any, and, if so, which prescribed transaction, or prescribed transactions, within the meaning of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) of the [Family Provision Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)? 
Answer:- 
Yes, the first and third prescribed transactions argued in the appeal.

Question 13:- 
If the answer to 12 is in the affirmative:- 
Are any, and, if so, which, of the assets held by, or on behalf of the
Gartner Foundation liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/).

What, if any, other property is liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) of the [Family Provision Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)? 
Answer:- 
Yes, the net assets of the Foundation are liable to be designated as notional property, in accordance with the third prescribed transaction identified in the reasons of Mason P.

The sums paid to Alexander Hyland, Charles Hyland, Ms Quang and the
Armidale School which were designated as "bequests" in the Memorandum of
Wishes dated 5 March 1987 and any property capable of being specified pursuant to [s25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s25.html) of the [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), in accordance with the first prescribed transaction identified in the reasons of
Mason P.
Respondents to pay the appellants' costs of the appeal and to have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act, if qualified.

JUDGMENT 
MASON P: As the "duck feather king", Charles Keith Hyland (the deceased) amassed great wealth from a feather business in Thailand and Vietnam. Many efforts were also directed at precluding claims on his bounty by members of his family with whom he had fallen out. At issue in these two appeals is whether he succeeded in this aim, or whether the long arm of the [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) ("the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)") enables assets to be clawed back as part of the deceased's "notional estate". 
BACKGROUND 
Two appeals, by leave, were heard concurrently. Each relates to answers given by Windeyer J to five questions for separate determination which arose in protracted proceedings that combined an administration suit and several sets of claims under the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/).

The deceased married Lisa Ludlow-Hyland in 1967. There are two children of the marriage, Alexandra Larissa Kaitha Hyland (born 1968) and Charles Christian
Ludlow-Hyland (born in 1970). (These three persons are the appellants in one of the appeals.) The marital state of Mrs Ludlow-Hyland and the deceased at the time of his death in 1989 has yet to be determined in Australian proceedings. The parties separated in 1970 before their son was born. Divorce proceedings commenced in New South Wales by Mrs Hyland were initially successful but failed on appeal on the basis that the deceased was not domiciled in Australia.[1] The deceased's own divorce proceedings in Thailand suffered a similar fate, apparently because the law of that country required both parties to be domiciled there and because a wife does not take her husband's domicile. In 1975 the deceased obtained a decree in the Republic of
Haiti purporting to dissolve the marriage. Whether it is recognised in
Australia and whether it matters if it is (for the purposes of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)) remain to be determined.

Between 1973 and 1978 the deceased had a relationship with Elizabeth Kavalee.
Her child Edward Hyland Kavalee is the appellant in the second appeal.
Although the deceased's name is recorded as his father on his birth certificate, paternity is disputed in these proceedings.

Before his marriage the deceased established a relationship with Anne Chi
Quang. Charles Lap Hyland (born 1964) is the child of that union. The relationship between the deceased and Ms Quang continued until the deceased's death in 1989. Steps were taken by the deceased to appoint Ms Quang and
Charles Lap Hyland to managerial positions in the deceased's continuing business interests in South East Asia.

Commencing in 1972 the deceased took steps designed to limit the capacity of his wife and the children of his marriage to make successful claims on his estate.

The original focus was to defeat divorce proceedings. Latterly, possible claims against the estate were in view. The deceased left two wills in favour of Ms Quang. Probate in New South Wales and Thailand respectively have been obtained by the executor Mr Burbidge QC. However in the light of Windeyer J's unchallenged answer to reserved question 9, which found in effect that the deceased's transfer of his assets to the Gartner Foundation was not a sham, it appears that the actual estate is relatively small and may have been consumed by legal costs. Hence the importance of the attempt to claw back these assets as notional estate.

The estate planning engaged in by the deceased has involved a stiftung ("the Foundation") established in 1972 under the law of Liechtenstein. It is called The Gartner Foundation and its current "Founder" is Cura Treuinstitut.
(These terms will be explained later.) By a series of transactions the deceased effectively transferred his substantial assets in Australia and elsewhere to the Foundation in 1972-73. The Court was informed that the assets of the Foundation stand at many millions of dollars. Panker Nominees Pty
Limited and Hartigan Nominees Pty Limited, which are companies that hold valuable shares upon trust for the Foundation, are parties to the proceedings here and in the court below.

THE PROCEEDINGS 
The principal claim in the proceedings is for an administration order. Such relief is sought in aid inter alia of claims under the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) by each of the four appellants. Although joined and served, neither the Foundation nor
Cura Treuinstitut appeared to defend the proceedings below, notwithstanding an order that the plaintiffs have leave to proceed against them pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/index.html#p10) r2.

The questions for separate determination were answered by Windeyer J as follows: 
Question 9:- 
Were, or are any, and if so, which of the assets formerly, or now, held by, or on behalf of, the Gartner Foundation, assets forming part of the actual
Estate of the Deceased? 
Answer:- 
No.

Question 10:- 
If the answer to 9 is in the affirmative:- 
Was any, and, if so, which of the several 'bequests' paid pursuant to the
Memorandum of Wishes of the Deceased to, or for the benefit of Ms Quang,
Charles Lap Hyland, Alexandra Larissa Kaitha Hyland ('Ms Hyland') Charles
Ludlow-Hyland ('My Hyland') and the Armidale School Foundation Limited ('the beneficiaries') paid out of those assets? 
Is the amount of any such bequest liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s24.html) of the family Provision Act, 1982? 
What, if any, other property held by, or on behalf of, the beneficiaries, or any of them, is liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s24.html) of the [Family Provision Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)? 
Answer:- 
Does not arise.

Question 11:- 
If the answer to 9 is in the negative, is the Executor of the will, or the
Administrator, or trustee, for the time being, of the Deceased's Estate, entitled to appoint the beneficiaries of, or otherwise to direct the position of, all, or any, and, in the latter case, which, of the assets held by, or on behalf of, the Gartner Foundation, and if so, in what manner may such appointment be made or direction be given? 
Answer:- 
No.

Question 12:- 
Did the deceased enter into any, and, if so, which prescribed transaction, or prescribed transactions, within the meaning of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) of the [Family Provision Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)? 
Answer:- 
No.

Question 13:- 
If the answer to 12 is in the affirmative:- 
Are any, and, if so, which, of the assets held by, or on behalf of the
Gartner Foundation liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/).

What, if any, other property is liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) of the [Family Provision Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)? 
Answer:- 
Does not arise. But on the assumption there was a prescribed transaction and the deceased was domiciled in New South Wales the sub-questions be answered as follows:- 
All of the assets of the Gartner Foundation.

Property of disponees of assets of the Gartner Foundation where dispositions took place after the death of the deceased.

The answers effectively preclude the appellants (Mrs Hyland and her two children and Mr Edward Hyland Kavalee) from bringing any effective proceedings under the Act in relation to the estate. The appellants have appealed, by leave, in two sets of appeals. The respondents who have appeared in these appeals are Mr Burbidge, Panker Nominees, Hartigan Nominees and Ms Quang.
Cross appeals have been filed.

Central to each appeal is a proper understanding of the Gartner Foundation and the deceased's relationship to it.

THE GARTNER FOUNDATION 
Expert evidence was given as to the legal nature of a stiftung and the law of Liechtenstein. It was established that a stiftung has a legal personality enabling it to hold the assets with which it is endowed. Its management may be vested in a Board of Directors but its effective control rests with its
Founder, who normally appoints and removes the Board. A Founder is the actual maker of the stiftung and the Founder's rights are primarily as defined in the "statute" (Articles) of the stiftung. Windeyer J held that a Founder's rights are assignable. Stiftung beneficiaries are usually defined by separate by-laws made by the Founder in accordance with the statute.

A claim that the Gartner Foundation was a sham was rejected by Windeyer J. It was not repeated on appeal.

The Foundation was established in 1972 under the law of Liechtenstein. The
Articles of the Foundation stipulate that its duration is indefinite (Art 1), and that its board members are as nominated by the Founder (Art 4). Articles -9 reveal the extent of the powers reserved to the Founder.

Art 6.

Beneficiaries 
The beneficiaries of the Foundation are the persons who are designated by the
Founder in a special by-law. The Founder determines upon his own discretion and without justification if and when a distribution of the income, retained earnings or assets of the Foundation to the beneficiaries is to take place.
Under the same conditions the Founder may make such distribution at any time and from time to time to any one or more of the beneficiaries to the entire exclusion or partial exclusion of any other or others of the beneficiaries.

Art.7.

Amendment of the Articles 
Upon a resolution of the Founder, these Articles as well as any by-laws may be amended at any time.

Art.8.

Dissolution 
Upon a resolution of the Founder the liquidation of the Foundation can take place. It shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of the law.

Art.9 
Transfer of rights 
The Founder can transfer the rights which are granted to him by the present
Articles to any third parties.

It will therefore be seen that the Founder retained the right to control the organisation and administration of the Foundation, and thereby to direct it in its dealings in favour of beneficiaries as determined by the Founder from time to time. Expert evidence revealed that this was a normal incident of founder's rights (1323, 1340-1).

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE DECEASED AND THE FOUNDER 
Critical to the appellant's case is an understanding of the legal and practical relationship between the deceased and Mr Yves Defago and various bodies associated with him. Mr Defago is based in Geneva and he is the principal of Defago et Cie S.a.r.l. He received and acted upon all instructions relating to the establishment of the Foundation and the operation of its affairs during the deceased's lifetime. These instructions came from the deceased or persons acting on behalf of the deceased, notably Mr Burbidge
QC, the deceased's legal adviser in his latter years and Mr Nathan his accountant. Correspondence and facsimile messages passing between the northern and southern hemispheres enables one to get a fairly clear understanding of what was happening.

Windeyer J held that "from the time it was set up ... the Foundation acted on the instructions of Hyland. That was the position whether there was or was not in existence an agency contract ... (During) his lifetime [Hyland] was exercising substantial influence over the affairs of Gartner ...". This finding is not challenged, but some of the detail lying behind it needs to be understood, because the appellants contend that additional findings relevant to a legal entitlement to control the affairs of the Foundation should have been made.

The initiative for establishing the Foundation came from the deceased who raised the matter with his accountant Mr Nathan of G T Hartigan & Co in
June 1972. The expressed purpose was to put the deceased in the position that he could assert that he owned no assets in the context of anticipated divorce proceedings. Mr Nathan then approached Mr Defago, then of Societe de Generale
Fiduciaire ("SCF") in Geneva, suggesting the establishment of a stiftung with the founder's rights vesting in the deceased (letter 23 June 1972).

Mr Defago responded, confirming "our agreement to acting as trustee in the formation and directorship of a foundation made under an agency contract to be passed with Mr C.K. Hyland" (letter 20 July 1972). He then set out detailed advice about the structure and functioning of the proposed foundation. On the matter of the rights of the founder he responded to Mr Nathan's suggestion mentioned above, stating: "Rights of founder 
We take it that in spite of your ' memorandum re C.K. Hyland' quoting that 'Mr C.K. Hyland will be the Founder' it is in actual fact meant that Mr C.K.
Hyland shall exercise his rights of Founder through our firm acting under the terms of an agency contract. Could you please kindly confirm." 
Mr Defago also advised that the beneficiaries of a Founder could either be designated in the Articles of the Foundation or in a separate instrument (by- law). He added: "In practice this means that Mr Hyland could have the power of becoming a/or the beneficiary of the foundation should he so desire at a later stage." 
On the topic of "beneficiary rights" Mr Defago advised that: "The instructions in case of death issued by Mr Hyland will supposedly take care of these rights unless the designation of the beneficiaries has been made before Mr Hyland's death and does not indicate Mr Hyland as beneficiary." 
Mr Nathan took the advice of Mr Santow of Freehill Hollingdale & Page solicitors before responding to Mr Defago on 27 July 1972. Of particular relevance to the present proceedings is the following comment responding to the questions raised in Mr Defago's letter: "Rights of Founder 
We confirm your understanding that Mr Hyland will exercise his rights of founder through your firm acting under the terms of an agency contract." 
Correspondence then passed between Messrs Nathan and Defago (with copies being sent to Messrs Hyland and Santow) in which the constituent documents relating to the establishment of the Foundation were settled. One of these was a draft
Agency Contract.

The Foundation was established on 3 October 1972. The constituent documents were:-
The Articles of the Foundation
A by-law made in accordance with para 6 of the Articles stipulating a list of beneficiaries. This has been amended from time to time.

It was established at trial that the law of Liechtenstein recognises a distinction between a donor and the Founder of a stitfung. There is no doubt that the deceased was the donor. The legal Founder was Cura Treuinstitut, but that body immediately transferred all the rights of Founder to SCF the firm then employing Mr Defago. Much later, in 1981, SCF transferred the Founder's rights to Defago et Cie S.a.r.l. In 1991 Mr Defago arranged to "return" the
Founder's rights to Cura Treuinstitut (AB 1/219). The appellants contend that none of these changes altered the original intent whereby the deceased would "exercise his rights of Founder through [Mr Defago's] firm".

On 30 November 1972, SCF (Mr Defago) wrote to the deceased setting out this firm's fees on an hourly basis for professional services in connection with the Gartner Foundation. The letter continued as follows: "Winding up of the Foundation.

According to its articles, Gartner Foundation can be wound up at any time upon the decision of the founder. As for the present we are exercising the rights of founder in accordance with your instructions, this means that you can wind up the Foundation whenever you wish. Liechtenstein law, however, compels us to distribute the proceeds of the liquidation of the Foundation to its beneficiary(ies). You may then have to request your nomination as beneficiary before the decision of winding up the Foundation is taken.

Title deeds over the Foundation.

There is no title deed as such. The evidence of the rights over the
Foundation are: a) the Agency Contract passed with us whereby we recognise that we are exercising the rights of founder for your account and in accordance with your instructions. We remind you that the founder has roughly the same rights over the Foundation as the shareholders' meeting would have over a limited company.
 b) The designation of beneficiary(ies), i.e. the designation of the persons entitled to receive the distribution of the income, assets and proceeds of liquidation of the Foundation. This document is issued by us in our capacity as founder of the Foundation (thus acting under your sole instructions)." 
On 21 June 1973 Mr Defago wrote to Mr Nathan. The letter discussed various wills which the deceased had then apparently executed, the terms of a by-law then being contemplated, and the role of the then proposed Agency Agreement.
Inter alia Mr Defago said: "My other fear relates to Mr Hyland being deemed to exercise a control over the Foundation. As previously mentioned the existence of an Agency Agreement or the fact for the by-law to envisage two situations (i.e. before and after
Mr Hyland's death) and to refer to 'wills' would tend to seriously suggest the idea that Mr Hyland still retains some control over the Foundation. Even assuming that the existence of the Agency Agreement is kept secret, there remains the problem of the by-law.
 ... ...

The combination of a 'simplified' by-law and the inexistence of the Agency
Contract would allow Mr Hyland to claim that he has no control whatsoever over the Foundation. ..." 
On 3 August 1973 Mr Santow advised Mr Nathan that: "if Mr Hyland wants to have maximum safety from the point of view of the founder not disobeying his wishes, then we should press ahead with the by-Law as we redrafted it and of course have the Agency Agreement brought into existence." 
On 29 October 1973 Mr Santow advised Mr Nathan that: "...on balance Mr Hyland is better off with an agency contract and by-laws than without since as a matter of law, these can only be evidential; the full legal position would emerge were Mr Hyland ever questioned in court proceedings and he clearly would not perjure himself whether or not such evidence existed, as to the setting up of the Foundation and the dispositions to it." 
On 21 December 1973 Mr Nathan wrote to Mr Defago. He referred to a great deal of discussion having taken place with Freehill Hollingdale and Page about Mr
Defago's letter of 21 June. The letter informed Mr Defago that: "We have come to the following conclusions which you will understand are based on our experience of the British legal system and court procedures:
Mr Hyland could never deny in a court of law that he parted with his assets.
A court would never believe that Mr Hyland does not directly, indirectly or through a trusted third person, have control over the substantial assets he no longer possesses.
The fact that he has given assets away can be discovered in a court of law.
If the agency agreement and the by-laws, including the 'draft Wills' are exhibited in a court of law, it can be contended that Mr Hyland has made appropriate provision for his wife, children and employees to whom he feels obligated. ...

From the foregoing you will appreciate that our discussions culminated in the thought that Mr Hyland could never deny that he gave the assets away and he may be better protected by having a substantial reason to maintain the control and thus protect his family." 
In the light of this decision, an Agency Contract was executed on 19 April
The parties were the deceased as "Principal" and SCF as "Trustee". The
Contract recited that SCF had acted on behalf and for the account of the
Principal in causing the Foundation to be constituted. SCF then undertook to exercise its functions as Founder "strictly in accordance with the instructions received from the Principal (or his nominees)" (Clause 1).
Clause 4 stipulated that "upon instructions to be given by the Principal, the
Trustee shall designate the beneficiaries of the Foundation in a special by- law". Clause 6 stated that "the Principal may ... request the Trustee to nominate a person of the Principal's choice to take over as founder".

Pausing at this stage in the narrative, the facts recited above indicate most clearly that Mr Defago and the firm which he represented had bound themselves to exercise the rights of Founder as stipulated in the Articles of the
Foundation strictly as directed by the deceased. There is nothing to indicate that such undertakings were unenforceable under the laws of Liechtenstein.
After all, Mr Defago advised that matters be established as they were, and he gave the clearest representations that the arrangements were effective according to their tenor. As an honourable professional he had clearly committed himself to do Mr Hyland's bidding. These arrangements were clearly contractual in effect, being evidenced by the Agency Contract and the correspondence. Mr Defago was obviously in the business of providing this service for reward and fees were paid for the services rendered. This was a business relationship, not a domestic one.

In November 1980 the deceased requested Mr Defago to change the Founder from
SCF to Defago et Cie S.a.r.l ("DFC"). Mr Defago had actually left his employment with SCF in about 1974, but (by arrangement with the deceased through Mr Nathan) had continued as "co-ordinating agent" (letter 4 February ). Some time later Mr Defago established his own firm, DFC. Throughout the whole period, Mr Defago remained the point of personal contact in Geneva. On January 1981 the deceased wrote to SCF terminating their contractual relations in respect of the Foundation. SCF was asked to transfer the
Founder's rights to DFC and offered a full release from the performance of functions to date. The transfer of founder's rights was effected on 26 or 30
October 1981.

Prior to the formal transfer, Mr Defago wrote to the deceased (letter dated 19
November 1980) pointing out that: "I wish to draw your attention to the fact that the Founder of Gartner is still formally Societe de Controle Fiduciaire, Geneva. I do not know whether it is within your intentions to maintain this construction which I do not object, expect (sic) that it is quite unusual. All other foundations and entities under my responsibility have my nominee company, Defago & Cir
S.a.r.l. as founder, and the founder's rights are lodged with a notary public here for the case of anything happening to me." 
Although DFC became the Founder as and from 30 October 1981 at the latest, no fresh Agency Contract was entered into between that body and the deceased.
There is nothing to indicate that this represented any loosening of the fiduciary obligations undertaken in the correspondence. On the contrary, there is every indication that it was "business as usual" throughout the 1980s: see, eg letter of 6 May 1987 quoted below. Mr Defago continued to be the point of contact with the Foundation. He received successive (revocable) Memoranda of Wishes from the deceased which were addressed to SCF, despite the fact that it had ceased to be the Founder. These expressed in clearly precatory terms the deceased's then current "testamentary wishes". These were translated into Special by-laws which broadly reflected the wishes expressed by the deceased. (I will address this aspect of the case in further detail below.) Mr
Defago's firms (DFC and Sagest) continued to render fees for services rendered: see eg letter dated 1 July 1986.

In 1987 there were exchanges between Mr Defago on the one hand and Messrs
Nathan and Burbidge QC on the other which require close attention. The respondents contend that they represent a conscious and significant loosening of the agency arrangement between Mr Defago (and the firms he represented) and the deceased. The appellants on the other hand contend that the changes were purely cosmetic and, at their highest, designed to remove evidence of control without altering its reality or detracting from the fiduciary obligations continuing to bind Mr Defago. (It will be seen that I prefer the appellants' argument on this point.) 
On 25 February 1987 Mr Defago faxed to Mr Nathan's partner Mr Tracy, stating: "... contrary to what I thought, there is no agency contract between Keith and Defago & Cie S.a.r.l. in existence. For the sake of good order, this should be done, although there are ample proofs all around of the rights of
Keith over the Foundation. You will find attached a copy of the standard agency contract which we normally enter into (document nr.1).

You will further find the document evidencing that Defago & Cie S.a.r.l.
does hold the rights of founder over Gartner Foundation (document nr. 2)." 
On 6 May 1987 Mr Defago wrote to Mr Nathan in the following terms: "The transfer of the Founder's rights from Societe de Controle Fiduciaire to
Defago & Cie was effected in 1982 (sic) with the agreement of Keith in order to reflect a situation which was on since 1974, i.e. that Societe de
Controle Fiduciaire was no longer involved in any way in the affairs of
Gartner Foundation. This transfer did not modify the rights of Keith as the continuity of Gartner Foundation is assured in case anything happening [sic] to me: under such an instance, the office would go on (Sagest and Defago & Cie are no longer a one man show) and the following persons have access to Gartner Foundation and would have the choice of maintaining Gartner as it is or make any modifications felt desirable: - Keith - yourself or in the case of your default an authorized representative of
Pannell Kerr Forster, Sydney, Australia.
 - Mr. R. Burbidge Q.C. (the nomination of Mr. R. Burbidge took place quite recently in the light of the Memorandum of Wishes sent to us by Keith.). 
The reason why I suggested that no agency agreement similar to the document signed in 1982 with Societe de Controle Fiduciaire be signed is that I was (and I am still) of the opinion that the control of Keith over the Foundation should not be formally emphasized in any way. There are now ample evidences of the right of Keith over the Foundation, and according to me there is no need for an agency agreement, which I am of course ready to sign at any time if you are of a different opinion. If need be, I confirm hereby that as long as Keith is alive and capable Defago & Cie S.a.r.l. and Sagest will comply with any lawful instructions of his in respect of Gartner Foundation. In the event of
Keith's death or incapacity the persons designated in the Memorandum of Wishes of Keith to this end shall be entitled to give any such instructions. I am sorry that this particular issue was not raised with you at the time." [Sagest S.A. is another firm under Mr Defago's control.] 
On 21 May 1987 Mr Defago sent to Mr Nathan's partner (Mr Tracy) copies of the documents recording the transfer of the rights of Founder by SCF to Defago et
Cie S.a.r.l. ("DFC"). The letter discussed the different forms which a new by-law might take, evidencing a concern to avoid demonstrating that the deceased had control over the Foundation. For example the letter said, in part: "It is possible that Keith, Mr Burbidge and/or Bruce Nathan may feel that the construction as it stands is not tight enough. Bearing in mind that it may be detrimental to Keith's position to demonstrate that he has control over the
Foundation, whether during his lifetime or for the case of his death, one could envisage the various solutions to modify the situation: ...

I remind you that the capacity of Founder and consequently the blank transfer of the rights of Founder gives full power over the foundation. As things stand now, the document in question is established and can be released as indicated in my fax of May 6, 1987 (no 239) to Bruce. The intervention of a notary would simply insure the persons concerned that the present Founder is not going to stick to his functions in case he is no longer wanted. ...

The main advantage of such a situation would be the elimination of the possible suspicion that the Foundation is or was at any time controlled by
Keith. ... 
I must make it clear that I strongly favour a loose construction as it allows the present flexibility to face unforeseen events. The consignment of the blank transfer into the hands of a notary would not make any harm. ..." 
On the same day Mr Nathan sent a fax to the deceased in which he referred to concern shared by himself and Mr Burbidge: "...with Defago's position and the transfer of the ultimate power from the
Societe Generale to Defago et Cie. The original arrangements arose from the fact that Yves resigned from the Societe and started his own business, Sagest.
I explained to Yves that we could not refer full control of clients' assets to him because of the lack of substance of his organisation. Because of this we arranged for the Societe to be trustees with full responsibility and Yves to be its agent and do all the hack work. Since Yves has now taken all the control to himself, that is Defago et Cie, we do not know its substance, whilst as Rick has referred to you there are some inconsistencies in Yves' actions in respect to the agency agreement.
 ...

Rick and I believe the Society should be reinstated as Trustee, the agency agreement should be sent to us as a matter of urgency and the assets of
Gartner in the control of Yves should be examined." 
Mr Burbidge QC sent a fax to the deceased the following day (22 May 1987) in which he detailed matters then of concern to him. The fax gives no indication of an intention to loosen the arrangement in fact. On the contrary, Mr
Burbidge addressed a number of issues touching what he described as the completeness of the structure. In a summary he suggested to the deceased that the deceased: "must determine whether the pipe i.e. the scheme, is structurally sound, where the pipe is leading, i.e. who is to have the Founder's rights, and whether the assets have been stuffed into the pipe?" 
The deceased sent a fax to Mr Defago on 2 June 1987 seeking information on a number of topics suggested by Messrs Nathan and Burbidge QC. Critically, he stated: "5. It is considered the following is required 
A. Your promised by law incorporating my memorandum of wishes.

B. A certified copy of the articles as presently constituted.

C. An agency agreement. This can further be discussed if you still consider it unnecessary." 
Mr Defago's response concerning this point was to refer the deceased back to his letter of 21 May 1987.

At about this time there were additional exchanges in correspondence and facsimiles examining the capacity of Mr Defago's company effectively to back any commitments which he made. To my mind these evidence a concern to ensure ultimate effective accountability.

On 12 June 1987 the deceased faxed a memo to Mr Defago (with a copy to Mr
Nathan). He emphasised his concern to put his affairs in order in the light of pending retirement and inevitable death. In explanation for the involvement of
Mr Burbidge, he added (using shorthand expressions whose meaning is fairly obvious): "I trust now that u understand that which is happening, at the moment n not misinterpret our actions perhaps I hv been wrong in not giving enough attention to my state of Worldly Goods to realize that these might be a temptation to others at my death n that the estate should be correctly set up n documented to achieve my wishes at my death without a problem for others." [sic] 
In December 1987 the decision appears to have been taken in Sydney that Mr
Defago should reinstate SCF as the Founder. It is clear that this decision was based upon the desire to have a corporation with substantial assets in the key position. Everybody realised that Mr Defago would continue to be the person doing the work. To my mind this insistence upon having a body of substance to "back" Mr Defago's commitments indicated a desire to have an effective right of recourse in the unlikely event that the chips were down. In Mr Nathan's words, in a fax sent to Mr Defago on 28 January 1988: "It was necessary that the trustee of the entities, that would hold the assets, should be an institution of undoubted financial strength. This was discussed with you at our first meeting many years ago. It was not a question of doubting your integrity, honesty or ability. It was purely a cautious approach to ensure our clients' assets could not be diminished through a mistake in your office which may render your office insolvent. ...

Perhaps now you will understand that having the Societe as trustee and you as the operator, Gartner Foundation was getting the best of two worlds. Firstly it had a very reliable administrator, namely you, who would take a personal interest in its activities, and secondly, in the event of your organisation becoming insolvent it could look to the Societe for any shortfall. You will now understand how I was surprised to hear that the trustee was changed from the Societe to De Fago et Cie without the matter being discussed with me.

Keith and his Australian advisers are all of the opinion that your services should be retained, however they would like the Societe as trustee. ...

Yves, I trust you will understand that there is no lack of confidence in your integrity or ability. All that has come out of this exercise is the expression of conservatism for which I am probably responsible, as we are dealing with assets of other people." 
On 1 February 1988 Mr Defago responded explaining, in firm terms, why there would be no risk that Gartner would suffer from a possible insolvency of DFC.
Obviously Mr Defago was a little stung by what he interpreted as a slight. He offered to relinquish "the mandate of Gartner", adding that he would fully cooperate to ensure a smooth takeover by "the new agent".

In an endeavour to pour oil on troubled waters, Mr Burbidge wrote to Mr Defago in an undated letter sent at about this time. He indicated that he had discussed with all interested parties in Australia the helpful suggestions contained in Mr Defago's faxed letter of 21 May 1987. A form of suggested by- law which would reflect the deceased's wishes was forwarded. Mr Burbidge added: "As to the alternative approaches outlined in [the fax of 21 May 1987], Mr
Hyland accepts that the existence of a signed transfer by Defago & Cie of the rights of Founder renders unnecessary additional legal documentation. I note your indication that such a document has been established, and perhaps you would be so kind as to let me know its location. A copy would also be appreciated." 
These exchanges caused the flutter in the dovecote to settle down. DFC remained the Founder, but the deceased's capacity to replace it at will was secured by a document executed by DFC which transferred the Founder's rights in blank. The terms of a by-law (ultimately made on 15 March 1988) were settled. This designated as beneficiaries of the Foundation the persons referred to in the "Bequests" section of the deceased's Memorandum of Wishes dated 5 March 1987.

It is also relevant to note that Mr Defago submitted annual accounts for the
Foundation to the deceased's accountants in Sydney.

On 14 October 1988 Mr Defago acting "in compliance with instructions given to me ... by Mr C K Hyland", sent to Mr Burbidge copies of the by-law and of a signed transfer of the rights of Founder. He added: "These documents are being kept in our safe. As confirmed in an earlier correspondence to Mr Hyland, these documents can be released by us upon the instructions of Mr Hyland or upon the joint instructions of two of the following persons: -your goodself, -Mr. Bruce Nathan -Mr. W. Robert Tracy, -Any formally authorized person designed by Pannell, Kerr, Forster, Sydney 
Should we be instructed accordingly by Mr Hyland, the documents could be released upon individual instructions." 
There the matter rested until the death of the deceased on 16 April 1989. It is therefore appropriate to address the legal relationship of the parties evidenced by the formal documents and the correspondence. I would merely add reference to a fax from Mr Defago to Mr Burbidge dated 5 April 1990 which was annexure R to Mr Burbidge's affidavit dated 1 June 1990 that was read in the proceedings. In that fax Mr Defago corrected an earlier statement of Mr
Burbidge and stated: "We simply intimated to you that we have been exercising the rights of founder in accordance with the directions of Mr C.K. Hyland during his lifetime." (A similar statement appears in Mr Defago's fax to Mr Burbidge dated 29 January 1990.) 
THE DECEASED'S CONTROL OVER THE FOUNDATION 
The question whether the Founder was legally obliged to act on the deceased's directions immediately prior to his death is relevant to several of the issues arising in the appeal. Windeyer J made the following findings referable to the deceased's control of the Foundation in his lifetime: "On 26 October 1981 SCF transferred the founder's rights to Defago and CIE
SARL (DFC). Mr Defago had in effect looked after the affairs of the Foundation at SCF but had gone out on his own. No new agency contract was signed but DFC did execute a transfer in blank of the Founder's rights. DFC did offer to sign an agency contract but it was a deliberate decision of Hyland not to have this but rather to rely upon the signed blank transfer as a means of exercising control."[2] .......
 "It is clear from the time it was set up that the Foundation acted on the instructions of Hyland. That was the position whether there was or was not in existence an agency contract as there was between SCF and Hyland but not between him and DFC. In fact Mr Defago suggested in a letter to Mr Tracey of February 1987 that there should be an agency contract between Hyland and
DFC 'although there are proofs all round of the rights of Keith over the rights of the Foundation'. It is not altogether clear when it came into existence but Mr Burbidge, in a letter to Defago sent sometime in 1988, referred to the existence of a signed transfer in blank by DFC of founder's rights. In 1987 Hyland was involved in making some direct investments in the
Gartner name. I think that all this indicates is that during his lifetime he was exercising substantial influence over the affairs of Gartner but to assume absolute control would at least have required transfer of founder's rights to him".[3] 
The appellants support these findings and seek to use them as a springboard for their arguments on the issues of construction. However, the appellants' submissions go beyond the trial judge's findings which have just been set out, because they assert that Mr Defago and the firms that he represented followed the deceased's instructions during his lifetime as a matter of legal obligation. They contend that the Foundation was the creature of the deceased during his lifetime in that (through Mr Defago and the firms he represented) it acted as the deceased wished at all material times and considered itself, through the Founder, bound so to act. The respondents on the other hand submit that the deceased did not have the power to compel the Foundation to act in accordance with his instructions, even though he expected and was assured that it would. Alternatively, the respondents submit that the deceased relinquished that power when the original Agency Agreement was not renewed in 1987.

The appellants' submissions should be accepted on this issue of legal control, for reasons which I will set out below. These reasons are given against the background of four points which should be made at the outset:-
Windeyer J's finding that the establishment of the Foundation was not a sham stands unchallenged. It follows that the assets over which a designating order is sought by the appellants were vested at law in the Foundation at the time of the deceased's death, subject to the rights conferred on the Founder by the Articles as modified by any special by-law extant at date of death.
At the date of death the Founder was DFC.
Acceptance of this situation does not preclude the engrafting of binding equitable obligations. Anyone cognizant with the history of Equity in our legal system would see no difficulty with such a concept in principle.
There was no evidence relating to the law of Liechtenstein that would preclude the imposition of fiduciary obligations upon the Founder. Australian law will presume foreign law to be identical with its own non-statutory law unless the contrary is established as a matter of fact, usually through the testimony of expert witnesses: see Nygh, Conflict of Laws in Australia th ed chp 17. Indeed, the appellants are also entitled to rely upon the indications that the law of Liechtenstein itself recognised concepts analogous to fiduciary and trust obligations when referable to the exercise of founder's rights: see the correspondence extracted above and the evidence of Dr Wanger (1305, 1310, 1323, 1327-8) and Dr Frommelt (1581-2, 1585).

The evidence set out in the preceding section of the judgment demonstrates that the respective Founders, through Mr Defago, assumed the role of the deceased's agent in relation to the exercise of the Founder's rights. Not only did they consider themselves bound to act in accordance with his instructions, they did so throughout his lifetime. (This is not contradicted by evidence of occasions when Mr Defago or the Board of the Foundation made occasional "executive decisions", later reported and effectively ratified in relation to investment strategies.) The trust and confidence which the deceased actually placed in Mr Defago was reciprocated in representations of loyalty and the dutiful following of instructions emanating from the deceased or his
Australian agents. The clearest evidence of this is found in the letters of 20
July 1972, 30 November 1972, 19 November 1980 and 6 May 1987 as well as the
Agency Agreement itself. The transfer in blank of Founder's rights (which Mr
Defago offered to lodge with a notary) evidenced and partly secured the agency in the latter years of the deceased's life. According to Mr Burbidge, "Hyland accepts that the existence of a signed transfer by Defago and Cie of the Right of Founder renders unnecessary additional legal documentation". A copy of that transfer was sent to Mr Burbidge on the deceased's instructions. The power to appoint and remove at will the persons in whom legal authority to manage an enterprise is vested is clear evidence of ultimate control residing in the appointor.[4] Mr Jackson QC, representing the second and third respondents, submitted that the ability to remove and replace the Founder is not the same as the power to compel the Founder to act in a particular manner.
In some contexts that is obviously correct. However, s24(1)(a) is not one of them, for reasons which I will develop later.

The fact that the agency was evidenced by an executed Agency Agreement during the earlier period (when SCF was the Founder) but not during the later period of the deceased's life (when DFC was the Founder) is explained initially by oversight and inaction and latterly by the desire of all parties to minimise the evidence of the deceased's control. No-one had concerned themselves about novating the Agency Agreement when Mr Defago left SCF in 1974. Between that date and 1981 it was "business as usual" even though Mr Defago had become an employee of DFC. When DFC assumed the rights of Founder in 1981 no one troubled themselves about a fresh Agency Agreement, but this appears to have been an oversight in view of (a) Mr Defago's fax of 25 February 1987 which has been set out, and (b) the fact that the deceased addressed his Memorandum of
Wishes to SCF in 1985 and 1986 even though it was no longer the Founder. It certainly did not represent a conscious decision to change the pre-existent arrangement. Quite the opposite. It was not until 1987 that the parties addressed the question whether "for the sake of good order" (Mr Defago on 25
February 1987) a fresh agency agreement was required. The correspondence in and 1988 that has been set out is eloquent with expressed common understandings that nothing had changed, that an agency agreement was unnecessary, and that the reason for not creating one was concern about evidence and not substance. When the issue was addressed in 1987, the parties were content to dispense with the formal agreement. Nevertheless the substance of the agency remained, reinforced by Mr Defago's professional status, the payment of fees, statements evidencing a clear fiduciary obligation at all times, and a transfer in blank of Founder's rights.

The transfer in blank of Founder's rights (which Mr Defago offered to lodge with a notary) evidenced the deceased's rights, partly secured them and provided one method of exercising them. A copy of that transfer was sent to Mr
Burbidge on the deceased's instructions and the original came to him after the deceased's death. The document also explains why a formal agency agreement was thought unnecessary at that late stage of the deceased's long and satisfactory relationship with his man in Geneva. According to Mr Burbidge, "Hyland accepts that the existence of a signed transfer by Defago et Cie of the Right of Founder renders unnecessary additional legal documentation" (undated letter, quoted above).

The respondents contended that the events of 1987 represented a conscious and effective restructuring of the agency arrangement between Mr Defago (or the firms he represented) and the deceased. It was submitted that such arrangement then became a looser one binding in honour only. The argument was that the deceased and his advisers, recognising the danger inherent in retaining any legal (or equitable) control, were content to enter arrangements with Mr
Defago which were binding in honour only. This was put primarily on the basis that the correspondence indicated an intention not to enter into a legal relationship analogous to agency, at least as and from the time that the earlier Agency Contract executed in by SCF in 1974 was recognised to be no longer operative. According to the respondents, whatever the provision under the Agency Contract, matters had moved from a situation where the deceased could compel the Founder to exercise its rights under the Articles to one in which there were no rights, save perhaps the right to substitute a new
Founder. It will already be apparent that I do not accept this argument.

The issue may be tested by asking what would have happened if Mr Defago had declined to do the deceased's bidding or if, which is virtually the same thing, he had elected to appoint a Founder of his own choosing and/or exercised the undoubted rights vested in the Founder under the Articles of the stiftung to benefit himself or members of his own family. The partly expressed and partly implied contract of agency requiring him to act with obedience and loyalty to the deceased with reference to the power to control the Foundation were clearly justiciable and enforceable by effective remedies.
For reasons indicated already, Australian law should presume that those principles and remedies were equally applicable in the European jurisdiction of Liechtenstein and Geneva as in the courts of this country. It is unnecessary to consider whether the representations of loyalty and obedience made by Mr Defago on behalf of the corporate firms employing him and received and acted upon by the deceased in New South Wales were also capable of protection through the wide range of appropriate remedies under the Fair
Practices Act and the Fair Trading Act.

The respondents argued that the non-binding nature of the relationship between the deceased and the Founder is emphasised by the fact that the deceased chose several times to give instructions in the form of a Memorandum of Wishes. The role played by these instruments will be addressed later. I have no difficulty at all in seeing these Memoranda, which were certainly not shams, as entirely precatory in nature. The Founder was free to disregard them if it wished; and if it did so, it committed no breach of its obligations in relation to the stiftung according to the Articles as they stood at the time. Non sequitur that the right of control did not exist. The fact that the Founder chose to make responsive by-laws from time to time does not prove what would have been the situation if the deceased had chosen to express himself peremptorily.

Reliance upon these Memoranda of Wishes as indicative of the absence of legal control entirely misses the point, for two reasons. First, it was the deceased's choice to communicate his "testamentary" wishes in this way and this form. It does not follow that a more peremptory directive would have been disregarded, or could (legally) have been disregarded. Secondly, and more importantly, the present concern is with the deceased's control over the
Founder, as distinct from the Foundation. If it was the case, as I consider it to have been, that the deceased retained effective control over the Founder then the deceased had the capacity to use that control to reconstitute the
Foundation itself. As a stiftung, the Foundation had legal personality independent of its Founder. Nevertheless, the Founder had the right to designate by a special by-law the persons who were the beneficiaries of the
Foundation; and to determine when and if a distribution of the income, retained earnings or assets of the Foundation might take place.[5] The Founder also had the power to alter the Articles of the Foundation.[6] The Founder's rights were transferable.[7] 
Put simply and in lay terms, the Founder had the right to cause the Foundation to deal with its assets as the Founder chose. And the deceased had the right to pull the strings that caused the Founder to jump at his direction.

NOTIONAL ESTATE 
The [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), through its "notional estate" provisions, confers powers on the Court that enable it to nullify attempts by a deceased to frustrate claims. An applicant for provision may now apply in the same proceedings for orders for relief and designating property as "notional estate" thereby compelling the "disponee" of a "prescribed transaction" to provide money or property for the purpose of making financial provision for the applicant.

A Court approaching the interpretation of the notional estate provisions is at once confronted with a legislative scheme which is both beneficial to applicants and restrictive of the existing property rights of disponees. And it uses both technical legal terms and expressions of indeterminate reference.

The Act provides for orders for provision in favour of eligible persons to be made out of the estate or notional estate of a deceased person. Part 2,
Division 2 arms the Court with power to designate as notional estate of the deceased person such property as it may specify in accordance with ss23-25, subject to the other sections of the Division. Section 23 relevantly requires the Court to be satisfied that, at any time before death, the deceased person entered into a "prescribed transaction" which took effect or is to take effect on or after the death of the deceased person. The deceased's intent is irrelevant if the prescribed transaction entered into before death took effect after death: s23(b)(iii). The respondents dispute that any prescribed transaction was entered into by the deceased. The power conferred by s23 to make a designating order is subject to ss26, 27 and 28. The respondents also contend that s26 prohibits the making of designating order in the present case.

SECTION 22 GENERALLY "Prescribed transaction" is defined in s22. It is obvious that the legislature has cast the net very wide, in pursuit of its goal of providing adequate provision in favour of eligible persons. As beneficial legislation, a liberal approach to construction is called for, notwithstanding the obvious impact of a designating order upon existing property rights.[8] However, the ability to choose a construction which promotes the purpose of extending the powers of the Court to the full range of benefits and advantages controlled by testators exists only "in so far as any question of construction presents a choice".[9] 
So far as relevant s22 provides: "Prescribed Transactions
A person shall be deemed to enter into a prescribed transaction if: on or after the appointed day he does, directly or indirectly, or omits to do, any act, as a result of which: property becomes held by another person (whether or not as trustee); or property becomes subject to a trust, whether or not the property becomes in either case so held immediately; and full value consideration in money or money's worth for the firstmentioned person's doing, or omitting to do, that act is not given.
 .......

In particular and without limiting the generality of subsection (1), a person shall, for the purposes of subsection (1)(a), be deemed to do, or omit to do, an act, as a result of which property becomes held by another person or subject to a trust if: he is entitled, on or after the appointed day, to exercise a power to appoint, or dispose of, property which is not in his estate but the power is not exercised before he ceases (by reason of death or the occurrence of any other event) to be so entitled and, as a result of the omission to exercise the power and of his death or the occurrence of the other event: the property becomes held by another person (whether or nor as a trustee) or subject to a trust (whether or not the property becomes in either case so held immediately); or another person becomes (whether or not immediately) or, if he was previously entitled, continues to be, entitled to exercise the power; 
Except as provided in subsection (6), a prescribed transaction involving the doing of, or omitting to do, an act as referred to in subsection (4) (paragraph (f) excepted) shall be deemed to be entered into immediately before, and to take effect on, the death or the occurrence of the other event referred to in that subsection in relation to that act or omission." 
Section 23 provides: . On an application in relation to a deceased person made by or on behalf of an eligible person, if the Court is satisfied: that an order for provision ought to be made on the application; and that, at any time before his death, the deceased person entered into a prescribed transaction: which took effect within the period of 3 years before his death and was entered into with the intention, wholly or in part, of denying or limiting, wholly or in part, provision for the maintenance, education or advancement in life of that or any other eligible person out of his estate or otherwise; which took effect within the period of 1 year before his death, and was entered into at a time when the deceased person had a moral obligation to make adequate provision, by will or otherwise, for the proper maintenance, education and advancement in life of that or any other eligible person which was substantially greater than any moral obligation of the deceased person to enter into the prescribed transaction; or which took effect or is to take effect on or after the death of the deceased person, the Court may, subject to sections 26, 27 and 28, make an order designating as notional estate of the deceased person such property as it may specify, being property which is held by, or on trust for the disponee or, where there is more than one disponee, any of the disponees, whether or not that property was the subject of the prescribed transaction." 
Section 6 defines "property" in broad and inclusive terms: "'property' includes real and personal property and any estate or interest (whether a present, future or contingent estate or interest) in real or personal property, and money, and any debt, and any cause of action for damages (including damages for personal injury), and any other chose in action, and any right with respect to property, and any valuable benefit".

This definition of "property" and s22(1)(a)(i) means that there may be a prescribed transaction even though there has been no change in the ownership of any property. It is sufficient that "any valuable benefit" becomes held by a person other than the deceased. Accordingly, an increase in the value of shares held by existing shareholders as a result of the conversion on death of the deceased's ordinary shares into preference shares falls within the scope of the Act: see Schaeffer versus Schaeffer.[10] 
The deceased's omission to do an act may mean that he or she is deemed to have entered into a prescribed transaction. There must, however, have been the absence of full valuable consideration in money or moneys worth.

Several of the prescribed transactions detailed in s22 required a specified consequence "as a result of" the specified act or omission: see s22(1)(a), (a), (c), (e). This poses a question of fact.[11] It should not be overlooked that the expression is "as a result" and not "as the result"; and that the link may be "directly or indirectly". I will return to the issue of causation when dealing with the prescribed transactions suggested in the appeal.

With this general background it is appropriate to assess the alternative ways in which the appellants advance their submission that there was a prescribed transaction. At trial the appellants argued in favour of four alternative prescribed transactions. All were rejected. Only the first three were pressed on appeal. The suggested prescribed transactions were:-
The deceased executed a Memorandum of Wishes on 5 March 1987, caused it to be incorporated into a special By-Law on 15 March 1988 and left it unrevoked; as a result, property of Gartner became held by Alexandra Hyland, Charles
Hyland, Ms Quang and the Armidale School.
The deceased executed the Memorandum of Wishes on 5 March 1987, caused the
Founder to make the special By-Law on 15 March 1988, omitted to cause that special By-Law to be revoked, and failed during his lifetime to direct Gartner to appoint property in favour of parties other than Gartner; and as a result, property (in the sense of valuable benefit) became held by Gartner in that
Gartner's assets were held by Gartner free from the control of the deceased.
The deceased had a power to appoint property of the Gartner Foundation; and as a result of his omission to exercise that power and of his death: that property became held by Gartner free of the deceased's control; and/or 
The Founder became entitled to exercise the power of designation and distribution of assets pursuant to Article 6.

THE FIRST ALLEGED PRESCRIBED TRANSACTION: PAYMENT OF THE "BEQUESTS" MENTIONED IN THE MEMORANDUM OF WISHES AND BY-LAW OF 15 MARCH 1988 
On at least three occasions late in his life the deceased executed a document called a Memorandum of Wishes. These are dated 3 October 1985, 26 November and 5 March 1987. Each was similar in that the Memorandum was addressed to SCF on behalf of the Foundation;[12] and it set out the deceased's "Wishes" with regard to the Foundation. These were requests as to the distribution of income, "bequests" and capital in favour of named persons. Each Memorandum also stated matters which the deceased wanted to be taken into account by the addressee, particularly referable to the moral claims (or lack thereof) of various members of the deceased's family, including parties to these appeals.
Were it not for the clearly precatory nature of the document as a whole these provisions might resemble dispositions found in a will.

The Memorandum of Wishes dated 5 March 1987, which was the one extant at the date of the deceased's death, is set out in full in the judgment of Windeyer
J. The deceased stipulated that: "This Memorandum records my wishes for the conduct of the affairs of the
Gartner Foundation, and replaces any and all prior expressions of Wishes. This
Memorandum whilst expressing my desires has no legal effect and does not fetter in any way the discretionary powers which you have as the Trustees of the Gartner Foundation. My Wishes as expressed herein are intended by me to be taken into account only after my death or incapacity and this Memorandum may be at any time countermanded by me during my lifetime. During my lifetime and unless I am incapacitated I request you to deal with the capital and income of the Foundation as I may from time to time request. In the event of my incapacity I request you are to act in accordance with the recommendations of the Advisors".

The Memorandum then recorded several matters which the deceased desired to be taken into account should any question of discretion or interpretation of the
Wishes arose. Then followed statements favourable or unfavourable to various members of the family, including several of the parties to this appeal. The deceased recorded whom he had appointed as "Advisors after my death or incapacity". The Memorandum then stated the deceased's wishes in the form of various "bequests". These included the wish that upon the deceased's death $500,000 be paid to Ms Quang; $200,000 be paid to Ms Quang "in trust for"
Charles Hyland on certain terms; $50,000 be paid to The Armidale School
Foundation; and that $150,000 be paid to each of Charles Hyland and Alexandra
Hyland. Other stipulations affecting income and capital were set out, again in unmistakably precatory form.

Despite being addressed to SCF, the Memorandum of 5 March 1987 was taken up in a special by-law executed by DFC as Founder on 15 March 1988. (SCF had ceased to be the Founder in 1981.) Translated, it provided: 
GARTNER FOUNDATION 
Vaduz 
Special By-Law 
This Special By-Law is made by Defago & Cie. S.a.r.l., Gingins,
Switzerland, in its capacity of Founder (Stifter) of the Gartner Foundation,
Vaduz, pursuant to the provisions of Article 6 of the Foundation's Articles, and replaces all or any antecedent Special By-Laws made pursuant to the said provisions.

The Founder hereby designates as beneficiaries of the Foundation those persons and that Foundation referred to in that section headed "Bequests" of a
Memorandum of Wishes of Charles Keith Hyland of 5th March 1987, a true copy of which is hereto annexed.

Dated this fifteenth day of March 1988.

DEFAGO & CIE S.a.r.l.

Yves Defago 
This By-Law remained extant at the date of the deceased's death. It was later ratified by Cura Treuinstitut on 27 March 1991, for reasons which are not apparent. The learned trial judge held that, in accordance with the Memorandum of Wishes, payments were made to the persons listed after the deceased died. I understand this to refer only to the "bequests" which I have detailed above.
(So far as I am aware, the substantial corpus of the Foundation has not yet been distributed. If and when it is, then the Court's reasoning in relation to the "bequests" may well apply to such distribution - particularly if it is compelled by the extant By Law.) 
The first issue is whether the "bequests" that were distributed by Gartner
Foundation after the deceased's death and in accordance with the By-Law dated March 1988 fell within s22(1)(a)(i). Can it be said that the deceased directly or indirectly did or omitted to do an act "as a result of which" the "bequests" were paid to Alexandra Ludlow-Hyland, Charles Ludlow-Hyland, Ms
Quang and the Armidale School? If the answer is "yes", a second issue arises, namely whether s26 precludes the Court from making a designating order.

On the first issue Windeyer J held: "There is no doubt that as a result of the execution of the Memorandum of
Wishes by the deceased, the execution of the special by-law and the decision of Cura Treuinstitut or Gartner to make distributions in accordance with the
Memorandum of Wishes or the ratified special by-law, property of the
Foundation became held by Alexandra Larissa Ludlow-Hyland and Charles
Christian Ludlow-Hyland, by Anne Chi Quang and by the Armidale School without their providing full consideration for it. At least the action of the deceased in signing the Memorandum of Wishes was a causal link in this chain.

Those interested argued that this is sufficient for the purposes of s22(1)(a)(i). The Founder was not compelled to act in accordance with the
Memorandum of Wishes, it was its decision whether or not to do so. The passing and non-revocation of the special by-law were actions or omissions of the
Founder, not Hyland. Therefore he was only responsible for one step in the causal chain. However one action out of three necessary actions to bring about a result cannot in itself bring about a particular effect or result and this argument of the plaintiff must, I think, be put aside." 
The critical issue is one of determining whether the deceased's conduct in executing the Memorandum of Wishes and declining to take any steps to cause the responsive By-Law to be countermanded meant that it can be said that
Gartner's payment of the bequests in accordance with the By-law occurred as a result. I appreciate that this is a question of causation in fact upon which minds may differ. However, I am firmly of the view that the causal link was established. My reasons follow.

The appellants submit that the relevant acts or omissions of the deceased were the act of executing the Memorandum of Wishes, (b) the act of causing the special By-law to be made, and (c) the omission to cause the special By-Law to be revoked.

Clearly (a) was the act of the deceased. In the passage just quoted, the trial judge held that (b) and (c) were acts or omissions of the Founder, not the deceased. I agree in relation to (b), having regard to the clearly precatory form of the Memorandum of Wishes. However, I disagree as regards (c). His failure to cause the By-Law to be revoked contributed materially to its non- revocation in the light of the co-operative relationship between the deceased and Mr Defago during the deceased's lifetime; a fortiori in the light of my conclusion that the deceased was entitled to give peremptory and legally effective directions to the Founder had he wished.

With respect to his Honour and the submission of the respondents, I do not see s22(1)(a) as confined to acts or omissions that are the operative cause of property becoming held by the deceased's intended disponee. To do so would ignore the thrust of this liberal enactment which emphasises its scope with the words "directly or indirectly", "as a result of which" (emphasis added) and "whether or not the property becomes ... so held immediately". On this basis alone I would respectfully disagree with the conclusion of the learned trial judge. True it is that the Founder could have disregarded the requests embodied in the obviously precatory Memorandum of Wishes. But we know that the Founder did not. It caused those wishes to be embodied in the By-Law which the Gartner Foundation obeyed when it paid what the deceased had designated as "bequests". Here the responsiveness of the Founder to the deceased's expressed wishes was no isolated accident. It represented the very thing that the parties expected would happen, that the deceased asked to happen, and which (whether or not so obliged) Mr Defago caused to happen as an incident of a long-established relationship of loyalty and fidelity. What is more, no one whose name was not mentioned in the Memorandum of Wishes got a substantial legacy, and no one got more than he or she was requested to be given. The legislation is clearly intended to operate in a context of human agents where several may have to act in concert and where there is the possibility that one may not cooperate. To paraphrase Mason J in Fagan v
The Crimes Compensation Tribunal,[13] "the fact that other unconnected events may also have had some relationship to the occurrence is not material if the ... act was a cause, even if not the sole cause". So long as the By-
Law stood, Gartner's acts are to be seen as those compelled by law, and not the discretionary conduct of Mr Defago, as the respondents have submitted. The expert evidence established that the By-Law gave rise to enforceable rights according to its terms so long as it remained unrevoked. This is sufficient to establish the requisite causal link.

The respondents dispute that it is correct to approach the issue of causation in this way. They support Windeyer J in his conclusion that the relevant act or omission must be the effective cause. We were reminded that the Act interferes with property rights. But the critical issue is the extent of that potential interference. In my view, the choice of a looser test of causation is open. For the reasons given, s22(1) suggests, and certainly permits, the looser approach to the factual issue of causation that I have adopted.
Schaeffer[14] identifies: "a purpose of the Legislature that the notional property provisions should extend the powers of the Court to the full range of benefits and advantages controlled by testators. In so far as any question of construction presents a choice, a construction which would promote this purpose is to be preferred; see [s33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s33.html) of the [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/)." 
I have anxiously considered the contrary view of Handley JA in his draft judgment which I have had the benefit of reading. However, my view remains.
With respect to the examples he gives (the compliant wife, the accommodating grandparent, the superannuation trustees that respond to an employee's wishes, and the trustees of a discretionary trust who choose to meet the settler's wishes) none of these involve situations in which the deceased has the capacity (in law) to compel the requested disposition. I respectfully agree with Handley JA that the transactions which he mentions do not involve prescribed transactions. But I would distinguish a situation like the present, where "if push came to shove" the deceased has the legal capacity to compel a particular disposition to be made by a third party. If that capacity exists a finding of causation is open even if the third party responds to a non- directive request.

In any event, [s22(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s22.html) extends to omissions. And since, as I have held, the deceased had the legal power to direct the Founder to do his bidding, the failure to exercise this power before death must surely be seen as an operative cause of the By-Law remaining in its final form. That By-Law "designate[d] as beneficiaries" of the Foundation those persons referred to in the "Bequests" section of the
Memorandum. By omitting to exercise his entitlement to direct the Founder to revoke the By-Law, the deceased omitted to do an act as a result of which the bequests stipulated in the By-Law came to be paid by the Foundation, which was obliged to obey its terms.

The first and fifth respondents sought to advance an additional argument, one which effectively challenges the trial judge's finding that Gartner Foundation distributed the "bequests" in accordance with the Memorandum of Wishes as embodied in the By-Law.[15] We were referred to evidence that the deceased's executor Mr Burbidge was "constantly concerned" that what was supposed to be happening under the Memorandum of Wishes was not happening, as well as to evidence that payment of the "bequests" was slow in coming, for various reasons indicated by Mr Defago. As to one of the bequests, in favour of Ms
Quang, it was argued that it had not been paid in full. During argument, the
Court indicated that this point was not open to be ventilated, in the absence of a notice of contention that flagged it. But, in any event, the evidence to which we were taken does not satisfy me that the "bequests" were not paid in the sums stipulated in the By-Law, or that this particular challenge to
Windeyer J's finding has been made good. It is true that Mr Defago dragged the
Foundation's feet for various reasons (the validity of which was never tested), and that Mr Burbidge felt at times that the By-law would not be honoured. Nevertheless, the sums were in fact paid, and this was in accordance with the Gartner Foundation's legal obligations under the By-Law. The requisite chain of causation was not broken.

I would also reject the submission on behalf of the first and fifth respondents that Windeyer J's conclusion in relation to the first alleged prescribed transaction was based in any way upon an unstated credibility finding based on an assessment of Mr Burbidge's credibility as a witness.

The Cross Appeals assert that [s26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s26.html) precludes the designation as notional estate of the "bequests" paid to the relevant respondents. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s26.html) provides: "26. On an application in relation to a deceased person, the Court shall not, by reason of a prescribed transaction having been entered into, make an order under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s23.html) or [25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s25.html) designating property as notional estate unless the prescribed transaction or the holding of property as a result of the prescribed transaction: directly or indirectly disadvantaged the estate of the disponer, an eligible person or, where the disponer was not the deceased person, the deceased person (whether before, on or after his death); involved the exercise by the disponer or any other person (whether alone or jointly or severally with any other person) of a right, a discretion or a power of appointment, disposition, nomination or direction which: if not exercised, could have resulted in a benefit to the estate of the disponer, an eligible person or, where the disponer was not the deceased person, the deceased person (whether before, on or after his death); or could, at the time the prescribed transaction was entered into or at a later time, have been exercised so as to result in a benefit to the estate of the disponer, an eligible person or, where the disponer was not the deceased person, the deceased person (whether before, on or after his death); or involved an omission to exercise a right, a discretion or a power of appointment, disposition, nomination or direction which could, at the time the prescribed transaction was entered into or at a later time, have been exercised by the disponer or any other person (whether alone or jointly or severally with any other person) so as to result in a benefit to the estate of the disponer, an eligible person or, where the disponer was not the deceased person, the deceased person (whether before, on or after his death)." 
Windeyer J held that the requirements of [s26(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s26.html) were met, assuming that there was a required act or omission. He stated that "on the basis Hyland could have appointed to himself prior to his death or directed distribution to himself his estate must have been disadvantaged by this omission." I agree. Accordingly, I find it unnecessary to consider whether paras (b) or (c) also apply, as the appellants contended by way of notice of contention to the Cross Appeals.

The cross appellants submitted that payment did not disadvantage the estate of the deceased "disponer".[16] A distinction is sought to be drawn between a failure by the estate to obtain an advantage and a "disadvantage". In my view this is a distinction without a difference, in this context. It is to be remembered that [s26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s26.html) is addressing a situation where something done or omitted by the deceased (during his lifetime) impacts adversely upon the deceased's actual estate. Conduct which diverts assets from entering the actual estate clearly disadvantages "the estate" as much as a directive that assets are to be paid out of the estate. I appreciate that paras (b) and (c) of [s26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s26.html) speak of conduct which, if it had not occurred, "could have resulted in a benefit to the estate of the disponer", but that is an appropriate way to describe an act or omission which, had it not occurred, could have resulted in the transfer of a benefit (which those paragraphs address). Non sequitur that an estate did not suffer a more direct "disadvantage" as a result of conduct which took assets out of the estate which would otherwise have passed to the legal personal representative. There is no warrant for reading the parts of [s26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s26.html) as mutually exclusive. This is a situation where caution if justified in the application of the expressio unius maxim. The requisite intention is not discoverable on the face of the section.[17] 
It follows that Windeyer J's answers to questions 12 and 13 require modification to take account of this prescribed transaction. His answer to question 11 may stand. It was agreed upon below by all parties. I read it as addressing the situation of the deceased's legal personal representative in the absence of a designating order.

THE SECOND ALLEGED PRESCRIBED TRANSACTION: FAILURE TO DIRECT FOUNDATION TO APPOINT PROPERTY TO PERSONS OTHER THAN THE FOUNDATION 
This transaction relies upon the deceased's conduct in executing the
Memorandum of Wishes of 5 March 1987 and the making of the By-Law of 15 March
But unlike the first prescribed transaction, the third step in the chain of causation is the deceased's failure to direct the Foundation to appoint property to persons other than itself. These three acts or omissions are said to have resulted in property becoming held by "another person", ie Gartner
Foundation on and after death. The legislative springboard for this argument is [s22(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s22.html), which is set out above.

Windeyer J rejected this submission, stating: "... it is said that during the lifetime of Hyland the Foundation held its property subject to the right of control by Hyland whereas after his death it was freed from that control. I must admit that I have had the greatest difficulty in understanding this argument. While the Foundation holds the assets its articles provide for the Foundation to have beneficiaries. In conventional terms the Foundation holds the assets upon trust for such of the beneficiaries designated in an appropriate special by-law, in such shares as the Founder determines. It is difficult to see how it obtains for itself any valuable benefit as a result of some form of control being extinguished and some other form being substituted. The assets held by the Foundation remained the same after death and there is nothing to show their value increased as a result of Hyland's death. If anything one might assume that without his control the assets might decrease in value. It is not to the point to say that there might have been no relevant by-law because as things happened there was." 
I share the learned trial judge's difficulty in understanding this submission, especially since it turns in large part upon the deceased's right of control over the Founder and the Foundation, which is the focus of the third transaction to which I shall turn shortly.

The appellants submit that the value of the assets in the hands of the
Foundation was affected by the existence of the deceased's powers in respect to those assets. I cannot see why this is so. There is a clear distinction between property subject to a power of appointment (and its value), which involves examining the state of accounts; and the nature and extent of the power itself, which involves examining the instrument that creates it.

The appellants' reliance upon Wentworth versus Wentworth[18] and
Schaeffer is misplaced. Those cases involved shares in companies that (by virtue of their articles of association) were altered in their incidents by the death of the shareholder. But what was critical was that this event meant that the remaining shares in the company swelled in value. It was that increase that was held to be a "valuable benefit" (within the definition of "property" in s6(1) of the Act) which became held by the owner of those remaining shares. By contrast, the second alleged prescribed transaction focuses upon the rights of the Gartner Foundation, the body analogous to the companies in Wentworth and Schaeffer. The death of the deceased did not affect the value of the Foundation's net assets, nor did it cause any valuable benefit to become held by the Foundation.

Windeyer J correctly rejected the appellants' arguments concerning the second alleged prescribed transaction.

THE THIRD ALLEGED PRESCRIBED TRANSACTION: OMISSION TO EXERCISE THE POWER TO APPOINT OR DISPOSE OF THE PROPERTY OF THE GARTNER FOUNDATION 
This argument rests upon s22(4)(a) (set out above) which relevantly provides that, subject to the absence of full consideration, there is a prescribed transaction if the deceased was "entitled ... to exercise a power to appoint, or dispose of, property" which was not in the estate and the power was not exercised before the deceased ceased by reason of death to be so entitled. It must also be shown (relevantly) that, as a result of the omission to exercise the power and of the death, one of the outcomes stipulated in paras (i) and occurred.

The appellants submit that, during his lifetime, the deceased could have caused the assets of the Gartner Foundation to be dealt with as he pleased.
They rely upon the trial judge's finding that the deceased had control of Mr
Defago who in turn had control of the Foundation through the capacity to compel the exercise of the full gamut of Founder's rights that were vested in
DFC at the time of the deceased's death. I have already indicated that I accept that such control existed.

Windeyer J held that s22(4)(a) did not apply because: the deceased had no power to appoint or dispose of the property of the
Foundation; and the property of the Foundation did not become held by another person as a result of the deceased's omission to exercise the power before his death. (in the terms of s22(4)(a)(i)).

The respondents support these propositions. The appellants dispute them and also invoke s22(4)(a)(ii). It was demonstrated that s22(4)(a)(ii) had been relied upon below.

Did the deceased have the power to appoint or dispose of the property of the Foundation during his lifetime? 
Windeyer J answered "no". He did not find it necessary to consider (as I have) whether the deceased had legal rights to compel Mr Defago, and through him the
Founder, to do his bidding. And he distinguished between the power of the deceased over the Founder on the one hand, and the power of the Founder over the Foundation on the other. The critical passage in his judgment was: "For s22(4)(a) to operate two conditions must be satisfied. First, Hyland must have been entitled to appoint or dispose of property not in his estate and second, the property (meaning that property) must have become held by another person by reason of the non appointment and of his death. As to the first, Hyland had no power to appoint or dispose of property. At best what he had was a power to obtain that entitlement by taking to himself the
Founder's rights, and then executing a special by-law designating beneficiaries, after which he would have been able to direct a distribution to particular beneficiaries. There is I think a clear distinction between entitlement and the ability to become entitled; one is present and one is potential. See W P Keighery Pty Ltd versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1957) 100 CLR 66]; Equiticorp Industries versus ACI International Limited <case>; [[1987] VR 485.] On the evidence Hyland never had in his possession the signed transfer in blank of Founder's rights; it was held by Defago. But on the assumption that he could have obtained it - and Defago said he could - to make it of any value he needed to complete it in his favour or in favour of an agent of his; to have that transfer accepted by the Foundation; and to execute a special by-law before any entitlement to appoint property arose. He was not so entitled although I accept he could have become entitled. De facto control does not equate to entitlement which has a legal connotation. That view is supported by cases such as Re Sutton Coldfield Grammar School [(1881) 7
App Cas 91](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281881%29%207%20AC%2091 "View LawCiteRecord" ) and is not I think contrary to what was said by Hodgson J in NCSC v
Brierley Investments Ltd [(1988) 14 NSWLR 273] at 287. 
The respondents submit that Windeyer J was correct to distinguish between the power to appoint or dispose vested in the Founder through the Articles, especially Article 6, and any power over the Founder vested in the deceased.

In my opinion, the distinction drawn by the learned trial judge (between a power to or dispose of property that was directly exercisable, and one which depended upon compelling Mr Defago to execute various documents) finds no support in this legislative scheme. What I have described as the deceased's legal power to compel Mr Defago, through DFC, to cause the Foundation to deal with its assets as the deceased might stipulate was in effect an entitlement to exercise a power to dispose of the property in the Gartner Foundation. That power existed (albeit indirectly) through the agency of Mr Defago and his firms, SCF and DFC. A "power to ... dispose of property" is not a technical term of law. In context it must mean something more than a traditional power of appointment, assuming that the latter concept were limited in any presently relevant way.

In W.P. Keighery Pty Ltd versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation[19] Dixon
CJ, Kitto J and Taylor J distinguished between a presently existing power of control and "a possibility of obtaining control over [a company] by reason of something in its constitution or its special circumstances". The context was a provision in the Income Tax Assessment Act that defined a private company as one "capable of being controlled". It was far removed from the present situation. But even there, the High Court recognised that capacity to control existed where a person had "enforceable and immediately exercisable rights (which) enable him to control".[20] See also Equiticorp Industries
Ltd versus ACI International Ltd[21] and National Companies and Securities
Commission versus Brierley Investments Ltd.[22] In the latter case, after reviewing various authorities in the context of legislation dealing with company takeovers, Hodgson J concluded that:[23] "So far as concerns the case of Equiticorp, in my view it does show that a distinction between power to control, and a potentiality to obtain power to control, may apply to these provisions. However, it does not, in my view, exclude the possibility that a person who has, as a matter of legal entitlement, only a potentiality to obtain power to control, may at the same time have an immediate factual power to control, based on understandings or arrangements, and further supported by the legal entitlement to which I have referred. That possibility is expressly put to one side in Equiticorp (at 242-243) as not being the subject of evidence in that case, and the general statement in that case that 'there must be an enforceable and immediately exercisable right to exercise control' should be read with that in mind: if that general statement were read as being entirely unqualified, it would, I think, be inconsistent with the Foreign Takeovers Act (Cth), s8".

Returning, as I must, to construing s22(4)(a) in context, and faithful to the purpose of Part 2 Division 2 of the Act as expounded in Schaeffer,[24] I am satisfied that the deceased had until his death an entitlement to exercise a power to dispose of property which was not in his estate, being the property vested in the Foundation.

I accept that there is a vital distinction between de facto control and legal entitlement: see Re Sutton Coldfield Grammar School;[25] NCSC v
Brierley Investments Ltd.[26] Section 22(4)(a) requires entitlement.
However, entitlement and immediate enjoyment are different. Here the powers of
DFC as Founder were at the deceased's disposal as a matter of right, through the rights which the deceased had over Mr Defago. And, if he chose, the deceased was, as a matter of right, able to have the Founder replaced by a
Founder that would do the deceased's bidding. Indeed, the deceased could have required DFC to appoint the deceased himself as the Founder. All steps to effect an appointment or disposal of assets as the deceased chose were really administrative once the deceased determined to act.

I have no difficulty in conceding that the power to appoint or dispose of the assets of Gartner (through Article 6) was vested in the Founder for the time being. Absent a contrary direction from the deceased, the Founder immediately before and after the deceased's death (DFC) was entitled to exercise that power of disposition. But more than one person may have concurrent powers to deal with or dispose of the same item of property. For example, a first and second mortgagee may each have a concurrent power of sale.

Accordingly, the deceased's authority over the Founder indirectly armed the deceased with similar rights touching the assets of the Foundation.

Did the omission to exercise the power before death cause either of the events in s22(4)(a)(i) or (ii)? 
Section 22(4)(a) stipulates that the deceased's omission to exercise a power to dispose of property before death is irrelevant unless: "as a result of the omission to exercise the power and of his death or the occurrence of the other event: the property becomes held by another person(whether or nor as a trustee) or subject to a trust (whether or not the property becomes in either case so held immediately); or another person becomes (whether or not immediately) or, if he was previously entitled, continues to be, entitled to exercise the power...." 
Windeyer J held that outcome (i) did not result from the omission. He did not address (ii).

His Honour's reasons for rejecting the invocation of s22(4)(a)(i) were as follows: "Further, assuming that he did have the entitlement, the property, (namely the Foundation assets held by that Foundation), did not become held by another person by reason of his death, it remained subject to the same disposition rights of the founder as before and remained held by Gartner. It is not a case of a gift over in default of appointment. One could consider this matter in terms of a discretionary trust where the trustee has power to amend the list of beneficiaries, and where the appointor has the power to remove a trustee and appoint another trustee. I do not think that it could be said that in such circumstances the omissions of (a) failing to remove the existing trustee; (b) failing to appoint the appointor himself or his agent as trustee; (c) failing to alter the list of possible beneficiaries and (d) then failing to provide that the assets in the trust go a particular way could amount to a prescribed transaction. No property rights move as a result of the death, but if removal of control was a valuable benefit it arose as a result of death not as a result of any other act or omission and death." 
I agree generally with Windeyer J on s22(4)(a)(i). The property of the
Foundation remained vested in it before and after the deceased's death. It did not "become held by another person" as a result of the omission to exercise the relevant power and the deceased's death.

However, s22(4)(a)(ii) must also be considered. The death of the deceased either led to the transmission of the deceased's rights over the Founder according to the law of the deceased's domicil, or it terminated those rights.
The argument before us did not explore which it was. Accordingly, I shall deal with each in turn. If the former, there was obviously "another person" (cf s22(4)(a)(ii)) who became entitled to exercise the deceased's power of disposition, and this occurred as a result of the deceased's omission to do so and his death.

If the latter, the expiry of the deceased's rights left the Founder's powers intact. Can it be said that as a result of the deceased's omission to exercise his power and of his death, the Founder "continue[d] to be, entitled to exercise the power" (to which it was previously entitled) to dispose of the assets of the Foundation? 
The respondents are correct in their submission that "the power" referred to in subparagraph (ii) must be the same power as that which was enjoyed by a deceased before he or she ceased to be entitled to exercise it. But the very fact that the subparagraph contemplates that "another person" may continue to be entitled to exercise the power shows that the provision embraces the situation of two or more persons having a concurrent power to dispose of property with one of those persons (being the deceased) ceasing to exercise it as a result of the prior omission to exercise it and death. I have already indicated that the powers vested in the Founder through Article 6 and the powers vested in the deceased through his capacity to control the exercise of the Founder's rights under Article 6 were concurrent powers to dispose of the property of the Foundation. True, the deceased's rights were one stage removed from the assets subject to the power, albeit a stage which the deceased was entitled to surmount. But each power was identical in its operative effect, so far as concerned the assets of the Foundation. The Founder's entitlement to exercise the power preceded the deceased's death and continued after it. This satisfied subparagraph (ii) if it were the case that the deceased's entitlement was non-transmissible.

This alone is not sufficient to satisfy s22(4)(a)(ii). It must also be shown that the continuation of the Founder's power came about "as a result of" the deceased's omission to exercise his concurrent power and of his death. The respondents submit that it is at this point that the appellant's argument breaks down. They submit that there is no link or connection between the continuation of the Founder's powers under the articles of the Foundation and the deceased's omission to dispose of the Foundation's assets (as he could have, through his power over the Founder that I have found to exist) before his death. And the respondents emphasise (correctly) that the same "power" is involved wherever it is mentioned in the paragraph.

This is the point at which I have the greatest difficulty with this appeal.
However, I would reject the respondents' argument for the following reasons.
If the deceased had exercised the power which he held yet omitted to exercise, then the assets of the Foundation would have been effectively disposed of. For example, the deceased could have directed the Founder to make a By-Law whereby the corpus of the Founder's assets (after payment of the "bequests") were paid to one or more of the appellants. That By-Law could have been made irrevocable, through an appropriate amendment to the articles procured by the
Founder on the deceased's instruction. The deceased did not procure this during his lifetime. It can therefore be said that his omission to do so before his death was a cause of the assets remaining in the Foundation. The
Founder's concurrent power of disposition (through making By-Laws) remained as it stood under the articles. It continued after the deceased's death. The provision does not require that the concurrent powers of disposition should be exercisable in identical ways. That continuation was causally linked to the deceased's omission in that the omission contributed to the continuation of the Founder's power of disposition under the (unamended) articles, and left the Founder with assets at its disposition in the Foundation.

Panker Nominees raised an additional line of defence. The starting point is s23 which has been set out above. It was submitted that the Court's power under the concluding words of s23, to make a designating order is limited to property held by or as testator for "disponee(s)" and that Gartner is not a "disponee" as defined in s21. Section 21 provides: "21. In this Division, except in so far as the context or subject-matter otherwise indicates or requires: `disponee', in relation to a prescribed transaction, means: where, as a result of the prescribed transaction, property becomes held by a person (whether or not as trustee) - the person; or where, as a result of the prescribed transaction, property becomes held subject to a trust - the object of the trust; `disponer', in relation to a prescribed transaction, means the person deemed by section 22 to have entered into the prescribed transaction." 
The impact of this argument also bifurcates depending on whether the "disponee" were the person or persons to whom the deceased's power of disponing of the assets of the Foundation were transmitted by the law of the deceased's domicil; [27] or Gartner Foundation. This is because the power to designate is linked to property held by or on trust for the relevant disponee.
The appellants have an obvious interest in identifying Gartner Foundation as the relevant "disponee" since it alone may own valuable assets at law or in equity.

On the latter branch of the fork (ie that pointing to Gartner), Panker contends that Gartner is not a "disponee" as defined because no property became held by Gartner "as a result of the [third] prescribed transaction".
Gartner held its assets before and after the third transaction. Cf my reasons for rejecting the second alleged prescribed transaction. I think that the answer to this submission turns upon the opening words of s22(4) which deem a person to have done, or omitted to do, an act, as the result of which property becomes held by another person if another person continues to be entitled to exercise a particular type of power. The obvious inference is that the property thus deemed to become held by that person is deemed held by the person as "disponee". Section 23 then enables the assets to be designated.

The respondents do not raise s26 as an answer to the third prescribed transaction. It is conceded that if there was a failure on the deceased's part indirectly to appoint or dispose of assets, then that disadvantaged his estate.

Accordingly, I would also amend the answers to Questions 12 and 13 to encompass this alternative prescribed transaction.

These reasons would appear to give rise to the following orders in each appeal:
Appeal allowed.
Amend the answers to questions 12 and 13 so that the question and answers read: 
Question 12:- 
Did the deceased enter into any, and, if so, which prescribed transaction, or prescribed transactions, within the meaning of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) of the [Family Provision Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)? 
Answer:- 
Yes, the first and third prescribed transactions argued in the appeal.

Question 13:- 
If the answer to 12 is in the affirmative:- 
Are any, and, if so, which, of the assets held by, or on behalf of the
Gartner Foundation liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/).

What, if any, other property is liable to be designated as notional property for the purposes of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s23.html) of the [Family Provision Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)? 
Answer:- 
Yes, the net assets of the Foundation are liable to be designated as notional property, in accordance with the third prescribed transaction identified in the reasons of Mason P.

The sums paid to Alexander Hyland, Charles Hyland, Ms Quang and the
Armidale School which were designated as "bequests" in the Memorandum of
Wishes dated 5 March 1987 and any property capable of being specified pursuant to [s25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s25.html) of the [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), in accordance with the first prescribed transaction identified in the reasons of
Mason P.
Respondents to pay the appellants' costs of the appeal and to have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act, if qualified.

Given the complexity of this matter, and the possible need to provide for the costs below, I propose to refrain from making these orders. The parties are directed to bring in Short Minutes to the Registrar within 14 days and are to have liberty to apply.

MEAGHER JA: I agree with Mason P.

HANDLEY JA: In this matter I have had the benefit of reading the reasons for judgment of Mason P. He has referred to the relevant facts and documents, and the history of the litigation and there is no reason for me to repeat these matters. 
I agree with his conclusion that Mr Defago, and the companies he represented from time to time (Mr Defago), followed the directions of Mr Keith Hyland (the deceased) during his lifetime not only in practice, but as a matter of legal obligation, but for somewhat different reasons.

The application of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (C'wlth) and the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) to
Mr Defago's representations and assurances is not self-evident and does not appear to have been litigated below. It seems that the deceased was a resident of Thailand during the relevant years because the great bulk of his correspondence originated from Bangkok, including his letters of 18 February and 9 March 1989 written shortly before his death on 16 April. The Acts would not apply to representations from Switzerland received and acted on by the deceased in Thailand and I am not clear how far the presumption that foreign law is the same as ours applies in such a case. On the other hand, I am satisfied that at all relevant times Mr Defago stood in a fiduciary relationship with the deceased because he undertook to act in the deceased's interests and not his own. See Hospital Products Limited versus United States
Surgical Corporation & Ors <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 41] at 68-9, 72 per Gibbs CJ.

The powers of the founder of the Gartner Foundation (the Foundation) were exercisable by the corporation which held that position at the relevant time.
There was no evidence that a fiduciary relationship of this kind would not be enforced under the laws of Switzerland or Liechtenstein and I would apply the presumption that their laws in this respect were the same as ours.

The powers were not vested in the deceased and could not be exercised by another as his agent. The relationship therefore was not that of agent and principal despite the so-called agency agreement of 19 April 1974 because, as was said in International Harvester Co of Australia Pty Ltd versus Carrigan's
Hazeldene Pastoral Co <case>; [(1958) 100 CLR 644] at 652: "Agency is a word used in the law to connote an authority or capacity in one person to create legal relations between a person occupying the position of principal and third parties".

In any event, in my view, the correspondence in 1987 and 1988 established or evidenced a contract under which Mr Defago undertook to act as directed by the deceased, and the deceased for his part refrained from taking steps to remove
Mr Defago as founder. The Foundation was a corporation, governed by a board of directors nominated by the founder, who appears to be the equivalent of a sole shareholder. The right to vote at a general meeting of a company is a right of property (Pender versus Lushington [[1877] 6 Ch D 70] at 75-6, ) and voting agreements by shareholders are enforceable by injunction which may be prohibitory or mandatory. See Puddephatt versus Leith [[1916] 1 Ch D ]
and Grimwade & Ors versus FCT <case>; [(1949) 78 CLR 199] at 206. There was no evidence that voting agreements by founders would not be enforced under the laws of Switzerland or Liechtenstein, and I would apply the presumption that the laws of those countries, in this respect, are the same as ours.

Nothing appears to turn on the existence of the blank transfer of the founder's rights which Mr Defago signed but retained until after the death of the deceased. The deceased had no capacity to obtain and use this document without the co-operation of Mr Defago, and as far as I can determine he had no right, independent of fiduciary duty or contract, to compel Mr Defago to deliver it up.

The issues before this Court concern the effect of the notional estate provisions of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) on the
Foundation and its assets. The plaintiffs identified what they claimed were four "prescribed transactions" falling within [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html), but all claims failed before Windeyer J. The claims in respect of the first three transactions were pressed on appeal, but the fourth was abandoned. Mason
P rejects the second claim, and I agree that this fails for the reasons he has given. However he would uphold the first and third claims, and I must now deal with these.

First prescribed transaction 
This claim was particularised as follows: "That in executing the Memorandum of Wishes (and in having the Founder incorporate this into a by-law) and in leaving this unrevoked, the deceased undertook an act as a result of which property became held by another".

The relevant Memorandum of Wishes dated 5 March 1987 was signed by the deceased and witnessed. It was directed to Societe de Controle Fiduciare which was no longer associated with Mr Defago and had ceased to be the founder on 26
October 1981. Mr Defago received the memorandum some time before 6 May 1987 when he wrote to Mr Nathan, a partner in Pannell Kerr Forster, acknowledging its receipt. A new special by-law, giving effect to the Memorandum of Wishes, was made by the founder with effect from 15 March 1988.

The Memorandum of Wishes was just that. It is not a will and does not purport to give binding directions to the addressee, let alone to Mr Defago. The relevant section is headed "My wishes are as follows", followed below by the word "Bequests", and below that by the words "Upon my death I wish the following payments to be effected". The new special by-law relevantly provided: "The Founder hereby designates as beneficiaries of the Foundation those persons and that Foundation referred to in that section headed `Bequests' of a
Memorandum of Wishes of Charles Keith Hyland of 5 March 1987, a true copy of which is hereto annexed".

Under the special by-law, the persons referred to were made actual and not merely precatory beneficiaries of the Foundation. Their rights were subject to
Art 6 of the Foundation which provided: "The beneficiaries of the Foundation are the persons who are designated by the
Founder in a special by-law. The Founder determines upon his own discretion without justification if and when a distribution of the income, retained earnings or assets of the Foundation to the beneficiaries is to take place.
Under the same conditions the Founder may make such distribution at any time and from time to time to any one or more of the beneficiaries to the entire exclusion or partial exclusion of any other or others of the beneficiaries".

This transaction was said by the appellants to fall within [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) which provides: "A person shall be deemed to enter into a prescribed transaction if: 
On or after the appointed day he does, directly or indirectly, or omits to do, any act, as a result of which: property becomes held by another person ...; or property becomes subject to a trust, whether or not the property becomes in either case so held immediately; and 
Full valuable consideration in money or money's worth for the first mentioned person's doing, or omitting to do, that act is not given".

Windeyer J made the following findings: "There is no doubt that as a result of the execution of the Memorandum of
Wishes by the deceased, the execution of the special by-law and the decision of ... Gartner to make distributions in accordance with the Memorandum of
Wishes or the ratified special by-law, property of the Foundation became held by (the persons identified in the Memorandum of Wishes) without their providing full consideration for it. At least the action of the deceased in signing the Memorandum of Wishes was a causal link in this chain ... the founder was not compelled to act in accordance with the Memorandum of Wishes, it was his decision whether or not to do so. The passing and non-revocation of the special by-law were acts or omissions of the founder, not Hyland.
Therefore he was only responsible for one step in the causal chain ... one action out of three necessary actions to bring about a result cannot in itself bring about a particular ... result ...".

Mason P considers that the deceased did an act within the section by causing
Mr Defago to make this special by-law. He also considers that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) is not limited to "acts ... that are the operative cause of property becoming held by the deceased's intended disponee".

I find myself in respectful dissent from these conclusions principally because, in my view, questions of causation of the kind referred to in Fagan v
The Crimes Compensation Tribunal <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 666] at 673, which arise so frequently in tort, contract, and workers' compensation cases, are not relevant to the operation of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) . The words "directly or indirectly" do not, in my view, support the construction accepted by the majority. They are linked to the doing of an act and not its results. The enquiry therefore is whether an act which had a certain result has been done directly or indirectly. It is not whether the deceased has, directly or indirectly, caused property to be disposed of to another or become subject to a trust.

In any event the expression "directly or indirectly" does not widen the scope of a statutory provision such as this. Doing an act directly means doing it yourself and doing it indirectly means doing it through another (Law Society of NSW versus Ramalca Pty Ltd & Anor [(1988) 12 NSWLR 34] at 43).
This requires something akin to agency in accordance with the principle that he who does an act through another does it himself. See Ex parte Aston
Investments Pty Ltd Re Hall & Ors [[1959] 60 SR 620] at 626. Thus in R versus Metal Trades Employers' Association & Ors Ex Parte AEU <case>; [(1951) 82 CLR 208] at 261, Kitto J said: "... the inclusion of the words `directly or indirectly' serve to make plain the completeness of the (provision), but makes no difference to its operation".

Although the deceased could give legally binding directions to Mr Defago, he did not attempt to do so in his Memorandum of Wishes. The appellants' proposition is that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) (a) extends to a case where a wish or a request communicated to another has been acted on. The section so construed would have an extraordinarily wide operation. Reference was made during argument to Martin versus Martin <case>; [(1959) 110 CLR 297] at 306 where the Court referred to the justifiable confidence that a husband will frequently have in his wife that she "will always consult his interests, and probably comply with his wishes in exercising her proprietary rights". Would a request by a husband to a wife, which she acted on by making some disposition of property, be an act "as a result of which property becomes held by another person"? Another example mentioned during argument was a request by a parent to a grandparent that he or she make a will in favour of the grandchildren rather than the parent. Other examples that readily come to mind include an employee's wishes communicated to superannuation trustees and a settlor's wishes communicated to the trustees of a discretionary trust. See Hartigan Nominees Pty Ltd & Anor versus Rydge [(1992) 29 NSWLR 405.] 
The causative potency of such requests may be clear, as it is in this case, but in my opinion the section does not make relevant the requests and wishes of a third party which are acted on by a disponer. Acts of that nature are not within the section.

I cannot see how [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s26.html) would prevent the notional estate provisions applying in such a case. If a parent who persuaded a grandparent to leave his or her estate to the grandchildren, instead of the parent, enters into a prescribed transaction within [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) (a) that would, it seems to me, disadvantage his or her own estate which would otherwise have benefited under an earlier will, or under one that would otherwise have been made.

The act of the deceased relied upon is the making and communication of his
Memorandum of Wishes. I am unable to accept that as "a result of" this act property became vested in another within the meaning of a statute concerned with property. The words, on their ordinary and natural meaning in this context, apply to acts which, in themselves, effect a disposition of property.
They apply to what Salmond referred to as "acts in the law" which, in the exercise of a legal power, create, transfer or extinguish rights. See Salmond, "Jurisprudence", 12th Ed, 1966 at 333-4.

The reference to "a result" in the section does not in my view support a different construction. An act in the law may have more than one result. Thus a person may settle his own property on himself for life with a remainder over, or with some other provision for the disposal of the property after his death. As "a result" of his settlement he retains a life estate but this does not fall within [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) (a). However as "a result" of the same act in the law, property has become held by another, although not immediately, or has become subject to a trust, and that result is within the section. The disposition must be "a result" of the act but one cannot change this to a statement that the act may be "a cause" of the disposition without enlarging its meaning. In my opinion the reference to "a" result does not assist the appellants in this case.

However this is not the end of the enquiry because [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) (a) also applies to omissions. The deceased had the power to direct Mr
Defago to revoke the special by-law and if he had exercised this power the bequests referred to in that by-law would not have taken effect.

The question then is whether "as a result" of the special by-law remaining in force, property became held by another person, that is by someone other than the Foundation? The omission of the deceased left the persons referred to in his Memorandum of Wishes as designated beneficiaries of the Foundation but, given the terms of Art 6, this only made them objects or beneficiaries of a power akin to a discretionary trust. A beneficiary under a discretionary trust has an interest because he has a right to be considered by the trustees as a potential recipient of benefit, and this right may be protected by a court of equity, but this interest is uncertain, contingent, and potentially valueless.
See Gartside & Anor versus IRC <case>; [[1968] AC ] at -8.

The trustees of a discretionary trust have a power of appointment among the objects of the trust which will generally be a special power. The effect of the exercise of a special power of appointment is well established. The appointees do not take any proprietary interest in the subject matter of the power until the appointment takes effect, but the instrument creating the power "is the assurance by which the property is imparted to the appointees once the power is exercised". See Pedley-Smith & Ors versus Pedley-Smith &
Anor <case>; [(1953) 88 CLR 177] at 189-191, and Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd versus Commissioner of Stamp Duties [[1977] AC ] at 534.

The beneficiaries designated in the special by-law took no proprietary interest under that by-law until the founder exercised his discretion to pay them the amounts referred to, but those amounts then came to them "under the by-law". See Pedley-Smith at 190. The section clearly treats a relevant omission as capable of causing property to become held by another. I see no reason for denying this result to the omission by the deceased to exercise his power to direct Mr Defago to cancel the special by-law. In my opinion the existence of the first prescribed transaction contended for by the appellants should be upheld on this basis.

Third alleged prescribed transaction 
This claim invoked [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) (a) which provides: "...a person shall, for the purposes of sub section (1) (a) be deemed to do, or omit to do, an act, as a result of which property becomes held by another person or subject to a trust if: he is entitled, on or after the appointed day, to exercise a power to appoint, or dispose of, property which is not in his estate but the power is not exercised before he ceases (by reason of death or the occurrence of any other event) to be so entitled and, as a result of the omission to exercise the power and of his death or the occurrence of the other event: 
The property becomes held by another person ... or subject to a trust (whether or not the property becomes in either case so held immediately); or 
Another person becomes (whether or not immediately) or, if he was previously entitled, continues to be, entitled to exercise the power; ".

Windeyer J held that the deceased had no power to appoint or dispose of property. He said: "At best what he had was a power to obtain that entitlement by taking to himself the Founder's rights, and then executing a special by-law designating beneficiaries, after which he would have been able to direct a distribution to particular beneficiaries. There is I think a clear distinction between entitlement and the ability to become entitled; one is present and one is potential ... De facto control does not equate to entitlement which has a legal connotation".

Mason P concludes otherwise but I find myself again in respectful dissent.
While the composite expression "a power to dispose of property" is not a technical term, its constituents (power, dispose of and property) have established legal meanings in a statute dealing with property. The composite expression has a long history in Anglo-Australian legislation imposing death and estate duties dating at least from the Finance Act 1894 (UK) <case> (2)(a).
It was included in the definition of general power of appointment in Part IV of the Stamp Duties Act dealing with death duty. The meaning of this expression in that context was the subject of much judicial consideration which in my opinion is highly relevant.

This Act does not impose taxation and should not receive the strict construction appropriate for legislation of that character. However the case law referred to does not depend upon a special construction of words in a revenue statute. Moreover the New South Wales Law Reform Commission in their report on The Testator's Family Maintenance and [Guardianship of Infants Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/goia1916231/) (LRC 28) which led to this Act drew on the statutes dealing with death and gift duties (above at 75-6, 79-80, 81 etc).

The meaning of this expression in death duty legislation was not restricted to powers of appointment strictly so called. See also the definition in <case> (6) of this Act. Re Parsons [[1943] Ch 12] decided that a legatee who disclaimed had power to dispose of the legacy before the disclaimer; and in Re Estate of Spencer Isles <case>; [(1946) 47 SR 33] decided that a member of a superannuation fund had power to dispose of the benefit payable to his legal personal representatives on his death. The expression was treated as capable of applying to the powers of a husband under regimes of community property in Ochberg & Ors versus Commissioner of Stamp
Duties <case>; [(1949) 49 SR 248] and Commissioner of Estate and Gift Duties versus Fiji Resorts Ltd [[1983] 2 AC ], and to property the subject of an option that lapsed on death in The Estate of
Taylor <case>; [[1950] 51 SR 16.] 
However decisions on the meaning of this expression in death duty legislation would deny it any application where the deceased for merely practical reasons had "in effect" an ability to bring about a disposition of property. Such a view is prima facie excluded by the reference to "entitled" which, as the word itself suggests, normally requires a legal title. See In re Sutton Coldfield
Grammar School [[1881] 7 App Cas 91] at 94-5. Re
Parsons was concerned with the expression "competent to dispose of property" in <case> (2) (a) of the Finance Act 1894 which was defined to include "every power ... enabling the donee ... to dispose of property as he thinks fit".
Lord Greene MR said at 15: "The phrase `competent to dispose' is not a phrase of art, and, taken by itself and quite apart from the definition clause in the Act, it conveys to my mind the ability to dispose, including, of course the ability to make a thing your own. From the moment of the testatrix's death the husband was able to make the legacy his own ... during the period between the death of the testatrix and the disclaimer, he was unquestionably `competent to dispose' within the meaning of those words in the sub-section, which, I think, are wide and, in a sense, popular in meaning. The matter is set beyond doubt by the definition in <case> sub section 2 (a) of the Finance Act 1894 ... That language seems to me clearly to cover the case of a legatee to whom a legacy has been given and who is in the position either to take it or to disclaim it as he thinks fit".

The decisions on the meaning of this expression were considered in Equity
Trustees Executors and Agency Co Ltd versus Commissioner of Probate Duties <case>; [(1975-1976) 135 CLR 268] where at 271, 274, 281, the view expressed by Lord Greene in Re Parsons was preferred to that of Luxmoore J in Re Penrose [[1933] Ch 793.] Stephen J, having referred to the phrase "competent to dispose" and its definition in the
Probate Duty Act (Vict), said at 273: "The competency spoken of must, I think, be legal competency to dispose and does not involve questions of the possession at the relevant time of a practical ability then and there to make an effective disposition. ... thus `to dispose' includes the effecting of a change in the ownership of property, not by its owner but by the deceased pursuant to some competency conferred by the owner. In any disposal of ownership one person loses title and another gains it ...".

Mason J said at 280: "The language of the paragraph is apt to apply to anything which the deceased could alienate, either because he was the owner of it or because he had a capacity to dispose of it stemming from some authority or power, not being fiduciary in character".

The construction of <case> (4) (a) which would confine it to powers to appoint or dispose of property which the deceased could exercise as a matter of legal entitlement, is supported by <case> (7) of the Act which provides: "A reference in this Act to a person entitled to exercise a power is a reference to a person entitled to exercise the power whether the power is absolute or conditional and whether or not the power arises under a trust, and includes a reference to a person entitled to exercise the power together with one or more other persons, whether jointly or severally".

This language can only properly apply to powers having an existence in law. It too has been drawn from death duty legislation, and reflects an intention to displace the decision in Commissioner of Estate and Succession Duties v
Bowring [[1962] AC 171], that a deceased person did not have a power to dispose of property as he thought fit where the power was joint, or only exercisable with the consent of others.

There is, as Windeyer J held, a distinction between entitlement and the ability to become entitled which has been recognised in analogous situations.
In W P Keighery Pty Ltd versus FCT <case>; [(1957) 100 CLR 66] the Court had to consider whether the appellant was "capable of being controlled" by not more than seven persons on the last day of a fiscal year. Dixon CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ said in a joint judgment at 85-7: "Clearly enough, the description of a company as `capable of being controlled' is not satisfied by the mere fact that a majority of shareholders, while not under any legal or equitable obligation to obey the directions of other persons, may ... obey those directions ... A power in a person to provide shareholders with an incentive or inducement to exercise their voting power as that person may wish is not aptly described as making the company capable of being controlled by that person. The person must be able to dictate the decisions of the general meeting, through a preponderance of voting power which either is vested in him or is subject to his command ... To describe a company as capable of being controlled by a person or group of persons is to attribute to that person or group a presently existing power of control.
`Capable of being controlled' in this context cannot be interpreted so widely as to be satisfied whenever a possibility of obtaining control over the company exists by reason of something in its constitution or its special circumstances. The natural sense of the expression is that of possessing, as a present attribute, a liability to be controlled.
 ... The truth is that `capable of being controlled' connotes the existence of either one person whose enforceable and immediately exercisable rights enable him to control, or a number of persons whose enforceable and immediately exercisable rights enable them, if they act in concert, to control".

In FCT versus Sidney Williams (Holdings) Limited <case>; [(1957) 100 CLR 95], decided at the same time, the Court rejected another argument on the same provision stating, at 112: "But to give effect to this argument would be to construe the expression `capable of being controlled' as referring, not to a capability existing in law - that is to say a liability to a lawful control by the exercise of legal or equitable rights or powers which persons are shown to possess - but to a possibility of being wrongfully subjected to de facto control by persons acting in breach of the rights of others. That cannot be what the paragraph means".

The Court therefore held that the existence of the relevant capacity was to be determined by reference to the existing legal rights and duties of the parties, and not by any potential capacity, or any present capacity which existed for purely practical reasons.

In analogous contexts, a reference in a taxing statute to a company which is controlled by a deceased person, or in which a deceased person has a controlling interest, has been construed as a reference to the legal control of the company, that is the company in general meeting. See Mendes v
Commissioner of Probate Duties (Victoria) <case>; [(1967) 122 CLR 152] at 161, FCT versus Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation Limited <case>; <case>; [[1987] VR 485] is of doubtful, if any, relevance in this case because [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/fta1975195/s8.html) of the [Foreign Takeovers Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/fta1975195/) (Cth) included control of voting power which was exercisable by means of "arrangements or practices, whether or not having legal or equitable force, and whether or not based on legal or equitable rights". See NCSC versus Brierley
Investments Ltd & Ors [(1988) 14 NSWLR 273] at 287. I would also regard the latter decision as irrelevant because <case> (3) of the
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Code included power and control over voting rights and shares "direct or indirect" as a result of "arrangements, understandings and practices ... whether or not they are enforceable". See also <case> (2), (4). It is significant however that the subject Act does not include provisions of this nature, although it post-dates the Acts under consideration in those cases.

The deceased's power, under his contractual arrangements with Mr Defago to direct the making of a special by-law, or to require a transfer of the rights of the founder to himself or another did not, in my view, make him "entitled ... to exercise a power ... to dispose" of the Foundation's property. He had no legal power or capacity to dispose of the property of the Foundation. An instrument signed by him purporting to effect such a disposition would have been without legal effect and the Foundation would have been bound to ignore it.

The capacity of the deceased during his lifetime to dispose of the property of the Foundation was entirely practical, and was not based on any power exercisable against it. His power against the Foundation always remained potential. Schaeffer versus Schaeffer [(1994) 36 NSWLR 315] at 318-9 does not require a different conclusion. That case, and the cases there cited, involved value transfer schemes which were held to give rise to prescribed transactions under other provisions which are not relevant in these appeals.
Bryson J said in the passage quoted that he observed "a purpose of the Legislature that the notional property provisions should extend the power of the Court to the full range of benefits and advantages controlled by testators. In so far as any question of construction presents a choice, a construction which would promote this purpose is to be preferred".

The questions of construction which arise in this case do not in my view present a choice. Moreover the Law Reform Commission in their Report stated (p ) that they had not attempted what they described as the extraordinarily difficult task of drafting a provision which would make the Act applicable to every will substitute. Thus the Commission did not propose nor did the
Parliament attempt, in terms, to extend the Act to situations where the powers of a deceased were practical rather than legal.

I conclude therefore that the requirements of <case> (4) (a) were not met in this case because the power the deceased could exercise over the Foundation was practical and not legal, and the legal power he was entitled to exercise was not a power to dispose of the property of the Foundation.

Further issues arise under <case> (4) (a) which, strictly, I need not address because of my conclusion that the deceased did not have a power to dispose of the property of the Foundation. However, because mine is a minority opinion, I should express a view on these other issues.

Mason P would affirm the decision of Windeyer J that the requirements of <case> (a)(i) were not satisfied in this case because, in the events that happened, the property of the Foundation did not become held by another. I agree with this conclusion and with the reasons given.

Windeyer J did not address <case> (4) (a)(ii) but Mason P concludes that its requirements were satisfied. Two alternatives were hypothesised; that the power which the deceased possessed was transmitted to others, or that it lapsed on his death. The Memorandum of Wishes contained a request by the deceased that in the event of his incapacity the founder would act in accordance with the recommendations of his advisers. On 6 May 1987 Mr Defago wrote to Mr Nathan stating that in the event of the deceased's death or incapacity the Advisers designated in the Memorandum of Wishes would be entitled to give him instructions. I am prepared to assume that the power of the deceased to give binding directions, despite some differences, passed in substance to the Advisers. If the deceased's power was within the section, its transmission to others would satisfy <case> (4) (a)(ii), but if it was not, the added requirement would make no difference.

During the deceased's lifetime, the founder had the power to make, vary or rescind a special by-law having the effect of defining or amending the beneficiaries of the Foundation. The founder continued to be entitled to exercise that power after the death of the deceased, but this power was not the same as that which had been exercisable by the deceased. This situation is not analogous to a joint or several power which continues to be exercisable by the survivors. Such a power is within <case> (4) (a)(ii) and that is put beyond doubt by <case> (7). However in such cases the same power continues throughout and the only change is that it is exercisable by fewer persons.

In the present case the only power which the Foundation was bound to recognise was that of the founder, the deceased's only power being exercisable against the founder personally, not the Foundation. In my judgment therefore sub para was not satisfied in this case because the founder did not "continue to be entitled to exercise the (same) power" that the deceased had been entitled to exercise. The two powers were different and while the founder's power continued it was not the same power as that which had been exercisable by the deceased. In these circumstances I need not express any view on the issue under <case>.

For these reasons the appeal should in my view be allowed in part, but as mine is a minority view I need not formulate the precise orders that would be appropriate.
 <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 639] at 650.
 [5] Article 6.
 [6] Article 7.
 [7] Article 9.
 [8] See Wentworth versus Wentworth. (Court of Appeal, unreported, 16
December 1991) per Priestley JA at p45; Schaeffer versus Schaeffer [(1994) NSWLR 315] at 319-20.
 [9] Schaeffer at 318F, citing Wentworth versus Wentworth (NSW Supreme
Court, Bryson J, 14 June 1991).
 <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 666] at 673; Kooragang Cement Pty Ltd versus Bates <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 666] at 673.
 [14] [(1994) 36 NSWLR 315] at 318, citing Wentworth versus Wentworth (Bryson J, June 1991).
 [15] Submissions para 33.
 [16] See s21, which defines "disponer" in relation to a prescribed transaction as the person deemed by s22 to have entered into the prescribed transaction.
 <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 239] at 250.
 [18] Court of Appeal, unreported, 3 March 1992.
 <case>; [(1957) 100 CLR 66] at 86.
 [20] At 87.
 [21] [[1987] VR 482] at 488-9.
 [22] [(1988) 14 NSWLR 273] esp. at 287.
 [23] At 94-5.
 [24] See Schaeffer versus Schaeffer [(1994) 36 NSWLR 315] at 318-9.
 [25] [(1881) 7 App Cas 91] at 94-5.
 [26] (1988) 14 NSW 273 at 287.
 [27] This was assumed to be New South Wales for the purpose of the issues debated before Windeyer J.
 * * * 
