

Hill versus Ballment Manufacturing Co Pty Limited Matter No 14182/96 [1998]
NSWSC 135 (17 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 
PETER HILL versus BALLMENT MANUFACTURING CO PTY LIMITED /96  April 1998 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In 1986 the plaintiff issued a statement of claim for damages for personal injury arising from an accident in which he was involved in 1982 whilst in the employ of the defendant. 
In 1996 Master Greenwood heard an application to strike out the plaintiff's claim for want of prosecution. The Master ordered that the plaintiff provide certain information about his earnings and about medical treatment by a certain date, in the absence of which the claim would be dismissed. The plaintiff did not provide that information within the time specified by Master
Greenwood. The plaintiff now seeks that Master Greenwood's orders be set aside.

The sorry history of these proceedings is summarised in Master Greenwood's reasons. There is no doubt the plaintiff sat on his hands for years and there is no satisfactory explanation for his inaction up to the time Master
Greenwood made his orders, or indeed since that time.

The present motion was before me in February this year and I adjourned it to today and made, by consent, certain directions in the meantime. Broadly speaking, the plaintiff has complied with those directions to the best of his ability at this stage.

He has now provided information as to his employment and income over the period since the accident. He has indicated that he calls no witnesses to the accident itself. However, he has been unable to provide the names of such medical practitioners who treated him in the years following the accident for the simple reason that he cannot now remember who they were.

The defendant pursued the plaintiff for particulars of his claim over the years and first moved to strike the claim out in 1994. Before me, Mr Marsh for the defendant submitted that there is still no satisfactory explanation for the plaintiff's inaction at all relevant times.

I must say I agree. That is not to say no explanation has been proffered but it is certainly not one that I consider satisfactory in the circumstances.

However, Mr Marsh submits that, apart from the absence of satisfactory explanation for the delay, there is prejudice to his client arising from that delay if the matter is now to proceed, both on the question of liability and on the question of damages.

As to liability, the plaintiff made a statement to the defendant's insurers around the time of the accident which did not raise a significant matter upon which, it seems, he now relies, a matter which is apparent from the statement of claim itself and also from the history he gave to Dr John Alam whom he saw only in January this year. It seems that statements were also taken around the time of the accident from two employees of the defendant but those statements throw no light on precisely how it was the accident occurred.

In the light of the matters now relied upon by the plaintiff, Mr Marsh points out that those two witnesses, assuming they can now be located, are unlikely to have a sufficiently detailed memory to comment upon the manner in which the plaintiff's claim is now framed.

Mr Marsh acknowledged that the failing memory of witnesses is a common enough problem in all proceedings of this kind, given the delays that normally attend, but submitted that in this case the delay is much greater than usual through the fault of no-one but the plaintiff.

On the question of damages, Mr Marsh submitted that any evidence the plaintiff or members of his family might give about the sequelae of the accident in the years following it would be unable to be checked by the defendant because any medical practitioners he attended during that period cannot be identified.

There is considerable force in all of these submissions, I must say. On the other hand, the inconsistency between the plaintiff's statement to the insurers and the claim he now makes works very much to his disadvantage, should the matter proceed, and could reflect most adversely on his credit.
Likewise, he would suffer the disadvantage that any evidence he might call about his condition in the years following the accident cannot be verified by medical evidence. Put shortly, then, it seems to me that the evidentiary difficulty flowing from the delay bedevils the case for the plaintiff as much as that for the defendant.

The matter which influences me most strongly is that the claim, if made out, is a substantial one. From the one medical report which is before me, that of
Dr Alam, it is clear that the plaintiff was seriously injured. I am also influenced to some extent by the fact that it was not until eight years after a statement of claim was filed that the defendant took decisive action to bring the matter to a head by an application that the claim be struck out for want of prosecution. In a sense, it ill behoves the plaintiff to rely upon that fact but it is a matter legitimately raised.

For those short reasons I propose to make an order in terms of paragraph 1 of the plaintiff's motion, that is, that the orders of Master Greenwood of 18
June 1996 be set aside.

The plaintiff asks that the costs of his motion be costs in the cause but I can see no justification whatsoever for any order other than the plaintiff pay the costs of this motion.

The motion as filed also asks that the proceedings be transferred to the
District Court but, as it happens, I heard no argument on that matter one way or the other and it seems to me that is a matter appropriately dealt with in due course and a matter about which I will make no order.
 * * * 
