

Keefe versus Law Society of New South Wales Matter No Ca 40187/95 [1998] NSWSC (10 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 October 1998 
KEEFE versus LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
CA 40187/95 September 1998 
Priestley JA, Sheller JA, Powell JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: LEGAL SERVICES TRIBUNAL 
FILE NO/S: CA 40187/95; LPDT 17/94 
DELIVERED: THURSDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 26-27 MARCH 1998 
PARTIES: KEEFE versus LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
JUDGMENT OF: PRIESTLEY JA, SHELLER JA, POWELL JA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: J HASSON (SOL) 
Respondent: I WALES 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: LEITCH, HASSON & DENT 
Respondent: LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
CATCHWORDS [LEGAL PROFESSION ACT ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) -
PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT OF A SOLICITOR 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 84 
KEEFE versus THE LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES [LEGAL PROFESSION ACT 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) - PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT OF A SOLICITOR - the Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal, pursuant to a complaint filed by the Law Society of New South Wales, made findings of professional misconduct against the appellant including wilful breaches of [ss 61](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s61.html) and [62](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s62.html) of the [Legal Profession Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) - the Tribunal ordered the appellant's name to be removed from the Roll.

On appeal the appellant submitted: pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s61.html), there was no evidence justifying the Tribunal's finding that any breach had been wilful in the handling of trust account moneys; due to the comparatively minor nature of the particulars of the complaint, the solicitor should be allowed to practice under specific conditions preventing him from dealing with trust accounts.

Held: the Tribunal was right in concluding that the appellant did wilfully breach [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s61.html) and [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s62.html) and these breaches with the remaining complaints proved against the solicitor amounted to professional misconduct sufficiently serious to require his name to be removed from the roll; [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s61.html) operating with the relevant Regulation explains the appropriate procedures for solicitors to use when dealing with client's trust accounts; when a solicitor holds moneys of various clients in a trust account in which there is a deficiency, the beneficiaries become rateably entitled to the available funds: Hagan versus Waterhouse [(1991) 34 NSWLR 308] as per
Kearney J at 358-9 approved.

Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] 
Hagan versus Waterhouse [(1991) 34 NSWLR 308] 
Johns versus The Law Society [(1982) 2 NSWLR 1] 
Steward versus Strevens [(1976) 2 NSWLR 321] re Walter J. Schmidt & Co [(1923) 298 F 314] 
Meagher and Gummow, "Jacobs Law of Trusts in Australia", 6th Edition, 1997, pars 2711-2712 at pp 749-751 
D.A. McConville, "Tracing and the Rule in Clayton's Case" [(1963) 79 LQR ]

Legal Practitioners Act 1898; ss 41, 43B [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/); [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s61.html), [62](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s62.html), [68](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s68.html).
[135](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s135.html).
[171F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s171f.html)(4) 
Legal Profession (Trust Accounts and Controlled Money) Regulation 1988; cll 3, 
Workers Compensation Act; <case> 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

KEEFE versus THE LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: 
Introduction.

In April 1994 the Law Society of New South Wales filed a Complaint in the
Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal against Mr S.G. Keefe, solicitor, pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s135.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) (the
Act).

The grounds of complaint were that the solicitor: wilfully breached <case> of the Act; wilfully breached <case> of the Act; wilfully failed to comply with his clients' instructions; charged twice for the same work; breached an undertaking to the court; and breached an undertaking to another solicitor.

The complaint then requested that the solicitor's name be removed from the
Roll.

Further particulars of the complaint were given, divided in accordance with the six grounds of complaint. The particulars were given by reference to individual clients and were listed by capital letter. Those for ground 1 ran from A to X; for ground 2 were Y, Z and AA; for ground 3 were AB to AL; for ground 4, AM; for ground 5, AN; and for ground 6, AO.

The Tribunal published its reasons and orders on 23 March 1995. It found established all twenty-four particulars of ground 1, the three particulars of ground 2, six of the eleven particulars under ground 3 and each of the single particulars for grounds 4, 5 and 6. It made findings of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory conduct.

The Tribunal concluded that the evidence clearly disclosed that the solicitor was unfit to practise, that he should be prevented from so doing, and ordered that his name be removed from the Roll.

Section 171F(4) of the Act governed appeals to the Supreme Court at the time of the Tribunal hearing and decision. Such appeals were full de novo appeals.
The solicitor on 12 April 1995 filed notice of appeal. (The Act has since been modified so that appeals are pursuant to <case> of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/).) 
In his appeal the solicitor filed a number of affidavits amplifying the facts concerning some of the cases particularised against him. No objection was made to the admission of these affidavits as evidence and they were treated as read. Apart from these affidavits, no further evidence was sought to be put before the court.

Mr Hasson, the solicitor for the appellant, prepared written submissions in two parts, and supplemented these with oral submissions. Mr Wales, counsel for the Law Society, also filed written submissions and made oral submissions.

The first part of Mr Hasson's written submissions drew attention to what was said to be the comparatively minor nature of the matters particularised against the solicitor and asserted that no client had lost any money as a result of the various matters found against him by the Tribunal. Reference was also made to the level of support received by the solicitor in his troubles from his clients and the section of the legal profession in which he had mainly practised. These submissions, implicitly recognising the likelihood that findings of professional misconduct by the solicitor would stand, were seeking an order less than a striking off order which would permit the solicitor to practise as an employed solicitor and on conditions that prevented him having anything to do with trust accounts.

The second part of Mr Hasson's written submissions dealt with individual matters particularised against the solicitor. In regard to the Tribunal's findings of wilful breaches of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s61.html), a frequent submission was that there was no evidence justifying a finding by the
Tribunal that any breach had been wilful. There was no contest, at least in respect of the great majority of the particulars, about the fact that there had been a breach of the section; the submissions were directed to the "wilful" ingredient of the Tribunal's findings. Additionally, in regard to some of the particulars, more specific arguments were relied on.

The greater part of the time, both in the Tribunal and in this court, was spent on the [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s61.html) matters.
In regard to these, it is relevant at this stage to mention some history which helps both in explaining the form taken by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s61.html) and also throws light on the conduct of the solicitor.

Previous disciplinary proceedings; [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s41.html) old Act;
Section 61 of the Act.

The solicitor was admitted on 6 June 1969 and practised on his own account from 1978 almost entirely in the litigation of claims for compensation or damages for personal injuries. On 14 April 1987 the Solicitors Statutory
Committee found that the solicitor had in the handling of trust moneys of a number of clients been in wilful breach of <case> of the Legal Practitioners
Act 1898 (the old Act). Section 41 of the old Act was the predecessor of <case> of the Act, but was expressed in more general terms, as follows: "41.(1) All moneys received in New South Wales for or on behalf of any person by any solicitor shall be held by him exclusively for such person, to be paid to such person, or to be disbursed as he directs, and until so paid or disbursed the moneys shall be paid into a bank in New South Wales to a trust account, whether general or separate.

The moneys shall not be available for the payment of the debts of the solicitor to any other creditor of the solicitor or be liable to be attached or taken in execution under the order or process of any Court at the instance of any such other creditor.

Nothing in this section or in section 42A of this Act shall be construed to take away or affect any just claim or lien which any solicitor may have against or upon any of the moneys, and nothing in this section shall apply to moneys receivable by a solicitor for or on account of legal costs, whether already due or to accrue due." 
Other matters had been raised against the solicitor in the proceedings before the Statutory Committee, of which the Committee had been critical. However, the Committee was impressed by evidence before it that the solicitor was a responsible, caring and hard working solicitor, sincerely concerned to help people in need of help, and formed the view that he was an essentially honest person. The Committee also thought that his numerous breaches were the result of temporary aberration not dishonesty. The result was that although the
Committee regarded the solicitor's conduct as serious, the evidence before them satisfied them that the aberration had passed and his then current method of handling files and dealing with trust account matters was satisfactory. A fine of $10,000 was imposed.

The Law Society appealed, contending that the solicitor's conduct required that he be struck off. In reasons for judgment delivered 15 November 1989 the
Court of Appeal considered the serious aspects of the solicitor's conduct and found that in two cases that conduct was significantly more serious than found by the Statutory Committee. However the court concluded that it was not in a position to interfere with the favourable findings made by the Statutory
Committee regarding the solicitor. Then, after saying that there was no reason to believe that the solicitor would offend again, the court ordered that the appeal be dismissed upon the solicitor giving certain undertakings to the court. These were to the effect that for two years the solicitor would have his practice regularly inspected and reported on to the President of the Law
Society as the President required.

Many of the complaints against the solicitor of wilful breach of <case> were that immediately upon the receipt into his trust account of settlement or judgment moneys, the solicitor transferred into his general account amounts for costs and disbursements, without any authority from the client. The
Statutory Committee found some of these complaints established and some not.
Preparatory to considering the individual cases, the Statutory Committee had discussed, at a little length, the legal situation that arose under <case> in respect of transfers out of trust to a solicitor's general account for costs and disbursements. One particularly relevant passage was as follows: "The Solicitor contends that it was his standard practice to obtain his client's authority (usually oral) to deduct from awards and settlement monies the amount of his costs and that he never knowingly departed from that practice. Where such an authority has been given there cannot, of course, be any breach of Section 41(1); there is no requirement in the Section for writing. Moreover, an authority may well be implied in the circumstances of particular cases and such an implication is quite likely to be the case in the type of litigation matters involving recovery of monies from third parties in which the Solicitor was continually engaged. In all such cases of implication, again, there can be no breach of Section 41(1). So much was conceded by Mr
Taylor [Counsel for the Society].

Quite apart from the existence of express or implied authorities, it is at least arguable that a solicitor may deduct the amount of his costs from monies which he holds for a client in all cases where he has a particular lien over such monies. Section 41(3) makes it clear that nothing in Section 41 is `to take away or affect' any `lien' which the solicitor may have against `any of the monies'. Without defining `particular lien' precisely, it is sufficient to note for present purposes that it arises in all cases where a specific fund or asset is recovered in litigation by the efforts of a solicitor on behalf of his client and such a lien applies to such recovered fund or asset.

It is clear (and was conceded by Mr Taylor) that in all the cases particularised in Question 2, [breaches of <case>] the Solicitor has a particular lien in respect of monies placed to the credit of his trust account. What is in issue here is another question, namely whether the particular lien entitles the Solicitor without any further ado and, more especially, without obtaining any express authority from his client to do so and without rendering a bill to his client, to help himself to the amount of his costs by transferring such amount from his trust account to his general account.

Of course, if in a particular case a common law lien such as a particular lien is prohibited by a statute from being claimed or exercised, the particular lien, though expressly excluded by Section 41(3) from the operation of Section 41(1) ceases to be a lien which the solicitor may have `against or upon any of the monies' because the claiming of it is prohibited by statute.
Any necessary support for that conclusion is to be found in the decision of
Helsham J in Coshott versus Stevnajic (1984(2) NSWLR 632).

The question whether a solicitor having a particular lien can merely help himself out of recovered monies to the amount of what he regards as his entitlement to costs can only arise to the extent that Section 56(2) has no application to the recovered fund.

At first sight, it does appear as if this `self help' mechanism is available.
For example, Helsham J in Stewart versus Strevens (1976 <case> 321) says `and if the money in respect of which the lien is claimed is already in his hands the solicitor may retain thereout the amount of his costs and pay over the balance to his client'. In Johns versus The Law Society [(1982 (2) NSWLR 1)], Hope JA, after stating that a particular lien may be enforced, goes on to say, `if money is in his hands the solicitor may retain his costs out of the recovered money and pay the balance to his client'. The words used are so similar to those used by
Helsham J that it would appear likely that Hope JA (though he does not say so) is merely re-stating (and of course, in doing so imposing the Court of Appeal imprimatur on) what had previously been stated by Helsham J in Stewart v
Strevens. In neither case was the question of the legitimacy of the self-help mechanism in issue and both remarks are, accordingly, obiter: they are obviously attempts to state very briefly and compendiously and only by way of background explanation, the basic principles which were subsequently applied to the actual issues.

Having carefully considered Mr Taylor's submission based on the decision in
Watson versus Maskell <case>; [(131
ER 1297)] (with particular reference to the remarks at page 1298), Makinson versus The Minister (40 SR 97) (with particular reference to page 102) and the statement contained in Corderoy, 7th Edition at page 288, the Committee's view is that, before a solicitor can treat any part of a fund recovered for a client to which a particular lien will apply, as his property and, hence, to be able to justify the transfer of it as such from his trust, to his general account without any concurrence by his client, he must first have quantified the entitlement which he claims by the rendering of a bill to his client. It is not necessary for present purposes to decide whether the bill so rendered must, in addition, either be taxed or become no longer susceptible of taxation because of the expiration of the period within which a client may require taxation. The reason for this is that, although the Solicitor often rendered bills on his clients' matters to the respondent in the proceedings or other party liable to meet his clients' costs at or about the time he appropriated trust funds towards his costs, his normal practice (as the Solicitor admits and the
Committee finds) was not to render bills to the client at such time. It seems clear to the Committee from the authorities already referred to that, in the ultimate enforcement of the lien as against third parties, the Court will require the Solicitor's entitlement to his costs to be finally established.
Since the third party must be in the same position as the Solicitor's client, the Solicitor's entitlement as against the client must similarly be finally established. That cannot occur until after, at the earliest, the claim is quantified in a proper bill rendered to the client and probably not until after the bill has been confirmed by taxation or the time within which taxation may be required, has expired.

In considering the various cases particularised in Question 2, it follows that, even where the solicitor had a particular lien not rendered unenforceable by the operation of Section 56(2) there must be a breach of
Section 41(1) unless a bill was rendered to the client or there was an actual authority from the client, express or implied. The Committee also notes at this juncture that, having regard to its view as to the effect of Gosper's case on the interpretation of Section 56(2) of the Workers Compensation
Act, the Solicitor did have an enforceable lien in all the cases involving deduction of costs from a lump sum Section 15 award." 
In my respectful opinion what the Committee said in the last paragraph of the above passage correctly stated what solicitors needed to do to avoid breaches of <case>, that is, whether or not there was a particular lien over trust moneys, before moneys for costs and disbursements could be transferred from the trust account to the office account either a bill must have been rendered to the client, or the client must have given actual authority to the solicitor, either expressed or implied. The whole passage contains a useful discussion of the position as it then was, but I need to state a reservation about what is said about the particular as opposed to the general lien. Some paragraphs appear to go on the footing that not only would a solicitor, against the wishes of the client, be able to retain moneys over which the solicitor had a particular lien, but could also, to use the Committee's words, "help himself out of" the recovered moneys subject to the particular lien.
The Committee appears to have based this view on what Helsham J said in
Stewart versus Strevens [(1976) 2 NSWLR 321] and what
Hope JA said in Johns versus The Law Society [(1982) 2 NSWLR 1.] However, although Helsham J at 327 and 328 of Stewart makes some observations which may (they do not seem to me to be fully clear) support the Committee's view, he also referred at 327, to the fact that the lien could "be actively enforced by application to the Court"; and in Johns, Hope JA said (at 19), "In the case of money recovered by a solicitor for his client, the solicitor has a particular lien which he may enforce by application to the court. If the money is in his hands the solicitor may retain his costs out of the recovered money and pay the balance to his client." 
The need to apply to the court, which Hope JA stated without qualification, arguably makes the situation significantly more complicated than one where the solicitor is able, without more, to "help himself" out of a client's recovered moneys. However, the main point for present purposes is that, as I have already said, I respectfully agree with the result reached by the
Committee in the last paragraph.

By the time the Court of Appeal delivered judgment in the solicitor's case in
November 1989 the (new) Act had been in operation for some time. Sections 1 and 2 began to operate on 12 June 1987 and the rest on 1 January 1988. Section was clearly an attempt to put into a clear statutory form the position as it had been decided to be under the more generally expressed <case> of the old
Act. Section 61, as it came into force on 1 January 1988, and so far as relevant to the present case, was as follows: "61(1) If a solicitor, in the course of practising as a solicitor, receives money on behalf of another person, the solicitor shall - hold the money exclusively for the other person; and ensure that subsection (2) and the regulations are complied with in relation to the money.

Money received on behalf of another person by a solicitor, in the course of practising as a solicitor - shall, except where the person on whose behalf the money is received otherwise directs, be paid, within the prescribed time, to the credit of a general trust account at a bank in New South Wales and be held in accordance with such regulations as may be in force in relation to trust money; shall, where the person on whose behalf the money is received directs that it be paid otherwise than to the credit of a general trust account and the money is to be held under the direct or indirect control of the solicitor for less than the prescribed period, be paid as directed; or shall, in the case of money referred to in paragraph (b) that is to be held for the prescribed period or a longer period, be paid as directed and held in accordance with such regulations as may be in force in relation to controlled money, and, in any case, shall be disbursed as directed by the person on whose behalf it is held.

This section does not operate - ...
 to prevent a solicitor from withdrawing or receiving, from trust money or controlled money - reimbursement for disbursements paid by the solicitor; or money for disbursements to be paid by the solicitor; or money due, or to accrue due, to the solicitor for costs, if the prescribed procedure is followed; to affect any enforceable lien or claim that a solicitor has to any money; or to prevent a solicitor from exercising a general retaining lien for unpaid costs and disbursements in respect of money in a trust account or a controlled money account (other than money received subject to an express direction by the client with respect to the purposes for which the money is to be applied), but only for an amount equal to the sum of the costs and disbursements unpaid, and only where the solicitor has delivered to the client on whose behalf the money is held an outline bill of costs and disbursements; or ...

Money received by a solicitor on behalf of another person is not - available for payment to a creditor of the solicitor; or liable to be taken in execution of an order or process of a court at the instance of a creditor of the solicitor, unless the creditor is the person on whose behalf the money is held by the solicitor.
 ...
 ...

A wilful contravention of subsection (1) is professional misconduct.

In this section - `Controlled money' [this is not relevant in the present case] `trust money' means money required to be dealt with in accordance with subsection 2(a)." 
Pursuant to the Act a Regulation called the Legal Profession (Trust Accounts and Controlled Money) Regulation 1988 was made which commenced on 1 April
Clause 8 of the Regulation required a solicitor to comply with the clause in respect of all money to which <case>(b) applied.

Clause 8(2) required a solicitor on receipt or as soon as practicable thereafter of money from which the solicitor was authorised to receive costs or disbursements, to deliver to the client an outline bill unless a bill or account of the costs or disbursements had been delivered to the client before the solicitor received the money. An outline bill was defined in cl 3(1) as "a statement in writing sufficient to identify the general nature of professional work or services, whether performed or to be performed, and the amount and purpose of any disbursement." 
Clause 8(3) said: "A solicitor shall not withdraw trust money or controlled money in satisfaction of any costs or disbursements unless - the person for whom the money is held has authorised the withdrawal and the solicitor has delivered to the person an outline bill; the solicitor has delivered to the person an outline bill together with a notice that, unless the person objects, the solicitor intends to withdraw the money and apply it towards payment of the bill at the expiration of 1 month, and the month has expired without any objection being made; or the solicitor, having received from the person an objection to an outline bill delivered under paragraph (b), has served on the person a bill of costs, or an account, in a form which would enable it to be taxed under the provisions of an applicable Act, rule or regulation and the person has not, within the time limited by the provisions, applied for taxation of the bill or account." 
Section 61 and the Regulation brought into operation a regime which explicitly told solicitors what they must do before they could withdraw trust money from a trust account for costs or disbursements. In substance, this regime was very similar to that described in the last paragraph of the passage earlier set out from the Statutory Committee's reasons in the solicitor's case in 1987. The solicitor's practice of transferring money from trust to his general account without first rendering a written bill to the client was forbidden under both regimes, with the qualification in respect of <case> of the old Act, that even without a bill, there would be no breach if there was express or implied actual authority from the client. Cases in the Statutory Committee had, however, shown that in litigious matters it could be difficult to show proper authority because it was hard for a solicitor to show, in the absence of some written statement of the precise amount of the costs, just what figure he was owed for costs at the time he transferred moneys from trust to office or general account. Under the new regime the possibility of a proper withdrawal of trust money for costs or disbursements without a bill first having been rendered, on the basis of express or implied actual authority, was removed by cl 8(3)(a) of the Regulation.

The 1988 Regulation was amended in a minor and presently irrelevant way in ; then it was replaced by the 1994 Regulation, but all of the facts concerning this case had preceded that Regulation.

Appointment of Receiver: Complaint lodged.

Miss J. Sayer was appointed Receiver on 18 December 1992 of all property held by the solicitor. He then ceased to practise. A sequestration order was made against his estate on 24 February 1993.

Miss Sayer took a trial balance of the solicitor's trust account as at 18
December 1992, the accuracy of which has not been in dispute. That trial balance contained the following information, (I have restricted the identification of clients to their initials):
MS 3. 9.90 $ 120.00
JJ 5. 9.91 $ 330.00
GD 18.12.91 $ 274.00
AH 7. 5.92 $ 130.00
DV 1. 6.92 $ 8.00
AG 9. 7. 92 $ 840.80
VP 23. 7.92 $ 180.00 [8. NH 28.] 7.92 $ .00 [9. MR 6.10.92] $ 190.00 [10. AK 8.10.92] $2,457.00 [11. WB 13.10.92](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=11%20WB%20131092 "View LawCiteRecord" ) $ 8.00 [12. HA 14.10.92] $ 500.00
GS 15.10.92 $ 440.00
MS 31.10.92 $ 203.00 $ 5,800.80 
Balance as per bank statement $2,274.30 
Deficiency $3,526.50 
Miss Sayer then prepared three reports, which became exhibits before the
Tribunal, setting out facts she had gathered, mainly from the solicitor's files, concerning the way he had dealt with the moneys of a number of clients.
The Law Society's Complaint was based on these reports.

As earlier mentioned there were six grounds of complaint. I now come to the individual cases under Ground 1.

Ground 1: Wilful breaches of <case>.

Complaint A - Grapsas. The particulars of the complaint were that as at 9
July 1992 the solicitor held $840.80 in trust for Mrs Grapsas and that by reason of shortfall in the solicitor's trust account that amount was unavailable for payment to Mrs Grapsas or in accordance with her instructions.
(She is AG in the trust trial balance figures.) 
In its reasons the Tribunal said "As a result of the short-fall in the trust account the amount of $840.0 was unavailable for payment to the client or to be paid in accordance with her instructions".

On this footing the Tribunal found the solicitor guilty of a wilful breach of s 61.

In the appeal the point made on behalf of the solicitor was that there was no evidence before the Tribunal justifying the finding that the breach of <case> was wilful. The fact that there was a breach was not disputed.

For the solicitor it was submitted that for the finding of wilfulness to be made, there needed to be some material before the Tribunal showing either that the solicitor had been conscious of what he had done or had acted with reckless carelessness. The submission was that there was no material on which any such finding could be made.

In my opinion, there was ample material before the Tribunal upon which it could be comfortably satisfied, to the standard required by Briginshaw v
Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] if necessary, that the solicitor was fully aware of the state of his trust account at all relevant times and that it was by actions of which he was conscious and for which he was responsible that it had got into the state in which it was. To the extent that that state manifested breaches of s , those breaches must in my opinion be regarded as wilful.

A point of some importance however was not taken before this court, and was not noticed by the court in the course of argument. It is probably not material in the case of the client Grapsas, but in the case of some other clients could be a very practical matter. It also throws light on the extent to which a single breach of trust committed by reference to one client may affect all who have moneys held in a solicitor's trust account.

The point arises this way. At the date of the alleged breach there was $2,274.30 in the solicitor's trust account, sufficient to pay Mrs Grapsas had she then called for it. Does that mean that the solicitor was not in breach of trust in regard to her? He was clearly in breach in regard to AK, for example, because the amount held on trust for that client was greater than the amount remaining in the solicitor's trust account.

A question arises, on facts such as the present, whether the beneficiaries (the clients) entitled to the trust moneys in a trustee's (solicitor's) possession, when those trust moneys are less than the total due to all those beneficiaries, become rateably entitled to the available funds, or whether the shortfall should be allocated on a first in, first out basis.

If the latter position is the correct one, then in the present case, if the dates listed in the trial balance set out above were the actual dates of deposit of each amount, Mrs Grapsas's money would be part of the $3,526.50 which had wrongly gone from the trust account and the solicitor was in breach of trust in regard to her.

If the former (rateable) view is correct, then also there is no doubt the solicitor was in breach of trust in respect to her.

The point was the subject of academic consideration by D.A. McConville in [1963 (79 LQR 388)] in an article entitled "Tracing and the Rule in Clayton's
Case". At pp 403 and following the author advances powerful arguments for the rateable solution. The same view is taken in the 6th edition (by Meagher and
Gummow) of Jacob's Law of Trusts in Australia, 1997, in pars 2711 and 2712, at pp 749-751. At the level of legal precedent, the same view was adopted by
Kearney J in Hagan versus Waterhouse [(1991) 34 NSWLR 308] at 358-9.
His decision should, in my opinion, be approved by this court. (The application of the rateable approach can itself be subject to complication depending on the timing of deposits to and wrongful withdrawals from a trust account in which the funds of different beneficiaries are held, as was pointed out by Learned Hand J in re Walter J. Schmidt & Co [(1923) 298 F .]
That does not however detract from the soundness of its application in straightforward situations.) 
On the rateable approach, once the amount to the credit of the solicitor's trust account became less than it should have been, he was in breach of trust to all fourteen clients for whom funds were held in it.

Thus, in Mrs Grapsas's case, assuming the correctness of the dates of deposit in the trust trial balance figures, on the rateable approach, part of the amount held by the solicitor on trust for Mrs Grapsas was paid away otherwise than in accordance with <case>, or, if the rateable approach be not correct, the whole of it was.

Complaint B - Swain. The particulars of this complaint were that the solicitor deposited a personal cheque received from the client Mr Swain in his trust account on 25 November 1992; on the same day he transferred $2,000 from his trust account to a general account; and Mr Swain's cheque was dishonoured on 30 November 1992.

The Tribunal found those facts proved and further found that the solicitor did not reimburse his trust account upon learning of the dishonour of the cheque, thus bringing about the greater part of the shortfall in the trust account shown by the trust trial balance of 18 December 1992. The Tribunal rightly rejected the solicitor's proffered explanation that it was for the client to "put the money back in" and commented that this conduct of the solicitor clearly demonstrated his failure to fulfil his obligations as a solicitor to his trust account.

The Tribunal found the solicitor guilty of a wilful breach of <case>.

On the appeal it was submitted for the solicitor that he had believed the cheque would be paid; further, that as it was for fees already rendered it should not have been deposited in the trust account at all; this was said to support the view that there was no evidence to show that what the solicitor did was wilful as distinct simply from oversight in failure to reverse the entry.

The submissions seems to me to miss the main point. The solicitor paid $2,000 from his trust account to his general account which was not yet there to be transferred, even if there were authority to transfer it. It was quite reckless of the solicitor to pay money out of the trust account before it arrived there. It could not be disputed that he knew the client's cheque had not been cleared when he caused an amount equal to what he hoped would be its proceeds to be paid out of the other clients' moneys in his trust account into his own general account.

In my view the solicitor was in wilful breach of <case>.

Complaint C - Kabalan. There were three separate particulars of breaches of s 61 in regard to this client, the second of which was that on 16 June 1989 the solicitor caused a cheque to be drawn from the trust account in favour of his firm in the sum of $582.53, no statement of account in respect of these moneys having been provided to the client.

The Tribunal found those facts proved. The Tribunal noted the solicitor's explanation for appropriating the $583.63 was that it "may have been on account of $750 my client owed me re personal loan". The Tribunal further noted that the solicitor had lent the client $750 but that it had been repaid on 21 December 1988. The Tribunal found the solicitor guilty of a wilful breach of <case>.

It was submitted for the solicitor in the appeal that he had paid out a litigation loan which was the responsibility of the client in an amount greater than that ultimately transferred, the $583.63. This defence fails on two grounds: first, even if correct, the solicitor was still in breach of s ; and second, there does not appear to be any basis in the facts for the proposition that the solicitor paid out the litigation loan from his own moneys; he appears to have used, properly, the client's money for the purpose.

Counsel for the Law Society, in the appeal, asked the court to go ahead and make findings against the solicitor in respect of the other two particulars filed against this particular client, even although the Tribunal had not done so. In view of my eventual conclusion that the order by the Tribunal that the solicitor's name be removed from the Roll, substantially for the reasons stated by the Tribunal, should not be disturbed, I do not see any need to deal with the particulars not dealt with by the Tribunal.

Complaint D - Karavas (also called Karavokiros). There were three separate particulars relating to this client (who was the AK in the trust trial balance figures earlier set out).

The first particular was that on 20 November 1992 the solicitor drew a cheque in favour of the client in the sum of $8,007 when there was no money to that client's credit in the trust account; nor were the funds in the trust account sufficient to meet the cheque, which resulted in its being dishonoured.

The second was that on 17 December 1992 a trust account cheque was drawn in the sum of $2,457 then standing to the client's credit in that account, payable to the client when there were insufficient funds in the trust account to cover the cheque. The cheque was dishonoured.

The third was that the solicitor withdrew three separate amounts totalling $5,360 from the trust account funds for the purpose of paying disbursements and did not pay the disbursements.

The Tribunal found the allegations proved and that they involved wilful breaches of <case>.

For the solicitor in the appeal it was not submitted that the findings were wrong but attention was drawn to the difficulties the solicitor was having at the time of the breaches.

There is no reason for disturbing the findings of the Tribunal or for coming to any different conclusions from those of the Tribunal.

Complaint E - Rachid. The particulars of the alleged <case> breach were that as at 27 November 1992 there was a balance of $190 in favour of the client in the trust ledger account (he was MR in the trust trial balance set out above) and, by reason of the shortfall in the trust account there were no moneys held covering the balance.

There was no denial of the facts concerning the balance of $190 in the client's favour. The Tribunal seems to have assumed that because of the shortfall in the solicitor's trust account the amount to Mr Rachid's credit could not be paid to him. This raises the "rateable" question previously discussed. In this case, prima facie at least, (that is, assuming that the dates given in the trust trial balance are the dates the various amounts were credited to the account) if the eight amounts credited to the account previous to that credited to Mr Rachid's account were treated as withdrawn first, they did not exhaust the balance remaining in the solicitor's trust account.
Approximately $202 would be left. On the view I favour, as earlier indicated, there was nevertheless an undoubted breach of trust in regard to Mr Rachid's trust moneys.

Complaint F - Reda. The particulars of this complaint were as follows: "(i) On 19 December 1990, the solicitor received $2,000 from Mr Reda for the purpose of commencing common law proceedings.

On 19 December 1990, the solicitor, having deposited the $2,000 in trust, drew out all of that amount by cheque which was deposited to his general account.

No common law proceedings were commenced.

On or about 1 October 1992, the solicitor settled Mr Reda's workers compensation claim upon terms which, inter alia, required the solicitor to refund the $2,000 to Mr Reda. The sum was never repaid.

On or about 16 November 1992, the solicitor received $6,503 from the GIO by way of agreed costs and disbursements in workers' compensation proceedings.

The solicitor on the same day withdrew this entire amount from trust and paid it into his general account. No bill had been given to Mr Reda to justify this withdrawal.

Certain disbursements which form part of the agreed costs and disbursements have not been paid. They are:- 
Counsel's fees: $1,186 
Interpreter's fees: $ 250 
Dr Maniam - report fees: $ 350 
Dr Lindray - report fees $ 250." 
The solicitor acted for this client in a workers compensation claim for a 1989 injury for which he was awarded compensation, pursuant to <case> of the Workers
Compensation Act, in the sum of $17,892. The client collected a cheque for this amount from the Government Insurance Office on 18 December 1990.

The solicitor wrote a letter dated the following day to the client noting the receipt by the client of the award moneys and continuing: "We confirm that we are issuing Common Law proceedings in the Supreme Court claiming damages arising out of the accident.

We enclose herewith our interim statement of costs in the Common Law proceedings (Not workers compensation.) We would be pleased to receive your cheque in this amount." 
The enclosed interim statement of costs was for "professional costs of acting for you in Common Law proceedings since 3rd
June, 1989 including taking original instructions, obtaining medical reports, advisings, and including cost of matter not specifically referred to say:- $2,000." 
Miss Sayer's first report recorded that the client on 19 December 1990 gave what appears to have been his personal cheque for $2,000 to the solicitor who on the same day credited it to his trust account. The solicitor, also on 19
December 1990, transferred $2,000 to his general account. The client's cheque would not have been cleared when the cheque representing the debited amount of $2,000 was drawn and banked by the solicitor.

Miss Sayer's report had also said that it seemed the client attended the GIO and gave that office the receipt issued to him by the solicitor for the $2,000.

By letter dated 20 December 1990 the GIO wrote to the solicitor concerning the workers compensation claim and the costs and disbursements paid to the solicitor, asking him to advise how they were made up so reimbursement could be made to the client. By letter dated 14 February 1991 the solicitor informed the GIO that the $2,000 had been received by him from the client in respect of the common law claim. At some stage he separately submitted a statement of his costs to the GIO totalling $2,350 in respect of the settled workers compensation claim and received on 15 March 1991 $2,100 for those costs which he had by then agreed with the GIO.

The client's trust ledger account shows a credit of $2,000 as at 19 December and a debit in the same amount on the same day from a transfer to the solicitor's general account.

A further aspect of the workers compensation claim was pursued and settled on October 1992. The client signed an authority/instruction to settle dated 1
October 1992 acknowledging that the settlement included past and future weekly compensation, past and future medical and hospital expenses, pain and suffering and percentage loss of hand. This document ended with the client saying he understood he would receive refund of $2,000 from the solicitor paid on account of proposed common law claim.

The solicitor then sent a statement of costs for the newly settled workers compensation claim, dated 2 October 1992, to the solicitors for the GIO. The costs were later agreed at profit costs $4,000 and disbursements of $2,503.
The client's trust ledger account shows a credit of $6,503 as at 16 November and a debit in the same amount on the same day from a transfer to the solicitor's general account.

There was nothing in the solicitor's papers to indicate that a statement of claim was ever filed in respect of the common law claim.

The solicitor did not refund the sum of $2,000 to Mr Reda. Disbursements within the sum of $2,503 received by the solicitor within the overall sum of $6,503 from the GIO being fees due to counsel $1,186, fees due to interpreter $250, and report fees to two doctors of $350 and $250 were not paid.

The solicitor submitted both before the Tribunal and in this court that <case> of the Workers Compensation Act had the effect that the costs payable by the respondent employer as a result of the settlement were the solicitor's costs and not the client's costs so that the moneys received by the solicitor were held not on behalf of the client but belonged to the solicitor who therefore had no obligation to account for them; they were not within <case>.

This argument derives from the provision in <case> that a solicitor is not entitled to recover from a client "any costs in respect of any proceedings under this Act". However, it was not suggested on behalf of the solicitor that the order for costs in this client's case was not the usual order which is that the respondent pay the applicant's costs. From the form of such an order it follows that a cheque sent by the respondent to the applicant's solicitor for the agreed costs discharges an obligation of the respondent to the applicant, not to the solicitor. From this it follows that the moneys received by the solicitor are not the solicitor's own moneys but must be held on behalf of the solicitor's client, in compliance with <case>.

Another matter relied on for the solicitor both before the Tribunal and in this court was that there was evidence in the proceedings that neither the counsel nor one of the doctors whose fees went unpaid by the solicitor regarded the solicitor as being in default to them. The doctor said that he had an arrangement with the solicitor under which he would wait for payment until after settlement of particular cases. Counsel said that he had been prepared to help the solicitor trade out of his difficulties and that he would not expect any claim by him on fees to constitute misconduct by the solicitor.
However, there was no evidence from either of these professionals of knowledge at any relevant time that the solicitor had actually received moneys on account of disbursements already due to them. There can be no doubt of the solicitor's duty to pay them immediately upon receipt of the client's money for the purpose of paying them. Even if, subsequent to the solicitor's breach of his immediate duty to pay, the persons entitled to payment were prepared to forego that entitlement, such willingness cannot retrospectively affect the already committed breach by the solicitor.

The solicitor also sought to rely on what he apparently regarded as similar arrangements with other service providers to those for which there was the specific evidence of the counsel and the doctor just referred to. No details were given of these arrangements, but the same observations would apply to them also; it was not for the solicitor to bargain with service providers about the disposition of moneys which he was bound to pay on behalf of clients. Fuller details of the solicitor's description of these arrangements are given later (see pp 47-54).

The Tribunals' finding was that the solicitor was guilty of a wilful breach of s 61 in that he transferred from his trust account the workers compensation costs and disbursements to his general account and then failed to pay disbursements totalling $1,820. In my opinion, the facts and circumstances which I have set out justified this finding, and in the appeal I come to the same conclusion.

Complaint G - Pappas. The further particulars here were that the solicitor acted for an infant, the claim was settled upon terms which included an undertaking to the court by the solicitor to pay $1,087 to a doctor and that although put in funds for that purpose the solicitor did not pay the doctor.

The Tribunal said: "It is clear from an examination of the trust account records that this sum of $1,087 was transferred to the Solicitor's general account as part of his costs." 
The foregoing facts were not disputed and the Tribunal found a wilful breach of <case>.

The only argument raised against the Tribunal's conclusion is that there was no material upon which the finding of wilfulness could be made. The solicitor himself said that he had no memory of the particular matter and that it was "obviously a mistake".

In my view, in the circumstances of the conduct of his one man practice by the solicitor, in which he signed all trust account cheques, the transfer of the amount from trust to general is evidence that the solicitor intended to do what he did from which the Tribunal was entitled to infer that his action was deliberate.

Apparently not mentioned before the Tribunal, and not dealt with either in the argument in these appeal proceedings, was the fact that these events took place in 1983. They were therefore subject to the regime of <case> of the old
Act, earlier set out and discussed. In my view the facts found by the Tribunal established a breach of the earlier regime, amounting to professional misconduct, which the Tribunal was entitled to take into account in deciding what order should be made in the proceedings before it. It is also a matter which in my opinion this court should take into account in considering the result of the appeal.

Complaint H - Figueroa. Two separate matters were particularised of this complaint. The first was that on or about 17 September 1987 the solicitor from settlement moneys received caused himself to be paid $1,892 on account of costs and disbursements. No bill had been sent to the client in respect of these moneys.

The other matter particularised was that the solicitor held funds for the purpose of paying amounts to three doctors totalling $305 in all which he did not pay and which on or about 16 June 1989 he caused to be paid to himself out of the trust account, no bill having been sent justifying the payment.

The solicitor did not dispute these facts before the Tribunal but offered explanations which, even if believed, were not exculpatory. The Tribunal's reasons do not make it clear whether or not the solicitor's explanations were believed.

In the regard to the first matter particularised, Miss Sayer had said in her report that when she examined the Figueroa file she found in it an original letter dated 17 September 1987 addressed to Mr Figueroa at a post office box number in Drummoyne with which there was a statement of account. The statement, headed "Settlement Statement" showed the receipt of $12,000 settlement moneys from which were subtracted a number of disbursements and the solicitor's costs and disbursements, all totalling $2,632 and concluding with the entry "cheque herewith $9,368". This was dated 1 September. The covering letter in the file dated 17 September 1987 said that it enclosed the settlement statement. It also confirmed that a cheque of $9,368 had been forwarded to the National Bank of Australia by registered mail to be deposited into a numbered account. Miss Sayer has said in her report that the original statement and the original covering letter being still in the file had obviously not been sent.

In his oral evidence before the Tribunal the solicitor first said he had a recollection that the client had gone overseas before he sent the letter and statement; a little later, in the further course of his evidence, after reading the statement and letter he contended, apparently from the reading of the two documents and nothing else, that the client got the letter.

It seems to me that the clear conclusion to be drawn from the facts before the
Tribunal was that the solicitor had calculated how much would be owing to the client from the settlement and at the client's request had caused a cheque for that amount to be sent to his bank account. This fits in with the settlement statement having been prepared apparently on 1 September 1987. However, the fact that the original settlement statement with the original letter dated 17
September remained in the file leads directly to the inference that they were not sent, presumably on the basis there was no point in sending them to a man who was overseas. Whatever the full explanation may be, it seems to me that the materials before the Tribunal and this court justify the conclusion, which
I reach myself, that no bill was sent.

It is not clear from the Tribunal's reasons whether there was a finding that the transfer of the $1,892 to his own account was a wilful breach of <case> by the solicitor. This by itself would cause me to hesitate before taking this matter into account in deciding what the result should be in this appeal. A further problem leads me to the definite view that the matter should be left out of account. This is that this part of the complaint is an old Act <case> case occurring some three and a half months before the new <case> came into operation. The fact that it was treated as a <case> case meant that the Tribunal did not give consideration to the possibility that notwithstanding the non sending of the bill, there had been actual authority, whether express or implied, given by the client to the solicitor to transfer the amount that he did.

I will therefore treat the Tribunal's findings as having been confined to the amounts totalling $305 not paid to the three doctors which I deal with now.
The solicitor's explanation in respect of the $305 paid into his own account from the trust account was that he had been advised by a reputable accountant that it was permissible to treat small amounts of unclaimed moneys in this way.

It is (barely) possible to understand such a practice being adopted, if, for example, because of lost records, (i) nothing could be decided definitely about such sums, and (ii) there was some reason for thinking they might represent untransferred costs or disbursements. Even then, such an approach would in my opinion be unacceptable. In this court in the written submissions for the solicitor it was said that the transfer of such moneys as were transferred here "is the usual practice when surplus moneys were found in the trust account some years after the event". It is not clear whether this submission was intended to convey that the practice was supportable. I think probably the better reading of the written submission is that the practice was not being suggested to be a proper one but was mentioned to give a foundation for the next submission, which I take to have been that the solicitor, having bona fide adopted the practice, the particular breach of trust was careless but not intentional nor reckless.

In my opinion it is extremely reckless to treat money in a trust account, which is by that very fact prima facie somebody else's money, as your own money, even if the amounts are small and make the accounting look untidy, when you are unable to prove that the money is yours. Section 68 of the Act (which reproduced <case> of the old Act) provided the appropriate method of dealing with unclaimed moneys in the trust account.

Putting the matter in lay terms, the money was either the doctor's money or the client's money. It most certainly was not the solicitor's money.

The submissions for the solicitor reminded the court that a finding of the kind which I think needs to be made against the solicitor here should only be made after proper consideration is given to the rules laid down in Briginshaw v Briginshaw. Bearing the requirements of that decision in mind, I am comfortably satisfied in reaching the conclusion that the solicitor was reckless in his disregard of his obvious non ownership of this money in putting it into his own account.

Complaint I - Jerabek (Joan). The particulars given of this complaint are simply that the solicitor drew from his trust account on account of his own costs amounts which exceeded $3,113, the amount of his bill of costs of 5
September 1991.

The written submissions for the solicitor concerning this complaint are intermingled with those concerning the complaint relevant to the client Mr
Figueroa and I have found it difficult to be clear what the submission is in the appeal.

Evidence before the Tribunal included a statutory declaration from the client dealing with matters other than the particulars of complaint I, in which the client said that she had always found the solicitor to be honest and that she was very pleased with the way he handled her case.

Nothing in any of the materials detracts from the fact that what is alleged in the particulars is correct. There was therefore a breach of <case>, which in the circumstances was at least reckless.

However, when the facts of the matter were looked into further in the argument in this court it appeared that the amount transferred by the solicitor in
September in excess of what he was entitled to, was restored during the following October. Counsel for the Law Society agreed that it seemed to be the position that at the end of the day (the interval was of the order of a month) the client was not out of pocket. Counsel of course maintained that the breach even although it lasted only a month was a serious one. It seems plain nevertheless that the case is less serious than if, for example, the money had not been repaid; this needs to be kept in mind in considering what orders should be made in response to the Law Society's complaint.

Complaint J - Giddins. Two matters were particularised in respect of this client. In order of date, one was that in anticipation of the receipt of a litigation loan from Westpac (of which $1,390 was deposited in the trust account on 17 July 1987) the solicitor drew $1500 as costs on 15 July 1987 resulting in a debit balance in the trust account. The other matter was that on 13 December 1990 the solicitor drew from his trust account an amount of $5,000 on account of costs and disbursements no bill having been sent to the client.

In regard to the first matter the Tribunal found that the facts were as particularised and showed a wilful breach of <case>. The conclusion was substantially correct, subject to noting that, because of the date, the finding should have been guilty of a wilful breach of <case> of the old Act.

The breach, though wilful, would not, standing by itself, be regarded as serious; however, it does not stand alone, and indicates the solicitor's attitude to his trust account obligations. In the statutory declaration which he made about this item he said: "It is not my fault there was a minor delay in transferring the money into the trust account". He does not seem to have appreciated that, although it was for only two days, he took somebody else's money to use as his own for that short period, and further, that the moneys from the litigation loan did not fully make up the amount he had taken. (The difference between the $1,500 Westpac was lending and the $1,390 which went into the trust account was the fee of $110 which Westpac took from the loan moneys before advancing them.) 
The particularised facts in the later matter were also established subject to the question of the bill having been sent to the client. Miss Sayer had found an original bill in the file. The solicitor sought to explain this in cross- examination: "Q. How do you explain the existence of the original statement of costs in your file? 
A. Again, we discussed that in the other matters. If there is an original in the file, I see that as of no significance whatsoever. What I mean by that is this, and perhaps I might clear all this up in one foul swoop: in the majority of cases the clients would come into the office to collect the cheques because most of them didn't want me to send it out by registered mail - and this is a general proposition; I can't give you chapter and verse for everybody.

They would come in and I would give them the cheque for the amount of money and say `There is the bill'. A lot of people don't want it, for reasons best known to themselves. I presume they don't want to clutter themselves up with paperwork. The money is the most important thing. Again, I can't remember specifically in this instance. They would come in and I would give them the cheque and they would sign for receipt of the cheque and that was that. If they didn't actually want the bill then I suppose it was just left sitting in the file.

Q, But you have no recollection of that happening? 
A. No, no. I'm just saying it as a general proposition because it is referred to by Jean Sayer on many occasions." 
In the Tribunal's reasons this was said: "...the Solicitor maintains that he must have shown this to the client. The
Tribunal does not believe that the Solicitor did show this bill to the client ..." 
A finding of wilful breach of <case> then followed. In view of the Tribunal's non acceptance of the solicitor's assertion concerning the showing of this bill to the client, I come to the same conclusion as the Tribunal; the solicitor was guilty of a wilful breach of <case>.

Complaint K - Kane. The particulars of this complaint were that on or about March 1992 at a time when the solicitor was no longer retained by a former client, Mr Kane, the GIO sent to the solicitor a cheque in the sum of $640 payable to Mr Kane which, on 1 April 1992 the solicitor deposited in his trust account upon which he then drew a cheque in the same amount which was deposited to his general account on account of common law costs, the solicitor having given no bill to the client and having no instructions permitting him to draw the moneys from the trust.

The Tribunal found these matters proved and that there had been a wilful breach of <case>.

No submissions to the contrary were made on the solicitor's behalf in the appeal. However, as this particular matter is relevant to the ultimate decision of what orders should be made in respect of the solicitor I will give some of its details.

The solicitor had been acting for the client in workers compensation proceedings when, in February 1991, while the solicitor was not in his office, the client went to the office and removed his file, behaving, as the solicitor believed, rudely to his staff and upsetting them. The client went to another solicitor who, according to the solicitor, undertook to pay any outstanding fees and costs. The new solicitors took the matter to completion but did nothing about seeing to payment of the solicitor's outstanding fees and costs.
No bill had been sent for these. The solicitor was angry about what the client had done, and about the matter generally. Because of this, the solicitor took matters into his own hands by making the money the GIO had sent to his former client his own. It was in fact the GIO's money as was starkly demonstrated by the fact that the GIO later took proceedings against the solicitor and obtained default judgment against him for the $640.

When cross-examined about this incident before the Tribunal, the solicitor gave some very revealing answers: "Q. When you received that cheque, you saw it was a cheque payable to Mr
Kane? 
A. I see that, yes.

Q. You saw it was a cheque from the GIO for travel expenses? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. You understood that, in all likelihood, the GIO was discharging an obligation to Mr Kane by that cheque? 
A. Yes.

Q. So that until Mr Kane was paid by the GIO, that obligation on its part persisted? 
A. Sorry, I just lost that.

Q. You understood that until the GIO paid Mr Kane, the obligation that the cheque was designed to discharge remained on foot? 
A. Sorry, I don't know what you mean by that.

CHAIRMAN: Q. The GIO still had a liability to Mr Kane until he received the cheque and banked it; that is what Mr Wales is putting to you.

A. It was a cheque for Mr Kane's travelling expenses, I have acknowledged that.

Q. Mr Wales is asking you did you understand that until Mr Kane received that cheque, the GIO still had an obligation to him to pay him for those travelling expenses? 
A. I'm sorry. Yes. Excuse me.

Q. You understand that? 
A. Yes.

MR WALES: Q. You understood that? 
A. Yes. I'm sorry.

Q. When you paid that cheque into your trust account, you were not just taking Mr Kane's money, you were taking the GIO's money? 
A. I realise that this second. I hadn't considered that before.

Q. That had not occurred to you before? 
A. No, it hadn't, not until this moment." 
This incident, as well as involving an uncontested and wilful breach of <case>, reflects badly on the solicitor's judgment and shows a lack of understanding of very basic ideas of ownership of and entitlement to money.

Complaint L - Jerebek (Emanuel). I find the position on this matter obscure and will try to explain why. The particulars alleged that an amount of $3,200 representing an amount due to Dr Ireland for treatment expenses was received by the solicitor from the Work Cover Authority on or about 13 October 1991, and that on that day the solicitor deposited the cheque into his general account. It was then said that the solicitor did not pay the amount of $3,200 to Dr Ireland until 29 September 1992.

A separate particular was that two doctors' fees for which the solicitors was put in funds were transferred to his general account. Miss Sayer's report supported the particulars. It contained the additional information that the solicitor had acted for the client in respect of a workers compensation claim determined on 2 August 1991. The formal award determining the matter was annexed to her report. It was noted in that award that the respondents (the employer and Work Cover Authority) agreed to pay the applicant the sum of $3,200 in respect of hospital and medical expenses upon production of accounts or receipts. The solicitor's general ledger card was also annexed and showed that the sum of $3,200 was received and deposited to the general account on 13
October 1991. Miss Sayer's narrative continued that fees of $3,293 were due to
Dr Ireland. This seems to have been deduced from the solicitor's file note dated 31 August 1991 which had an entry, "Dr Ireland's account", then two figures, the first $2936 for hospital, the second $357 for three consultations, totalling $3293. The narrative continued that the fees due to
Dr Ireland were not paid until 29 September 1992 when Mr Keefe forwarded a cheque drawn on his general account for that sum. This statement was based on a copy letter in the file from the solicitor to Dr Ireland enclosing a cheque in that amount for "outstanding medical fees".

The solicitor did not deal with this complaint by way of statutory declaration. In his evidence in chief before the Tribunal he said he had not made a declaration because he could not remember the circumstances of Dr
Ireland's bill at all, the file had been out of his possession, and he had not had a chance to look at it again until about a week before the hearing. He said the client had paid Dr Ireland $3,200 at some stage and that he had paid the client $3,200. He further said the client had borrowed an amount of $16,000 from him. This was in addition to a loan about which there was no dispute made to the client early in September 1991 and repaid in the same month. He was not able to explain the matter further except by way of a rather confused reconstruction that I find difficult to understand and which no doubt the Tribunal did also.

In cross-examination he agreed that he had become bankrupt early in 1992 and had made a statement of his assets and liabilities for the Trustee in
Bankruptcy. He had not included any amount owing to him by the client in that statement.

On this evidence the Tribunal found that the solicitor had retained the $3,200 for his own benefit from 13 October 1991 until 29 September 1992 committing a wilful breach of <case> in the process.

A telling point which influenced the Tribunal was, as the Tribunal stated it, that the solicitor "was unable to explain why if Dr Ireland was not owed the $3,200 he paid him that amount in September 1992".

What makes the position obscure for this court is that among the affidavits which were in the appeal treated as read and in evidence was one by the solicitor sworn on 31 October 1995 annexing a letter from Dr Ireland saying that he had received a cheque for $2,936 on 30 September 1991 and enclosing a copy of what Dr Ireland called a receipt. There is a partly legible and poorly reproduced copy of this annexed to the solicitor's affidavit. So far as I can make out it looks more like a photostat from an account book of some kind than a formal receipt. There is no reason however to question either its genuineness or that of Dr Ireland's letter, nor did the respondent do so.

The coincidence of the amount with that recorded in the solicitor's file note dated 31 August 1991 makes it seem very likely that the $2,936 was part of the $3,293 which Miss Sayer had said was due to Dr Ireland and which she equated with the $3,200 referred to in the Compensation Court award and the amount paid to Dr Ireland on 29 September 1992. In the circumstances however and with the advantage of facts not available to Miss Sayer, I cannot accept that equation.

One thing seems clear: there are not sufficient facts before this court to justify any confident conclusions about what happened in the client's matter about payment to Dr Ireland of what was owing to him for treatment of the client relevant to that matter.

On the available evidence it seems probable (although I am by no means sure of this) that $2,936 of the $3,200 referred to in the Compensation Court award was paid to Dr Ireland before any money was received from the Work Cover
Authority in October 1991. A further $3,200 was paid to Dr Ireland by the solicitor by the cheque enclosed in the letter of 29 September 1992. I cannot even conjecture what this was for. In light of the further evidence however it certainly does not constitute the damning admission which the Tribunal was entitled to treat it as.

In the result I am not satisfied that the Law Society has substantiated its allegation that the solicitor did not pay the amount of $3,200 to Dr Ireland until 29 September 1992.

The part of this complaint relating to the alleged non payment to Dr Ireland therefore fails.

The Tribunal did not deal with the other part of the complaint. For the reason indicated earlier in discussing complaint C I do not think it necessary to deal with the particulars not dealt with by the Tribunal.

Complaint M - Kandris. This was another case in which the solicitor banked into his trust account a sum of settlement moneys and transferred the whole amount to his general account on the same day, no outline bill having been sent to the client.

It had been agreed between the solicitor and the client that this amount was to be for costs and disbursements. Disbursements for counsel and medical expenses totalling $3,310 were not paid by the solicitor.

There was material before the Tribunal from the counsel and two of the doctors concerned indicating they wished to support the solicitor and in a general way indicating they had no complaints about his failure to account to them.
However, they do not say that they were paid the amounts referred to in Miss
Sayer's report.

In the appeal it was submitted for the solicitor that he would have paid the outstanding amounts in due course had not the receivership intervened. It was also sought to rely on the fact that, as the solicitor believed, he should have received a settlement sum of $15,000 not the $13,958 which was paid by the GIO, and that the dispute that ensued between him and the GIO about that alleged shortfall in some way contributed towards his non payment of the disbursements.

I do not think any of these matters can deflect a finding that in doing what he did the solicitor was in wilful breach of <case>.

Complaint N - Vearing. The particulars of this complaint were that the solicitor drew from his trust account moneys for disbursements totalling $2,075, that disbursements remained unpaid including $750 due to Dr Mahoney and $110 due to Dr Higginbotham and that more disbursements might be outstanding.

The following matters were set out in Miss Sayer's report.

On 1 June 1992 the solicitor deposited to his trust account a cheque for $31,888.89, the proceeds of an award made by an arbitrator in favour of his client. The trust account showed that on the same date the solicitor transferred $12,000 to his general account and paid counsel $2,800. By letter dated 5 June 1992 the solicitor sent the client a cheque for $15,005.89. On 11
June 1992 $2,075 was paid to the solicitor's general account. By mistake $8.00 was left in the trust account. With the solicitor's letter dated 5 June 1992 there was enclosed a Settlement Statement showing $16,875 for "our costs and disbursements". At this time agreement had not been reached between the solicitors for the GIO and the solicitor on the amount of costs to be paid.
The solicitor was asking for $12,000 profit costs and disbursements of $4,875.
The GIO was offering $7,000. By letter dated 14 July 1992 the client wrote to the solicitor referring to the fact that following the settlement on 26 March for $31,888.89 she had received only $15,005.89 and saying that she needed her money desperately. She asked when she would receive the balance of what she had been awarded at court. On 19 August 1992 the solicitor wrote to an officer of the Law Society, referring to his telephone conversation with that officer that day and enclosing copies of his accounting records together with copies of some correspondence. One item from the correspondence was a letter dated the same day to the client saying that an office account cheque for $2,000 which the solicitor had given to the client to assist her with her mortgage repayments had been dishonoured because the writer had exceeded his overdraft. The letter went on to say that the client was aware that the solicitor gave her the cheque to assist with mortgage repayments and it was not a cheque from the trust account and the solicitor was under no obligation to give it to her; nevertheless, he said as a sign of good faith he was enclosing a bank cheque for $2,000 and reconfirmed that he was preparing a bill of costs for taxation as the client on the solicitor's advice had rejected the offer of $7,000 from the GIO. He ended by saying that after the bill had been taxed he would forward her a final accounting.

According to Miss Sayer's report the original of this letter was in the file when she inspected it and it may not have been sent to the client.

The client by a document dated 28 August 1992 instructed the solicitor "to accept the sum of 7,000 costs and disbursements offered by the GIO. I understand that Mr Keefe thinks the offer is low but I wish to accept. I understand that I will receive the 7,000 clear and that subject to receipt of this 7,000 I will receive in total the sum of 24,005.89 made up as follows: ,005.89 .00 .00 ,005.89 
I understand that this is the TOTAL amount to be received by me as a result of my car accident. I also understand that I will not receive a refund of ) $691 moneys I have paid for medical reports.
 ) $109 travelling expenses.
 as these amounts are included in the sum of 24,005.89." 
On 7 September 1992 a cheque for $7,000 was received from the GIO, deposited to the trust account and paid to the client on the same day.

The statement of costs the solicitor had sent to the GIO listed the items making up $4,975 incurred in disbursements. The largest item in this was $2,800, for counsel's fees, which I have already noted were promptly paid.
This left an amount of $2,075 which amount the solicitor had transferred to his general account on 11 June 1992. That in itself was a breach of trust and a breach of <case>, compounded by the fact that the solicitor's records showed that only $311 of the remaining disbursements had been paid.

The solicitor's statutory declaration dealing with this matter provided no answer to the complaint. It was in the nature of a plea in mitigation that the solicitor had in the end received very low profit costs from a very long matter in the course of which he had helped the client with a personal loan.
In it he also said that there had been no failure to account to Dr
Higginbotham.

When asked about Dr Higginbotham in cross-examination, he said that his assertion there had been no failure to account was made "on the same basis as ... expressed before" (AB 2/263). This was a reference to a matter that was discussed on a number of occasions in the course of the oral evidence. A clear statement of the solicitor's position is in the following passage of cross- examination: "Q. If I could ask you a different question: It was your practice as a solicitor to account to clients for moneys which you received? 
A. Yes.

Q. And in that account you commonly set out what you described as disbursements? 
A. Yes.

Q. Such as counsel's fees, doctors' costs and the like? 
A. Yes.

Q. Obviously in the course of a matter you incurred obligations to counsel? 
A. Yes.

Q. And it was your common practice, or at least counsel's common practice, to wait until the conclusion of the matter for payment? 
A. Yes. I never had any money prior to settlement, with the odd, maybe the odd exception.

Q. Can I ask you your understanding in a situation such as this: Assume in a matter that you instruct Mr Smith, barrister, to advise and to appear and Mr
Smith renders accounts totalling, say, $1,000 and in your statement to the client you note as a disbursement fees to Mr Smith of $1,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. What do you understand to be your obligation in relation to that $1,000 described as a disbursement in your account or settlement statement to your client? 
A. It is to be paid to Mr Smith, counsel.

Q. When is it to be paid? 
A. Well, as I said previously, I had these arrangements with various barristers in relation to a timeframe concerning the payment of some of their fees.

Q. Well, I am asking you, in a matter where you received settlement moneys and gave a statement to the client in which you described a disbursement, say, $1,000 to Mr Smith, barrister, what did you understand to be your obligation as to payment of that sum to that person? 
A. It was to be paid to the counsel.

Q. When? 
A. Either at that stage or, in accordance with arrangements I had with barristers, at a later time.

Q. Is this the position, that in situations where you describe, in statements of account to clients, disbursements to, for example, barristers, you felt under no obligation to forthwith pay to counsel the amount referred to on that statement? 
A. I'm sorry, could you say that again? 
Q. Is this the situation, that in cases where you accounted to clients for settlement moneys and provided them statements of account or bills which described disbursements to counsel, you felt under no obligation to pay those disbursements forthwith from the moneys which you had received? 
A. Not in all circumstances, no, having regard to the arrangements that I had with the various counsel.

Q. So you felt no impediment in delaying that payment to counsel? 
A. No, in accordance with the arrangements I had.

Q. Even though the account to the client suggested that that figure was a disbursement in favour of that counsel? 
A. Well, that is what the statement says, yes.

Q. And was it common for you to defer payment to counsel of amounts which you described in statements of account to clients as disbursements to counsel? 
A. In some cases, not all cases.

Q. Was it common for you to do that? 
A. I wouldn't say it was common, it was in some cases and not in other cases.

Q. Well, you described counsel, I think, who you had known for many years as being of the same ilk as yourself as far as payment was concerned. Is that right? 
A. No, what I meant by that was people with whom one deals in business being of the same ilk - what I meant by that is not about making payments, but being of the same personality. You may have three barristers with the same ability, but you brief the one with the same personality. That's what I meant by ilk:
Personality.

Q. Let's say you received settlement moneys in a matter of $50,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. Regularly, counsel who had been briefed would not have been paid to that point? 
A. Correct.

Q. You rendered an account to the client which included your own profit costs and disbursements? 
A. Yes.

Q. And the balance was paid forthwith to the client? 
A. That's right.

Q. Any client who read that account would think that you had, from that $50,000, paid those disbursements? 
A. Well, that would be up to them - I assume so, yes.

Q. But do you say that in not every case did you in fact pay counsel shown on the settlement statement immediately? 
A. No, I didn't.

Q. You paid that money to your general account? 
A. Yes.

Q. And paid counsel parcels of money from time to time? 
A. In some instances, yes.

Q. In what instances? 
A. Well, there are matters in which counsel are paid immediately. Other matters are as you just described.

Q. Why was it that you deferred payment to counsel when you had been put in funds by settlement moneys and had accounted to the client for moneys due to counsel as a disbursement? 
A. I would have to refer to individual matters in order to answer a question like that.

Q. Could it be because you yourself felt a need for the money which had been described on the statement of account as disbursements to counsel? 
A. No, not necessarily.

Q. Could there be any other reason why you would not forthwith pay to counsel? 
A. Yes, yes, there could be, that's why I'm saying one would have to refer to the individual matter. 
Q. In any event, you saw nothing wrong - is this right - in deferring payment to counsel in the situation which I have described? 
A. In accordance with the arrangement I had with counsel and having regard to the particular circumstances of these matters here.

Q. What exactly were these arrangements you had with counsel? 
A. The arrangements were that if there were any difficulties in relation to my getting full costs or there had been some out of pocket expenses coming in that hadn't been taken into account on settlement, that type of thing, counsel would wait for some period afterwards to be paid because of the fact that I was dealing with them in many, and perhaps hundreds, of cases." 
There then followed some questions concerning the solicitor's arrangement with
Mr Farah, an interpreter frequently used in the solicitor's cases, which led to the following question and answer: "Q. Once again, is this the position: When you accounted to a client for a disbursement to Mr Farah, you felt no difficulty in not paying Mr Farah that amount of money then and there from the settlement moneys you had received? 
A. The client is not disadvantaged, the money has to go to Mr Farah. There is no disadvantage as far as the client is concerned." 
This led on to some more general questions on the same topic, which although they cover much the same ground as in the earlier extract from the evidence, I again set out in full: "[CHAIRMAN] Q. Didn't you regard those moneys that you showed in accounts for disbursements which you drew across from trust into your own funds, into the general account, as encapsulated under the term `trust money' that had to go to the people that you identified it as going to, whether it be Mr Farah, Mrs
Wong or whoever - and I am now talking about the particular matters in the reference? 
A. Yes.

Q. Do you understand my question? 
A. Yes, I understand your question.

Q. We can go through them in a moment, but in a number of matters in the reference moneys came into the trust account? 
A. Yes.

Q. You gave the client the moneys that you said you would give the client? 
A. Yes.

Q. You prepared a bill or this short-form bill that you said? 
A. Yes.

Q. Took that money across into your account, into your general account, and then, at some stage, you would set out the detail of your profit costs and the disbursements? 
A. Yes.

Q. Didn't you regard those items of disbursements as encapsulated under the term `trust moneys' to be paid to the persons who you said they were disbursements for? 
A. Well, I was relying on the arrangements that I had with these people.

MR WALES: Q. So that having, by your statement of account, told the client you were taking from the client's moneys a certain amount for counsel's fees or interpreter's fees, you felt entirely at liberty to then deal with those moneys due to counsel and interpreters in accordance with some arrangement between yourself and those persons? 
A. That it is in fact what happened, yes - not in all circumstances.

Q. Commonly? 
A. Well, you use the word `commonly', I don't know what that means. There were a lot of circumstances where that didn't take place. I don't use the word `common', but it happened.

Q. You also received from time to time from solicitors for insurers in worker's compensation matters amounts representing agreed party/party costs? 
A. Yes, most of the cheques were from insurance companies, almost all of them.

Q. And you wouldn't receive a cheque from an insurer for party/party costs in a worker's compensation matter unless there had been some agreement about the total amount? 
A. Yes.

Q. Your practice was to send to the insurer's solicitor a party/party bill? 
A. Yes.

Q. And that was then the subject of negotiation? 
A. Yes, that's right.

Q. And a figure was arrived at for the agreed party/party costs? 
A. Well, when you say `party/party costs', in some of the instances in these documents here there was a blanket amount which didn't split up as to which were the costs and disbursements.

Q. Whatever the amount was, it was a figure which had been agreed between your practice and the solicitors for the insurer? 
A. Yes, that's correct, yes.

Q. Whether it was a process of itemisation or agreement to take a lump sum? 
A. Yes, that's correct.

Q. And unless there was agreement you wouldn't get the cheque from the insurer? 
A. That's right, correct.

Q. And you understood that the cheque to you represented, in part, your profit costs and, in part, disbursements which you had incurred? 
A. In most of the instances I just indicated where there was what I call a non-compartmentalised amount, that did not apply, but, yes, the majority of them were X amount for costs and X amount for disbursements.

Q. Even in those cases where there was a lump sum agreed, it was obviously a figure made up in some fashion from your profit costs and your disbursements? 
A. Well, I don't know how they came to the figures, if they offered one amount and then split it up, I couldn't look into their minds.

Q. But did you not understand that, when you received cheques for party/party costs from a worker's compensation insurer, part of those moneys at least was earmarked for disbursement? 
A. That's probably correct, but I don't know what portion was.

Q. You at least knew what disbursements you had incurred in that matter? 
A. Of course.

Q. Did you regard yourself as being under an obligation to pay forthwith from those party/party costs the disbursements which you had incurred in that particular matter? 
A. I did that in some cases and not in other cases, as I have indicated previously and I have indicated in my stat decs, in accordance with arrangements I had.

Q. Did you regard yourself as under an obligation to deal with the party/party costs by paying from them the disbursements which you had incurred in the course of running the matter? 
A. I think I've just answered that.

Q. Well, your answer was that in some cases you paid and some cases you didn't. What I'm asking is did you, in your own mind, feel an obligation to pay from the party/party costs the disbursements you had incurred in the course of running the case? 
A. I felt an obligation to pay them, of course there was an obligation to pay them. In accordance with the arrangement, it wasn't necessarily at that particular point in time. Of course I have an obligation to pay them.

Q. To pay them in accordance with the arrangements you had with the providers of those services? 
A. That is as I said, I haven't said I wasn't going to pay any of them." 
This is sad evidence from the point of view of the solicitor. The arrangement he so ingenuously described involved him in continual breaches of trust. To make matters worse he does not appear to have understood this in November 1994 when giving evidence before the Tribunal, nor does he appear to have understood it in 1998 when submissions were being made on his behalf in the appeal, because again, his "arrangements" were being relied on. The last part of what I have just said may be a trifle harsh, in that it may be that the persistence in the submission in this court was directed towards mitigation of the breaches of trust rather than denial of them; even so, there has been nothing to indicate to this court that the solicitor understands even yet that in making his "arrangements" he was using as his own, money that did not belong to him, nor for that matter to the persons with whom he had made his arrangements. Obviously, the breaches of trust he was committing, taken individually, and in the cases when the persons to whom the money was owed were paid relatively soon after the solicitor had received the money into trust (and that means in every single one of these cases on trust) caused no great harm as a practical matter. Much greater culpable harm was done when the solicitor never paid the person owed, thus leaving the client in law still liable to that person. Even in those cases I have described as not having caused much practical harm, taken individually, the serious aspect of them is that they formed part of a continuous practice which demonstrated the solicitor's complete absence of understanding that he was breaking an absolutely basic professional commandment: you must not treat your client's money as your own. The fact, if it was a fact, that this was happening because he could not tell the difference between money that belonged to clients and his own money does not help him so far as fitness to practice is concerned.

To return to the case of Vearing: the Tribunal found that there had been wilful breach of <case>. The Tribunal did not make explicit findings on the allegation that $750 remained due to Dr Mahoney and $110 to Dr Higginbotham. I will therefore treat the Tribunal's decision as confined to the breaches of trust and wilful breaches of <case> involved in the transfer of the money earmarked for disbursements. In my opinion, on the facts before the Tribunal, and this court, no other decision could be made.

Complaint O - Hadchiti. This is one of a number of cases which fall into the same category as that of the last one dealt with, Vearing. I have examined the materials relevant to it and in my opinion it is clear that breaches of trust and wilful breaches of <case> occurred in the same way as in the previous case.
I think it unnecessary to go through the details in order to demonstrate that.
In my opinion the Tribunal's decision was correct.

Complaint P - Defteros. The particulars of this complaint were that the solicitor, $40,000 having been paid into his trust account on 31 October 1990, to be used to pay the client's husband in settlement of Family Law proceedings, drew a cheque on his trust account on 24 December 1990 for $9,500 and paid it into his general account, no bill of costs having been rendered nor authority obtained; further, when the client needed $40,000 to satisfy terms of settlement she had entered into on 10 May 1991 the solicitor drew a cheque for $31,000 on his trust account, the balance to the client's trust account then being $30,500 leaving a debit balance in that account until the solicitor deposited a cheque for $500 in that account on 25 June 1991. The particulars acknowledged that the balance of $9,000 needed by his client for the settlement on 10 May 1991 was made available to her on that day by a cheque for $9,000 drawn on his general account.

It followed from the particulars that from 24 December 1990 until 10 May 1991 the solicitor used as if it were his own $9,500 of the client's money, and from 10 May 1991 until 25 June 1991 $500 of the client's money.

In his statutory declaration in answer to the particulars the solicitor said that he believed that he had had authority to transfer $9,500 on account of costs on 24 December 1990. He was unable to comment on whether he had in fact sent a bill but said that it had been his regular practice "to dictate a bill prior to transferring costs" and that it would have been "unusual if there was not a bill in this matter". The solicitor presumably recognised the inconsistency between this position and his payment of $9,000 to the client on May 1991; he said he could not remember why he paid her $9,000 on that day but presumably he and the client had a discussion reversing the agreement of
January 1991. He said the trust account debit of $500 was an accident of which he was unaware when it happened.

The closest thing to an authority in the solicitor's file for his taking his costs out of the $40,000 he had received into trust from his client on 31
October 1990 appears in a file note which I at first took to be 21 December recording a conference with the client containing the following: "confirming that it was not now a legal aid matter - she is responsible for our fees - doesn't want legal aid - she confirms she has been working for some time - no longer legal aid - " 
However, the solicitor, although relying on his asserted usual practice in regard to sending bills before taking costs from trust was unable to explain the absence of any copy of the bill from his file nor to reconcile the fact of having sent one bill as at 24 December 1990 for $9,500 for work done to that time, with having sent another dated 28 May 1991, a copy of which was in his file, which he sent to the Legal Aid Commission, for all work in the matter done up till that time and after the matter was completed, for $9,000.

In his oral evidence, the solicitor agreed in cross-examination that if he had sent a bill to the client on 24 December 1990 or earlier, there ordinarily would have been a copy in the file.

There also emerged in cross-examination a question about the date of the conference of which there was the file note with the date which at first I thought was 21 December 1990. Either the original or photostats of the original were available at the hearing and because of the way the date is written. I now think the date could be any one of 21 December 1990, 21
December 1991, 21 January 1990 or 21 January 1991. From surrounding circumstances the two more likely of those dates are 21 December 1990 and 21
January 1991. The cross-examiner treated the date as being 21 January 1991 and asked his questions on that basis, to which no objection was raised either by the solicitor or his counsel. On that basis, the unlikelihood of a bill having been delivered to the client before the costs were taken from trust is even greater.

This is even more so when the chronology of what happened with the Legal Aid
Commission (LAC) is taken into account. The solicitor had been notified by a letter dated 4 May 1989 from LAC that legal aid had been granted for him to act on behalf of the client. Amongst other things the letter said that the solicitor's costs would be paid in accordance with Pt V of the Family Law
Regulations. LAC wrote by letter dated 22 January 1991 to the solicitor saying they had not heard from him since 17 May 1989. LAC wrote again on 5 June 1991 acknowledging receipt of and raising questions concerning the solicitor's memorandum of costs which he had sent to LAC in a letter dated 28 May 1991.
Finally, by letter dated 21 November 1991 LAC advised the solicitor that his account had been assessed for payment in the sum of $2,786.10.

In cross-examination, the solicitor was pressed about his payment of $9,000 to the client on 10 May 1991. In summary, what he said was that he had no clear recollection of the events of the day, but, on a reconstruction basis what had happened was that, although in January (which sub silentio he was accepting as the date of the file note conference) there had been an agreement that although the client was on legal aid she no longer wanted it and wanted to pay him in full, which was the reason he had taken the costs from trust, now she was $9,000 short of the money needed to settle with her husband, the solicitor had had a good relationship with her, she had sent him clients, and since the whole settlement would be off if she could not get the $9,000 he had agreed with her to cancel the deal in relation to her paying the fees, he would send the bill off to Legal Aid and repay her $9,000.

Even if this explanation were accurate (and it seems that at best for the solicitor it must at least be incomplete) it would not cure the breaches of trust that had previously occurred, if, as the Law Society was contending, no bill had ever been sent before the solicitor had transferred $9,500 from the trust to his general account.

The Tribunal found, without being as explicit about the finding as would have been preferable, that the solicitor had not rendered any bill of costs before withdrawing $9,500 from his trust account, nor did he have any authority to do so. On this basis the Tribunal concluded that the solicitor had wilfully contravened <case>.

In the appeal, the written submissions for the solicitor repeated his belief that there had been a bill and an authority justifying him in transferring the $9,500 from the trust to the general account.

Having considered the circumstances disclosed by the evidence the probabilities seem to me to be very much in favour of the view that no bill had been delivered to the client on or before 24 December 1990 and that no authority justifying the transfer of the money had been given to the solicitor by the client.

It is therefore my opinion that the correct conclusion is, as found by the
Tribunal, that the solicitor in the circumstances of this instance was in wilful contravention of <case>.

Complaint Q - Chaumar. The particulars of this claim were that, there being in his trust account settlement moneys of the client from a third party claim, he withdrew $9,000 without having provided a bill of costs and $1,802 in excess of moneys due to him.

In his statutory declaration dealing with this case the solicitor did not deny the assertion that bills of costs had not been sent to the client before the withdrawal of the $9,000. He did rely on an authority signed by the client instructing him to settle her case for $25,000 with $15,632 clear to her after deduction of legal costs and disbursements and the payment of three specified amounts. The solicitor had apparently prepared the bill substantiating these figures but did not send it, the original still being in the file when Miss
Sayer inspected it. This bill showed his profit costs as $7,000 and disbursements $1,710. Thus, had he rendered a bill in the required way he could have transferred $7,000 but not $9,000 from trust to general account.
Had he confined the withdrawal to $7,000 the breach of trust (and <case>) might have been capable of being regarded as formal only.

Figures in Miss Sayer's report, taken from the solicitor's files, and not disputed by the solicitor, showed that in addition to drawing the $9,000 for his own costs from the trust account he also drew $370 from it which was used for the payment of counsel's fees (not mentioned in the unsent bills of costs) making a total of $9,370 drawn from trust, whereas the authority of 11 April specified $7,000 profit costs and he had paid proper disbursements from his general account of $568, these figures totalling $7,568, the difference between that figure and the amount drawn from trust being $1,802, leading to the Tribunal's conclusion that he had drawn from his trust account $1,802 in excess of moneys due to him.

Thus the three matters in the particulars were made out.

In the appeal no substantive submission was made on the solicitor's behalf in regard to the complaints concerning this client.

The case is an example where the client received the amount which was to be clear to her upon the settlement, as recorded in the instruction to settle.
The way in which the settlement moneys were treated after their receipt into the solicitor's trust account gives the impression, confirmed by the practice apparent from a number of the other cases, that the solicitor acted on what he no doubt thought was the practical view that once a client received whatever the solicitor and client had agreed upon as the amount to go clear to the client, the client had no further interest in the disposal of the balance of the moneys to the client's credit in the trust account. In a crude practical sense this might be true so long as the solicitor's profit costs and the disbursements were from that time on properly dealt with. That did not happen in a number of the instances particularised in these proceedings, resulting in major culpability on the part of the solicitor, even if in the individual instances the amounts were not large. The situation would be serious in any event so far as the solicitor is concerned whether or not any of the numerous breaches of trust in <case> had crystallised into the more culpable situations.

Complaint R - Lazos. The particulars of this complaint were that the solicitor accounted to his client with a statement showing amongst funds disbursed, an amount of treatment fees to a doctor of $1,092, which the solicitor did not pay to the doctor.

Upon settlement of the client's third party claim an amount of $26,500, which was to include costs, was paid into the solicitor's trust account, the client having signed an authority to the effect that he would receive $19,000 clear.
The solicitor's accounts showed receipt of the settlement moneys of $26,500 on October 1987; the payment to the client of $19,000 on the same date; the payment to the solicitor's general account of $2,346 on the same date; further, his file contained a copy of a settlement statement showing the settlement moneys received less disbursements which included one to a doctor for $1,092. Not only was this amount not paid but the doctor brought proceedings to recover the outstanding moneys against the client. Those proceedings reached the stage where the doctor obtained judgment and had arranged for the levy of execution against the client. At that stage, 11 May , the solicitor paid the doctor.

In statutory declarations before the Tribunal the solicitor explained there had been two cases for this client running at the same time and over a long period, both involving personal injury. He said he had some difficulty in deciding to which case various of the medical expenses should be assigned. The explanation did not deal with the fact that in the settlement statement given to the client in connection with the matter in respect of which the $26,500 settlement moneys were received, the doctor's treatment fees of $1,092 were included, it thus being represented to the client that the doctor either had been paid or would immediately be paid out of the settlement moneys which had gone to the solicitor's trust account. In cross-examination before the
Tribunal the solicitor said that he thought his conduct was "pretty shabby" and he "handled it very badly actually".

The Tribunal found that the solicitor was in wilful breach of <case>. In doing so no attention was given to the fact that the starting point of the solicitor's action subject to complaint took place in 1987 when <case> of the old Act was the relevant section. For reasons earlier explained, this does not in my opinion affect the substance of the professional misconduct of the solicitor.

The solicitor's written submissions in the appeal did not attempt to displace the Tribunal's finding. In my opinion it was the only finding open, although the wrong statutory provision was considered.

Complaint S - Lazos. This complaint concerned the same client as the previous one and related to the matter that had been running concurrently with the proceedings from which the previous complaint arose. The particulars of the complaint were that the solicitor transferred $17,000 from his trust account to his general account on account of his costs and disbursements without having sent an appropriate bill, that he paid himself $4,715 more than he was entitled to and that he failed to pay medical expenses and counsel's fees from funds which he had for that purpose.

In his statutory declaration concerning this matter the solicitor said that he considered he was justified in transferring $17,000 profit costs to his general account from trust on 21 June 1990 in accordance with his short form bill of that date. There was such a bill in his file when examined by Miss
Sayer. It was an original bill and in her report she said it had obviously not been sent to the client. In about February 1992 the client complained to the
Law Society that he had not received any accounting. In March 1992 the solicitor wrote to the client saying, amongst other things, that his general practice was to dictate a settlement statement of costs at the end of a case, that for some reason he had not been able to locate this statement and he enclosed a further statement.

Although the Tribunal's reasons in respect of this matter do not make explicit any finding that the statement was not sent, the evidence all pointed to that being the case, the solicitor did not seriously claim that it had been sent and the reasons seem to me to go upon the basis that it was not sent. The first of the three items in the particulars was thus made out, in my opinion.
I also think the solicitor's conduct can only be regarded as reckless.

The further statement which the solicitor sent to the client dated 10 March showed his profit costs as $11,750 although he had earlier taken $17,000.

In a statutory declaration the solicitor referred to an amended common law settlement statement showing a considerable number of disbursements which had the effect of reducing his profit costs to $6,915. So far as I can see there is no information in the statutory declaration or elsewhere in the materials before the Tribunal or this court indicating when this amended settlement statement was prepared or showing that all the disbursements in it had been paid. As to the date of the statement and whether it was ever delivered, the tentative conclusion I come to is that it must have been prepared after the receivership and never sent to the client. The fact that it was not referred to in the oral evidence before the Tribunal seems to me to be significant. On the materials that were before the Tribunal there can be no doubt in my mind that at least for a period the second item in the particulars of this complaint was made out.

As to the third item, non payment of counsel's fees, in the written submissions in this court it was said for the appellant that this was because of the arrangement with counsel. This submission therefore fails for the reasons indicated earlier in respect of the solicitor's "arrangements". As to the medical fee component of this item the appellant made no written submission.

In my opinion this complaint was made out.

Complaint T - Vatikiotis (D). This is another of the "arrangement" cases.
Having gone through the details, I can see it was an unlucky one for the solicitor in that it was settled by counsel and the solicitor's clerk on a basis that apparently overlooked a number of disbursements and left the solicitor with low profit costs. Nevertheless, he acknowledged by letter dated October 1990 that $24,000 settlement moneys placed to the credit of the client's account in the solicitor's trust account on 5 September 1990 were held on terms that the unpaid out of pocket expenses were to be paid from those trust moneys (this is my interpretation of the legal effect of the letter). He did not do so, but made "arrangements" for payment of some of the unpaid expenses by instalments, something itself in breach of trust and of s 61.

In my opinion the Tribunal's findings were correct.

Complaint U - Sklibiosis. The particulars of this complaint included assertions that the solicitor had received the proceeds of an arbitration award in respect of a personal injuries claim, had retained an amount for the purpose of paying disbursements and out of pocket expenses and had failed to pay certain disbursements. As the Tribunal did not deal with the other allegations in this complaint, I do not reproduce them.

The materials set out in Miss Sayer's report supported the allegation which the Tribunal found proved. The solicitor in his statutory declaration in regard to this case gave an explanation falling into two parts: he asserted that the client, not he, was responsible for the out of pockets. In saying this he did not explain how it came about that he had accepted the moneys into his account from trust. The other element of his explanation was an admission that the latest statements of account he had furnished to the client prior to the receiver being appointed to his practice were incorrect. He said he would have amended his last statement of account if the events of 17 December 1992 had not taken place.

In the course of this statutory declaration, he responded to an assertion in the particulars of duplication of disbursements claimed in his client's two cases by saying: "Concerning the `Duplication'. The Bills of Costs to GIO did include some disbursements in relation to medical report fees. The reason for this is that it is my obligation to get the maximum return for the client. For example, the report of Dr Higginbotham was tendered in both cases. The question arises therefore - is it a disbursement properly payable by GIO under a court costs order in the first case or the second case or in both cases? If it is payable in both cases then this maximises the amount finally payable to the client." 
The Tribunal did not make any finding on the particulars within this complaint that raised the matter of duplication. I think however that this part of the solicitor's evidence, showing again an ingenuous ignorance of obvious rules and basic honesty, is something to be taken into account when considering what order should be made in the light of the findings against him.

Complaint V - Amer. Particulars of two matters were given of this complaint.
The Tribunal was not satisfied that the first was established. The particulars of the other matter were that the solicitor although put in funds failed to pay counsel's fees and medical report fees totalling $1,617. Before the
Tribunal the Law Society conceded that the sum should have been $1,557. The
Tribunal held that the evidence was clear that the solicitor failed to pay those disbursements and was therefore in wilful breach of <case>.

However, I have not been able to find in the materials before this court the clear evidence of which the Tribunal was speaking. There was evidence in Miss
Sayer's report, but in her oral evidence on 15 November 1994 (AB 1/141) Miss
Sayer said she had some concern about the whole section (presumably relating to this client) and that she wanted to check to see whether there might be typing errors. The Tribunal then gave leave for her to be further examined and cross-examined on the matter when the file or papers were available. The matter was then left until the next day. On 16 November 1994 the solicitor was giving oral evidence and was being taken through the cases one by one, the
Chairman noted that the Amer matter was again to be deferred until the next day (AB 1/185). I cannot find any reference to the Amer matter in the transcript of the next day (17/11/1994) when the evidence came to an end and the hearing was adjourned until 7 December 1994 for oral addresses. When counsel addressed on 7 December 1994 it was partly by reference to written submissions that had been filed in the meantime. The only reference I can find to the Amer matter is in the address of counsel for the Law Society who said: "I don't propose to say more about Amer. There was controversy as to what precisely was outstanding, but on any view there were medical expenses outstanding." (AB 2/320) 
The matter was not made any clearer in the written and oral submissions in this court. It may be that the written submissions before the Tribunal would show why the Tribunal felt able to make the factual finding that it did. On the materials presently before the court I am unable to come to the conclusion which the Tribunal did on this matter.

Complaint W - Koutsoukis. Paragraphs (i) to (iv) of the particulars of this complaint asserted that from moneys deposited to the credit of his client in the trust account being first the proceeds of the District Court verdict deposited 19 December 1986 and later an amount received on 6 April 1989 on account of party and party costs, on three occasions, 19 December 1986, 31
January 1988 and 7 April 1989, transferred moneys from the trust account to his general account on account of costs without having first given a bill justifying the transfer.

Paragraph (v) asserted that in a statement of costs and disbursements dated 22
September 1992 given to the client the solicitor claimed as disbursements sums totalling $482 which had already been paid by the client and that the solicitor therefore failed to account for that sum.

Paragraph (vi) asserted that the solicitor withdrew from his trust account $2,736 in excess of costs due to him as shown in the settlement statement dated 22 September 1992 given to the client.

The Tribunal found that "the Solicitor breached <case> of the Act by reason of his failure to send the client a bill before drawing his costs and disbursements from his trust account. This breach was wilful." 
The appellant's written submissions dealing with this matter in the appeal said that the Tribunal found that the sum referred to in par (vi) "was properly accounted for but that the appellant did not send a bill in respect to costs and disbursements in respect of a second matter with the same client.

The appellant accepts that in the findings at p 463I [which dealt with par ] that he was incorrect with that answer. The appellant says if there was no bill on file to the client it was an oversight as it was his practice to show clients the bill upon their picking up the verdict moneys. There was certainly no wilful breach of <case>." 
In its findings on this complaint the Tribunal expressed somewhat more fully than in other places an aspect of the solicitor's responses to the complaints that troubled them. Both because of that, and because of what was submitted to this court on the appellant's behalf as just set out, I reproduce what the
Tribunal said on this complaint: "On 19 December 1986 the Solicitor received into his trust account $9,205.00 being the verdict moneys awarded to the client in the District Court on 21
November 1986. On the same day the Solicitor transferred from his trust account $4,500.00 to his general account on account of costs. Also on the same day he submitted a Bill of Costs on a party/party basis to the GIO in the sum of $5,993.50 but no outline bill was sent to the client. However the Solicitor maintained that, as was his standard practice, he would have given a copy of the bill to the GIO to the client and would have said to him, `I have rendered a bill, here's a copy of the bill, to the GIO'. The Solicitor further stated, `On receipt of the initial cheque, as I have done in all these matters, I would take my costs as outlined in this particular bill here. I will pay the balance of it. On receipt of the next cheque from the GIO for costs there will be a final accounting to the client.' 
The Solicitor claimed that this was a sufficient authority and a sufficient outline bill which justified him in transferring the $4,500.00. There was a further $205.00 that the Solicitor transferred from his trust account to his general account on account of costs on 31 January 1988. No bill was sent to the client to justify this transfer. On 6 April 1989 the Solicitor received into his trust account $4,024.57 from the GIO being party-and-party costs. On the following day the Solicitor withdrew this amount from his trust account by way of cheque payable to his firm. No outline bill had been given to the client.

On 3 September 1990 the client complained to the Law Society that the solicitor had not accounted to him in full for the verdict moneys received. It was not until September 1992 that the Solicitor issued a statement dated 22
September 1992 - this accounting included an amount of $2,736.07 which the
Solicitor had transferred from the trust account to his general account as costs in excess of the costs and disbursements that he claimed. Nevertheless this statement disclosed that this was correctly used as a credit in another action in which the Solicitor acted for the client; consequently whilst there was a serious delay in the Solicitor accounting to his client for these moneys, they were finally properly accounted for.

This matter is another example of the lack of understanding on the part of the Solicitor of his statutory and ethical duties in relation to trust moneys.
In cross-examination (page 259): `Q: If that is the position, how do you justify the withdrawal of moneys for costs and disbursements from trust on the basis of a bill sent to the GIO on December 1986? 
A: Well, that's the bill that is the justification for it, that's the bill.

Q: The bill to whom? 
A: Well, it's the bill to the Government Insurance Office.

Q: Don't you understand that, before you take money from trust, you have to render a bill to the client? 
A: No, I don't agree with that.

Q: You don't agree with the proposition that to take money from trust for costs and disbursements you need to bill the client? 
A: No. The authorisation for the transfer of the moneys is contained in this bill here to the Government Insurance Office, in the initial aspect, in the initial stages, subject to a final accounting to the client." 
The Tribunal then made the finding of breach reproduced earlier, and which I also make.

Complaint X - Andonenas. The matters particularised in regard to this complaint combined features of the "arrangement" examples already dealt with and of the matters the subject of pars (i) to (iv) in complaint W -
Koutsoukis. The solicitor's attempt to justify what he did failed before the
Tribunal, which found him guilty of wilful breaches of <case>.

Having gone through the materials relevant to this complaint, I reach the same conclusion as the Tribunal did, for the same reasons indicated earlier in regard to similar complaints.

General conclusion on Ground 1. The Tribunal said that in respect to the vast majority of matters under Ground 1 it found the solicitor wilfully contravened <case> and that it followed that the solicitor was guilty of professional misconduct.

Although basing myself on slightly fewer instances than the Tribunal, I reach the same conclusion.

Ground 2 - Wilful Breaches of <case>.

Section 62 requires a solicitor to keep accounting records of trust money which at all times disclose the true position in relation to that money and in a manner that enables the accounts to be conveniently and properly audited.
The section makes wilful contravention of these requirements professional misconduct.

Two of the three cases particularised under this ground arose from the same facts as cases dealt with under Ground 1, complaint B - Swain, and complaint D - Karavokiris. The third concerned a trust account cheque dated 20 November payable to the Supreme Court, not posted to a trust ledger account, the nature of the payment of which Miss Sayer was unable to establish.

Each of these complaints was found proved by the Tribunal, in my opinion rightly.

In the circumstances of the solicitor's overall conduct of his practice, these breaches were not individually serious, except for the light they cast on the solicitor's inability to manage his trust account and his accounting records in a proper and professional way. In the solicitor's favour, is the fact that
Miss Sayer's investigation does not appear to have brought to light anything to suggest that the solicitor deliberately falsified any records or attempted to manipulate them in a way to conceal or misrepresent any matters.

Ground 3: Wilful failure to comply with clients' instructions.

Complaint AB - Grapsas. The solicitor was instructed to settle the client's case for $32,000 inclusive of costs. The NRMA on the defendant's behalf wrote a letter dated 23 June 1992 referring to a recent settlement conference and setting out the terms of the settlement agreed upon. These were that the negotiated settlement figure, inclusive of costs, was $32,000, and that that figure was to be less out of pocket expenses already paid by the NRMA of $1,262. The letter said that upon return of the enclosed Agreement for
Release, executed, a cheque would be forwarded for $30,738. A cheque for that amount was deposited to the solicitor's trust account on 9 July 1992, the inference being that the executed Agreement for Release had been returned to the NRMA. The solicitor wrote to the NRMA by letter dated 10 July 1992 asking for comment on his understanding that there was not to have been any deduction from the settlement moneys. There is no evidence of any response from the
NRMA. The solicitor paid the client the amount that had been agreed to go to her, on the basis of the settlement moneys being $32,000 without deduction.
The shortage thus created in the solicitor's funds partly brought about the non payment of various disbursements which the solicitor had undertaken to pay in accordance with his instructions to settle the case for $32,000 inclusive of costs.

In his statutory declaration before the Tribunal dealing with this matter the solicitor said: "It would appear that I did not read properly the letter from
NRMA dated 23 June 1992". He referred to his letter to the NRMA seeking clarification and said he did not receive a reply and that as far as he was concerned the matter was incomplete. He said he would have paid everything necessary to be paid but for the Receiver having been appointed.

The non payment of the disbursements which the solicitor had promised, and had been instructed, to pay, can only have been deliberate.

The Tribunal found that the solicitor's conduct amounted to professional misconduct. I reach the same conclusion.

Complaint AC - Karageorgious. Reduced to its essentials, this complaint was in the same category as complaint AB. Again, pursuant to a letter of instructions the solicitor became responsible to pay various disbursements which were not paid. He argued that he had no legal liability for these disbursements, but intended to pay them anyway, but was unable to do so because of the receivership.

In my opinion the Tribunal was right to find that his actions amounted to professional misconduct, a conclusion which I also reach.

Complaint AD - Kabalan. By letter dated 26 September 1988 the client instructed the solicitor to settle two proceedings for a total of $26,000 from which the client was to receive the sum of $16,000 clear after deduction of various sums totalling $6,020, including an amount for rehabilitation $2,473.
He did not make this payment. He put forward explanations before the Tribunal and in this court which amount to mitigation of the complaint not an answer to it.

In my opinion the Tribunal reached a proper conclusion in finding the solicitor's conduct was professional misconduct.

Complaint AE - Rachid. This is a simpler example of what happened in each of the three preceding complaints. Again, I would reach the same conclusion as the Tribunal that the solicitor's failure to carry out his instructions amounted to professional misconduct.

Complaint AG - Hadchiti. This is in the same category as the previous matter and again in my opinion requires the same conclusion.

Complaint AI - Choumar. Again, this matter falls in the same category as the previous one, with the same result.

Ground 4: Charging twice for the same work.

Complaint AM - Kabalan. In the first of Miss Sayer's reports she referred to two bills of costs prepared by the solicitor, a later one apparently covering all work done by him in the matter for $4,000 and an earlier one for work done in the early stages of the matter, for $1,500. Miss Sayer's comment was that the later bill obviously duplicated work covered by the earlier, which appears to have been overlooked. The Tribunal found the complaint made out. In the appeal it was submitted that there was no evidence that the client was overcharged, which in a formal sense, is not to the point. It was also said that except for the pro forma phraseology of the two bills there was nothing to indicate double charging. However, implicit in this submission is that the phraseology used in the two bills did indicate double charging.

Although in the circumstances described by the solicitor concerning this matter, I would be prepared to accept that there was no intentional double charging, it nevertheless seems to me that the conduct was properly described by the Tribunal as unsatisfactory professional conduct.

Ground 5: Breach of undertaking to the court.

Complaint AN - Pappas. In the earlier Pappas case, complaint G, one of the terms of settlement was an undertaking by the solicitor to the court to pay $1,087 to Dr Segelov. The solicitor was put in funds but did not pay that amount. His explanation was that it was "obviously a mistake".

I agree with the Tribunal that the solicitor's actions amounted to professional misconduct.

Ground 6: Breach of undertaking to another solicitor.

Complaint AO - Jerebek. The solicitor took over the conduct of this client's matter from other solicitors. By letter the solicitor told the other solicitors his client had agreed with the costs and disbursements in a bill the other solicitors had rendered. In a later letter the solicitor explicitly undertook to the other solicitors to pay their costs and disbursements. The client said that she had always objected to the other solicitors' account and never instructed the solicitor to agree to what she considered its excessive amount.

On settlement the solicitor received sufficient funds to enable him to discharge his undertaking to the other solicitors, but he did not do so.
Before the Tribunal he said he had instructions to dispute the other solicitors' assessment of costs. As the Tribunal pointed out, at whatever stage it was that his client made known to him her objection to the amount of the other solicitors' costs, he gave his own clear written undertaking to pay them. He did not honour his undertaking.

The Tribunal found his conduct to be unsatisfactory professional conduct, and
I am of the same opinion.

Conclusion 
At the end of the general section of the appellant's written submissions it was said that the appellant sees his future in his present position as a
Claims Manager with an underwriting agency company, and that he has indicated to the Law Society he has no intention of ever applying for an unrestricted practising certificate again. It was also indicated in the course of the hearing that the solicitor would wish to remain on the Roll, subject to conditions which, in effect, would result in his having nothing to do with trust accounts and working only in the capacity of an employee.

The general submission also made the point that Miss Sayer had examined 476 active files as Receiver and that the complaints that were taken before the
Tribunal arose only from twenty-four files. Reliance was also placed on the support the solicitor received from a number of the clients in respect of whose files complaints were made and also the support he received from professionals with whom he had come in contact in the course of practise.

The material before the Tribunal and this court also showed examples of the solicitor having lent money to some of his clients in order to tide them over financial difficulties in the course of the cases he was conducting for them.
It was possible to see aspects of the solicitor's behaviour to and sympathy for his clients which brought about the favourable response of the Statutory
Committee to him in its decision of 14 April 1987.

However, things had changed since that response. The solicitor had suffered a $10,000 fine by the Statutory Committee, he had been more strongly criticised by the Court of Appeal than by the Statutory Committee, the Act had begun to operate on 1 January 1988 and <case> operating together with cl 8 of the 1988
Regulation had spelt out the procedures to be followed in dealing with trust accounts in respect of which the solicitor should already have had considerable instruction from the Statutory Committee's decision of 14 April .

In the matters that came before the Tribunal and the court in this appeal there is little sign of the solicitor's having learnt from these things.
Looked at overall, his conduct does not appear to have been directed to deliberately stealing from or deceiving his clients or the Law Society; but, as the Tribunal remarked, those instances that were brought forward by the Law
Society and in particular the way in which the solicitor responded to many of them, showed an absence of understanding of the way in which his trust moneys should be handled. This seriously undermines his claim to be fit to practise, even on the limited basis to which he would submit.

Even if all or some of his lapses could be regarded as due to carelessness, haste or pressure of work, I do not think that would help him. Further, the lack of grasp of his duties in regard to trust moneys (duties which apply equally to small and large amounts of money, however tedious it may be in a one man practice to discharge them carefully) had the potential to lead to more morally culpable actions, and as has been pointed out in going through the various matters, in some cases did so.

In my opinion the professional misconduct established in these proceedings shows the solicitor is unfit to practise and that his name should be removed from the roll. In my opinion the court should dismiss the appeal.

KEEFE versus THE LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: I agree with Priestley JA. 
KEEFE versus THE LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
JUDGMENT 
POWELL JA: I agree with Priestley JA. * * * 
