

Rupert Phillip Oliviera versus The State of New South Wales No. 10607 of 1990 [1995] NSWSC 7 (24 August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMON LAW DIVISION
SPENDER AJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 15-16 June 1995 #DATE 3:7:1995 #ADD 24:8:1995
ORDER
Judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $72.291.29. 
From the amount payable by the defendant there will be deducted the sum of $4,500, which will be paid back to the appropriate authority. 
The defendant will pay the plaintiff's costs.
JUDGE1
SPENDER AJ:  On a hot morning on 14 February 1984 Mr Rupert Oliviera was lying in his bunk which was the lower of two in a two man cell on the ground floor of the two storied "B" wing of the Malabar Training Centre, Long Bay
Gaol. He was wearing light cotton clothes.
Mr Rodney James Cook, his cell mate was with him. Apparently, Mr Cook was asleep. The door to the cell opened; two men with balaclavas over their heads appeared. One, whom Mr Oliviera identified, was holding a large urn with a cord attached to it. The urn was about two feet high and filled with boiling water. The man holding it was built like a weight-lifter. A tall man was with him; Mr Oliviera also thought he could identify him. The man built like a weight-lifter was using a green jacket to hold the urn. He threw the contents of the urn over Mr Oliviera who suffered burns to just over 25% of his body. The two men left, slamming the door and bolting it behind them from the outside.
These essential facts are not in dispute, although the identification of the two men is.
 
LIABILITY
ISSUES
Mr Oliviera sues the State of New South Wales (and others - but they may be put to one side) for damages. Stripped to essentials, his case is that as a prisoner the defendant owed a duty to take reasonable care for his safety.
That this duty was owed is not in dispute. He claims the duty was breached in two ways. First, he says what happened to him would not have happened if there had been reasonably adequate supervision in the gaol; and that because of a strike of prison officers that supervision was absent.
Second, he was an asthmatic who daily received medication in a prison where drugs were sought after and were internal currency; he says he had asked for a transfer shortly before the strike of prison staff, he had done so because he feared that he would be harassed for his daily medication; and in breach of the duty owed to him his application for transfer was refused; he suffered the attack while prison officers were on strike; had he been transferred this would not have happened.
Summarily stated, the defence is to this effect:
That the plaintiff has not made out either of the claimed breaches; 
That the plaintiff is a liar, and his evidence is not to be believed unless corroborated, (although, as I have said, there is no real dispute about how the attack took place and none on the injuries received); 
That the Malabar Training Centre ("the MTC") was a low level security prison; the evidence is that those in it did not want to lose their privileges; and that (to use my words, rather than the defendant's), the attack was quite out of the ordinary; that these kinds of attacks cannot be guarded against ever if there was one on one staff to inmate supervision.
The evidence was limited, and in some ways extremely sketchy. It was made up of the plaintiff's evidence; that of his cell mate (who added nothing); Mr
Osborne, a former Governor; a nurse, Ms Triantafilledes, and some documents.
There was nothing more. No attempt was made by either party to present a structured picture of the gaol, or how it worked.
Some of the relevant facts are common ground, or are undisputed, or are clearly established.
I shall set out my findings on these facts with some brief references to the evidentiary sources:
The plaintiff was born in England on 16 May 1942; 
He had been at the MTC since 27 June 1983. Before then, he had been in other gaols; 
The MTC, part of the Long Bay complex, was a low security gaol. It had around 200 prisoners in it. They were imprisoned on a variety of charges and earned low security classification because of their conduct. There might have been as many as on life sentences nearing the end of their term (Mr Osborne); others were nearing the end of long sentences or were on short sentences, mainly for drug offences.

The MTC was ordinarily staffed by 90 prison officers in three shifts; there were 7 executive staff. At the time of the attack on the plaintiff the Governor was Mr Osborne.
(Mr Osborne).
 "B" wing was one of four wings. It was a two story building. There were in all about 300 prisoners in the wings which made up the MTC. (Mr Osborne and Plaintiff).

It was not common place but quite regular for privileges to be taken away from "C" class prisoners - those in C1, C2,
C3 categories which were in the MTC - because of their behaviour. (Mr Osborne).
 
The MTC was a working prison. When the prisoners finished breakfast they went out to work: sometimes inside, but mainly outside the main gaol. Those left in the gaol were sweepers, cleaners, and the Wing Officer. They maintained the wing during the day and they did not see the other prisoners until they came back for their evening meal at around 3.30pm (Mr
Osborne). The inmates of "B" wing were not locked up until around 9.30 or 9.45 in the evening. (Plaintiff).

Before the assault, the plaintiff worked in the kitchen as a cleaner. He would start work at 7.30 in the morning and worked until 10.00, then took some rest, and worked in the afternoon from about 1.00 until 3.30 (Plaintiff). There was a kitchen within "B" wing, and a dining room. The inmates (except for prisoner cooks) were not supposed to be in the kitchen. If somebody went into the kitchen it was the duty of the officer in charge of the kitchen to find out what he was doing there. During the strike the kitchens were locked up.
(Mr Osborne). Food was delivered from outside during the strike. (Plaintiff). There was a dining area which was open to the prisoners during the strike; there was an urn in the servery (which appears to have been adjacent to the kitchen and in or near the dining area where the prisoners ate).
(Mr Osborne).

When the prisoners were loose in "B" wing, i.e. when not locked up and not working, there was an officer on duty on each floor. (Mr Osborne, Plaintiff).

There had never been, to Mr Osborne's knowledge, a similar incident in the prison.
 
Shortly before the assault on the plaintiff, (the date of the strike did not emerge) the prison officers went on strike, leaving only the seven executive officers to look after the odd inmates. There were no officers for any of the wings during the strike. For the first three days the prisoners were allowed loose in their wings; after that they were allowed loose in the MTC; there was no work; there were no visits to the prisoners from friends or family from outside the prison.
(Mr Osborne, Plaintiff).

Prisoners observed a code of silence; if assaulted by another prisoner, they almost always refused to say who it was. It was consistent with Mr Osborne's understanding of the plaintiff, and the way prisoners acted, that if the plaintiff had known or suspected the identity of those who attacked him he might have kept that information to himself. (Mr Osborne).

The plaintiff had the habit of mumbling to prison officers about people who were on drugs (which, from documents in evidence, appears to have been somewhat of an obsession with him) and very obviously slipping pieces of paper to officers.
This was treated lightly by other prisoners, as a sort of a joke. (Mr Osborne).

The undisputed effect of the evidence Mr Osborne, and of the plaintiff, is that drugs were a problem in the prison; that drugs were traded and were an internal currency. The plaintiff said drugs were brought in during visits; he was not challenged on this. Drugs such as steroids were in high demand in gaol "where you have physical types, body builders, or what have you; this is quite an obsession with some prisoners." (Mr Osborne).
Without outside visits during the strike, drugs could not be smuggled in.
 
As a severe and long-term asthmatic (who had previously required hospitalisation on a number of occasions), the plaintiff received daily medication. Before the assault he was receiving 600mgs of Theo-dur, and sometimes some Prednisone steroids. They made him breathe better. This steroid gave him a sense of well-being. Ordinarily this was handed to him at the clinic window by a member of the nursing staff, Sister
Triantafilledes. (Plaintiff). The policy was that prisoners should take their medicine there and then; this did not always happen; the system was not fully supervised and broke down.
(Mr Osborne). It was possible, with prisoners in a queue, to see what other prisoners were taking. (Sister
Triantafilledes). The medical staff were in charge of handing out drugs; this had nothing to do with prison officers.
(Mr Osborne, Plaintiff). It was the defendant's case that the drugs could not be identified when handed to prisoners at the clinic window. I do not agree. The effect of Sister
Triantafilledes' evidence is to the contrary and I am not persuaded by a statement of hers which I allowed into evidence - with some doubt as to whether that course should be adopted - that there is any reason for not accepting her oral evidence. I would also infer that in a prison where drugs were of such high demand, and were handed out daily at the clinic (before the strike) to the plaintiff and other prisoners that if prisoners wished to learn what he was taking, the probabilities are that they could do so. This conclusion is supported by evidence, referred to below, that he had previously been harassed over his medication.
 
During the strike the medication was handed out in the wing by two registered nurses. There was a complete break-down of any attempt to police the policy that prisoners should take their drugs at the clinic. (Mr Osborne).

As a consequence of the strike, there was no internal supervision of the prisoners in the MTC complex. (Mr Osborne).
I turn now to the facts which are in dispute. As I have said, it was submitted by the defendant that I should treat the plaintiff as a liar, and should not act on his evidence and that is strongly corroborated. It was pointed out that the plaintiff had admitted to being willing to lie to get out of prison (something I find quite unremarkable, many people would), and it was submitted that his criminal history was such that he would not scruple to lie for gain. I will assume this to be so; but it does not necessarily follow that in important respects he was not telling the truth.
I now set out my findings in this disputed area:
I will commence with the most difficult issue; was there an application made by him, before the strike, for transfer to the prison hospital because he feared that he would be stood-over during the strike because of his medications? This issue may be broken up into the following elements: 
The plaintiff says that there were rumours about the strike before it took place. I accept this evidence.
It was not seriously contested, and received some little support from
Nurse Triantafilledes. It also accords with common sense, which one must not leave outside the court. If prison officers are going to go on strike, they will talk among themselves about what they are going to do; this is no light step. It would be surprising if prisoners did not learn that a strike was in the wind; they would then also talk about it among themselves. It would be an important event in their lives.
 
Would the plaintiff have been concerned about being harassed during a strike because of his medications? He said he was, and on the probabilities, I think he would have been.
Three pieces of evidence corroborate his expressed concerns.
 
First, in a report of 17 June 1983, some eight months before the attack on the plaintiff, from Dr Ward (who regularly worked at the prison) to the Probation and Parole Officer,
Long Bay Parole Unit, Dr Ward had specifically reported on the problem: "One of (Mr Oliviera's) problems in the MRP was that the drug abusers were standing over him for his medication which he often, therefore preferred not to collect. This problem may be solved by his transfer to the MTC." (My emphasis). It was about this time that he was transferred to the MTC.
 
Second, a document written by the plaintiff on 6 February 1984 on a form headed "Prisoner's Application or Statement" and stamped "B Wing". (it is both dated and stamped with that date) which was the subject of some contention contains these statements (which I will quote literally): "I a Corrective System where so much objective drug taking exist, rampart scheming to be in possession of it, gross mismanagement of its use, and most of all enmity, envidg and acrimony is put upon any person who is receiving medical treatment for a chronical illness which is not in any way his fault which totally turns him into a victim because of so many junkies and image seekers. Junkies seek their own personal gain to feed their habit by looting cells, standing over the weaker inmate which now is a plague to "inmates" who are not junkies, but victims ....." 
And: "....... I can no longer live in this kind of prison. My medication at times I throw down the toilet bowel to avoid any conflicts." 
Plainly this shows a real fear of harassment because of his medication, and the date of this complaint is significant: just eight days before the attack and within a day or days of the start of the strike.

Third, in a report of 16 April 1984 Dr Ward again said the plaintiff had told him that on several occasions other inmates harassed him over his medication; that this occurred both at the NW (from which he was moved in June 1983) and the MTC.

I add, in view of the defendant's contention that the plaintiff fabricated a story about a fight with another prisoner when he refused to trade one of his drugs (I refer to this later) and that he did not know why he had been assaulted or by whom, reference to two letters written by the plaintiff to prison authorities. These were tendered by the defendant.
In the first, a letter of 19 January 1986, he referred to then being harassed over is medication, and this was the same thing that "happened at the MTC which put me in hospital." In the second, a letter of 10 March 1986 he said that he was "boiled with boiling hot water for my medication ......" 
He said that he spoke to Dr Ward about being relocated.
This is contrary to what Dr Ward said in his report of 16
April 1984, which was tendered by the plaintiff.
Dr Ward was not called and that leaves me in the unenviable position of deciding between what was said, no doubt perfectly genuinely, by Dr Ward in his report (incidentally, the plaintiff had a high regard for Dr Ward), and the plaintiff's evidence on this issue. On balance, I am not persuaded I should accept the plaintiff's evidence of this.

He gave evidence that he had been previously bashed in
Maitland Gaol over drugs. The only evidence before me about
Maitland Gaol, shows that he was in Maitland gaol after, and not before, his term in the MTC. The defendant relied on this discrepancy in time, but
I do not think this matters in view of the evidence to which I have referred in (ii) above.

He said he wrote two applications.
It was put to him by the defence that the only application in evidence (the one dated 6 February 1984 to which I have referred) was what was called a section 6 application, which had nothing to do with a transfer to hospital. Mr Osborne did not know what this letter referred to but, - and this is of some significance - did say that he was "again talking about the drug system in the gaol and the effect it is having on the people ...." (My emphasis).
He thought it could have gone "through either Dr Ward as the
Medical Superintendent ......"; he did not state who the alternative was. I do not read the document as a transfer to the prison hospital; but certainly it put the authorities plainly on notice of the plaintiff's concerns and, it seems from the document and from Mr Osborne's evidence, that the application which at the very least was an application to get out of the MTC - was supportive, but not acted upon. I do not know what the system was of keeping applications, or how infallible it might or might not have been: there was no evidence before me of the record-keeping system. Assuming there was no second written application, or nothing which would precisely answer the description of a written application for transfer to the hospital, there remains the evidence given by the plaintiff about how he sought to be transferred. Incidentally,
I note it was put to the plaintiff that he had previously not wanted to go into hospital; but he said, and this seems reasonable to me, that circumstances had changed with the talk about the strike coming up when there would be no prison officers in the gaol.
 
He says that he spoke to an Indian staff member in the "B" wing MTC, and that this officer whom he named gave him the applications; that he did this in "B" wing. Mr Osborne confined that there had been a person of Indian ethnicity employed in the MTC at the time. More significantly, the plaintiff said that he was called down (after making the two applications he said he had made) to see the Deputy
Superintendent Executive Officer, "Patrick Culham I think. I think it might have been him." He seems to have been fairly clear about Mr Culham's identity and said he was told by Mr
Culham: "There is nothing you can do about it, you know." He was treated brusquely he said. Mr Osborne confirmed that there was such a person on the prison staff at the time and that Mr
Culham's position was Assistant Superintendent.

It was properly conceded by the defendant's counsel that I could draw a Jones versus Dunkel inference by reason of the defendant's failure to call Mr Culham.
I do so.

On balance, I accept the plaintiff made a request to be transferred to the prison hospital because of his concern about being harassed over his daily medication; that he expressed his concerns; and his application was refused.
In reaching this view I have been influenced not just by my view that he was genuinely concerned about being harassed - of which the statement I have quoted provides corroborative evidence - but the circumstantial support given by his nomination of an ethnic Indian and more importantly Mr Culham, and by the defendant's failure to call Mr Culham.

An issue between the plaintiff and the defendant was whether a fight had taken place of which the plaintiff gave evidence. His evidence was that during the strike he got his medication in the morning from Sister Triantafilledes at the dining room window; that other prisoners were in the area; that a man named Arkinsaw who was a weight-lifter asked for some of his steroids and said he would give tobacco in exchange; that he ended up having a fight with Arkinsaw's mate, a tall fellow named Nooky; that he said he was not going to give his medication to them. I accept such a fight did take place. His evidence struck me as truthful.
It was consistent with his concerns about harassment, and provided a motive - retribution in an unguarded prison - for the attack which later took place.

The identification of his assailants was, as I have said, in issue. I accept the plaintiff's evidence of identification.
The fact that they wore balaclavas would not have prevented the plaintiff from identifying them by reference to their physical characteristics; a weight-lifter and a very tall man, with whom he had had confrontation leading to a fight only a day or so before - precisely how long is unclear, but does not matter. He would have good reason to know their physical appearances.
 
There are some other areas of the evidence which require comment. Mr Osborne gave evidence to the effect that had the plaintiff made application to him for a transfer he would immediately have acted on it.
However, I do not think that request necessarily got to him, particularly in a pre-strike situation when - and this is somewhat contrary to Mr Osborne's view of things - some of the usual procedures might have been getting frayed. In any event, accepting as I have the plaintiff's evidence about rejection, the logical inference is that his application never got to Mr Osborne.
And, as I understand Mr Osborne's evidence, he had no memory of seeing the prisoner's application which the plaintiff undoubtedly wrote shortly before the strike. Also, Mr Osborne was being tested on his recollection of routine rather than striking in unusual events (and I am not speaking of the assault on the plaintiff) more than eleven years later, and this has to be borne in mind. On the issue of distribution of drugs during the strike, Mr Osborne said there was no set policy - which seems wholly understandable. This was left in the hands of the medical staff. (Mr Osborne). Asked whether in the ordinary course of events a prison would be allowed take an urn filled with boiling water out of the kitchen he said, not normally, that there would be questions asked about this, and that, (I interpolate, to state the obvious) prisoners did not normally wear balaclavas. The defendant relied on evidence by the plaintiff's cell mate that the plaintiff, when the boiling water was thrown over him, said: "why me, why me." I found Mr
Cook an unimpressive witness. The plaintiff thought he might have said: "why this" - why this extreme and brutal action, as
I understand his evidence. This would have been said in a moment of shock and extreme pain. I prefer the plaintiffs evidence on this point. Even assuming he said: "why me" it does not in my view detract in any way from his identification of his assailants or his evidence concerning the fight. One does not give too over-refined an analysis to words uttered in such a dreadful moment, when the person attacked would have been shocked that such a dreadful thing had been done to him.
The applicable legal principles are these.
First, the defendant had a duty to exercise reasonable care for the plaintiff's safety while in custody. This was an obligation the defendant owed to the plaintiff in common with all other prisoners: Howard versus Jarvis <case>; [(1958) 98
CLR 177] at 297, Kirby
P. Kirkham versus Chief Constable of the Greater Manchester Police <case>; [(1990) 2 QB 283] at 293-294, Farquharson LJ.
Second, when the negligence complained of is an omission to act, questions of causation are answered by reference to what would or would not have happened had the breach of duty not happened: Bennett versus Minister of
Community Welfare <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 408] at 467, Mason J.
Third, what must be shown is that the negligent act or omission was a material contributing cause to the damage suffered by the plaintiff.
Bonnington Castings Ltd versus Wardlaw <case>; [(1956) AC 613] at 530, McHugh JA.
Fourth, questions of causation are matters of fact, common sense and judgment. Policy considerations may be taken account of: March versus E & M H
Stramare Pty Ltd <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506.]
I shall now deal with the first head of claim:
Ordinarily, at the time that the assault took place, the plaintiff and all other prisoners would have been at work. Had there been no strike, the attack could not have taken place at that time.

When the prisoners were allowed back into their cells, there was an officer on duty at each of the two levels of B wing.

There are assaults which will take place in prison, ranging from the minor to the very severe, which are quite unpreventable.

However, in order to attack the plaintiff the two assailants: 
Had to get an urn of boiling water - and a very large one at that. Most probably, this would have come from the kitchen area rather than the servery, although it does not seem to me to matter which. The plaintiff identified the urn as a huge steel urn of the kind found in the kitchen, and there is no reason to suppose that he lied about this. The plaintiff's evidence on this was not challenged.

This had to be carried to the plaintiff's cell. If taken from the kitchen area this would have been a distance of about metres. If taken from the area where the prisoners had their food - which I would infer was next to the kitchen area, the distance would be somewhat less.

For one person to be carrying a large urn with a flex attached to it filled with boiling water into the wing area where the prisoners had their cell is, I infer, out of the ordinary. There was no reason for this to be done in the ordinary course of events: the urn, I infer, was to stay in the kitchen/servery area of the dining room. What was being done was made even more out of the ordinary by the fact that he was carrying it using a coat for that purpose to avoid - I infer - being burnt.
 
The man carrying the urn, and his companion, were both wearing balaclavas when they arrived at the cell. This was no doubt for the purposes of avoiding identification. It was put by the defendant that one does not know when the balaclavas were put on the heads of the plaintiff's attackers; this could have been done just outside the cell door. I think this is improbable. If they wished to avoid being identified by the plaintiff and his cellmate, I would infer they would also wish to avoid being identified by others. There was evidence of the prisoners detestation of informers, described as "dogs"; there was evidence given by Mr Osborne that he had his own informers in prison. I infer that the two attackers would have been aware of the problems of informers: they would not know in any event who might be minded to identify them. Accordingly, I think the probabilities are that they must have carried the urn while wearing their balaclavas, and not put the balaclavas on outside the plaintiff's cell. What was to be done was a serious crime; they would do what they could to avoid identification. Apart from the fact that it was a serious crime for which they could be prosecuted and if convicted might have received heavy sentences - and they would have been aware of this risk - their prison privileges would also have been at risk.

The seven executive staff were pushed to the limits; they were trying to do the work of ninety, and also, I infer some of the work they would ordinarily do themselves. No doubt those at the end of their term as life prisoners, and other prisoners who had earned their low security status, would wish to keep that status. But the absence of discipline and supervision would remove restraints on conduct. It would be nonsense for the court to assume that we are dealing with people whose conduct is ordinarily the subject of the kind of restraints the great majority of the community voluntarily impose on themselves.

I find, on the probabilities, that the absence of any supervision was a material contributing cause in that, it is more probable than not, that in prison the absence of discipline and supervision may lead to violence. The facts of the assault take it out of the kinds of assaults which cannot be guarded against. Common sense tells one that this is exactly the sort of thing that would not take place with reasonable supervision of prisoners.
 
The assault is the sort of thing that reasonably should have been foreseen as a result of withdrawal of supervision of the prisoners; it was not far fetched or fanciful: Wyong Shire
Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 48, Mason J. The danger that actually occurred need not of course be identical with the danger that might be apprehended:
L versus Commonwealth at 282.
Directing myself to the Bennett test to which I have earlier referred, this aspect of the plaintiffs case may be summarised, favourably to the plaintiff in these terms: 
There was an absence of reasonable supervision; as a result of the strike, supervision had for all intents and purposes vanished.

Had it been in place, the probabilities are that the attack would never have taken place. This was a working prison; at the time the attack took place the plaintiff would not have been in his cell; he would have been attending to his duties; the other prisoners would not have been roaming free in the wing; they would have been attending to their working duties; in short, the actual attack could not have happened.

Consequently, the plaintiff is entitled to succeed. The court is not dealing with a hypothetical attack, but an actual attack.

More generally and separately there was in the ordinary course of events a regime of discipline, regulation, oversight and sanctions in place, which on the probabilities, in my opinion, would have prevented the attack in question taking place.
I hold that the plaintiff has made out his case on what I have called the first head of claim.
I turn (with some repetition only of the material facts) to the second head of claim. I will not traverse my findings about the plaintiff's concerns, his medications, his application for transfer and the reasons for that. I go directly to these matters:
The plaintiff gave evidence that he had a fight, before the assault and after the strike when asked by a man called
Arkinsaw, who was always doing weights, for some of his steroids. The fight was with a tall fellow who was with him, called Nooky.

He identified by his build Arkinsaw as the person holding the urn, and the person with him was a tall man whom he said was the person he had the fight with. He was a little less positive about the identification of the tall man, but in my view, positive enough.
From the plaintiffs description of them, they would have made a striking pair. I accept this evidence, and I find it quite unremarkable that he would not have disclosed Arkinsaw's identity, or his views about the identity of his tall companion.

The defendant was on notice of a foreseeable risk of injury: i.e. harassment for his medications, in the event that there were no staff in the prison. I would have reached this conclusion even if I had found that there was no oral application made and refused. Plainly enough, the medications made him a target in an unregulated prison, and plainly enough, the authorities were on notice of this fact and of his concerns. They were also on notice generally of the kind of drug problems that have been described in evidence not just by the plaintiff (whose evidence on this subject I accept), but also by Mr Osborne, and to a lesser extent from inferences that may be drawn from Mrs Triantafilledes' evidence. The plaintiff could have been moved to the prison hospital; this was not done. He was left at risk of harassment over his medications; that happened; he resisted; retribution followed.
I find for the plaintiff on the second way in which he put his case.
Before leaving issues of liability, there is one matter I should address briefly.
It was not put to me, and rightly so, that the defendant could get any solace from the fact that there was a strike. The defendant's duty was and is to provide reasonable protection for those in the defendant's custody; industrial difficulties cannot relieve the defendant of such a duty. The prisoners' right to reasonable protection while in custody - when he (or she) may have to depend very largely on the control and supervision exercised by prison officers for protection from harassment, or very serious assaults - is one which the law maintains and protects.
 
DAMAGES
Damages is, in my opinion - and contrary to some of the defendant's submissions - a fairly uncontentious area.
The extent of the plaintiff's injuries are not in dispute, nor the period of his hospitalisation.
The plaintiff was immediately in great pain; this is uncontested.
He was locked in the cell, his cell-mate tried to break down the door; eventually help arrived; the plaintiff was immediately placed under a shower. He was taken that day to Prince Henry Hospital; then to the burns unit at Concord
Hospital. He stayed there till March 1984 when he was returned to the prison hospital, Long Bay with dressings on both forearms, the chest, and right leg. He remained there until 11 May 1984.
In his report of 16 April 1984 Dr Ward noted burns to the face, chest, arms, abdomen and right leg. He noted the great pain the plaintiff had been in, the severe pain of the first few weeks, nightmares relating to the assault, and that he still was in a state of chronic anxiety. The plaintiff gave evidence to a similar effect of the great pain he had been in, of nightmares and anxiety. I accept his evidence, which seems to me to be entirely consistent with the injuries he suffered and the way they were inflicted.
Dr Steven Shumack, in report of 12 May 1994 expressed the view that the plaintiff was subject to some disability because of scarring (which must be taken in conjunction with the plaintiff's many tattoos), and that his skin will be slightly more sensitive to sunburn with sun exposure.
It was contended that the plaintiff had exaggerated the consequences of his injuries and that in particular, he had not told the truth about the time when he was required to wear a specially made covering on his body. But I do not think it matters very much how long he wore the special skin jacket (which he said helped him), and I will assume it was for the shortest possible time.
I think that may be some exaggeration concerning his sensitivity about going to the beach and I think that the great majority of the consequences of his injuries are now past. There was no dispute about his hospitalisation; none about the pain he must have suffered; and on any view of things it was a dreadful and painful period. I accept that he has had and continues to have nightmares - although with decreasing frequency - as a result of his injuries.
It was suggested that the plaintiff had magnified or fabricated some of his alleged disabilities. Overall, this was not my impression.
I asked the parties to put a value on the general damages (there being no claim for any but general damages). The defendant put a figure of $30,000 to $40,000; the plaintiff put a figure of $40,000 to $60,000. It was agreed that there would be a pay back for funds received by the plaintiff under the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme which amount to $4,500.
In all the circumstances, I think an award of general damages of $60,000 is well within the range, and I make that award. I would allocate 90% (or $54,000) of this to the past.
 .
It was put to me that if I found in favour of the plaintiff, interest should not be awarded on the whole of the period for general damages up until the date of judgment by reason of the lateness of the plaintiff bringing the proceedings. I am not persuaded that
I should accede to this application, and
I do not do so.
The sum of $54,000 will carry interest at the usual rate. This comes to $12,291.29.
 
ORDERS:
I make the following orders:-
Judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $72.291.29.
 .
From the amount payable by the defendant there will be deducted the sum of $4,500, which will be paid back to the appropriate authority.
The defendant will pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/7.html  
