

National Australia Bank Ltd versus Garcia [1996] NSWSC 253 (3 July 1996) 
NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LIMITED versus GARCIA /93; ED 3310/90 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY P, MEAGHER, SHELLER JJA 
CATCHWORDS: EQUITY - equitable relief - unconscionability - undue influence - principle in Yerkey versus Jones should not be followed; Commercial Bank of Aust versus Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447] 
CONTRACTS - procedural or substantive unfairness - [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
National Australia Bank Limited (NAB) appealed and Mrs Garcia cross appealed from decisions of Young J delivered on 7 and 22 April 1993. Mrs Garcia had begun proceedings in the Equity Division, seeking a declaration that a mortgage and four guarantees, granted in NAB's favour, were of no force and effect and were void.

Mrs Garcia relied upon allegations of undue influence by her husband and unconscionability by the NAB to support her claim that she should be relieved of the burden of the transactions. She also relied on the principle in Yerkey v Jones <case>; [(1939) 63 CLR 649.] 
Young J held that, even though Mrs Garcia would not have been entitled to relief on grounds of unconscionability principle because of NAB's lack of actual or constructive knowledge of Mr Garcia's conduct, NAB had failed to discharge the onus of showing that it had taken reasonable steps to ensure that the wife had given a true and informed consent to the transactions. His
Honour held on this basis that the guarantees did not bind Mrs Garcia.

Mrs Garcia also argued that she should have been granted relief pursuant to the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). Young J rejected this ground because the Act dealt with conduct up to the making of the contract and the terms of the contract itself, whereas her claim was that what happened after the making of the contract was unfair. The fact that unjust consequences flowed from a contract would be insufficient for the operation of the Act.

On appeal, NAB argued that Yerkey versus Jones had been subsumed by Commercial
Bank of Australia versus Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447], while Mrs Garcia submitted on her cross appeal that NAB had acted unconscionably. Barclays Bank PLC versus O'Brien <case>; [[1994] 1 AC ]

HELD: . In the past, the matrimonial relationship and the experience of a married woman may have been such that it was proper to infer or even to accept in principle that she would not have had sufficient experience of business to enable her to form a sound judgment of the transactions in question, or that she would have been unduly influenced by her husband. The principle in Yerkey versus Jones was based upon general assumptions about the capacity of married women rather than upon evidence of the circumstances of that case. However, to infer such matters now would so often be contrary to experience that it is wrong to accept them to be so in principle or as a presumption of fact.
While it is the duty of the Court of Appeal to accept loyally the decisions of the High Court ( Trident General Insurance Co Limited versus McNiece
Bros Pty Limited <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 107] at 129), the principle in Yerkey versus Jones did not flow from a majority decision which would have been binding on this Court. It was at best a principle to which only one Judge adhered and thus had no sure foundation in Australian law. The principle should no longer be applied in New
South Wales. The High Court decision of Commercial Bank of Australia versus Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447] is the authoritative statement on equity's jurisdiction to grant relief against unconscionable conduct.

Akins versus National Australia Bank Limited [(1994) 34 NSWLR 155] at 177 per Clarke JA.
 . Before a transaction allegedly procured by undue influence may be set aside, it must have been sufficiently evidenced to NAB that Mrs Garcia suffered from a special disability which prevented her from understanding the nature or effect of the transaction. Young J found that there was nothing to show that it was unconscientious for the Bank to accept her assent to the transaction in this case. His Honour's finding should not be disturbed.
Mrs Garcia's case was based largely if not entirely upon procedural rather than substantive unfairness. The substance of her case was that what happened in 1988 and thereafter was unfair. Such conduct would not fall within the scope of the Act. The [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) only operates to relieve parties where there is substantive unfairness in the contract itself or procedural unfairness in the conduct leading up to the making of the contract; West versus AGC (Advances) Limited [(1986) 5 NSWLR ]
at 621-2. Discretion to grant relief under the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) will not generally be exercised if the disability complained of was one of which the other party was unaware.

Beneficial Finance Corporation Limited versus Karavas [(1991) 23 NSWLR ]
at 277.

ORDERS . Appeal allowed;
Set aside orders 1 to 4 and 6 and 7 of 7 April 1993;
In lieu thereof dismiss the plaintiff's claim with costs;
On the cross claim, judgment for the cross claimant for possession of the property described in Certificate of Title Volume 10003 Folio 103 known as 148
Campbell Drive, Wahroonga in the State of New South Wales;
Leave to issue a writ of possession in respect of the said property;
Judgment for the cross claimant in the sum of $518,137.51 together with interest thereon from 1 March 1993 pursuant to s94 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/);
The cross defendant to pay the cross claimant's costs of the cross claim;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/);
Cross appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: The facts have been stated and the issues canvassed in detail in the judgment of Sheller JA which I have had the advantage of reading. I agree with the orders proposed by Sheller JA and in general with his reasons. In view of the nature of the issues involved I shall indicate briefly the basis of my views in relation to the main matters at issue.

In my opinion it is wrong to approach the position of a party to transactions of the kind here in question upon the basis that there is a principle or a presumption that either party has been less than fully capable of dealing with his or her affairs. It is wrong to treat the position of a party - in the present case it is the position of a married woman - as being in principle one of disadvantage. Each case must, for such purposes, be considered according to its own facts.

Nor, in my opinion, should the position of any party, whether wife, husband or otherwise, be approached upon the basis that an inference of fact is to be drawn (in principle, prima facie, or otherwise) as to the capacity of that person to deal with his or her own affairs by reason only of his or her matrimonial position or family relationship. Again, each case must be examined and determined by reference to its own facts.

I do not mean by this that the Court may never infer relevant incapacity from a person's status or condition. Thus, proof that a person was an infant, an alcoholic, a mentally disturbed person or the like may warrant an inference or a provisional inference of fact that the person did not have the mental or emotional capacity to appreciate the incidents of the transaction in question.
But, in the end, the decision must be one of fact: did the person have at the relevant time the capacity to deal with his or her own affairs in the relevant way? 
The present appeal concerns the position of a woman in a matrimonial relationship. One suggestion has been that, because she was a married woman and/or because her husband was involved in the transactions, the conclusion should be drawn that she lacked the capacity or will to enter into them. The suggestion was that the cases to which Sheller JA has referred warrant that conclusion. One may find that the circumstances of the life of a married woman may be such that it may be inferred, as a matter of factual probability, that she had not had sufficient experience of business transactions to enable her to form a sound judgment of the transactions in question. One may find that her matrimonial relationship to her husband was such that it may be inferred that she did not exercise a free will but was unduly influenced by him. But in my opinion such matters should not now be inferred merely from the fact that she was married and that her husband was involved. In the past, the matrimonial relationship and the experience of married women may have been such that it was proper to infer such matters as facts or even to accept that in principle such was the case. To infer such matters now would so often be contrary to experience that it is wrong to accept them to be so, in principle or as a presumption of fact.

Whether a person has knowledge and/or experience in this regard can, I believe, readily be proved in evidence. I am not now prepared to draw inferences of this kind merely from the state of the matrimonial or other relationship of a man or woman. In my opinion, factual findings as to capacity and the like should be approached upon that basis.

The orders proposed by Sheller JA are, I believe, the correct orders to be made. If, having regard to Mrs Garcia's position, other orders should be made,
I would reserve to her the right to apply.
 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Sheller JA.

SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
National Australia Bank Limited (NAB), the defendant, appeals and Jean Balharry Garcia (Mrs Garcia), the plaintiff, cross appeals from decisions of Young J of 7 and 22 April 1993 in proceedings Mrs Garcia began for a declaration that a mortgage and four guarantees and indemnities she and her then husband, Fabio Benjamin Garcia (Mr Garcia), executed, were of no force or effect and void and for an order that NAB deliver up the certificate of title of the mortgaged property together with a discharge of the mortgage in registrable form. The mortgage, which was executed on 9 August 1979 over a property known as 148 Campbell Drive, Wahroonga, was in favour of the Commercial Banking Company of Sydney Limited (CBC), which subsequently amalgamated with or was taken over by NAB. The four guarantees and indemnities were in favour of NAB. Three of them, executed on 11 February 1985, 17 November 1986 and on or about 25 November 1987, were to secure facilities granted to a company called Citizens Gold Bullion Exchange Pty Limited. The fourth guarantee executed on 12 September 1985 was to secure a facility granted to another company called Citizens Finance Corporation Pty Limited. NAB cross-claimed for possession of the mortgaged property and for judgment in the sum of $329,160.83 with interest from 19 October 1990. 
Young J said that the evidence showed that Mrs Garcia was in her 52nd year.
She and Mr Garcia were married on 30 January 1970 in the United States of
America. Early in 1971 Mrs Garcia returned to Australia and on 7 April in that year bought the land at Campbell Drive, Wahroonga for $14,500. On 9 November the property was transferred into their joint names "to have a breadwinner", Mr Garcia, on the certificate of title for borrowing purposes.
Mr Garcia paid nothing for the transfer. In March 1974 the property was mortgaged to secure a loan from United Permanent Building Society Limited which was used to build a house. In 1977 Mr Garcia started business on his own account as a foreign exchange broker. Mrs Garcia is a qualified physiotherapist. In March 1979 she opened a physiotherapy practice at Hornsby.

The August 1979 mortgage in favour of CBC was an "all moneys" mortgage for a loan of up to $15,000, $5,000 of which was to secure a business facility for
Mr Garcia, who was short of liquid funds, and the balance a personal loan to both Mr and Mrs Garcia. On 17 June 1982 Citizens Gold was incorporated and on January 1983 according to the books of that company Mrs Garcia appointed a director. Thereafter the various guarantees to which I have referred were given. Young J said that although Mrs Garcia was, together with Mr Garcia, a shareholder and director of Citizens Gold, Mr Garcia was its controlling force. Apparently Mr Garcia conducted a gold bullion business through Citizens
Gold and Citizens Finance. The business was described as "one with a high turnover". The bank account or bank accounts would sometimes be in credit in a six figure amount and sometimes in debit for a similar amount depending on whether there had just been a heavy buying period or a heavy selling period.
The first guarantee of 11 February 1985 was for the "basic liability" of $100,000. By letter of that date Mrs Garcia wrote to the bank depositing documents in support of the guarantee which included "certificate of title
Volume 10003 Folio 103 Registered Mortgage over the above deeds". The guarantee of 12 September 1985 was for the "basic liability" of $150,000, the guarantee of 17 November 1986 for the "basic liability" of $400,000. The fourth guarantee which was dated 25 November 1987 and executed either in late
November or early December 1987, was for the "basic liability" of $270,000. By each of the guarantees the guarantors agreed to pay NAB "on demand" the moneys thereby secured. Corresponding letters of deposit accompanied all the guarantees and the mortgage was treated as security for all of them.

In November 1988 Mrs Garcia told an officer of NAB, Mr Shield, that on 1
September Mr Garcia had left her. Young J said: "Mr Shield's note made on that occasion notes this information, notes a request that the account be kept within limits and indicates that Mrs Garcia will 'revert' after speaking to her husband. It does not appear that she ever did so. However, shortly afterwards Mr Shield approved an extension of the
Citizens Gold facility for three months pending receipt of up-to-date financial details. During December 1988 the Citizens Gold overdraft account came into credit. In early 1989 [Mr Garcia] was arrested and bailed to appear in a Queensland Court on 10 January 1989. On 9 January 1989 the defendant Bank directed that the Citizens Gold account be stopped to debit operations. On 12
January 1989 the account was still in credit and indeed on 23 March 1989 it was in credit to the sum of $362,179. In April 1989, despite a profit and loss account showing a loss for the previous year of $418,000, the facility was renewed and the Bank advanced further moneys. The account went into debit which continued until the account was stopped on 25 May 1989 as a result of a
Mareva injunction obtained on behalf of the Standard Chartered Bank. Citizens
Gold was wound up on the petition of the Standard Chartered Bank on 13 October
On 30 November 1989 the plaintiff obtained a decree nisi for divorce from [Mr Garcia] which became absolute on 1 January 1990. On 31 May 1990 an order was made by the Family Court transferring [Mr Garcia's] interest in the
Wahroonga property to the plaintiff subject to the defendant's mortgage. On 28
June 1990 the plaintiff commenced these current proceedings." 
On 23 August 1990 NAB made a formal demand on Mrs Garcia under the guarantee of 25 November 1987 for the amount of $327,189.69 and a demand under the mortgage and gave a notice expressed to be "pursuant to [s111(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s111.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) and/or [s57](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) (b) of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/)." NAB's main claim was under the 1987 guarantee but it also sought to enforce the 1985 and 1986 guarantees even though it had made its demand only under the 1987 guarantee. Young J held that the 1985 and 1986 guarantees could not assist NAB on its cross claim. NAB did not challenge that conclusion in its appeal but it did challenge the form of his Honour's order in respect of those guarantees.

Young J said that the issues to be determined in the proceedings were as follows: "1. Did the plaintiff have a substantial interest in Citizens Gold Bullion
Exchange Pty Ltd or any other relevant company so as to deny her the right to rely on <case>; [(1939) 63 CLR 649]?]
What were the circumstances of the plaintiff signing the various guarantees?
What facts can be found, if any, that point to it being unconscionable for the defendant to enforce the guarantees?
What degree of knowledge, if any, did the Bank have of the plaintiff's situation?
Did the plaintiff suffer a mental disadvantage? 
An examination of those facts will then lead to conclusions on the following issues:
What should happen to the plaintiff's claim under the general law?
What should happen to the plaintiff's claim under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/)? and,
What should happen to the Bank's cross claim?" 
The principle said to be established by Yerkey versus Jones can be stated as follows. If the wife of a debtor gives a guarantee to his creditor and the wife's agreement to give the guarantee was obtained by undue influence or pressure or misrepresentation or without an adequate understanding of the nature and effect of the transaction, the creditor cannot enforce the guarantee if it knew of the relationship, but failed to take reasonable steps to ensure that the wife had given a true and informed consent to the transaction; compare Barclays Bank PLC versus O'Brien <case>; [[1994] 1 AC ] at -8. This means that the creditor, in obtaining the wife's agreement to the transaction, must assume, without knowledge or notice, and unless the contrary is shown, that the wife is the weaker party in the relationship prone to be influenced by her husband against her own interest and likely not to have understood the nature and effect of the transaction. The principle has been held not to apply where the guarantee is for the debts of a company in which the married woman is engaged with her husband and the transaction is not shown to be unfavourable from her point of view; European Asian of Australia
Limited versus Lazich [(1987) ASC 55-564] at 57,291 per Clarke J, as he then was.

This exception gave rise to the first issue about whether Mrs Garcia had "a substantial interest" in the debtor company Citizens Gold. Young J found that the exact beneficial holding in the various companies including Citizens Gold in which Mrs Garcia was said to have an interest was quite obscure. Mrs Garcia gave uncontradicted evidence that her husband forged her signature from time to time on company documents. Young J said: "If I were to wholly accept Mrs
Garcia, it would be clear that the Bank has failed to discharge its onus of proof." Generally speaking he accepted Mrs Garcia as a witness of truth and her evidence that she was not directly involved in the various companies. He found that there was little doubt that benefit did from time to time flow through to the family from the companies to the extent of $300 a week at one stage, but held that the mere fact that a man provided for his family out of his earnings from a company did not mean that the company must be considered to be one in which the family was beneficially interested. The rule in Yerkey v Jones applied.

The second issue identified required an examination of the circumstances in which the mortgage and guarantees were executed. Young J found that NAB had not shown that the fact that the guarantee was secured by the mortgage over the home signed in 1979 was sufficiently explained to Mrs Garcia so that the guarantee, if it was to stand at all, must stand on an unsecured basis. His
Honour continued: "As to the guarantee, there is no difficulty at all about a person comprehending that a document headed 'Guarantee' which her husband has explained is to guarantee the Bank's overdraft is just what it says. Moreover the plaintiff had signed guarantees in 1985 and 1986 and another one in connection with Planet International Ltd to the Standard Chartered Bank. The
Standard Bank guarantee was signed, it would seem in front of a bank manager on 10 December 1987. Indeed, Mrs Garcia's whole evidence is consistent with her having agreed to guarantee the company's overdraft. The vice, however, was that the husband assured Mrs Garcia that there was either the money or the gold there and there would be no risk.
 ..........

Accordingly we have a situation where Mrs Garcia was informed by her husband that there would be no risk, she signed the guarantee on that basis and were it not for something that happened thereafter, there would have been no problem. The Bank seeks to enforce the guarantee in the problem circumstances and the onus is on it because of the special tenderness equity shows to wives, to show that the transaction was not unconscionable. In my view it has failed to satisfy me on that score. Accordingly in my view the plaintiff is entitled to relief setting the guarantees aside." 
Young J did not think Mrs Garcia was entitled to relief "under the unconscionability principle" because of NAB's lack of knowledge, actual or constructive of Mr Garcia's conduct. Mrs Garcia relied also on the [Contracts
Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) principally on the basis of events in October 1988 and thereafter. His Honour rejected this case and said that the Act dealt with conduct up to the making of the contract and the terms of the contract itself. Later conduct was not within the scope of the Act. The mere fact that unjust consequences flowed from a contract was insufficient. She was not entitled to any relief under that Act.

Young J declared that the guarantees dated 11 February 1985, 17 November 1986 and 25 November 1987 did not bind Mrs Garcia and that there were no moneys owing by her to NAB under the mortgage "immediately prior to the order made in the Family Court in proceedings number S7074 of 1989 wherein it was ordered that subject to the mortgage in favour of NAB, Mr Garcia sign all documents and do all things necessary to transfer to Mrs Garcia all his right, title and interest in the property." 
YERKEY versus JONES 
In the forefront of NAB's appeal was the submission that the decision of the High Court in Commercial Bank of Australia versus Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447] at 200: "In more recent times, it has been acknowledged that the concept appealed to, in relation to a married woman, is at best a survivor from the days when a married woman was almost incapable in law. I feel compelled to say that in the year 1985 it seems anachronistic to be told that being a female and a wife is, by itself, a sufficient qualification to enrol in the class of persons suffering a special disadvantage. However, counsel for Mrs Kurland submitted that the iron grip of precedent requires me to submit to such a finding. Were this to be correct, it would affix a badge of shame to this branch of the law.
In my opinion, stated in the extreme form embraced by counsel, the proposition is not correct but, nonetheless, it has sufficient claim to accuracy to require a review of this branch of the law so as to bring it into conformity with current thinking and standards. That being a female spouse should place a person shoulder to shoulder with the sick, the ignorant and the impaired is not to be tolerated." 
In Amadio the majority, when restating the principles upon which equity will grant relief against a party to a transaction guilty of unconscionable conduct, insisted that the party shown to be under a special disability and seeking to be relieved from obligations under the transaction, on that ground, show that the special disability was "sufficiently evident" to that other party. If the principle derived from Yerkey versus Jones is the law, in this respect married women are treated differently from other persons under a special disability. However it is doubtful whether the High Court has authoritatively adopted the principle ascribed to Yerkey versus Jones.

The facts of Amadio can be stated shortly. In March 1977 the respondents, Mr and Mrs Amadio, were aged respectively 76 and 71 years. They owned their home, an adjoining orchard and a block of four shops. On 25 March 1977 they executed a document containing a guarantee and a supporting mortgage to secure the existing and future indebtedness to the appellant bank of a company associated with one of their sons. At the time they executed these documents they mistakenly believed that their potential liability thereunder was limited to a maximum amount of $50,000. In fact it was unlimited. They began proceedings in the South Australian Supreme Court for orders relieving them from their obligations under the guarantee and mortgage. The bank counterclaimed for declarations of validity and an order that they pay to it the amount owed by the guaranteed company. The trial judge found in favour of the bank and entered judgment in its favour in the amount of nearly $240,000. The Full
Court upheld an appeal, ordered that the guarantee be set aside and that a discharge of the mortgage and the certificate of title to the land be delivered to Mr and Mrs Amadio.

Five justices heard the bank's appeal to the High Court. Gibbs CJ found that the bank owed a duty to the mortgagors to disclose unusual features relating to the overdrawn account and the non-disclosure amounted to a misrepresentation sufficient to entitle the mortgagors to have the deed set aside. Dawson J dissented and would have allowed the appeal. The other three members of the Court, Mason, Wilson and Deane JJ, held that the mortgagors were under a special disability when they executed the deed containing the guarantee which was sufficiently evident to the bank to make it, in the circumstances in which execution was procured, prima facie unfair or unconscientious for the bank to procure execution of the document of guarantee and mortgage. The onus lay on the bank to show that the transaction should not be set aside and it had not been satisfied. Mason J agreed with Deane J's conclusion that the respondents were entitled to relief on the ground that the bank was guilty of unconscionable conduct. Wilson J agreed with Deane J's conclusion and the reasons advanced in support of that conclusion. Accordingly it is convenient first to refer to the judgment of Deane J. On pages 474-5 his
Honour described the jurisdiction of Courts of Equity to relieve against unconscionable dealing and said it extended generally to circumstances in which "(i) A party to a transaction was under a special disability in dealing with the other party with the consequence that there was an absence of any reasonable degree of equality between them and that disability was sufficiently evident to the stronger party to make it prima facie unfair or 'unconscientious' that he procure, or accept, the weaker party's assent to the impugned transaction in the circumstances in which he procured or accepted it.

Where such circumstances are shown to have existed, an onus is cast on the stronger party to show that the transaction was fair just and reasonable:".

His Honour went on to distinguish the equitable principles relating to relief against unconscionable dealing and those relating to undue influence.
"Unconscionable dealing looks to the conduct of the stronger party in attempting to enforce, or retain the benefit of, a dealing with a person under a special disability in circumstances where it is not consistent with equity or good conscience that he should do so. The adverse circumstances which may constitute a special disability for the purposes of the principles relating to relief against unconscionable dealing may take a wide variety of forms and are not susceptible of being comprehensively catalogue(d)." On page 475 his Honour said that in most cases where Equity Courts have granted relief against unconscionable dealing, there has been an inadequacy of consideration moving from the stronger party though it was not essential that this should be so.
Speaking of the instance where adequate consideration may have moved from the stronger party but to some third party involved in the transaction, not to the party under the disability, his Honour said: "Thus, it is established that the jurisdiction extends, in an appropriate case, to relieve a guarantor of the burden of a guarantee of existing and future indebtedness (see Owen and Gutch versus Homan <case>; [(1853) 4 HLC 997], at 1034-1035 <case>; [[10
ER 752], at 767]).
Such a guarantee is properly to be viewed in the terms enunciated by Cussen J in Bank of Victoria Limited versus Mueller <case>; [[1925] VLR 642] at 649: 'In the first place, it is obvious that a large benefit is conferred both on the creditor and the debtor, which, so far as any advantage to the guarantor is concerned, is voluntary, though no doubt 'consideration' exists so far as the creditor is concerned, so soon as the forbearance is in fact given or advances are in fact made. It is, I think, to some extent by reference to the rule or to an extension of the rule that, in the case of a large voluntary donation, a gift may be set aside in equity if it appears that the donor did not really understand the transaction, that such a guarantee may be treated as voidable as between the husband and wife.' 
Cussen J's above analysis was made in the context of a guarantee procured by a husband from his wife in favour of the husband's bank. There is, however, no basis in principle or policy for confining the process of reasoning therein contained to cases of the relief of female spouses. It is appropriate to the circumstances of the present case." 
The passage quoted exemplified one sort of special disability consisting of a lack of understanding of a transaction by which a party voluntarily conferred a large benefit on another. Deane J regarded the analysis in Mueller's case as of general application and hence not dependent upon any general assumption about the position of married women.

An essential condition of entitlement to the relief Deane J described was that the special disability, that is to say the absence of any reasonable degree of equality, was "sufficiently evident to the stronger party". It is that which may make the stronger party's procuration or acceptance of the weaker party's assent to the impugned transaction in the circumstances unfair or unconscientious. The absence of any reasonable degree of equality may derive from undue influence or pressure or misrepresentation or, looked at slightly differently, from total reliance upon or confidence in another party for reasons of love and affection or it may derive from a lack of understanding of the particular transaction. But there is nothing to suggest that, in the case of husband and wife, Deane J cited Mueller's case as authority for a presumption that, in a transaction to which a husband and wife are parties, the husband is the stronger and any reasonable degree of equality absent.

At 462 Mason J, after referring to what Fullagar and Kitto JJ had said in separate judgments in Blomley versus Ryan <case>; [(1956) 99 CLR 362] at 405 and 415, explained the importance of the adjective 'special' qualifying 'disadvantage' to emphasise that "the disabling condition or circumstance is one which seriously affects the ability of the innocent party to make a judgment as to his own best interests, when the other party knows or ought to know of the existence of that condition or circumstance and of its effect on the innocent party." 
At 463 Mason J said: "Of course the relationship between the present parties and the transaction into which they entered were by no means novel, viewed as a situation to which the general principle can apply. That the principle might justify the setting aside of a guarantee is established by decisions such as Owen and Gutch v
Homan at 1034-1035; <case>; [10
ER 752] at 767, and
Bank of Victoria Limited versus Mueller <case>; [[1925] VLR 642] at 649." 
The citations, the second of which Deane J quoted, described the special disadvantage which may spring from the lack of understanding of the transaction. In Owen versus Homan at the pages referred to, Lord Cranworth LC found that bankers seeking to enforce securities given by a married woman for the debts of a third party must have known of circumstances which should have caused them to suspect that the securities were fraudulently obtained.

At 464 Mason J said: "The situation of special disadvantage in which the respondents were placed was the outcome of their reliance on and their confidence in their son who, in order to serve his own interests, urged them to provide the mortgage guarantee which the bank required as a condition of increasing the approved overdraft of his company...and misled them as to the financial position of the company." 
In deciding whether the bank took unconscientious advantage of the position of disadvantage in which the respondents were placed it must be asked, first, what knowledge the bank had of the respondents' situation (466-7). His
Honour's answer was that in the circumstances it was inconceivable that the possibility did not occur to the bank manager that the respondents' entry into the transaction was due to their inability to make a judgment as to what was in their best interests, owing to their reliance on their son, whose interests would inevitably incline him to urge them to sign the instrument put forward by the bank. The bank manager should have been alerted to the likelihood that the son had not adequately or accurately explained the intended transaction to them, let alone the possible or probable consequences which attended it.

The relationship of a particular husband and wife and the nature of the particular transaction into which they have entered may be such that equity will act to relieve one from his or her obligations thereunder. In one case the wife, in another case the husband, may be the stronger party and the other under a special disability.

In his dissenting judgment Dawson J, after referring at 485 to the proposition of law that if a guarantor has, short of non est factum, been induced to give a guarantee to a bank as result of some misrepresentation or other impropriety by its customer or a third party, then the validity of the guarantee is not affected so far as the bank is concerned unless the bank had notice of the impropriety or ought to have been put upon inquiry that impropriety might occur, at 486 said: "Special considerations apply in cases where a husband procures his wife to become surety for his debt and the cases dealing with these circumstances may be put to one side. See Bank of Victoria Limited versus Mueller; Yerkey versus Jones." 
His Honour was the only member of the Court to refer to Yerkey versus Jones.
 
In the passage in Bank of Victoria Limited versus Mueller, which Deane J quoted and Mason J referred to, Cussen J applied the general principle, that the
Court will not as a rule recognise a voluntary deed of gift when it appears that it was not understood by the donor, to a guarantee because it confers a large benefit both on the creditor and the debtor which, so far as any advantage to the guarantor is concerned, is voluntary. At 651 he said that this doctrine as to the necessity for fully understanding the transaction is extended to transactions of a commercial nature, such as guarantees given to a creditor by a wife for the benefit of her husband, particularly if there is a heavy indebtedness to be secured. "In such cases the relation of husband and wife and the past indebtedness may put the creditor in such a position that, if he does not take care to fully explain the transaction, he may find himself defeated by proof that the wife did not fully understand it." Where the guarantor is the wife of the principal debtor, this requires the creditor to proceed on the assumption that the wife is under a special disability and, unless the creditor explains it to her, will not sufficiently understand the proposed transaction. If she proves disability or lack of understanding she succeeds even if the creditor had no notice of it. Logically the assumption makes knowledge of the particular circumstances irrelevant. Absent this assumption there remains no foundation for saying that, without knowledge of the special disability in the particular case, the creditor acted unconscientiously. Notice is essential if equity is to act on the conscience of the creditor.

Cussen J dealt with the authorities notably the decision of the Privy Council in Turnbull & Co versus Duval [[1902] AC 429.] That case concerned a security Mrs Duval gave to the appellants, Turnbull & Co, whereby she charged her share of her father's residuary estate in favour of the appellants for all sums due or to become due from her husband to them to an amount of [sterling]1,000. The appellants' agent, who arranged the security and had it prepared, was an executor and trustee of Mrs Duval's father's will.
She gave evidence that at the time she executed the security she had no advice about it, had not read it and had not had it explained to her. She signed it because her husband pressed her to do so. At 434-5 Lord Lindley, who delivered the judgment of the Judicial Committee, said: "The effect of the evidence given at the trial has been already stated. In the face of such evidence, their Lordships are of opinion that it is quite impossible to uphold the security given by Mrs Duval. It is open to the double objection of having been obtained by a trustee from his cestui que trust by pressure through her husband and without independent advice, and of having been obtained by a husband from his wife by pressure and concealment of material facts. Whether the security could be upheld if the only ground for impeaching it was that Mrs Duval had no independent advice has not really to be determined. Their Lordships are not prepared to say it could not. But there is an additional and even stronger ground for impeaching it. It is, in their
Lordships' opinion, quite clear that Mrs Duval was pressed by her husband to sign, and did sign, the document, which was very different from what she supposed it to be, and a document of the true nature of which she had no conception. It is impossible to hold that Campbell or Turnbull & Co are unaffected by such pressure and ignorance. They left everything to Duval, and must abide the consequences." 
The first part of the double objection is straightforward enough. The difficulties are said to flow from the second part and the statement that it was impossible to hold that Campbell or Turnbull & Co were unaffected by such pressure and ignorance because they had left everything to Mr Duval.

In Bank of Victoria Limited versus Mueller at 651 Cussen J said that in Turnbull & Co versus Duval: "It was held that it was quite impossible to uphold a security given by a wife (I disregard matter irrelevant to the present case) by reason of the fact that it had been obtained by a husband from his wife by pressure and concealment of material facts, and of the fact that the creditors, having left everything to the husband, were affected by such pressure and ignorance. It was contended by plaintiff's counsel in the present case that the Judicial
Committee had really decided on what was equivalent to a plea of 'non est factum'. I cannot believe that Lord Lindley would have used the language which he did use, or relied on the authority on which he did rely, if he thought he was giving effect to such a plea." 
Thus emerged the concept that a creditor, who leaves to the husband the procurement from his wife of a guarantee to secure his debts, will suffer the consequence of any impropriety by the husband in obtaining his wife's agreement. This concept has been explained as one depending on agency.

In Yerkey versus Jones the Bench comprised Latham CJ, Rich, Dixon and McTiernan
JJ. Mr Jones agreed to buy Mr and Mrs Yerkey's property on terms that the price be paid in two instalments over three years and that Mr Jones procure the execution by his wife of a second mortgage over other property owned by her as security for payment of the instalments. In due course Mrs Jones gave a mortgage to secure part of the final payment. The mortgage contained a joint and several covenant by the Joneses to pay the amount secured. Mr and Mrs
Yerkey's action in the South Australian Supreme Court to recover the principal and interest secured by the mortgage failed against Mrs Jones on the grounds of undue influence, misrepresentation and unilateral mistake. Mr and Mrs
Yerkey's appeal was allowed.

At 663 Latham CJ held that the defences based on undue influence, fraud, innocent misrepresentation, mutual or unilateral mistake failed. Accordingly
Mrs Jones' case must depend "upon some special rules applying to a wife who becomes a surety for her husband. The rule relied upon is a rather vague and indefinite survival from the days when a married woman was almost incapable in law and when the courts of equity gave her special protection in relation to transactions affecting her separate property." 
That rule his Honour said was stated in its form most favourable to Mrs Jones in a passage from Halsbury's Laws of England, 2nd ed, volume 15 at 282: "Further, where creditors of the husband procure the wife's signature to a security for his debt through the agency of the husband, they must, in order to succeed in an action on the security, be in a position to prove that a proper explanation of the effect of the document was given to the wife." [my emphasis] 
This was a restatement of what Lord Lindley had said about the consequences of the creditor leaving "everything" to the husband, expressed in the language of agency. At 664 Latham CJ said that the rule could not be made to fit into any systematic statement of the principles relating to fraud, misrepresentation or undue influence but there was authority to support it and he referred to
Turnbull & Co versus Duval, Chaplain & Co Limited versus Brammall [[1908] 1
KB 233] and Bank of Victoria Limited versus Mueller. The first was a clear case of abuse of confidential relationship. However the Court said that the plaintiff "left everything to Duval and must abide the consequences." Duval deceived his wife, and she did not know what she was doing. There were no corresponding features in Yerkey versus Jones. 
In Chaplain & Co Limited versus Brammall the plaintiffs, having agreed to supply goods to the defendant's husband on credit if his wife would guarantee payment by him of their price, sent to the husband a form of guarantee, in order that he might obtain his wife's signature to it, leaving the matter entirely to him. The husband obtained his wife's signature to the guarantee, without sufficiently explaining to her the nature of the document, which she did not understand when she signed it. At 237 Vaughan Williams LJ, giving the principal judgment in the Court of Appeal, said that the case fell exactly within the words of Lord Lindley in Turnbull & Co versus Duval.

It is fairly clear from Latham CJ's judgment that he treated the special rule as depending upon the wife's signature being obtained "through the agency of the husband". The beneficiary of the security "must abide the consequences" if the husband deceived his wife or proffered no explanation of the document she was signing. His Honour said that in Bank of Victoria Limited versus Mueller, the husband "in procuring his wife's assent to the guarantee" had made a material misrepresentation as a result of which she did not understand the true nature of her liability. She was given no explanation or only a partial explanation of this material matter. That case, like the others, he regarded as distinguishable from the case before him.

At 665-6 Rich J said that he did not wish to derogate in the least degree from the judgment of Cussen J in Bank of Victoria Limited versus Mueller but that the facts in the case before him fell short of establishing the necessary foundation of facts. The second of the three cardinal matters of fact which caused his Honour to concur in allowing the appeal and which he identified at , was that he did not think that Mr and Mrs Yerkey or their solicitors were "shown to have so acted as to be bound by equities arising out of his conduct going only to her comprehension of the transaction" [my emphasis]. The third cardinal matter of fact was that he did not think that a case was made and proved on the wife's part that in executing the document she acted in the belief that the solicitors were advising her or her husband as well as the appellants and were protecting her interests [my emphasis]. No where does his
Honour suggest that there was a presumption that Mrs Jones, as a married woman, was under a special disability. The passages I have emphasised tend against such a presumption.

At 690 McTiernan J said no more than that he agreed, with some doubt, that the facts did not raise an equity entitling the respondent, Mrs Jones, to be relieved of her covenant and concurred in the order that the appeal be allowed. His Honour's conclusion derived from the evidence and is no authority for treating married women as in a special position.
 
In the judgment, which turned out to be the most influential, Dixon J recognised that equities invalidating contractual obligations effectual at law often depend upon a combination of a large number of circumstances affecting the transaction and cannot be reduced to a series of syllogistic propositions (669). Subject to that overriding consideration the following propositions emerge from his judgment. The relation of husband and wife is not one which gives rise to a presumption of undue influence. Even so the relationship had never been divested completely of equitable presumptions of an invalidating tendency (675). His Honour dealt with these under three heads, the first directed to the position of the donee husband, which Dixon J described as a doctrine or perhaps a rule of evidence. If a voluntary disposition in favour of the husband is impeached, the burden of establishing that it was not properly or unfairly procured may be placed upon him by proof of circumstances raising any doubt or suspicion (675). This doctrine he regarded as beyond question though somewhat vague and indefinite (677). 
The second proposition concerned the position of strangers "who deal through the husband with the wife in a transaction operating to the husband's advantage". They may, "by that fact alone" be affected by any equity which as between the wife and the husband might arise from his conduct. Turnbull &
Co versus Duval is the authority for this proposition. The creditor had used the husband as its agent to obtain the wife's agreement to the transaction. Dixon
J said that the proposition was connected with the rule, established in the case of relations of influence, that (677): "......... where there is a relation of influence and the dominant party is the person by or through whom an instrument operating to his advantage is obtained from the other the instrument is voidable even as against strangers who have become parties to the instrument for value if they had notice of the existence of the relation of influence or of the circumstances giving rise to it." [my emphasis] 
His Honour regarded as analogous the case of the guarantee procured by a principal debtor in favour of his creditor from a niece residing with him who had not long come of age and whose guardian he had been. "The creditors ............ knew her defenceless position" (677). In this case the equitable presumption of an invalidating tendency requires the creditor who knows the surety is a married woman and the principal debtor her husband, to assume that the husband is the dominant party and the wife in a defenceless position.

At 678 Dixon J emphasised the opportunities the relation of husband to wife, even if not one of influence, gave. In consequence if the husband procured his wife to become surety for his debt, a creditor who accepted her suretyship, obtained through her husband, took it subject to any invalidating conduct on the part of her husband even if the creditor was not actually privy to such conduct. In case where the creditor dealt directly with the wife personally it was a question of how far an apparent or real comprehension on the part of the wife or advice or explanation received by her will prevent any earlier improper conduct on the part of the husband from operating to make the transaction voidable (678). A review of the cases supported the following proposition at 683.
 " ............. if a married woman's consent to become a surety for her husband's debt is procured by the husband and without understanding its effect in essential respects she executes an instrument of suretyship which the creditor accepts without dealing directly with her personally, she has a prima facie right to have it set aside." 
Again the authority must be Turnbull & Co versus Duval.

The third proposition made an adequate understanding of the actual nature and consequences of the transaction a condition of validity of a voluntary dealing by a wife for the advantage of her husband (676). Dixon J accepted Kay J's statement of the law in Henry versus Armstrong [[1881] 18 Ch D 668] that anybody of full age and sound mind who has executed a voluntary deed by which he has denuded himself of his own property is bound by his own act and if he himself comes to have the deed set aside he must prove some substantial reason for so setting aside (679). But Dixon J held that unless it appeared that a wife clearly understood the effect of an instrument conferring a voluntary benefit on her husband it might be invalidated. He quoted with approval Cussen
J's statement in Bank of Victoria Limited versus Mueller at 651 that in cases such as those where guarantees had been given to a creditor by a wife for the benefit of her husband, particularly if there was a heavy past indebtedness to be secured, the relation of husband and wife and the past indebtedness might put the creditor in such a position that, if it did not take care to fully explain the transaction, it might find itself defeated by proof that the wife did not fully understand it. However the burden of proving that a wife fully understood a guarantee given by her for her husband's debt was not placed on the creditor by the mere fact that her consent to give the guarantee or become surety was secured by her husband (680-1).

The proposition that a creditor, who uses a husband to obtain his wife's agreement to a transaction to her disadvantage and to the husband's and creditor's advantage, is affected by any equity arising from the husband's impropriety creates no difficulty; Australasian Brokerage Limited versus Australia and New Zealand Banking Corporation Limited <case>; [(1934) 52 CLR 430] at 441. The decision in Amadio supports the conclusion that a disponor's lack of understanding of a transaction may, if the disponor is under a special disability, be a ground for setting aside a voluntary disposition of property.

At 684 Dixon J considered the extent to which the principles he had stated were necessarily qualified by considerations arising out of the position of the creditor as a third party giving value to the husband and possibly bona fide. His Honour distinguished cases in which a wife, alive to the nature and effect of the obligation she was undertaking, was procured to become her husband's surety by the exertion by him upon her of undue influence, affirmatively established, and cases where she did not understand the effect of the document or the nature of the transaction of suretyship. In the former case nothing but independent advice or relief from the ascendancy of her husband over her judgment would suffice to validate the transaction. His
Honour used the language of Lord Lindley in Turnbull & Co versus Duval when he said at 684: "If the creditor has left it to the husband to obtain his wife's consent to become surety and no more is done independently of the husband than to ascertain that she understands what she is doing, then, if it turns out that she is in fact acting under the undue influence of her husband, it seems that the transaction will be voidable at her instance as against the creditor." 
The basal reason for binding the creditor with equities arising from the conduct of the husband was that: "......in substance, if not technically, the wife is a volunteer conferring an important advantage upon her husband who in virtue of his position has an opportunity of abusing the confidence she may be expected to place in him and the creditor relies upon the person in that position to obtain her agreement to become his surety. Misrepresentation as well as undue influence is a means of abusing the confidence that may be expected to arise out of the relation." 
However where the substantial or only ground for impeaching the instrument is misunderstanding or want of understanding of its contents or effect if the creditor takes adequate steps to inform the wife and reasonably supposes that she has an adequate comprehension of the obligations she is undertaking and an understanding of the effect of the transaction, the fact that she has failed to grasp some material part of the document, or, indeed, the significance of what she is doing, cannot in itself give he an equity to set it aside (685).

Finally at 686 Dixon J said that if undue influence in the full sense was not made out but the elements of pressure, surprise, misrepresentation or some or one of them combined with or caused a misunderstanding or failure to understand the document or transaction, the final question must be whether the grounds upon which the creditor believed that the document was fairly obtained and executed by a woman sufficiently understanding its purport and effect were such that it would be inequitable to fix the creditor with the consequences of the husband's improper or unfair dealing with his wife.

Debate has taken place about whether, if the creditor is not privy to the husband's misconduct in obtaining his wife's agreement to a guarantee, the right to equitable relief proceeds from the husband's position as the creditor's agent in obtaining his wife's agreement or from the treatment of married women as members of a class protected because of their supposed vulnerability in such a situation. According to Lord Lindley in Turnbull & Co versus Duval the creditor or beneficiary who leaves it to the husband to obtain security from his wife must abide the consequences of the husband's impropriety. In such circumstances no notice, actual or constructive, of the particular impropriety need be proved. The rationale is that the wife has voluntarily conferred an important advantage upon her husband who in virtue of his position had an opportunity to abuse the confidence she may be expected to have placed in him and the creditor relied upon the person in that position to obtain her agreement; Yerkey versus Jones per Dixon J at 685. The question is whether a creditor, obtaining a guarantee from a married woman of her husband's debts, must assume that she is under a special disability so that her equity is not conditioned upon the creditor's knowledge of her particular disability, as it would be in the case of other persons under the same disability; compare Mason J in Amadio at 462. Mason J disavowed any suggestion that the principle applied whenever there was some difference in the bargaining power of the parties to emphasise that the disabling condition or circumstance was one which seriously affected the ability of the innocent party to make a judgment as to that party's own best interests, when the other party knew or ought to have known of the existence of that condition or circumstance and its effect on the innocent party. In Yerkey versus Jones Dixon J held that a creditor will be unable to enforce the security against a married woman who did not fully understand the nature and effect of the transaction, unless it has taken adequate steps to inform her or has reason for supposing that she had an adequate comprehension of the obligations she was undertaking and an understanding of the effect of the transaction.

Not surprisingly recent cases have raised doubts about a principle founded on the assumption that a married woman is ipso facto under a special disadvantage in any transaction involving her husband and that the husband is in this context the stronger party. In European Asian of Australia Limited versus Kurland at 200 Rogers J regarded it as completely inappropriate for Mrs Kurland to appeal to such statements as that of Cussen J in Bank of Victoria Limited v
Mueller at 651 to the effect that the relation of husband and wife and the past indebtedness may put the creditor in a position that if the transaction is not fully explained to her the creditor may be defeated by proof that the wife did not fully understand it. In Warburton versus Whiteley [(1989) NSW Conv.
R 55-453] this Court passed upon the applicability of the Yerkey v
Jones in a modern context. The Court felt bound to apply the principle Dixon
J stated in Yerkey versus Jones. Kirby P at 58-286 said it was anachronistic.
"The general advance in the education and economic involvement of women does not prevent the conclusion that, in a particular case, the woman in question suffers a relevant special disadvantage." But on the basis of what was said in
Yerkey versus Jones their Honours concluded that, although the evidence was not sufficient to establish that the creditors were on notice of her special disabilities or knew that the transaction was improvident, the mere knowledge by the creditors that one guarantor was the wife of the other was sufficient to establish her entitlement to relief.

The principle said to be behind Yerkey versus Jones applies in two situations. In both the wife is a volunteer in the sense that she derives no benefit from the security she gives. In the first case if the husband on behalf of the creditor procures his wife to become surety for his debts, the creditor must abide the consequences of any impropriety by the husband even though the creditor has no notice of the impropriety. In the second case even if the husband has not on behalf of the creditor procured his wife to become surety, the security is unenforceable, if she did not understand its nature and effect, unless the creditor can show that the wife was fully advised of its nature and effect.
The onus is on the creditor.

Barclays Bank PLC versus O'Brien concerned a husband and wife who executed a second mortgage of their matrimonial home as security for overdraft facilities extended by the plaintiff bank to a company in which the husband, but not the wife, had an interest. The wife signed the deed without reading it in reliance on her husband's false representations. The bank sought to enforce the mortgage against them. Lord Browne-Wilkinson, who gave the judgment of the
House of Lords, referred to 'the agency theory' and 'the special equity theory'. The first afforded no special protection to married women. The rights of the creditor bank could only be adversely affected by the wrongful acts of the principal debtor, the husband, in procuring the surety's liability if the principal debtor was acting as the agent of the creditor in procuring the surety to join or the creditor had knowledge of the relevant facts. The second theory was that equity afforded special protection to a protected class of surety viz those where the relationship between the debtor and the surety was such that influence by the debtor over the surety and reliance by the surety on the debtor were natural features of the relationship. In such case the surety obligation was unenforceable by the creditor bank if the relationship between the surety and the debtor was known to the creditor; the surety's consent was obtained by undue influence or by misrepresentation or without 'an adequate understanding of the nature and effect of the transaction'; and the creditor had failed to take reasonable steps to ensure that the surety had given a true and informed consent to the transaction.

On the question whether a wife could set aside the transaction, not against the wrongdoing husband, but against the creditor bank, his Lordship said at :
 "Of course, if the wrongdoing husband is acting as agent for the creditor bank in obtaining the surety from the wife, the creditor will be fixed with the wrongdoing of its own agent and the surety contract can be set aside as against the creditor. Apart from this, if the creditor bank has notice, actual or constructive, of the undue influence exercised by the husband (and consequentially of the wife's equity to set aside the transaction) the creditor will take subject to that equity and the wife can set aside the transaction against the creditor (albeit a purchaser for value) as well as against the husband: see Bainbrigge versus Browne [[1881] 18 ChD 188] and Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA versus Aboody [[1990] 1 QB 923], 973.
Similarly, in cases such as the present where the wife has been induced to enter into the transaction by the husband's misrepresentation, her equity to set aside the transaction will be enforceable against the creditor if either the husband was acting as the creditor's agent or the creditor had actual or constructive notice." 
This statement of the law is uncontroversial. The question is whether the law has passed beyond this well defined frontier to give special protection to married women giving security for their husband's debts. Lord Browne-Wilkinson considered the basis upon which Turnbull & Co versus Duval was decided obscure. He set out the passage from the judgment of Lord Lindley which I have quoted and said that the first ground mentioned, the trustee's breach of fiduciary duties, raised no problem. "It is the second ground which has spawned the whole line of cases" with which their Lordships were concerned. It raised two problems. What was the wrongful act of Mr Duval vis a vis his wife and why did the fact that Turnbulls "left everything to Duval" render them unable to enforce their security. At 193 his Lordship said that it was impossible to find a sound basis for holding that Mrs Duval was entitled to set aside the transaction as against her husband because: "the pleadings contain no allegation of undue influence or misrepresentation by Mr Duval. Mrs Duval did not in evidence allege actual or presumptive undue influence." 
If the Board considered that Mr Duval had committed a wrongful act vis a vis his wife, it proceeded on a mistaken basis.

With respect I find this criticism strange. Whatever the state of the pleading the findings of fact supported a conclusion that Mr Duval had acted at the least improperly. At 431 Lord Lindley observed that Mr Duval was indebted to all three branches of Turnbulls in London, New York and Jamaica. To London he owed [sterling]22, to New York [sterling]1,500 and to Jamaica [sterling]1,000, the last mainly for the supply of beer. Mrs Duval gave evidence that she never authorised her husband to offer her property as security and never requested anyone not to take proceedings against her husband. She talked with her husband about giving security and knew that he was in difficulties about the beer business believing that [sterling]1,000 would get him out of his troubles. She knew that he had a brick factory and machinery but not that he was in difficulties with reference to this. She knew nothing about any document she was to sign until it was brought to her by her husband. She had no advice about it; she did not read it; it was not explained to her. She signed it because her husband pressed her to do so and told her he was being pressed by Campbell and because she believed that if she would sign it for [sterling]1,000 it would enable her husband to settle the beer contract. She meant to lend him [sterling]1,000 to get him out of his trouble. Lord Lindley said that her statements as to what she knew of her husband's affairs, of what he told her, and of the pressure under which she signed the security, were all corroborated by her husband.

At 193 in Barclays Bank PLC versus O'Brien Lord Browne-Wilkinson said that it was the lack of any sound basis for holding the Mr Duval was guilty of a legal wrong, for which Turnbulls were indirectly held liable, which led to the theory that the creditors, Turnbulls, were themselves in breach of some duty owed by them as creditors directly to the surety, Mrs Duval. His Lordship, I think, had particularly in mind the requirement that the creditors take steps to ensure not only that the husband had not used undue influence or made a misrepresentation but also that the wife had "an adequate understanding of the nature and effect" of what she was doing. The latter was imposing on the creditors vis-a-vis a particular class of surety a duty greater than that which, under the ordinary law, a husband would owe to his wife. I interpolate that in Australia since Amadio a husband may owe such a duty to his wife who is contemplating making a voluntary disposition in his favour. Lord Browne-
Wilkinson observed that the expression "they left everything to Duval and must abide the consequences" provided the only guidance as to the circumstances which led the Board to set aside the surety agreement as against Turnbulls. At he continued: "As the Court of Appeal in this case point out, in the majority of cases the reality of the relationship is that, the creditor having required of the principal debtor that there must be a surety, the principal debtor on his own account in order to raise the necessary finance seeks to procure the support of the surety. In so doing he is acting for himself not for the creditor." 
Lord Browne-Wilkinson examined a number of authorities including Bank of
Victoria Limited versus Mueller which he described as a decision reached by applying the Romilly heresy. With the greatest respect quite clearly it was not. As Dixon J underlined in Yerkey versus Jones at 680, Cussen J prefaced his proposition with the words "disregarding any question as to the onus of proof which may be a doubtful matter - see Henry versus Armstrong". Of the English cases Lord Browne-Wilkinson observed that in each emphasis was placed on the question whether the creditor was infected by the debtor's wrongdoing because the debtor was acting as the agent of the creditor in procuring the wife's agreement to stand as surety. However in four of them attention had been drawn to the fact that, even in the absence of agency, if the debtor had been guilty of undue influence or misrepresentation the creditor might not be able to enforce the surety contract if the creditor had notice, actual or constructive, of the debtor's conduct.

Lord Browne-Wilkinson rejected the special equity theory. In particular he concluded that to require the creditor to prove knowledge and understanding by the wife in all cases was to introduce by the back door either a presumption of undue influence, which had been decisively rejected, or the Romilly heresy which had long been treated as bad law. If the doctrine of notice was properly applied, there was no need for the introduction of a special equity in these types of cases (195). His Lordship said: "A wife who has been induced to stand as a surety for her husband's debts by his undue influence, misrepresentation or some other legal wrong has an equity as against him to set aside that transaction. Under the ordinary principles of equity, her rights to set aside that transaction will be enforceable against third parties (eg. against a creditor) if either the husband was acting as the third party's agent or the third party had actual or constructive notice of the facts giving rise to her equity. Although there may be cases where, without artificiality, it can properly be held that the husband was acting as the agent of the creditor in procuring the wife to stand as surety, such cases will be of very rare occurrence. The key to the problem is to identify the circumstances in which the creditor will be taken to have had notice of the wife's equity to set aside the transaction." 
With respect this appears to be a traditional approach to the problem and I believe not contrary to anything that was said in Turnbull & Co versus Duval.
However when coming to consider what facts would put a creditor on inquiry as to the circumstances in which the wife agreed to stand surety, his Lordship said that the "invalidating tendency" or the laws "tender treatment" of married women became relevant.
 "Therefore in my judgment a creditor is put on inquiry when a wife offers to stand surety for her husband's debts by the combination of two factors: (a) the transaction is on its face not to the financial advantage of the wife; and there is a substantial risk in transactions of that kind that, in procuring the wife to act as surety, the husband has committed a legal or equitable wrong that entitles the wife to set aside the transaction." 
Mr Jackson QC, who appeared for Mrs Garcia, argued with considerable force that this was a re-statement of what has been said to be the rule in Yerkey v
Jones substituting the words "there is a substantial risk" for the words "there is a presumption".

In my opinion, even if Lord Lindley's statement of facts in Turnbull & Co v Duval is insupportable, the principle he enunciated, if the husband was truly the agent of the creditor, is unexceptionable. But if the husband was not acting as agent for the creditor to procure the guarantee, the question remains what is the authority for saying that the creditor, without notice of the wife's lack of understanding or the husband's impropriety, must ensure that the wife had an adequate understanding of the nature and effect of what she was doing or will be affected in equity by the impropriety. Lord Browne-
Wilkinson's criticisms are potent. Indeed the proposition does seem to reintroduce by the back door either a presumption of undue influence and perhaps, in part, the Romilly heresy. The authority for Dixon J's conclusion is found in Cussen J's proposition in Bank of Victoria Limited versus Mueller at that the "doctrine as to the necessity for fully understanding the transaction is extended to transactions of a commercial nature, such as guarantees given to a creditor by a wife for the benefit of her husband, particularly if there is a heavy indebtedness to be secured. In such cases the relation of husband and wife and the past indebtedness may put the creditor in such a position that, if he does not take care to fully explain the transaction, he may find himself defeated by proof that the wife did not fully understand it". The creditor will be defeated by proof that the wife did not understand the transaction. In the various ways which I have set out, Dixon J sought to identify and explain the cases. At 683 he restated the principle as giving to a married woman a prima facie right to have the transaction set aside if she executed it without understanding its effect in essential respects.

I have some difficulty with the propositions Lord Browne-Wilkinson advanced at which led him at 198 to identify a number of other special relationships, including that of a son to his elderly parents, which would put a creditor accepting a security from the party assumed to be the weaker, on inquiry.
However, if it be correct, as I think it is, that the extended principle expounded in Yerkey versus Jones has no sure foundation in Australian law, the
High Court's decision in Amadio describes the jurisdiction in equity to relieve against unconscionable dealing.
 
In Akins versus National Australia Bank [(1994) 34 NSWLR 155] at 170
Clarke JA said that the Court should reconsider whether it should continue to accept that there is a special rule relating to wives where they become guarantors for their husbands or their husbands' businesses and at 172-3 concluded that it was difficult to support the existence of a special rule.
Once the principles of Amadio were applied to the facts of the case there should be no room for resort to the special rule in Yerkey versus Jones. At 173 his Honour said: "Indeed, if relief is available on either the ground articulated in Yerkey v
Jones or the ground in Amadio there is a theoretical possibility that conduct found not to be unconscionable (or unconscientious) could nevertheless provide grounds for relief under Yerkey versus Jones. This is, in my view, quite inconsistent with the principles which inform equitable relief." 
The present is just such a case. In Akins I expressed my agreement with the judgment of Clarke JA. However the argument in the present case that this
Court was bound by the decision in Yerkey versus Jones and should follow it until the High Court held otherwise, a view supported by the remarks of Hunter J in
Teachers Health Investments Pty Limited versus Wynne (1994) 6 BPR 97480 at 13524 and following has led me again to review the cases. I am not persuaded that
Turnbull & Co versus Duval proceeded on a wrong basis or that on its particular facts Lord Lindley's reasons for the conclusion he came to were wrong. Nor do I think that Cussen J reintroduced the Romilly heresy directly, though he may have done so indirectly. This it seems to me undermines Lord
Browne-Wilkinson's opinion about the foundation in authority for Dixon J's conclusions. To that extent I have revised my agreement with Clarke JA's reasons for judgment.

It is the duty of this Court to accept loyally the decisions of the High
Court; Broome versus Cassell & Co <case>; [[1972] AC ] at ; Trident General Insurance Co Limited versus McNiece Bros Pty Limited <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 107] at 129.
Yerkey versus Jones was decided nearly sixty years ago. If a majority of the
Court had agreed with Dixon J's reasons for judgment I think this Court would have been bound to follow it regardless of what the House of Lords said about it in Barclays Bank PLC versus O'Brien. However in none of the judgments of the other three Justices is there support for the principles which have been said to flow from Dixon J's decision. At best what is said to be the principle in
Yerkey versus Jones is a principle to which one Judge only adhered. Moreover at its heart it is based upon general assumptions about the capacity of married women rather than upon evidence of the circumstances of the particular case.
Accordingly my conclusion is unchanged that Clarke JA was correct to say that the so-called principle in Yerkey versus Jones should no longer be applied in New
South Wales.

Mr Oslington QC, who appeared for NAB, submitted, in the alternative, that even if the principle derived from Yerkey versus Jones applied in New South
Wales, Mrs Garcia's claim should be dismissed for two reasons. First because she was at relevant times a director and shareholder of Citizens Gold entitled to assert her rights as such and second because the facts were indistinguishable from those of Yerkey versus Jones in which the mortgagor, Mrs
Jones', defence based on the special rule failed. It is unnecessary to decide this alternative ground of appeal. However I am not satisfied that NAB has demonstrated any error in Young J's conclusion on either point. As to the first he accepted Mrs Garcia's evidence that she was not directly involved in
Mr Garcia's companies and noted her uncontradicted evidence that Mr Garcia forged her signature from time to time on company documents. I agree with
Young J that the fact that money from time to time came from one of the companies to her for household expenses is not significant. As to the second point Young J found that Mr Garcia pressured her to sign the November 1987 guarantee and accepted her evidence that NAB failed adequately to explain it to her. Mr Garcia told her there would be no risk. His Honour was not satisfied that NAB had discharged the onus of showing the transaction was not unconscionable. In my opinion this conclusion was open on the evidence.

CROSS APPEAL 
Mrs Garcia submitted that she should be relieved from the burden of the mortgage and guarantees because NAB had acted unconscionably. The success of this part of her cross appeal depended upon her showing that by entering into the transactions or any one of them she conferred large benefits on Mr Garcia and NAB under pressure from Mr Garcia and without understanding the nature or effect of the transaction, a special disability which was sufficiently evident to NAB. Young J said that what occurred was that an intelligent, articulate lady with a professional position called at the bank and appeared voluntarily to be signing a guarantee to secure the account of a company of which on its face she was a director and shareholder. There was nothing to show that Mrs Garcia's lack of understanding of the risk was sufficiently evidenced to the bank to make it unconscientious that it accept her assent to the transaction. This was not a case in which NAB left it to Mr Garcia to procure the execution of the documents. The February 1985 guarantee was signed in front of a bank officer. The September 1985 guarantee was signed in front of NAB's branch manager at Wahroonga. The November 1986 guarantee was signed in front of the relieving manager of the Wahroonga branch. The November 1987 guarantee was signed in front of a customer service supervisor. NAB was not able to satisfy his Honour that its normal practices were followed on any of these occasions, but there was nothing of which NAB was aware that might reasonably have led it to suspect that Mr Garcia was bringing pressure on her to execute the documents or that she was doing so other than voluntarily.

Mr Jackson sought to put an alternative argument that it was unconscionable for NAB to seek to retain the benefit of the 1987 guarantee after it had been advised that Mrs Garcia and her husband had separated and she had requested that the account be kept within limits. NAB, without further reference to her, approved a number of extensions of the facility. When Mrs Garcia spoke to NAB the company's account was in credit. After the extensions were granted it went into debit. However Young J said that this issue was not raised in the pleadings and Mrs Garcia had not sought to amend to raise it. Accordingly NAB conducted its case on the basis that this was not an issue. Mr Oslington told the Court that the material was relied upon only in support of an argument under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). By a note delivered to the Court the day after the oral hearing of the appeal finished counsel for Mrs Garcia indicated that she did not rely on this material other than in relation to the claim for relief under the [Contracts
Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). 
In these circumstances it is unnecessary to consider further this alternative argument.

Mrs Garcia relied upon Barclays Bank PLC versus O'Brien particularly at 196 where
Lord Browne-Wilkinson said that where a transaction is not on its face to the financial advantage of the wife and is of a kind that there is a substantial risk that, in procuring the wife to act as surety, the husband has committed a legal or equitable wrong, that would entitle the wife to set the transaction aside. In order to remove constructive notice the creditor should take steps to bring home to the wife the risk she is running by standing as surety and advise her to take independent advice. This may illustrate a particular aspect of the Amadio test but, in my opinion, the submission is answered by his
Honour's findings that the transaction was not apparently to the disadvantage of Mrs Garcia as a director and shareholder of the company concerned and she attended at the bank and appeared voluntarily to execute the documents.

Mrs Garcia argued that the guarantees were obtained as the result of Mr
Garcia's undue influence. Even if this was so NAB was not affected with an equity unless it had notice and plainly his Honour was of the view it had none.

Finally Mrs Garcia relied upon the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). She claimed that within the meaning of [s7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) the guarantees were unjust in the circumstances relating to them at the time they were made. Reference was made to various of the matters to which, under [s9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) (2) the Court may have regard such as inequality of bargaining power, lack of prior negotiation and independent advice and the limited educational background of Mrs Garcia in business and financial matters. All this was combined with Mr Garcia's pressure and her lack of understanding of the effects of the document. In this context NAB's lack of knowledge would not prevent the contract being set aside; Gough versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia [(1994) ASC 56-270] at 58,855.

Mrs Garcia's case was based largely if not entirely upon procedural rather than substantive unfairness; see West versus AGC (Advances) Limited [(1986) 5
NSWLR 610] at 621-2. Young J said that the statement of claim pleaded no substantive unfairness and that the substance of the case was that what happened in October 1988 and thereafter was unfair. Young J held that this type of conduct could not be brought within the purview of the Act which dealt with conduct up to the making of the contract and the terms of the contract itself. His Honour said: "Unless one can see that there is some substantive injustice in the contract itself or there was procedural injustice leading up to the making of the contract, the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) is of no assistance. Indeed the only materiality of what happened after the contract was made is if it can be said that such a consequence was foreseeable at the time when it was made; see eg West's case at 620. Of course it may occur that what happens later throws up the fact that right from the beginning the contract was unfair, but that is a different matter." 
Mr Jackson emphasised Mr Garcia's pressure on Mrs Garcia and her lack of understanding. However this Court has more than once said that the discretion to grant relief under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) will not generally be exercised if the disability complained of was one of which the other party to the contract was unaware; Beneficial Finance Corporation
Limited versus Karavas [(1991) 23 NSWLR 256] at 277. I am satisfied that Young J correctly refused to grant relief under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).

CONCLUSION 
In my opinion the following orders should be made:
Appeal allowed;
Set aside orders 1 to 4 and 6 and 7 of 7 April 1993;
In lieu thereof dismiss the plaintiff's claim with costs;
On the cross claim, judgment for the cross claimant for possession of the property described in Certificate of Title Volume 10003 Folio 103 known as 148
Campbell Drive, Wahroonga in the State of New South Wales;
Leave to issue a writ of possession in respect of the said property;
Judgment for the cross claimant in the sum of $518,137.51 together with interest thereon from 1 March 1993 pursuant to s94 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/);
The cross defendant to pay the cross claimant's costs of the cross claim;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/);
Cross appeal dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
