

Regina versus Daniel Robert Tillott, Torek Hassan Jamal, Robert Andrew Haines and Paul Bargashoun Nos. 60888, 60919, 60928 of 1993 and 60004 of 1994
Criminal Law and Procedure [1995] NSWSC 83 (17 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
GROVE(1), ABADEE(2) AND JAMES(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 2-3 March 1995 #DATE :9:1995 #ADD 17:10:1995 
Counsel for the Crown:        G. J. Hosking 
Solicitors for the Crown:       S. E.
O'Connor 
Counsel for Appellant Tillott:    A. P Cook 
Solicitors for Appellant Tillott:   John Bettens and Co 
Counsel for Appellant Jamal:     J. S. Stratton 
Solicitor for Appellant Jamal:    Brenda Duchen 
Counsel for Appellant Haines:
K. P. Coorey 
Solicitors for Appellant Haines:   David H. Cohen and Co 
Counsel for Appellant Bargashoun:   Ms.
L. M. McSpedden 
Solicitor for Appellant Bargashoun:  T.A. Murphy - Legal Aid
Commission
ORDER
Appeals allowed
JUDGE1
GROVE J I have had the opportunity to read the judgment of Abadee J in draft form and I agree with it. I wish only to add an observation about the adoption and adaptation of the guidelines specified by the New Zealand Court of Appeal in R versus McFelin <case>; [1985 2 NZLR 750] and the United States sources referred to in that judgment. The outcome of the present appeal should not provide a basis for misunderstanding the distinction between guidelines and requirements - a distinction which in the current context lies at the heart of the separation of judicial and legislative power. Potential unreliability in the testimony of a witness will ultimately have to be resolved, on a case by case basis and the onus on the party seeking to introduce the evidence is frequently likely to be critical.
The appellants
Tillott and Haines were convicted of attempting to escape, the jury being unable to agree on more serious charges against Tillott and acquitting Haines on similar charges. The appellants Bargashoun and Jamal were convicted of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm and malicious wounding of the prison officers Mr Thompson and Mr Doyle respectively. They had pleaded guilty to escape.
As noted by Abadee J., the trial extended over several months, much of which appears to have been occupied by the enquiry into the possible effects of therapeutic treatment upon the testimony of Mr
Thompson. The circumstances which lead to the quashing of convictions are such that in my view it is proper to direct that new trials on the contested counts be had.
In each case the appeal should be allowed and the convictions entered against the respective appellants (other than those entered upon the pleas of guilty to escape by Bargashoun and Jamal) quashed and new trials ordered.
JUDGE2
ABADEE J The appellants Tillott, Jamal, Haines and Bargashoun were several of a number of accused indicted before Justice Mathews and a jury of twelve on 26
March 1993 on a number of charges. Each were, charged on 28 July 1991 with wounding one Neil Thompson with intent to murder (charge 1A), an alternative count of wounding
Thompson with intent to do grievous bodily harm (charge 1B) and with maliciously wounding Anthony John Doyle (charge 2). The appellants
Bargashoun and Jamal were further charged with a third count of escaping from lawful custody on 28 July 1991 (charge 3). The appellants
Bargashoun and Jamal pleaded not guilty to charges 1A, 113, 2 and guilty to charge 3. The appellants, Haines and Tillott were also charged with attempt to escape from custody (charge 4). They pleaded not guilty to all charges against them, ie, charges 1A, 1B, and 4.
On 30 September 1993, her Honour directed a verdict of not guilty to the first charge, ie, that of wounding Thompson with intent to murder (charge 1A).
On 3 November 1993, the jury returned verdicts as follows.
In relation to appellants
Bargashoun and Jamal, guilty on charges of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm to Thompson and malicious wounding of
Doyle (charges 1B and 2).
In relation to the appellant Tillott the jury were unable to agree on the charges of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm to Thompson and the charge against him of malicious wounding of Doyle (charges 1B and 2) but found him guilty of attempted escape (charge 4).
In relation to Haines the jury found him not guilty of the charge of wounding Thompson with intent to do grievous bodily harm and not guilty of maliciously wounding Doyle (charges 1B and 2) but guilty of attempt to escape (charge 4).
On 17 December 1993, each of the appellants were sentenced.
Bargashoun was sentenced to a total of 17 years penal servitude in respect of the offence of wounding Thompson with intent (charge 1B) and to concurrent fixed terms of four years penal servitude (charge 2) and eighteen months penal servitude (charge 3) respectively.
Jamal was sentenced to a total of 15 years penal servitude in relation to the offence of wounding Thompson with intent (charge 1B) and to concurrent fixed terms of four years penal servitude (charge 2) and two years penal servitude (charge 3).
Tillott was sentenced to a total of two years and six months penal servitude for the offence of attempt to escape (charge 4).
Haines was sentenced to a total of three years for the offence of attempt to escape (charge 4).
Each of the sentences imposed were cumulative upon sentences already being served by the appellants, save to the extent stated.
The Crown case in relation to the charges against all of the appellants may be summarised as follows.
At about 2.30pm on 28 July 1991, Mr. Nell Thompson and Mr. Anthony Doyle were on duty as prison officers in Wing No. 2 at the Long Bay Prison Complex.
They were present in the Wing Office when a number of prisoners came in. The prisoners attacked both prison officers. Thompson was stabbed a number of times and rendered unconscious. Doyle was also rendered unconscious. The prisoners then took the keys and unlocked the gate which led from the Wing to the Sterile Area. They carried a makeshift ladder constructed of bed-ends through the gate, across the Sterile Area, and propped it up against the prison wall. Jamal was seen to scale the ladder and jump down from the wall.
He then climbed another fence and escaped. He was not arrested until the following
September. Bargashoun was the next one up the ladder. He also scaled the wall and climbed over the outside fence but was chased and recaptured in
Anzac Parade.
Another prisoner, Shane Taylor, was half way up the ladder when he was shot by a prison officer in the guard tower. He received a wound in the thigh and fell back down the ladder. The remaining prisoners then ran away from the
Sterile Area.
When his first statement was taken on 16 August 1991, Thompson named all four appellants as having been amongst the prisoners who came into the Wing
Office. He then also identified them in a photograph album. On 4 May 1993
Thompson made another statement in which he ascribed certain roles to individual prisoners. He said Bargashoun was holding a white coloured knife which was four or five inches long. Jamal (whom he called "Torek") had hold of his left arm. Tillott had hold of his right leg. Haines was standing over him with a fire extinguisher. The prisoners were attempting to tie him up to something and he was struggling. Doyle also named Tillott and Haines as being amongst the prisoners who entered the Wing Office. He was held down but could see prisoners punching Thompson. He felt the keys taken from his body, but remembered no more. Bargashoun was seen by another prisoner to enter the Wing
Office and thumping noises were then heard. When Bargashoun was recaptured he was in possession of a knife. It was later examined by a forensic biologist and human blood was found on the blade. One of the blood groupings of this sample was consistent with one of the blood grouping of Mr. Thompson's blood.
The blood on the handle was not consistent with Mr. Thompson's blood. Items of
Bargashoun's clothing were also examined for blood. Human blood was found on some items and was found to be consistent with Thompson's blood grouping. When interviewed by police he declined to answer questions.
In respect of the escape charged against each appellant, the Crown case depended upon the evidence of a number of witnesses and forensic and scientific evidence. Each of the appellants allegedly made their escape via a ladder and by climbing over the outer wall.
The defence case in relation to each appellant was as follows. Bargashoun claimed he was asked to take part in an escape attempt. He assisted in obtaining parts for the ladder.
When he went to the Wing Office he saw a prison officer lying face down on the ground with blood on his clothing and head. He saw another prison officer sitting in a crouched position. He approached the officer lying on the ground and received no response. He spoke to the other prison officer and received no response. He told him to get help for the first officer and then left the Wing
Office. He noticed the back gate of Wing No. 2 was open. He ran through the gate, saw the ladder up against the wall and used it to make his escape. He denied having a knife in his possession when he was recaptured.
Jamal made a statement in which he said that he did escape from gaol on July 1991, but did so by initially hiding himself under a meal truck, and then jumping under or over a fence.
Tillott in his statement said that he was talking to another prisoner when he heard a commotion. He observed a number of inmates rushing down the
Wing holding a ladder. He stepped out the back gate, heard shots fired, he went back into Wing
No. 2 to the front gate. He then passed out into the main square with a number of inmates.
Haines in his statement said he was an inmate of Wing No. 4. After collecting his lunch he went to another cell where he played chess with a prisoner. He then went to the front of Wing No. 4 requesting that he be let out of the wing. He saw something going on in Wing No. 2, did not want to be involved, and returned to Wing No. 4.
The grounds of appeal advanced on behalf of the appellants contain a number of common grounds. In other respects there are different and particular grounds of appeal argued in relation to each individual appellant.
Each appellant relied in particular upon the following grounds: 
The learned trial judge erred in admitting into testimony the evidence of the Crown witness Thompson. 
The trial judge erred in law in her directions in relation to complicity. 
The trial judge erred in not directing the jury in terms of Pollitt v
The Queen <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 558] as to the evidence of prison informants. 
In their written grounds of appeal each appellant also relied upon the unsafe and unsatisfactory ground, although in written submissions and oral submission advanced on-behalf of Tillott, this ground was not relied upon or argued.
It is appropriate to repeat that some of the appellants relied upon other individual grounds of appeal pertaining to their respective cases. It is not necessary to deal with each of such separately in the light of the views reached in relation to the grounds that I have set forth above, and in the light of my ultimate conclusion that in any event the unsafe and unsatisfactory ground has not been established in the instant appeal.
Further in the event that the appeals against conviction fail, several appellants have also sought leave to appeal against the sentences unposed.
In relation to the first ground, namely that the trial judge erred in admitting into evidence the testimony of the Crown witness Thompson, it has not been submitted by the Crown that were this ground to be made out each of the respective appeals should not be allowed. In my view this approach, that the appeals should be allowed if this ground is made out, is the correct one.
Although the jury's acquittal on the first and second charges shows that the jury was not, for example, in the case of Haines satisfied that the appellant was involved in the attack on the two prison officers, nevertheless Thompson identified Haines and a number of other inmates who attacked him in the office. Thompson was the first witness to identify Haines. Further even though
Tillott was only convicted of attempt to escape (the jury could not reach a decision on the other two charges), and even though Tillott was not convicted of any offence in relation to Thompson, the Crown case was that both the assault on the prison officers and the attempt to escape were virtually one event and that if an accused was in the Wing Office such could also have been used by the jury as evidence that he was participating in the escape. Next, the jury did not in relation to Tillott necessarily reject what Thompson had said in evidence.
In my view if the first ground is made good, each of the appellants would be entitled to a new trial in respect of the charges to which they pleaded not guilty and of which they were in turn found guilty.
 
GROUND 1
The learned trial Mae erred in admitting into the evidence the testimony of the Crown witness,
Thompson
Background to the first ground
The judgment on the voir dire in relation to the admissibility of the evidence of Mr.
Thompson is reported: R versus Jamal and Ors [(1993) 69 A Crim R .]
The case presents a particular question previously undecided by an appellate court in this country and not dealt with overseas (as far as researches indicate) namely, whether testimony of a witness who has undergone a psychotherapeutic procedure known as Eye
Movement Desensitisation and
Reprocessing (generally referred to as "EMDR") is admissible in a criminal trial and if so, in what circumstances and under what conditions, if any. As I understand it the instant case is the first known occasion in which a court has been asked to adjudicate on the effect of EMDR and upon its admissibility.
Indeed, it is the first occasion where an Australian appellate court has considered the admissibility (and the conditions of such) of hypnotically induced testimony, a matter which falls for discussion and consideration in the case.
In her reasons for admitting Mr. Thompson's evidence her Honour referred to the views of Dr. Shapiro PhD (the discoverer of EMDR). In Dr. Shapiro's
EMDR Newsletter of May 1992 (a copy of which was put before her Honour as well as before this Court), Dr. Shapiro observed that EMDR "was not well enough known to have been tested in court".
Further as the trial judge also said the evidence indicated that no study had been conducted certainly in Australia, and probably also elsewhere as to the effect of EMDR upon a person's memory.
Her Honour later described EMDR as a "novel and thus far unexplained procedure". My judgment is not concerned with the validity or otherwise of this procedure or whether or not it is soundly founded in science. No argument has been advanced on appeal in relation to such a question. Indeed, her Honour also observed that in parts of the USA it has been recommended that potential witnesses not undergo EMDR because they are liable to lose acuity in their memory and may thus be an unsatisfactory witness (itself perhaps an additional reason why there should be caution in relation to subjecting a prospective witness to such a procedure, whether for therapeutic, investigative or forensic purposes.
The issue is also not really one involving the admissibility of the evidence of a psychologist regarding observations or statements made by a witness during the procedure, or in terms, as to the admissibility of expert opinion in relation to such. If the witness's evidence is inachnissible, so are the expert views touching upon the admissibility of the witness's evidence. The question rather relates to the admissibility of evidence from a witness who has been subject to the EMDR procedure, and if admissible then whether on discretionary grounds it should in the event be excluded whether for reasons of unfairness, or because the prejudicial effect outweighs its probative value.
In several respects it was submitted that the same or similar considerations apply or in some ways overlap or are common both to the issue of admissibility, or if the evidence is admissible, in relation to the discretion to exclude. It was alternatively argued therefore that if the evidence of Thompson was admissible, nevertheless as a matter of discretion it should have been rejected, in the circumstances of this case.
In relation to the matter of unfairness, a trial judge has a discretion to exclude any evidence if the strict rule of admissibility operates unfairly against the accused: Alexander versus The Queen <case>; [(1980-1981) 145 CLR 395] per Gibbs
CJ at 402. As to the discretion to exclude evidence on the ground of unfairness to the accused in order to ensure a fair trial for the accused: see also Ridgeway versus The Queen (HC, 19 April 1995, unreported per Brennan J). A judge also always has the power to refuse to admit any evidence the prejudicial weight of which outweighs its probative value: see the decision of
Hunt CJ at CL in R versus Jenkyns [(1993) 32 NSWLR 712] are applicable to a witness who has undergone
EMDR, then it seems to me that the matter of admissibility aside, where there is a failure to comply with such hypnosis guidelines there is a strong case to be made that it would be unfair to the accused to admit that evidence.
In the instant case a voir dire examination was conducted at the commencement of the trial in order to determine the admissibility of the evidence of a key Crown witness, Mr. Nell Thompson. It appears from her
Honour's judgment that it was primarily argued that her Honour should reject the evidence of Mr. Thompson essentially upon discretionary grounds. Indeed, the matter of non-admissibility of his evidence does not appear in terms to have been argued before her Honour. However before us, both matters, that is of admissibility and discretion, were argued. Before her Honour the defence had contended that Mr. Thompson's memory was so tainted by a psychotherapeutic procedure (EMDR) that he had undergone, as to render his evidence wholly inadmissible. The primary contention was that the process of EMDR either itself produced a distorted memory in Mr. Thompson about the events of 28 July , or alternatively, it so enhanced his distorted memory as wholly to taint his evidence, so that his evidence should be rejected in full. A secondary submission was that Mr. Thompson's evidence should be restricted to material contained in his "pre EMDR" statement, and that he should be prevented from describing the further details as set out in his "more recent statement". Her
Honour (at 550) rejected the second approach as being artificial and unrealistic. Her Honour determined that Mr. Thompson's evidence should either be admitted in its entirety or rejected outright. It has not been submitted upon appeal that this approach was incorrect. Indeed, this ground of appeal has been argued by the appellants and the Crown upon the basis of her Honour's approach being correct. All parties have accepted before this
Court that if the ground of appeal is made out the whole of his evidence was inadmissible.
It is not necessary to consider the secondary submission put to her Honour at the trial.
At the conclusion of an extensive hearing her Honour ruled that Mr.
Thompson's evidence was admissible. Her Honour however deferred giving her reasons for the judgment on the voir dire until well into the trial.
Indeed, her Honour's reasons were given on 30 August 1993 after evidence had been given before the jury by the witness Mr. Thompson, and by a Mr. Miletic, clinical psychologist specialising in trauma counselling and by one psychiatrist, a Dr. Vaughan. Mr. Miletic had apparently been brought into the matter as a consultant therapist by Mr. Thompson's employer, the Department of
Corrective Services who inter alia, had been involved in the investigation of the events involving the injury to Mr. Thompson. Indeed, much of the initial investigation appears to have been done by the Service rather than by the police. In her reasons her Honour observed that none of the "major findings" in her judgment would have been affected by further but incomplete evidence touching upon the EMDR which was given at the trial. In the event no complaint is made in terms that her Honour was in error when giving judgment on the voir dire application in having regard in any way to the oral evidence given at the trial by the named persons. Indeed, her Honour observed that no evidence was given in the presence of the jury which in any way would have led her to question her earlier ruling that Mr.
Thompson's evidence was admissible and the possible effect of his EMDR session went only to weight.
For the purposes of this appeal I shall take the facts from her Honour's judgment on the voir dire reported in Jamal and Ors supra. As the decision in
R v
Hawkins (CCA, 17 December 1992, unreported) illustrates, such findings of fact made on the voir dire are not generally open to be challenged on appeal.
Indeed, before us Mr. Stratton in arguing the first ground of appeal (and whose arguments on this ground were generally adopted by counsel for the other appellants) accepted her Honour's findings of fact made in the judgment on the voir dire.
He stated he did not intend to suggest any of her Honour's findings were really wrong.
As I have said, the charges in the indictment relate to an incident which took place at Long Bay Gaol on 28 July 1991. The appellants were all prisoners at the time.
The witness in question, Mr. Thompson, was a prison officer. An attempted break out occurred on that day in the course of which Mr.
Thompson received serious injuries. He was taken to Prince Henry Hospital where life saving surgery was carried out. Whilst in hospital, on 16 August 1991, he made a statement to police about the incident on 28 July 1991. In it he named six of the original eight accused as being amongst the prisoners involved in the fracas. Five were identified from a book of photographs. In the statement Mr.
Thompson also said: see Jamal and Ors (at 546): "I cannot remember which prisoner did what to Tony Doyle and myself, I can just remember that between eight and nine prisoners came into the wing office".
Her Honour referred to the evidence given by Mr. Thompson at the committal proceedings on 13 and 16 March 1992. No attempt was apparently made to explore what Mr. Thompson had remembered since the statement on 16 August
It also appears from the evidence that Mr. Thompson was apparently later present at the Local
Court in June 1992 and at the time the magistrate committed the appellants for trial.
Her Honour found that about a month before the trial was due to start, namely 4 May 1993, Mr. Thompson made a further statement about the events of July 1991. Her
Honour quoted part of this statement. The following passage appears in her judgment (at 546): "... On 16 August 1991 I made a statement to Police in relation to that assault. In that statement I identified six prisoners that I know entered the Wing and assaulted me. At the time of making that statement, I was unable to identify which prisoner did what to me. However, since then, I have seen a trauma counsellor and a psychiatrist and during these visits the incident has become more clear to me..."
In the same statement Mr. Thompson described in some detail the actions inter alia, of Bargashoun, Haines and Tillott.
Her Honour said (at 547): "It is obvious from a reading of these two statements that by
May 1993 Mr. Thompson had a much more specific memory of the incidents than he did in August 1991. In the meantime, on 12
August 1992, he had undergone a psychotherapeutic process known as Eye Movement Desensitisation and Reprocessing (generally referred to as EMDR)".
 .
Thus it is clear from the two statements of Thompson of 16 August 1991 and 4 May 1993, that by the later date Mr. Thompson had a much more specific memory of the incident in question than he did in August 1992 and, I would add, than he did in March 1992 when he gave his evidence at the committal. In the first statement he said "I cannot remember which prisoner did what to Tony
Doyle and myself". In the second statement he said that at the time of making the first statement "I was unable to identify which prisoner did what to me".
In the second statement he identified with some specification the role of each of the accused, what each did to him, that is who assaulted him and in what way. Her Honour found that the account given during the EMDR session at least in part involved the assignment of roles to individual assailants.
Her Honour observed that between the two statements the witness had undergone the psychotherapeutic process of EMDR "a deceptively simple procedure" in which the therapist causes the patient to move his or her eyes rapidly from side to side whilst concentrating on some disturbing event or emotion.
In between the making of the two statements, Mr. Miletic, a psychologist specialising in trauma counselling, had apparently administered the EMDR therapy to Mr. Thompson. Prior to 12 August 1992 he had seen Mr. Thompson on a number of occasions. On 12 August 1992 he visited Mr. Thompson at his home. He found him to be agitated and anxious and suffering from general symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder. He decided to treat Thompson with EMDR to relieve his anxiety. Mr. Thompson gave his permission for the procedure to take place. Her Honour quoted the statement of Mr. Miletic dated 27 May 1993 describing the treatment given. I shall do likewise. Her Honours quote appears as follows (at 547): "As the EMDR treatment began, Prison Officer Thompson very quickly began to relive the assault. He was re-experiencing details of the assault, such as a particular prisoner standing over him with a fire extinguisher, smashing it down on his head. During this very intense session, Prison Officer Thompson was able to recall the names of particular prisoners and what roles they played. I do not recall the names of any of these particular prisoners as my concern was for assisting Prison
Officer Thompson to go through this process of releasing the trauma from his mind.

At the end of the session Prison Officer Thompson was considerably more at ease and his anxiety level had dropped significantly. The EMDR treatment had acted as a catalyst to draw out his repressed memory and experience of the horror of his assault. For the first 12 months of his recovery,
Prison Officer Thompson had been preoccupied with his physical wellbeing and had repressed many of the details of the trauma, a very common phenomena for trauma victims. Following the passing of the 12 month anniversary of the assault, the resurgence of his symptoms had brought him to the point of being ready to recall his experiences in detail. At this time he was physically very well and had been functioning confidently at work and at home, and therefore was most likely to begin to recall the incident. THE EMDR TREATMENT SPEEDED UP THE
PROCESS OF RECALL AND RELEASE OF HIS REPRESSED MEMORY AND
POST
TRAUMATIC STRESS REACTION". (my emphasis).
Her Honour referred on a number of occasions to the substantial, startling or surprising discrepancies between descriptions given by Mr.
Miletic and Mr. Thompson relating to the latter's EMDR session, a matter in itself also leading a number of witnesses to hypothesise that Mr. Thompson must have been in a hypnotic trance at the time of the EMDR session.
It is appropriate here to observe that after hearing trial evidence from both Mr. Thompson and Mr. Miletic on the voir dire in relation to the EMDR session', her Honour said (at 553) that in some ways "Mr. Miletic and Mr.
Thompson appeared to be discussing two entirely different events. As to the objective circumstances of the session I am sure that Mr. Miletic's version is more likely to be accurate". In this passage her Honour was referring to the inconsistencies between Mr. Miletic's account of the session and that of the witness, apparently preferring the view of Miletic rather than the recollection of the witness Thompson.
Her Honour also observed that the precise details of what Mr. Thompson recalled during the EMDR could never be accurately ascertained, Mr. Thompson had no real memory of it, and Mr. Miletic took no notes, either during or after the session. Her Honour whilst expressing perhaps a tentative view (at ) said: "Accordingly the account which he (Mr. Miletic) describes Mr.
Thompson as giving during the EMDR session could only have come from Mr. Thompson himself And there is no doubt that this does, at least in part, involve the assignment of roles to individual assailants".
Her Honour found it impossible to reach a firm conclusion as to whether
Mr. Thompson's session did precipitate an improvement in his memory, observing (at 558) "(i)n the absence of such notes (of Mr. Miletic) we can only surmise as to the effect of the EMDR upon Mr. Thompson's memory". Her Honour also concluded (at 570) that whilst it was unlikely that Thompson was in a hypnotic trance during his EMDR session, nevertheless it was difficult to find why his memory of the session had become compressed in point of time. Her Honour (at ) further found that it was unlikely that EMDR played any particularly significant role in the return of his memory.
Her Honour discussed EMDR - its history, nature and effect. Her Honour described it. I again quote a significant part of what her Honour said (at -549): "EMDR - Its history. nature and effect 
EMDR was serendipitously discovered by a Californian psychologist, Dr Francine Shapiro in 1987. Dr Shapiro happened to be moving her eyes rapidly from side to side whilst she was thinking of a traumatic event in her past. Afterwards she unaccountably felt better. Accordingly she embarked on a series of clinical tests which confirmed that the process of moving one's eyes from side to side whilst focusing on a traumatic event, had the effect of isolating the memory of the event from the distressing emotions which had previously accompanied it.

In a typical session of EMDR the therapist will move a finger or an object horizontally in front of the patient's face, so that the patient's eyes move rapidly from side to side. At the same time the patient is asked to focus on a particularly distressing emotion or event in his or her past. A standard session of EMDR will include many of these "rounds" of eye movements, interspersed by discussion between the therapist and the patient as to how the patient is coping with it. Often the experience is a highly cathartic one with the patient reliving the traumatic event, sometimes in a very dramatic way.

The clinician's role during these sessions is usually, although not 'invariably, a reactive one. As Dr. Vaughan said: 'You are continually directing them back to the memory, asking them what they think, what did they feel. What you are trying to do is get them to arouse the memory as vividly as possible ....

You don't often have to put input in yourself The therapist can put in input. There is no hard and fast rule. Shapiro advises very strongly you put as little input as possible' (ts, p 100).

There is, as yet, no theoretical explanation for the effectiveness of EMDR. Despite this, and despite its beguiling simplicity, which to some smacks of quackery, it appears to be very effective indeed in many cases of post-traumatic stress disorder. Two of the psychiatrists who gave evidence on the voir dire, Dr Kevin
Vaughan and Dr Robert Hampshire, use EMDR regularly as a therapeutic tool. Dr Vaughan, the Director of the Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder Clinic at Hornsby Hospital, has conducted a controlled study of 36 patients, half of whom underwent traditional therapy and half of whom underwent EMDR.
Admittedly the sample was not large. Nevertheless, the results indicated that, at least in the short term, the patients who had undergone EMDR were significantly more improved than those who had not.
 
Dr Vaughan described the effect of EMDR in the following terms.
 'Usually they start at first to relive it. So they say things like, 'oh my heart is beating' ... They can see the colour of the person's eyes, or they are focused on a gun or a knife or something like that. You get this curious phenomenon after you have done it a number of times, that the vividness decreases.
On a completely successful case they can't picture the trauma at all' (ts, p 101 ).

A number of possible theoretical bases have been posited for
EMDR. One possibility is that it is akin to hypnotism. This is very relevant to this case and
I shall be discussing it in more detail later. Another theory is that EMDR is associated with REM (rapid eye movement) sleep.
Dr Hampshire hypothesises that the eye movement might open a shunt between those parts of the brain which deal with short-term and long-term memory.

All these hypotheses remain in the area of speculation.

The absence of any theoretical base for EMDR leads a number of people to be very sceptical about it. Dr Jonathan Phillips, who uses it rarely himself, comments as follows (Ex PB2): 'To this point in time there is no satisfactory rationale for EMDR. It is purported, however, that there is a neurophysiological link between eye movement and the laying down and retrieval of memory. Whilst EMDR lacks a firm scientific basis, it is generally a useful tool for the therapy of patients experiencing symptoms linked with post-traumatic stress.
It is a simple technique and requires no particular skills or level of scholarship. It is a novel technique and carries with it a touch of magic. It is a fashionable form of therapy at the present time.

A word of caution is necessary. Psychiatry has been bedevilled by "miracle treatments". Many have come and gone. Each new treatment has brought with it its devotees and ever willing and compliant patients. The new treatments have worked wonderfully in their earlier days but have been found wanting with the passage of time. It is too early to know whether EMDR will find an enduring place in the psychiatric armamentarium.' 
It is clear from all I have said that EMDR does not purport to be a memory retriever. If anything it is the reverse. It is intended as a therapeutic tool not a forensic one. Indeed in parts of the United States it is recommended that prospective witnesses not undergo EMDR - not because of a fear that their evidence might become distorted in the process, but because they are liable to lose acuity in their memory and thus be unsatisfactory as witnesses".

Her Honour in her conclusion also said (at 570): "EMDR is a novel therapeutic tool which is particularly valuable in the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder. "
It would thus appear to me that upon her Honours findings, the EMDR procedure, its general and particular application, appeared to be one fraught with to say the least some controversy. Indeed, a considerable number of psychologists and psychiatrists were called who gave extensive and somewhat conflicting and contradictory evidence on the subject of EMDR.
Further, as her
Honour observed, the voir dire occupied some nine hearing days. Evidence was called from no less than four psychiatrists and four psychologists in addition to Mr. Thompson. Her Honour said (at 548): "It would be fair to say that this proliferation of expert testimony did little to clarify many of the issues raised on the voir dire. Indeed for almost every expression of opinion from one expert there was a contrary expression from another.
This has not facilitated my task in reaching any firm conclusions on the matter. On the other hand it has confirmed my view that the effect of EMDR upon Mr Thompson's evidence is properly a matter for the determination of the jury".
The trial as I have said ultimately lasted some five months. The expert testimony, as to the effect of EMDR upon Mr. Thompson (and his evidence as well) appears to have occupied a considerable amount of the hearing time at the trial.
It might equally be fair to observe that not only did the expert evidence apparently do little to clarify many of the raised on the voir dire, but further, that the contradictory and conflicting expert evidence also perhaps created difficulties for the jury. Indeed, one may be forgiven in doubting how intelligible to the jury the conflicting evidence would have been. As will be seen, a complaint made by the appellants is that the scientific aura surrounding the EMDR technique may have given the jury the false impression that the testimony of Mr. Thompson having involved a scientific psychological technique or even having been produced by it, was for this reason alone, objectively true. Indeed, implicit in the appellants' submissions is that the jury may also have been left with misconceptions of the EMDR process, its efficacy, validity, even a belief that it provides some panacea for lost memory, which matters or some of them might otherwise impair their ability to further objectively to weigh the credibility of the witness who has been subject to the EMDR procedure.
In Clark versus Ryan <case>; [(1960) 103 CLR 486] Dixon CJ (at 491) in referring to technical evidence of physics and of relevant opinions to be deduced thereon, and concluding that such evidence might have been led from an expert, observed that "one may doubt how intelligible to the jury the evidence would have been". I am not suggesting that intelligibility alone precludes admissibility but where the reliability of memory associated with a "novel and thus far unexplained procedure" such as EMDR is in contest among the experts, the difficulty for the jury to apply and comprehend the conflicting expert opinions and to evaluate its reliability in the light of lengthy extensive contest among the experts over a prolonged period might itself suggest the need for care in considering the admissibility of the evidence of a witness who has undergone the EMDR process, or if it is otherwise admissible whether such ought to be excluded as a matter of discretion absent the existence of safeguards such as apply to the memory of a witness who has been subjected to hypnosis. Indeed, it is the thrust of the appellants' submissions (to which I will turn later in greater detail) that the policy reasons for applying procedural safeguards to hypnotically revived memory should apply equally to memory revived by EMDR, and that the same safeguards as apply to memory affected by hypnosis should apply equally to memory affected by EMDR. Her
Honour accepted (at 549) that one possible theoretical basis posited for EMDR was that it was akin to hypnotism, and that if the same dangers which relate to hypnosis also applied to EMDR "there would be much to be said for rejecting
Mr. Thompson's evidence", and further (at 571) that although the balance of opinion was that EMDR and hypnosis were different she "would nevertheless have had serious concerns as to the possible unreliability of memory revived through this novel and thus for far unexplained procedure".
Her Honour (at 571) referred to the dangers discussed by the experts, and strongly recommended that "the type of safeguards referred to in the
Californian legislation and approved by the New Zealand
Court of Appeal be adopted whenever a prospective witness undergoes this therapy". It seems to me that her Honour whilst considering the question whether the same dangers which relate to hypnosis also applied to EMDR did not in the end expressly answer or address it in terms. It seems to me that the question whether the dangers are the same perhaps really encapsulate the real issue in the case.
Having said this it would seem to me that when one examines "the dangers" referred to by her Honour, and the basis for her strong recommendation, then as will be seen there is much to be said for the view that her Honour whilst ultimately holding that EMDR and hypnosis as procedures were different, was really saying (or at least implicitly saying) that there was a sufficient similarity of dangers or inherent dangers to be found in each process as to justify applying the hypnosis type safeguards to EMDR. Further, it is also clear that her
Honour when referring to "this therapy" clearly did not consider that the recommended safeguards should only be applied in cases where it was used as an investigative technique or even as a forensic one. Nor was such a view argued before us. Her Honour considered that the safeguards should apply even when
EMDR was used as "therapy". What occurred in this case in terms of the time spent on the issue both on the voir dire and at the trial, and the proliferation of expert evidence which her Honour found did little to clarify many of the issues raised on the voir dire, reminds me of observations of
Pashman J in State of New Jersey v Hurd 86 NJ 525, [432 A 2d 86] (1981). In that case the New Jersey Court laid down certain procedural requirements for admissibility of hypnotically refreshed memory in order to reduce (not to eliminate) the risks associated with hypnosis. It was a decision very much to the forefront of those American decisions prescribing procedural safeguards for the admissibility of such testimony, and one which appears to have been also adopted or reflected in the Californian Evidence Code which was in turn adopted by the New Zealand Court of Appeal in R versus McFelin <case>; [(1985) 2 NZLR 750.]
Pashman J said (at 92): "Because the introduction of hypnotically refreshed memory will often require additional expert testimony by both sides to help the jury evaluate the reliability of the procedures followed during hypnosis, there is a potential for confusion of the issues and a tremendous consumption of trial resources. The potential disadvantages would be even greater if it were necessary to prove the lack of general acceptance of the procedure in every case as well as the unreliability of its use in the particular instance".
The reference to general acceptance is a reference to the test for admissibility of scientific evidence as found in Frye versus United States [293 F.
 (D.C.] Cir. 1923) which provides background to many decisions in the
U.S.A. in relation to the matter of admissibility of the evidence of a witness who has been subject to hypnosis. The observations of Pashman J might be thought to be somewhat descriptive of what took place in the instant case, in the sense of giving rise to confusion of issues and tremendous consumption of trial resources. However,
I am not suggesting that the passage itself, standing alone renders the evidence inadmissible.
Against this background I turn specifically to consider the first ground.
In her reasons for judgment her Honour appeared to approach the matter as follows (at 550): "The two main issues to be determined on the voir dire are:
Did Mr Thompson's EMDR produce a distorted memory of the events in question? 
Alternatively
Did the EMDR entrench or reinforce Mr. Thompson's already distorted memory of the events so as to unfairly hamper cross-examination of him? 
My findings on these questions will in turn depend upon my findings on a number of related issues. In particular, my answer to the first question will entirely depend upon my accepting, as a matter of fact, that Mr. Thompson's EMDR at least partially precipitated the improvement of his memory.
I turn, then, to that issue."
The appellants challenge this approach and the formulation of the issue in the way stated.
Indeed, it was submitted that her Honour, by adopting the approach stated, led herself into error by posing the wrong question (or issue) for consideration. It was argued that EMDR should be treated in the same way as hypnosis and that in the absence of the type of safeguards that have been suggested for controlling or governing the receipt of evidence of a witness who has been subject to hypnosis, it should be accepted that a person who has undergone this process should not have his/her evidence admitted.
The appellants' submissions may be further summarised as follows. EMDR should be treated in the same way as hypnosis. The procedural guidelines or safeguarding conditions controlling the admission of evidence of a witness who has been subject to hypnosis as stated in McFelin (adapted from the
Californian Evidence Code) and applied in Jenkyns should equally apply to the evidence of a witness who has been subject to EMDR. The reasons for applying the procedural safeguards in cases of hypnosis apply equally to memory revived or enhanced as the subject of the EMDR process. It matters not whether EMDR and hypnosis are or are not the same procedures. The fact is they are both psychological techniques associated with memory. It was argued that even though each process may be different, the dangers and risks associated with each are the same or substantially or significantly the same or inherently the same, so as to justify the application of the hypnosis induced testimony guidelines or procedural safeguards to a witness who has been the subject of the EMDR process. They submit that the question is not whether the processes are the same but whether they each share in common the same objectionable features in the sense of similar or like dangers or risks. They submit that the essential reason why the hypnosis safeguards should apply to EMDR is that there is in the result a similar risk shared by both, namely, the possible unreliability of evidence revived, enhanced or retrieved by either procedure.
It is the result of the procedures that is said to be important.
They also submit that the potential unreliability of memory is common to both, that is important, not whether or not the different processes used to bring about that result are different. Thus the point made by the appellants is that even if
EMDR and hypnosis are different (as her Honour found) they have similar dangers or risks giving rise to potential unreliability of memory, such that the hypnosis safeguarding rules or guidelines should be applied to EMDR testimony. Her Honour it is said posed the wrong question namely, whether the procedures are different, rather than asking the correct question, whether each gave rise to similar dangers or risks.
The appellants in addition to pointing to passages at 571, also rely upon her Honour's expressed view (at 569): "It would have to follow that, if the same dangers which relate to hypnosis also applied to EMDR, there would be much to be said for rejecting Mr. Thompson's evidence".
It seems to me that this passage in many ways reflects the argument of the appellants to the extent that it poses what they say is at least a critical question, never answered, and which if answered could have been only answered in an affirmative way, namely that the same dangers which relate to hypnosis also apply to EMDR. It appears to me if they can make good their argument (there will be a need to consider and explore the similarities) then the appeal should be allowed. Indeed, the Crown as will be seen accepts that if the dangers are the same or similar dangers exist between EMDR and hypnosis, then McFelin and the decision in Jenkyns applying McFelin in relation to hypnotically induced testimony, should apply.
It is appropriate to observe that the EMDR in the instant case was used for a therapeutic purpose. It was not argued by the appellants nor indeed, by the Crown that because the EMDR was in the instant case used as a therapeutic tool, as a form of therapy (and not as an investigative tool or a forensic tool or in a forensic setting) that such provides a point of real distinction between the hypnosis cases and a case involving EMDR. It seems to me the dangers are the same in terms of considering the reliability of evidence after both procedures whether either or both processes are used for investigative, forensic or therapeutic purposes. Indeed it would seem that the procedures are capable of use for any or all of such purposes. The Crown relied upon the two being different, not upon the fact that there is to be found a distinction between for example, hypnosis used for an investigative or a forensic purpose and hypnosis used for a therapeutic purpose (the American cases do not suggest such a distinction) nor EMDR used for a therapeutic as opposed to an investigative, or forensic purpose. Indeed, her Honour (at 571) did not suggest there was any such distinction, clearly suggesting that memory revived through the EMDR process used as a form of therapy of itself warranted the adoption of the hypnosis safeguards (even those safeguards associated with the use of hypnosis in an investigative or forensic setting). In my view the same dangers or risks, the same possibility of unreliability of memory is common whether hypnosis or EMDR, both or either, are used for investigative, forensic or therapeutic purposes. The fact that EMDR is intended to be used as a therapeutic tool, for therapeutic purposes is clearly beside the point. The
American cases, see for example Hurd, acknowledge that hypnosis is an accepted medical tool for psychotherapy, the treatment of psychosomatic illnesses and memory recall; so likewise is said to be EMDR. Further, some of the American cases suggest that in cases where the evidence of a witness subject to hypnosis is admitted, subject to procedural safeguards, those safeguards should apply whether or not the hypnosis has been for forensic or therapeutic purposes. Likewise, those
American cases holding that the evidence of the witness is per se inadmissible, do not in terms draw a distinction between evidence the subject of hypnosis in a forensic setting or the subject of an investigative procedure and evidence the subject of hypnosis in a therapeutic setting. It appears to me that each procedure, however performed, carries the same actual or potential risks or dangers and shares in common the possibility of production of unreliable memory.
Finally on this point as Grove J pointed out in argument, the vice sought to be avoided is the admission of potentially unreliable evidence and it does not matter how it was sourced, revived, or the purpose for which that evidence was revived. One is not concerned with whether the potentially unreliable evidence was obtained by a forensic or therapeutic route, or an accidental or deliberate route. The need for safeguards is not addressed to or concerned with whether the procedure is accidental, deliberate, forensic or therapeutic.
I have dealt with this matter of treatment by EMDR for therapeutic purposes at some length because of a distinction made by Seaman J in the recent case of The Queen versus Jumeaux (WA Supreme Court, 23 September 1994, unreported). It is a case to which I will refer again later in this judgment.
His Honour appears to have treated the McFelin and Jenkyns guidelines as not applying to therapeutic procedure. With respect I do not agree with his view.
I have set out some of my reasons why. I do not agree that a ground of distinction between the cases is to be found between whether or not the relevant procedure is used for forensic purposes.
The appellants specifically submitted that the initial question for her
Honour in a case where it was established that a witness had undergone EMDR, was whether EMDR in general, and not in the actual specific case, was a psychological procedure such as to call for the application of the type of guideline "rules" of the-type discussed in relation to hypnotically induced testimony in McFelin (in turn adopted and adapted to an extent from the requirements of the California Evidence Code) and as applied by Hunt CJ at CL in Jenkyns. The question, it was said, to be initially posed was whether or not EMDR in a general sense calls for the imposition of special rules of the type postulated in cases where hypnosis has been used upon a witness. It was submitted that her Honour did not address or really address this general question. The appellants submitted that her Honour erred by formulating the issues by reference to the particular case, and diverted from consideration of the proper initial general question. Thus it was said that her Honour was in error in that she really addressed not the threshold general question but the particular question whether or not the actual testimony of Mr. Thompson was safe to be admitted, or put another way, posed the wrong question by looking at the matter in terms of whether or not Mr. Thompson's case in particular called for the exclusion of his evidence.
The arguments of the appellants then proceeded upon the basis that once it is established that the witness has been the subject of EMDR, and that the hypnosis procedural safeguards or guidelines in relation to hypnosis should be applied in a case where a witness has undergone the EMDR procedure (or is to) then a number of matters follow. It was submitted that the case law relating to post-hypnotic recollection provides a guide as to how the evidence of a witness subject to EMDR should be dealt with. Indeed her Honour considered such to be clearly relevant.
It was argued that the statutory requirements in the Californian Evidence
Code (adopted and adapted as court guidelines in McFelin) did not require a finding that hypnosis in fact caused memory to be revived in an instant case, but rather that its provisions came into operation if in fact the witness had undergone hypnosis for the purpose of recalling events which are the subject of the witness testimony. The Evidence Code appears to have an historical background and was brought into existence after the Californian Supreme Court decision in People versus Guerra [(1984) 690 P. 2d 635] which applied "retrospectively" the earlier decision of that court in People versus Shirley [(1982) 31 Cal 3d 18] where the court refused to admit hypnotically induced evidence from a witness (a strict application of the rule described as the per se rule of exclusion). In many ways the Code "safeguards" and requirements are also consistent with and reflect the earlier approach of the New Jersey
Supreme Court in Hurd, supra. The Code was adopted and applied as court guidelines in McFelin and Jenkyns, and further by the Home Office in England in Home Office guidelines given Judicial endorsement by the English Court of
Appeal in the recent case of R versus Browning (The Independent 17 May [1994; (1995)
Crim LR 227).] In the last mentioned decision the Court held that non disclosure of the fact of the hypnosis sessions of an important witness and non compliance with Home Office draft guidelines of 1987 in relation to hypnosis sessions constituted a material irregularity.
Each of these cases concerned the matter of admissibility of hypnotically induced evidence and what safeguards should be in place. It is however by no means clear whether the decision in Jenkyns left the matter of admissibility of hypnotically induced testimony as being conditional upon compliance with the McFelin safeguards or whether those safeguards were relevant to the matter of the discretion to exclude hypnotically induced testimony. The observation of Hunt CJ at CL in Jenkyns (at 727) might suggest that the hypnotically induced testimony of the witness was excluded on the basis of not being sufficiently reliable as to provide a prima facie reason for admitting it, and thus a decision on admissibility and not one on discretion.
A particular point made by the appellants is that the threshold question as with hypnosis is whether or not the witness has in fact undergone EMDR, not whether in fact EMDR (like hypnotism) has caused memory to be revived in the instant case. This latter question as to whether in fact EMDR has caused memory to be revived, never arises unless and until the first question is posed and answered. Thus if the initial question is answered "yes", the witness has undergone EMDR, then it is submitted the safeguarding procedures should be applied as a condition for admissibility of the evidence. If they have not been complied with, the EMDR evidence must be rejected. Then it was submitted that the Californian
Evidence Code (and the cases) point to the onus being on the proponent of hypnotically induced evidence to show that such evidence should be admitted, and to show that the safety procedures or procedural safeguards have been complied with. Thus if the onus is not discharged, the threshold test of admissibility is not met and the-evidence is to be rejected for such reasons and no question of discretion arises. The matter of onus is one of some importance depending upon whether the matter be looked at in terms of admissibility (onus on the proponent) or discretion to exclude admissible evidence. The settled rule is that the onus is on the accused to show that admissible evidence should be excluded on discretionary grounds: Pfennig versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 147] per McHugh J at 186.
Next it was submitted that her Honour did not address the crucial question of whether or not the post-EMDR evidence of Mr. Thompson should be admitted at all, given that virtually all of the procedural safeguards in the
Californian Evidence
Code and McFelin (and generally applicable according to
Jenkyns in cases of hypnosis in New South Wales), which it was argued should have been applied to EMDR testimony, were not complied with. Clearly they were not. Her Honour found (at 569) that many of the safeguards referred to in
McFelin were not adopted. Her Honour accepted (at 558) the "misgivings" of counsel for the appellants, expressing the view at least tentatively that in the absence of notes one could only surmise as to "the effect of the EMDR upon
Mr. Thompson's memory". In Hurd Pashman J speaking for the Court considered (at 97) that the procedural safety guideline requirement at least relating to the recording of the hypnosis sessions was essential "otherwise the opponent will have no effective way to challenge the credibility of the testimony at trial". Ms is a view that I share. The similar McFelin guideline relating to recording I consider for the same reasons to be an essential one. Indeed, her
Honour's concerns clearly suggest the importance of the need for recording the session.
Then it was said that had the correct question been posed, Mr.
Thompson's evidence would not have been admitted or at the very least would have been excluded as a matter of discretion.
Counsel took the Court to the matters of similarity between EMDR and hypnosis, and the dangers associated with admitting hypnotically induced or affected testimony and why there are similar dangers in the case of EMDR. It will be necessary to consider these matters when looking at the cases concerning such. These matters will need to be explored further. Her Honour (at 564) specifically found that the relationship between EMDR and hypnosis was significant for a number of reasons. The first reason was that a possible explanation for the effectiveness of EMDR was that it induces a hypnotic-type trance.
Secondly, hypnosis "has been with us long enough to have produced a great deal of debate about its efficiency as a memory retriever".
In addition, the number of legal rulings as to the admissibility of post-hypnosis evidence provided insight as to how courts had dealt with the problem of memory retrieved through unorthodox and potentially distorting processes. Finally, there was a question as to whether Mr. Thompson may have been in a hypnotic trance during the EMDR session.
In relation to the issues as formulated by her Honour including whether or not the EMDR affected Mr. Thompson's actual memory of the attack, or whether or not EMDR distorted his memory, a number of further submissions were made. It was submitted that her Honour appeared to have imposed upon the accused in effect an onus of establishing that EMDR did in fact affect Mr.
Thompson's memory. It was argued that if the hypnosis law and cases supra applied, the onus was on the proponent of the evidence to establish that it did not affect his memory. Next it was argued that since McFelin and the
Californian Evidence Code the safeguards apply once it has been established that the witness has undergone hypnosis in fact, and they do not require for their applicability a finding that hypnotism caused the particular witness' memory to be revived. Thus the appellants argued that there was no onus on the accused to establish that the process actually caused the memory to be revived. Similar arguments were advanced in relation to whether or not EMDR distorted Mr. Thompson's memory. Her Honour said (at 562) that she could not find that Mr. Thompson's EMDR produced a distorted memory of the assault.
Clearly the Californian
Evidence Code, McFelin and other cases on hypnosis do not require the accused to establish that the memory was distorted by hypnotism.
As will be seen under the Code the party seeking to rely upon the evidence is required to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the hypnosis did not affect the witness so as to make his recollection unreliable or substantially impaired: see also similar views in the earlier decision in
Hurd.
Many of the arguments advanced by the appellants were advanced both in support of their contention that the evidence of Mr. Thompson was inadmissible and alternatively, that it should have been excluded as a matter of discretion either in terms of unfairness or otherwise. There is some duplication and overlap in relation to the arguments in respect of each.
It is appropriate to make some specific observations in relation to discretion. Mr. Stratton advanced several arguments that perhaps on one view might be perceived to be more relevant to the question of the discretionary exclusion of Mr. Thompson's evidence, were it to be otherwise held to be admissible. Mr. Stratton submitted that on any view the evidence of Mr.
Thompson should have been excluded on the discretionary ground of unfairness to the accused.
Mr. Stratton submitted that the erroneous crucial question in her
Honour's reasons in the voir dire was whether or not EMDR precipitated in Mr.
Thompson a new memory of the attack.
He pointed to the fact that Her Honour in reaching a conclusion in relation to Mr. Thompson's account of his memory improvement and the making of tentative findings in relation to such, observed that it was impossible for her to reach a firm conclusion as to whether Mr. Thompson's EMDR session did precipitate an improvement in his memory. Her Honour when dealing with this matter observed (at 558): "Mr. Miletic took no notes during the EMDR session nor indeed during any of Mr. Thompson's other consultations.
For this he was severely criticised by defence counsel. I MUST share their misgivings on this account. Had a full history been taken both before and after the EMDR session, then there would have been clear reference points in relation to Mr Thompson's account of the assault. In the absence of such notes we can only surmise as to the effect of the EMDR upon Mr Thompson's memory". (my emphasis).
There was dispute between Mr. Thompson and Mr. Miletic including how long the EMDR session lasted in August 1992. The absence of a recording of the session or of notes pertaining to such precluded a full and effective way of challenging
Mr. Thompson's credibility at the trial: see also Hurd. Further or alternatively, in relation to the matter of discretion much importance is attached to her Honour's finding which I have just quoted.
Her Honour was nevertheless rather inclined to the view that the EMDR was probably of little, if any importance in the improvement of Mr. Thompson's memory, ultimately concluding (at 571) that it was unlikely that the EMDR played any significant role in the return of his memory.
It was said that a reason for the uncertainty about the effect of the
EMDR was the failure of Mr. Miletic to take the basic procedural safeguards referred to in McFelin and required by the Californian Evidence Code in relation to hypnosis and which it was said were applicable as well to EMDR.
These included, as will be seen, the failure to keep records of both the hypnosis sessions themselves, and of the patient's recollection of events before and after therapy. Her Honour (at 558) criticised the failure of Mr.
Miletic to take notes during the session (nor indeed during other consultations). The absence of the recording of Mr. Thompson's pre-EMDR memory, the failure to videotape the session, and of
Mr. Miletic to keep a record of the time elapsed during the session, were found (at 569) to be safeguards not adopted. These were inter alia, safeguards of the kind recommended in McFelin, by her Honour in the instant matter (at 571), and by
Hunt CJ at CL in
Jenkyns, decided since Jamal. The lack of records is a matter of significance. In Hurd's case the New Jersey Supreme Court considered that the keeping of records was of such importance and that the failure to keep records of a hypnosis session was of such significance as a procedural safeguard that failure to comply with such safeguard itself would involve rejection of the evidence, the subject of hypnosis.
In the instant case there was apparent virtual unanimity among the experts called as to the importance of keeping some sort of record in the course of a procedure such as EMDR (and as "required" by the Californian
Evidence Code, McFelin, Jenkyns and Browning in the case of hypnosis). Without some kind of record there are not only the problems identified by her Honour but the accused may be denied the opportunity of exploring the risk of suggestion, cues or contamination in the course of the EMDR session or having the full benefit of cross-examination: Hurd's case. In the instant case there was no way of measuring Mr. Thompson's pre-EMDR memory. Thus it would appear to me that in relation to the matter even of discretion (if such arises), the omission to keep notes was one of considerable significance.
Her Honour specifically found (at 561) that Mr. Thompson clearly fell within the category of persons who were troubled by their memory gaps and would be trying to fill them. It follows there was always a risk of confabulation with or without EMDR. Whether the EMDR assisted in this process in Mr. Thompson's case simply cannot be gleaned from the evidence.
Indeed, (at ) her Honour specifically found that given Mr. Thompson's personality and incomplete memory of events there was a "real danger of confabulation". It was possible his memory was a reconstructed one (563).
Thus it was submitted also in relation to the discretion that non compliance with the Californian Evidence Code procedural safeguards in relation to hypnosis or the guidelines in Mcfelin (applied in Jenkyns) and in particular the rule relating to the keeping of records of the session, for reasons given by her Honour, at the very least provided proper reasons for excluding Thompson's evidence if otherwise admissible, on the ground particularly of unfairness. In my opinion there is much substance in this alternative submission.
For the Crown the following submissions were made.
Firstly, that the rules relating to hypnosis do not apply to EMDR. The
Crown relied upon her Honour's finding that making a comparison between hypnosis and EMDR was very difficult (565), that the state of consciousness induced by EMDR was quite different from a hypnotic trance, and her Honour's finding that it was unlikely that Mr. Thompson was in a hypnotic trance.
 .
The Crown accepted that although her Honour did not expressly answer our question whether EMDR was subject to the same dangers as hypnosis, her Honour "implicitly" concluded that the same dangers did not exist. With respect I do not agree that her Honour implicitly concluded that in general the dangers were not the same. The passages to which I have made reference, and the further reasons to be given, rather support my view. Indeed, the submission in some respects is inconsistent with her Honour's findings and recommendations.
The Crown submitted that the question is whether or not it is safe to-admit the evidence in the particular case in the sense that it is sufficiently reliable. I do not consider that this is the correct question.
The argument was Miter alia advanced upon the basis of the Crown's initial threshold position, that EMDR and hypnosis were not the same and hence the hypnosis cases and the
Californian Evidence Code did not apply to EMDR. In my view the Crown argument should not be accepted.
The Crown's submission that there is little information on EMDR and hence no evidence of any dangers is one that I reject. The Crown in relation to this matter submitted that there was much experience and literature demonstrating the dangers of hypnosis, that hypnosis had a long history, whereas there is no evidence that in relation to the relatively new procedure of EMDR there are similar or the same dangers, and in particular none in the instant case. With respect to this submission as I will show, her Honour identified significant similariities and dangers to which I will refer in due course.
The Crown's submission that because there is no evidence of any dangers similar to hypnosis in EMDR there is no onus on the Crown to establish that it is safe to admit evidence post-EMDR, likewise is one dependent on the proposition it essentially advanced, that is EMDR and hypnosis are different.
The acceptance or rejection of the Crown's argument is very much dependent not upon whether EMDR and hypnosis are the same but whether there are the same dangers of a like nature or character in each thus rendering both as potentially involving the introduction of unreliable evidence.
I would not accept the Crown's submission that because one can never be satisfied that EMDR evidence is "objectively true" does not make it therefore different to any other evidence, and that it is for the jury to decide whether to accept it. This argument has been rejected in relation to the admissibility of hypnotically induced testimony (for reasons I have both given and still am to give). The argument should likewise and for similar reasons be rejected in relation to EMDR evidence.
Next, the Crown referred to her Honour's finding that the particular EMDR treatment of Mr. Thompson did not contain dangers, or that it was unlikely that the EMDR played any particularly significant role in the "return of his memory". This is a finding very dependent upon what is the correct test, or what is the appropriate threshold question to be asked.
The Crown argued that the evidence could only be excluded in the exercise of judicial discretion, and that this is the way her Honour looked at the matter. It argued that no issue of admissibility really arises for consideration.
It submitted that her Honour did not conclude the evidence was unfair or that its prejudicial effect outweighed its probative value, so if the matter is viewed in terms as being only one of discretion it would be difficult to interfere with her Honour's discretion to admit the evidence. I accept as do the appellants, the Crown's submission that the findings of fact on the voir dire are generally not open to challenge. I also accept the view where no error of principle is shown an appellate court will be slow to substitute its opinion for that of a trial judge: Webb versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 68
ALJR 582] per Mason CJ and McHugh J at 587. However, if error of principle is shown or the trial judge did not apply the correct test or posed the wrong question in the exercise of her discretion then this Court may interfere with the exercise of the discretion, Indeed, it may be considered that the question at this stage on appeal, is perhaps really whether, in the event, there was a miscarriage of justice if the discretion was incorrectly exercised. The Crown submitted in relation to discretion that the issue involved a judgment first as to whether the evidence was unsafe in the general case and secondly, in the instant case. Her Honour it was submitted did not find that in the general case the evidence was unsafe as to make it inadmissible, nor that it was so in the particular case.
Next, it was submitted that no onus lay on the Crown when the question was considered in the context of discretion. Further, it was submitted that there was no unfairness in admitting the evidence, nor was there any ground for excluding it for any other discretionary reason.
As to the specific matter of unfairness (or indeed prejudice, both or either) in the particular instance one may make several further comments. No safety procedures were in place in relation to the EMDR procedure. There was considerable conflict as to what took place. Mr. Miletic kept no notes of his one and half hour session. He made no notes afterwards. None of the critical
McFelin safety procedure or safeguards were followed. There were no notes upon which the appellants could properly cross-examine
Miletic or Thompson in relation to the session, and there were startling inconsistencies between their evidence as to material matters.
Her Honour commented upon Mr.
Thompson's vagueness in material areas, and indeed, rejected his views on objective matters at times in favour of accepting Miletic's views. The unfairness or prejudice in this case, one would have thought was in fact demonstrated.
Next, it is to be noted that the EMDR session was only a month and a half after the committal, a matter I also consider to be one of some significance when one has regard to the American law in relation to hypnosis.
Finally, the difficulty of cross-examining was somewhat similar in some respects to the problem of cross-examining a witness who has been hypnotised.
The Crown also submitted that her Honour was exercising a discretion, that no error was demonstrated in her findings of fact, and that her Honour did not err in the test that she applied to the question of admissibility.
However of special significance is that the Crown accepted, and properly so, that if EMDR presented at least as many dangers as hypnotism, then the law as stated in McFelin and in
Jenkyns should be applied. It did not dispute that those cases applied where a witness has been hypnotised whether for forensic, therapeutic or investigative purposes. The Crown's essential position was that
EMDR was not hypnosis, and hence the hypnosis law had nothing to do with the matter, was of no assistance, and not on point. However, as I understand the submission at least in relation to hypnotism, the Crown accepted that the law as stated provides a test of admissibility in the first place, rather than as a test applicable to the matter of discretionary exclusion of admissible evidence.
Finally and very significantly, the Crown expressly accepted that if it had been found or should have been found "as a fact" that EMDR presents the same or many of the same dangers as hypnosis, her Honour was in error in not proceeding in accordance with McFelin and Jenkyns. This is a most important concession and identifies perhaps at the end of the day the real issue in the matter.
In my view for reasons which will appear in this judgment EMDR does present the same or many of the same dangers as hypnosis.
 
EMDR and Hypnosis
Her Honour found that the relationship between EMDR and hypnosis was significant for a number of reasons to which I have already referred. In her judgment on the voir dire her Honour referred to the view of Dr. Shapiro, the discoverer of EMDR, as emphasising that there is no guarantee that a memory which emerges through EMDR will be accurate (itself apparently a factor relevant to the introduction of safeguarding rules in relation to hypnosis induced evidence). I take it that this observation is based upon the contents of Dr. Shapiro's EMDR Newsletter of May (to which I have already made reference) which was put before her Honour as well as being put before the
Court. In it Dr. Shapiro said: "Questions have arisen about the use of EMDR in the courts and the comparison to hypnosis. So far EMDR is not well enough known to have been tested IN COURT; it is simply described under the rubric of cognitive-behavioural techniques (as it is for insurance purposes). However, I want to make sure everyone realises that just because a scene emerges during an EMDR session, does not mean that it is "true" in a literal sense. Things can be "truly experienced" without having actually happened". (my emphasis).
This quoted passage underlines or emphasises one of the reasons for the safeguards of the type also introduced in relation to hypnosis type evidence.
It underlines the reason for caution in relation to the introduction of EMDR evidence in the courtroom. Indeed, her Honour accepted that one of the possible theoretical bases posited for EMDR is "that it is akin to hypnotism", albeit also observing (at 571) that the balance of opinion is that EMDR does not involve the patient going into a hypnotic trance with all its inherent dangers of suggestibility. This particular point however, was made in terms of distinguishing the two procedures, not in terms of the similarity or otherwise of dangers common to each. What is particularly significant in her Honour's reasons is that her Honour nevertheless considered that in general, aside from the instant particular case, there were serious concerns as to the possible unrellability of memory revival through the novel and unexplained procedure of
EMDR, when she recommended that the safeguards applying to persons the subject of hypnosis as found in the California Evidence Code and McFelin should be adopted whenever a witness undergoes the EMDR therapy.
 
The overseas cases and law in relation to hypnosis
U.S.A.
The cases suggest that where a prosecutor seeks to call a previously hypnotised witness to give evidence in a criminal trial of existing recollection of an event that occurred prior to hypnosis then several issues arise to be considered, because trials involving the use of the hypnotised witnesses may lead to a miscarriage of justice. The cases acknowledge that hypnotically induced memory offers no guarantee that the testimony obtained is accurate, truthful or reliable, and that instead the opposite may be the situation.
Her Honour acknowledged that there had been no uniformity in the way the courts in America had dealt with the matter of hypnotically induced evidence.
In
Jenkyns Hunt CJ at CL observed (at 714) that unlike the situation in some of the States of the United States (and apparently in France) there should be no inflexible rule that hypnotically induced testimony is inachnissible (ie, the per se rule of exclusion). Prior to the introduction of the Californian
Evidence Code the decisions in Shirley and Guerra represented an example of the per se rule of inadmissibility or exclusion.
It is probably correct to say that in the United States there are different views reflected in the different State Courts relating to the admissibility of testimony of a previously hypnotised witness other than a criminal defendant. Such views range from the per se rule of inadmissibility (automatic exclusion) covering hypnotically refreshed testimony by witnesses generally to other States which have adopted a rule that hypnosis affects credibility but not admissibility of testimony (automatic admission). In relation to the per se rule the arguments regarding the dangers of hypnosis include suggestibility, confabulation, deliberate fabrication, prospects of bolstered or increased witness confidence, erroneous juror perceptions. These are regarded as justifying the rule that all hypnotically enhanced testimony is inadmissible per se. Another argument advanced is that the witness after hypnosis is really in effect not the same witness as he/she was pre-hypnosis.
The per se rule involves the view that a witness other than the defendant in a criminal trial may not offer testimony to the extent that it has been enhanced through hypnosis. I do not consider that the per se rule represents the law in this country: see also Jenkyns. It was not argued that it should be so regarded. The decisions in the U.S.A. in relation to the per se rule also appear to make no distinction between hypnosis used for forensic purposes and hypnosis used for therapeutic purposes: see for example, People versus Zayas [(1989) N.E. 2d 513] App. 1 Dist 1991). Again other courts conduct an individualised inquiry in each case, (perhaps in some ways not dissimilar to what was done in the instant case), whilst again in some jurisdictions the courts have established procedural pre-requisites for admissibility in order to reduce the risks associated with hypnosis, which in one sense reflects a compromise view that accepts that there should be safeguards as a condition of admissibility, but which nevertheless still will not eliminate the risks or dangers altogether: see the discussion of the various situations by the
Supreme Court of the United States in Rock versus Arkansas <case>; [483 US 44]; and in 29A Am
Jur 2d pp 481-484 para 1019. The Supreme Court in Rock did not decide as to what might be the appropriate rule, expressly confining itself to holding that evidence of a hypnotised defendant accused was however admissible upon essentially constitutional grounds in a criminal trial.
It has been suggested that even those jurisdictions which do admit hypnotically refreshed memories, where procedural safeguards unposed by the courts are followed, have nevertheless ruled that testimony involving an "uncorroborated personal identification of the defendant, whom the witness was not able to identify until undergoing pre trial hypnosis, is inadmissible per se in criminal proceedings where the witness had reason to know when hypnotized that the defendant was already under suspicion":
A Am Jur 2d -484.
It is appropriate to observe in passing that in the instant case Mr.
Thompson gave evidence at the committal hearing over two days in March 1992.
The appellants were presumably present as was Mr. Thompson at the time of the committal in June 1992 (a matter to which I earlier made reference). The EMDR session took place approximately one and a half months after committal. The appellants were clearly already under suspicion.
As earlier stated in the instant case her Honour (at 571) strongly recommended that the type of safeguards referred to in the Californian
Evidence Code (dealing with the testimony of a witness who has undergone hypnosis for the purpose of recalling events which are the subject of the witness' testimony) should apply to a prospective witness undergoing EMDR therapy. This legistation was passed to temper the effect of the exclusionary rule decision of the Supreme Court of California in Guerra. There the court reaffirmed the earlier decision of that Court in Shirley where it had been held that the use of hypnosis to restore or improve the memory of a potential witness was not accepted as a reliable procedure by a consensus of the relevant scientific community and hence the testimony of such a witness was inadmissible as to all matters the subject of the hypnotic session. Thus the testimony of the witness who had been subject to a hypnotic session was inadmissible per se, at least as to all matters the subject of the hypnotic session. In Guerra, the court held that the rule of exclusion applied to witnesses in cases not yet final as at the date of the decision in Shirley.
However, it is appropriate to observe that the decision in Shirley (as other
American cases on hypnosis show) is one inter alia, having a background in part based upon the test in Frye v United States [293 F 1013 (DC] Cir 1923).
This case states that the general test for the admissibility of the result of a scientific procedure or technique is that to be admissible the procedure must have gained general acceptance in its particular field. In other words before a court can admit expert testimony the court must be satisfied that such procedures yield reasonably reliable results and this is reflected partly in whether the procedure has gained general acceptance in the particular field to which it belongs. The decision provides a basis for the inadmissibility of the evidence of a witness who is subject to a technique or procedure which was not generally accepted.
Thus, the decision in Shirley as applied in Guerra which adopted the inadmissibility per se rule is one where the court drew its conclusions from application of the Frye test of scientific acceptance so that to permit a witness to testify as to identification of a witness after hypnosis is said to be inconsistent with Frye. The grounds for per se exclusion which identified the problems and dangers associated with hypnosis enhanced memory (and which appear relevant to the matter of procedural safeguards) were summarised by the Court in Guerra. The court ultimately concluded that evidence of hypnotically aided recall should be excluded as being intrinsically unreliable. In summarising what was said in Shirley,
Guerra stated (at 652): "First we noted studies of human memory showing that a witness often subconsciously alters his recollection of an event in response to later information or questioning, and does so in ways that are both irreversible and impossible to detect. (Id.
at pp 57-62, [181 Cal. Rptr. 243], 641, P.2d 775). Next we reviewed the scientific literature establishing that "each of the phenomena found by such research to contribute to the unreliability of normal memory reappears in a more extreme form when the witness is hypnotized for the purpose of improving his recollection". (Id. at p. 63, [181 Cal. Rptr. 243], 641 P.
d 775.) We summarized the salient conclusions of that literature as follows: A hypnotized person is hyperceptive to suggestions by the hypnotist, whether express or implied, verbal or nonverbal, deliberate or unintended, even unperceived by the hypnotist himself. The hypnotized person experiences a compelling desire to please the hypnotist by giving the responses he believes are expected; his critical judgment is impaired, causing him to credit vague recollections he would not have relied on before hypnosis; and if he cannot actually recall an event he will produce a "pseudomemory" that may be compounded of irrelevant facts from an unrelated experience, "confabulations" or fantasized material unconsciously invented to fill the gaps, and conscious lies. If the claimed memory cannot be verified by independent means, neither the subject nor an expert nor a lay observer can distinguish between accurate recollections and the foregoing pseudomemories, either during the hypnotic session or afterwards, i.e., at the trial.
Finally, a witness who is uncertain of his memory of an event before being hypnotized will become convinced by that process that the story he told under hypnosis is entirely true; that conviction grows stronger as he repeats the story, until "by the time of trial, the resulting 'memory' may be so fixed in his mind that traditional legal techniques such as cross- examination may be largely ineffective to expose its unreliability". (Id. at p 66, [181 Cal. Rptr. 243], 641 P. 2d ). We concluded (ibid.) that the professional literature thus "demonstrates beyond any doubt that at the present time the use of hypnosis to restore the memory of a potential witness is not generally accepted as reliable by the relevant scientific community", and hence that the testimony of a witness whose memory has been tampered with by hypnosis is inadmissible as to the events that were subject of the hypnotic session".
It is here appropriate to bear in mind and have regard to the dangers in relation to hypnosis usefully summarised in this passage when comparing such with the dangers identified and associated with EMDR.
It is here also appropriate to observe in passing that the decision in
Frye has not remained unchallenged. It is no longer the rule for admissibility of scientific evidence in Federal Courts or in litigation in the Federal
Courts. There the admissibility of expert scientific evidence is now governed by Federal Court rules. In Daubert versus Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc <case>; [125 L Ed d 469] the Court held that the Frye standard has been superseded in Federal
Courts by the legislatively enacted Federal Rules of Evidence for Federal
Courts. However, these rules are Federal not State rules. Shirley's case and
Guerra's case are thus examples of the stricter general rule in relation to the inadmissibility of testimony by a witness who has been hypnotised, and was cited as an example of such by the Supreme Court in Rock's case. They are an example of what has been a strict rule of exclusion, ie, automatic exclusion or the per se rule of exclusion. The Californian legislation thus has as its background the need to overcome the strict per se rule of exclusion as found in Shirley and Guerra.
The Californian Evidence Code where applicable, admits evidence from the witness, subject to procedural safeguards of the type found in the earlier decision of the New Jersey Supreme Court in Hurd which quotes in part the dissenting opinion of one of the judges in Guerra: see McFelin per Cooke J at
In Hurd the principal question, as I have indicated, was whether the testimony of a witness who had undergone hypnosis to refresh her memory was admissible in a criminal trial, and if so in what circumstances and under what conditions. The decision in Hurd was cited by the Supreme Court in Rock as an example of the approach of admission conditional on compliance with detailed procedural pre-requisites in order to reduce the risks associated with hypnosis. In Hurd the Supreme Court held that to be admitted in a criminal trial, the hypnotically refreshed memory testimony must satisfy the standard of acceptability for scientific evidence in accordance with the Frye test. The
Court, whilst recognising the problems raised by the use of hypnosis upon a witness who has undergone hypnosis to refresh her memory, nevertheless held that such evidence was admissible, subject to strict safeguards to ensure the reliability of the hypnotic procedure. In Hurd the Court stated that the party seeking to introduce hypnotically refreshed testimony had the burden of establishing its admissibility by clear and convincing evidence, and by clear and convincing proof of procedure. As I would understand it this view did not distinguish between the position of the prosecution and the accused. It was ultimately found that the State had failed to demonstrate reliability of the hypnotic procedures it had used. The evidence was thus not "admissible" at all (not merely for discretionary reasons). The
Court laid down requirements to be satisfied before a party might introduce hypnotically refreshed testimony in a criminal trial.
The Californian Evidence Code which reflects the dissenting view in
Guerra, in some ways also reflects the earlier procedural rules laid down by the New Jersey Supreme Court in Hurd. Indeed, it is interesting to observe that the safety procedural rules adopted in Hurd were those in fact advocated by a defence witness Dr. Orne (at 96). This matter is mentioned because the
English Home Office
Rules (discussed in Browning) had as a background an earlier conference chaired by Lord Justice Lawton at which Dr. Orne attended and made a contribution. Ultimately in Hurd the court concluded the State had failed to demonstrate the reliability of the hypnotic procedures used and the evidence was not admitted. In Hurd Pashman J (at 97) indeed considered as a most important procedural safeguard that the recording of the session was almost absolutely essential, a minimum requirement. It is a view that I too share. In the instant case the absence of such a record is heavily relied upon by the appellants not merely on the matter of admissibility but if necessary in relation to the matter of discretionary exclusion.
The approach in Hurd suggests that before a proponent may introduce hypnotically refreshed memory it must satisfy certain general pre requisites, whilst still acknowledging that if the testimony is admissible the opponent may nevertheless challenge the reliability of the particular procedures followed in the individual case, by introducing expert testimony at the trial "but the opponent may not attempt to prove the general unreliability of hypnosis. The trier of fact must then decide how much weight to accord the hypnotically refreshed memory" (see p 95).
In Rock's case the
United States Supreme Court left open the question of admissibility of testimony of previously hypnotised witnesses confining its actual decision to holding that a criminal defendant who had been hypnotised had a constitutional right to testify.
To sum up the American position many of the decisions in America in relation to hypnosis have as their background inter alia, the influence of the decision in Fye (but as to which now see Daubert) and of Rock's case where it was held that an accused who had been hypnotised also had a constitutional right to testify. The Californian Evidence Code reflects in part the dissenting approach in Guerra and the approach in Hurd which establishes the principle of admission conditional upon compliance with detailed procedural requisites or procedural safeguards. The Californian Evidence Code rejects the per se rule of automatic exclusion or per se hypnosis rule and the rule of automatic inclusion. The Californian Evidence Code thus in one sense itself "codifies" the safeguarding rules of the type considered in Hurd.
In the instant case her Honour set forth the new relevant provisions of the Californian Evidence
Code (at 567-568). Since her Honour recommended such safeguards referred to be adopted when a witness is to undergo EMDR it is appropriate to repeat them. They are as follows: "(a) The testimony of a witness is not inadmissible in a criminal proceeding by reason of the fact that the witness has previously undergone hypnosis for the purpose of recalling events which are the subject of the witness' testimony, if all of the following conditions are met: 
The testimony is limited to those matters which the witness recalled and related prior to the hypnosis.

The substance of the prehypnotic memory was preserved in written, audiotape, or videotape form prior to the hypnosis.

The hypnosis was conducted in accordance with all of the following procedures:
A written record was made prior to hypnosis documenting the subject's description of the event, and information which was provided to the hypnotist concerning the subject matter of the hypnosis.
The subject gave informed consent to the hypnosis.
The hypnosis session, including the pre and post-hypnosis interviews, was videotape recorded for subsequent review.
The hypnosis was performed by a licensed medical doctor or psychologist experienced in the use of hypnosis and independent of and not in the presence of law enforcement, the prosecution, or the defense.
 
Prior to admission of the testimony, the court holds a hearing pursuant to Section 402 of the Evidence Code at which the proponent of the evidence proves by clear and convincing evidence that the hypnosis did not so affect the witness as to render the witness' prehypnosis recollection unreliable or to substantially impair the ability to cross- examine the witness concerning the witness' prehypnosis recollection. At the hearing, each side shall have the right to present expert testimony and to cross-examine witnesses.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of a party to attack the credibility of a witness who has undergone hypnosis, or to limit other legal grounds to admit or exclude the testimony of that witness."
As will be observed the Californian Evidence Code does not require a finding that hypnotism in the instant case caused particular memory to be revived at all, nor is the matter one to be considered in relation to whether the safeguarding procedures should apply. The Californian rules apply and come into operation (as do the rules in Hurd) in the circumstances stated in (a)- including if the witness has in fact undergone hypnosis, otherwise the strict automatic exclusion rule, ie, the per se rule laid down in Shirley appears to apply. Thus the critical threshold question for admissibility is whether the witness has undergone hypnosis in fact (not whether his/her memory has been revived by it). Further, admissibility turns on whether the procedural safeguards have been complied with, not whether the hypnosis did or did not play any particular role in relation to memory or return of memory.
The Californian Evidence Code, and the approach in Hurd provides support for the view that assuming the hypnotic safeguards should be applied to EMDR (and her Honour appears in her recommendations and views to consider they should), her Honour failed to consider the critical threshold question, and apply the procedural safeguards suggested. If the Californian Evidence Code hypnosis safeguarding rules should apply to memory that has been subjected in fact to EMDR, then post-EMDR testimony would be not admissible at all unless, like hypnosis, the procedural safeguards have been complied with so far as is practicable, and at least the most important safeguard of recording the session.
 
NEW ZEALAND
It is appropriate to observe that her Honour considered that the safeguards referred in the Californian Evidence Code were adopted, approved and to an extent adapted in the New Zealand case of McFelin: see also Jenkyns at 714. The New Zealand decision was the subject of careful analysis by her
Honour in the instant matter (at 568-569).
Her Honour also recommended that the McFelin safeguards in relation to the testimony of a witness who had undergone hypnosis should be adopted whenever a prospective witness undergoes "this therapy" (EMDR). In McFelin the New Zealand Court expressed the view that post-hypnotic testimony introduced by the Crown should prima facie be treated as inadmissible and should only be allowed if the judge was satisfied that to do so would be safe in the particular circumstances. The New Zealand
Court of Appeal also recommended "guidelines" or standards to be introduced in relation to the admissibility of post-hypnotic testimony.
In McFelin Cooke J referred to the dangers of hypnosis. His Honour said (at 752): "Under hypnosis a person may unconsciously respond to intended and unintended cues. There may be an eagerness to please the hypnotist, or those who have promoted the experiment, by producing answers.
The subject's capacity to judge the reality of his apparent memories may be impaired. Without knowing that he is doing so, he may confabulate, recounting what he firmly believes to be a memory although in truth he has only imagined it. He may also acquire a stronger and artificial confidence in pre-hypnotic memories. Hence the saying that the defence no longer has the same witness to cross-examine.

At the same time there are cases, of which the present is an example, in which hypnotism has no truly significant discernible effect whatever on either the content or the quality of the subject's memory. Whether this is because of the personality of the subject, the depth or shallowness of any hypnosis, or the nature of the experience being recalled ... are not questions upon which the available material enables us to form a view".
A number of rulings were also given in relation to hypnosis (at 755): "Accordingly we hold that in a cases where the Crown proposes to call post-hypnotic testimony:
The fact that the witness was hypnotised should be disclosed to the defence, and all relevant transcripts and information provided on request.
If objected to, the evidence should be excluded unless the judge is satisfied that it is safe to admit it in the particular circumstances.
The Judge should have regard to whether the hypnotism was carried out by a qualified person independent of the police and the prosecution, and with sufficient safeguards against the influencing of the subject by suggestions or otherwise.
Pending the establishment of New Zealand guidelines, in deciding whether safeguards are sufficient reference may be made to overseas guidelines, such as the Californian section set out in this judgment. They are not mandatory in New Zealand but indicate standards to be aimed at as far as reasonably possible.
 . The Judge should also have regard to the strength of any confirmatory or supporting evidence to be called by the Crown.
This applies in all cases but is especially important in relation to any recollection or purported recollection which is not proved by the Crown to have existed before hypnotism.
If he admits the evidence, the Judge should warn the jury of the special need for caution before relying on post-hypnotic evidence. The warning need not be in any particular terms but should adequately alert the jury to the dangers referred to in this judgment".
The second guideline points to the need for a preliminary ruling as to admissibility, where it has been shown that the Crown proposes to call post hypnotic testimony.
In the instant case her Honour found that many of the safeguards referred to in McFelin were not adopted in the instant case.
Indeed it appears most were not. Her Honour said (at 569): "There was no recording of Mr. Thompson's pre EMDR memory, nor was the EMDR session itself recorded on videotape. Indeed Mr
Miletic made no written record at all at the time. It would have to follow that, if the same dangers which relate to hypnosis also applied to EMDR, there would be much to be said for rejecting Mr. Thompson's evidence (and presumably I would also add the host of "experts" on the subject). Similarly had 
I been satisfied that Mr. Thompson was in fact hypnotised during the EMDR session, the absence of safeguards might well have led me to reject his evidence".
Before leaving McFelin it is appropriate to make several brief observations. The reasons of the Court of Appeal are to be seen against the background of the Crown's failure to disclose to the defence or to the Court (at the trial) that the victim had been hypnotised. After the trial and before the appeal, the Crown disclosed that hypnosis had taken place. Fresh evidence was put before the Court of Appeal including affidavits, scientific writings and American judgments were made available to the court. The issue of hypnosis and its effect was not dealt with on a voir dire or at the trial as in the instant case. The specific ground of appeal advanced was not concerned with admissibility as such.
The ground of appeal in relation to the hypnosis of the witness was that the conduct of the prosecution was unfair to the accused because the Crown had "failed to disclose to the defence or to the Court that Gloria Kong had been subjected to interrogation under hypnosis". The Court dismissed this ground, accepting that non disclosure was due to "error of judgment made in good faith" and because non disclosure did not in the circumstances lead to injustice by reference to the rule requiring the prosecution to supply the defence with any information held by it which would support the defence case.
Nevertheless, the Court ultimately appears to have reflected the actual ground in the first rule supra.
However, it is clear that despite this finding, the court incorporated the obligation to disclose into its guidelines, indeed in the first guideline.
With respect to the New Zealand Court of Appeal it appears to me that the obligation of the Crown to disclose to the defence that an important witness has been hypnotised is a matter of such importance, that a failure to do so of itself would vitiate most, if not all trials, where there has been an omission to do so. In relation to the non disclosure point there is much to be said for commending as the correct view that reflected in the more recent English decision of the Court of Appeal in Browning.
 
ENGLAND
The use of hypnosis in the English criminal cases is not well documented in the case law.
Apparently in 1982 at a Home Office Conference chaired by
Lord Justice Lawton there was discussion of the use by police of hypnosis.
Dr.
Martin Orne apparently attended. I have already noted that Dr. Orne's views were the basis of the safeguard procedures or Court procedural safeguards adopted in Hurd's case: see also Editorial "Dangerous Evidence" in the New Law
Journal, May 1994 p 661. In the Home Office produced certain draft guidelines based on his views relating to the use of a hypnotised witness. In new draft guidelines were produced. They were apparently not adhered to in Browning. There the English Court of Appeal quashed a conviction for murder, ruling that a disclosure should have been made to the defence that a witness had been subject to two hypnosis sessions.
In this respect there is a similarity with the facts in McFelin save that the non disclosure of the fact that the Crown witness had been hypnotised was not revealed until not only after the trial but also after an appeal was dismissed. However, Browning did not in terms really address the matter of admissibility or discretionary exclusion of hypnotically induced testimony. Nevertheless, the
Court indicated enough to suggest that hypnosis should never be undertaken without careful consideration of the evidential risks.
Browning was really a case essentially turning upon the disclosure of prosecution material, including hypnosis of a witness. Nevertheless, the Court took the opportunity of endorsing the need for the observing of Home Office guidelines (1987) where the use of hypnosis upon a witness is contemplated. The 1987 guidelines apparently acknowledged that there were various problems associated with hypnosis, including the problem that if the subject had not assimilated the information in the first place, hypnosis could not achieve recall of what was not there to be recalled; that there was nothing to prevent a subject lying; and that a person under hypnosis was very susceptible to suggestion; and in addition that there was the danger of confabulation (the incorporation of inaccurate memory or fantasy which may become established in the waking memory). It appears that for these reasons the Home Office accordingly regarded the use of hypnosis with extreme caution, a view "endorsed" by the Court of Appeal. As the Court itself observed in Browning, the wisdom of Home Office guidelines emerged with crystal clarity in that case. The Court also considered the Home Office guidelines where hypnosis was contemplated, with appropriate specified safeguards. These were stated to be as follows: "(1) Before the hypnosis begins, the hypnotherapist should take a resume of the witness' recollection of the events in question in case fresh information may be revealed which would make it unnecessary to proceed with the session.

The whole of the interview, including the taking of the statement, should be video recorded, particularly if there is any risk that the witness may have to give evidence in court.

If there is any possibility of the witness giving evidence in court, the video recording should be treated as an exhibit and transcribed in full.

The hypnotherapist should make a short written statement recording the fact that the interview has been undertaken.

If any additional information, which is relevant to the offence, is obtained during the period of hypnosis, a fresh statement should be taken from the witness in the normal way at least 24 hours later. The officers taking that statement should take great care not to prompt the witness by revealing knowledge of any fresh information obtained under hypnosis.

If the case is to be brought to court, the Crown Prosecution
Service should be fully informed about any resort to hypnosis.
The 1987 guidelines do not apparently contain the first guideline referred to in the McFelin guidelines. Nevertheless, the actual decision in
Browning holding that failure to disclose the fact that the witness was hypnotised in effect now achieves in England such additional requirement. It will be noted that the Home
Office guidelines, as endorsed, but with the further requirement in Browning, the safety procedures in Hurd, the procedural safeguards in the Californian Evidence Code, and the procedural guidelines in
McFelin (despite minor differences) are in general harmony with each other, and address similar concerns in relation to the matter of a witness who has been subject to hypnosis.
 
AUSTRALIA .
The instant case is not one concerned with the exclusion of evidence for discretionary or other reasons in a civil case. The civil cases may be put to one side. Clearly the stakes are less in a civil action than in a criminal prosecution. Many of the Australian authorities in relation to hypnosis were considered by her Honour (at 566) and have been collected and discussed by
Hunt CJ at CL in Jenkyn's case. That decision was after Jamal to which his
Honour referred (but not in terms of endorsing it) at 713. There his
Honour observed that there was no authority binding upon him in relation to hypnotically induced testimony.
In Jenkyns Hunt
CJ at CL considered the matter of the admissibility of hypnotically induced testimony. His Honour considered and discussed the guideline that should be observed in determining the admissibility of hypnotically induced testimony. Jenkyns involved a judge alone trial where there was an issue on the admissibility of hypnotically induced evidence following a voir dire examination. The evidence was held to be inadmissible.
As I have said what is not clear is whether the basis for the decision was that the evidence was not admissible, or whether, it being admissible, such should be excluded upon discretionary grounds. His Honour stated the view that unlike in some
States of the United States (and apparently also in France) there should be no inflexible rule that hypnotically induced testimony is inadmissible. His Honour when considering that the guideline in McFelin should be followed, also referred to the matter of onus.
He noted that McFelin placed the onus on the party seeking to introduce the hypnotically induced evidence to establish its reliability.
As his Honour said (at 714): "In my respectful opinion, and until directed by an appellate court or the legislature to the contrary, the trial courts of
New South Wales should follow the guidelines put forward in R v
McFelin, which were in turn adopted (and to some extent adapted) from the requirements of Californian Evidence Code. The distinction between guidelines and requirements is an important one to notice. According to McFelin the onus lies upon the party seeking to introduce the hypnotically induced evidence to establish that it is safe to admit that evidence in the particular case, in the sense (as
I understand it) that it is sufficiently reliable as to provide a prima facie reason for admitting the evidence: cf Wendo v The Queen <case>; [(1993) 109 CLR 559] at 572-573. In the present case, the onus lies upon the Crown which seeks to introduce the evidence of Mr. Lewis; it does not lie upon the accused to have the evidence excluded in the exercise of the trial judge's general discretion to ensure that the accused has a fair trial; cf MacPherson versus The Queen <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 512] at 519-520. That distinction as to onus is also an important one."
His Honour in stating that the guidelines put forward in McFelin should be followed (being an adaptation of those set forth in the Californian
Evidence Code) examined and commented upon the requirements of the Code rules.
His Honour noted that the McFelin guidelines did not insist upon compliance with every one of the safeguards but rather left it to the discretion of the trial judge as to whether any non compliance rendered the evidence unreliable.
His Honour further observed that the Californian requirements were to be complied with as far as reasonably possible. Nevertheless, as I have said the decision of the Court of Appeal in Browning highlights the obligation to comply with in effect the first McFelin guideline and the decision in Hurd emphasises the almost minimum requirement to comply with "at least" the provision of the Code requiring the recording of the hypnosis session.
Like his Honour in Jenkyns (at 716) it is not necessary for me to determine whether and to what extent the obligations upon an accused who seeks to introduce hypnotically induced evidence should differ from those imposed by the McFelin guidlines on the Crown. There is I believe a strong case to be made that the approach in relation to
Crown witnesses should equally apply as regards defence witnesses with the exception of the accused himself. In one sense the reasons in Rock's case support this view, The decision of the United
States Supreme Court in Rock as to the right of the hypnotised accused is founded in his/her constitutional rights to be found in the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) itself. However, I would not consider that such, of itself, is a reason for not concluding that an accused, albeit subjected to hypnosis, should personally either be subject to the procedural safeguards or have his/her evidence excluded. Indeed, I am firmly of the contrary view.
As I have said there is no reported judgment touching on the admissibility of evidence based upon the application of the procedure of EMDR (whether for forensic, investigative or therapeutic reasons). In Jumeaux, the trial judge Seaman J ordered a voir dire to investigate the reliability of evidence of two sisters who alleged sexual offences against their father, where such evidence was based on "long repressed and recently recovered memories" and "recovered" after being separately treated for depression following child birth. The evidence of one witness was based upon recovery of memory after two years of therapy by a psychologist, and of the other, inter alia, emerged after hearing of her sister's memories and following hypnosis by a medical practitioner and therapy by another medical practitioner. The procedures did not involve as I understand it a procedure in terms described as EMDR.
His Honour ordered the voir dire because he thought there was a possible analogy between the circumstances of the case and cases involving post-hypnotic evidence and evidence recovered by EMDR relying inter alia, upon
Jenkyns as well as her Honour's judgment in the instant matter. Seaman J described this case as one where "Her Honour dealt by way of analogy to hypnosis with the admissibility of memory recovered by a procedure known as eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing".
It does not appear that it was argued before Seaman J that the evidence sought to be adduced was inadmissible, but rather that as a matter of discretion it should be rejected on the ground of "unfairness".
Importantly for the purposes of argument was his Honour's finding as follows: "... I am of the opinion that evidence based upon memories recovered by various forms of counselling and psychotherapy have similar inherent dangers; namely the production of false evidence by means of suggestion. I do not consider that the guidelines which are recommended in The Queen versus McFelin and
The Queen versus Jenkyns apply to THERAPEUTIC PROCEDURES ...".
(my emphasis).
With respect to the views of Seaman J, I do not agree with his Honour's approach to the extent that it is suggested or implicit that where hypnosis,
EMDR or other psychotherapy procedures (having the same or similar dangers or inherent dangers as to be found in hypnosis) are applied for therapeutic purposes then the guidelines in the Californian Evidence Code and McFelin as followed in Jenkyns do not apply. I have already expressed most of my reasons why. It introduces a distinction not found in the cases, including the
American cases (indeed is inconsistent with the per se exclusionary rule of admissibility), and it is not a view supported or shared by her Honour (at ) when recommending the application of the hypnosis rules to cases involving the EMDR "therapy" of a potential witness, and it is not an argument advanced in the instant case by the Crown. Further, the Crown's argument essentially is that the EMDR and hypnosis are different, not that there is a distinction based upon the use of hypnosis for forensic or investigative rather than therapeutic purposes. Indeed, the Crown conceded that if there were the same dangers then the cases of McFelin and Jenkyns applied even in the instant case where EMDR had been in fact used as a therapeutic tool. The decision of Seaman J ought not to be followed.
 
The Dangers in EMDR and Hypnosis - a comparison
It seems to me that it is in this area one finds resolution of this first ground of appeal, it being conceded by the Crown that if the dangers and risks of the unreliability of memory the subject of EMDR are the same or similar to those, found to be associated with hypnosis, then the "rules" in
McFelin and Jenkyns should be applied in determining the admissibility of evidence where the EMDR process has been employed.
Her Honour accepted that one possible theoretical basis posited for EMDR was that EMDR was akin to hypnotism and that such was very relevant to the case (see p549); and the relationship between EMDR and hypnosis is significant for a number of reasons when one looks at her Honour's findings.
The concerns addressed by her as to the possible unreliability of memory revived through
EMDR in many ways, upon analysis, are similar to the same serious concerns associated with the unreliability of memory revived through the use of hypnosis. Indeed, upon examination the dangers referred to as the basis for her recommendation that the type of safeguards referred to in the Californian legislation and approved in McFelin should be adopted whenever a prospective witness undergoes the EMDR therapy appear to be the same or similar dangers or inherent dangers (despite EMDR and hypnosis being different) as are to be found in hypnosis or associated with hypnosis.
It seems to me that her
Honour's very recommendation of hypnosis type safeguards in many ways is predicated on the view that the
EMDR dangers so similar or sufficiently like those associated with hypnosis as to warrant their adoption.
Thus if the Court is satisfied that the same dangers which relate to hypnosis also apply to EMDR, albeit the processes are different, then it appears that the first ground of appeal has been made out. The Crown importantly virtually conceded as much (but took as its stance that hypnosis and EMDR are different, which in my view is not the test or question). Her
Honour (at 569) also appeared to have accepted that if the same dangers which relate to hypnosis also applied to EMDR there would be in itself much to be said for rejecting Mr.
Thompson's evidence. The absence of an affirmative view of her Honour that the same dangers are to be found appears to suggest error when one considers not only her views (at 571) but her own findings in relation to EMDR which I propose to state. The absence of a conclusion that there was such a similarity seems to be somewhat inconsistent with her
Honour's findings and recommendations at , perhaps explicable because her
Honour perceived the question to be whether EMDR and hypnosis were different, rather than focussing on in my view the real question of whether like or similar dangers are associated with each.
Her Honour's own analysis and findings which I recount in relation to
EMDR would suggest that there is to be found in the EMDR procedure like or similar dangers as are to be found in relation to hypnosis. The problems and dangers associated with hypnosis I have already identified by reference to some of the case law, where such is usefully summarised. When those associated with EMDR (as found by her Honour) are compared with those associated with hypnosis, there are in many respects the same or very similar dangers.
Thus it is not the comparison between EMDR and hypnosis that is important, or whether or not they are similar processes. Indeed her Honour acknowledged an inability to find a generally accepted theoretical basis for either procedure, thus making comparison difficult. This was her approach, but it seems to me that by focussing on whether or not they were comparable or different, her Honour was diverted from the real question, namely whether there were the same or significantly the same dangers or risks or inherent dangers or inherent risks as to warrant the application of the hypnosis safety guidelines in McFelin or Jenkyns to the evidence of the witness who has undergone or is about to undergo the EMDR therapy.
In my view within her Honour's own findings there are enough similarities or risks associated with EMDR to conclude that they are the same or similar to those found in hypnosis. These findings are as stated by her
Honour. They include that it is theoretically possible for EMDR to revive or enhance a person's memory of a traumatic event in his or her past (see p551).
Further that Dr. Shapiro, the discoverer of EMDR, emphasises there is no guarantee that a memory which emerges through
EMDR will be accurate (559).
Until more is known about EMDR and its effect upon memory one must accept the risk as with hypnosis, that the subject might be sufficiently suggestible so as unwittingly to adopt information received from the therapist as part of his or her own memory (560). One must accept that there is at least a danger that any "new" memory retrieved through EMDR could well be a distorted memory, either as a result of external input or as a result of unconscious confabulation on the part of the subject (560-561). There is a risk of confabulation with (and without) EMDR for persons (like Mr. Thompson) who are troubled by memory gaps and who try to fill them (561). The experts were divided on the question of whether or not EMDR "as a general proposition" can "assist" in the process of confabulation (562). The evidence is not all one way as to whether or not the witness, the subject of EMDR, "is the same witness as before EMDR" or whether memory retrieved through EMDR is such that the subject thereafter has a very firm and steadfast belief that the memory is an accurate and complete one (the "possession issue" at 563). There is much to be said for the proposition that any therapeutic process which serves to entrench a prospective witness' memory is so "inherently dangerous" that the rejection of post-therapy evidence should not be dependent upon proof that the memory was a distorted one. The risk should be assumed, at least on a prima facie basis (at 564). The relationship between EMDR and hypnosis is also significant for the reasons stated by her Honour (at 564-565). Her Honour's conclusion that the weight of evidence whilst indicating that the state of consciousness is quite different from a hypnotic trance and that the subject is less suggestible, is nevertheless not a finding that the patient is not suggestible at all in the EMDR process, or that unlike the subject of hypnosis the witness still has total control over his/her situation. In my view this finding of her Honour's is that the difference is rather a quantitative one.
Dr. Shapiro, the discoverer, does not rule out the possibility that what is happening with EMDR is a quick induction into a trance state (565). Likewise she emphasises that there is no guarantee that the memory which emerges through EMDR will be accurate (559) (see also her Newsletter). The memory revived by both processes is not necessarily true or objectively true. The fact that memories which emerge as a result of hypnosis may be false is in my view itself a reason for the procedural safeguards to be met before memory the subject of EMDR should be admitted.
Both techniques in a way appear to involve an empowered therapist and a willing patient (as is the case here, where consent was sought by Mr. Miletic to the procedure, and the patient was willing. Her Honour's conclusion (at 571) that EMDR does not involve the patient going into a hypnotic trance with all its dangers of suggestibility is not inconsistent with a view of some possible trance state being induced by the procedure.
Next it appears to me that apart from her Honour's findings that both are psychological techniques, each may be used for therapeutic purposes or for psychotherapy. Each may apparently be used for investigative or forensic purposes.
Both techniques may make a witness more certain of false memory. As has been shown in the cases, hypnotism may increase a witness' confidence or certainty about both incorrect and correct material, and may make a witness appear convincing or more convincing to a jury, especially where there may be a scientific aura surrounding the techniques and their use. There is the like risk of false expression of testimony where the procedure has been employed.
There is the difficulty, or potential difficulty, of effectively cross-examining the witness, a problem common to each procedure. Both procedures can retrieve, revive or enhance memory, and the memories revived are not necessarily true.
I have identified sufficient meaningful similarities of dangers, inherent dangers, and risks to support the view that the same safeguards as apply to memory affected by hypnosis should apply to memory the subject of the
EMDR process. It seems to be that upon analysis her Honour's conclusion (at ) that EMDR and hypnosis are entirely different did not really involve posing the proper test for admissibility. However, her Honour's serious concerns as to the possible unreliability of memory revived through this novel and unexplained procedure in many ways clearly reflects essentially similar concerns that have been shown to be associated with hypnosis. Likewise, her
Honour's recommendations to apply the safeguards referred to in the
Californian
Evidence Code and in McFelin "because of the dangers referred to by the experts" in itself would suggest that her Honour (although not saying so) considered that the EMDR dangers referred to in many respects were both similar to and in common with hypnosis, so as to justify the hypnosis safeguards being applied when the witness is to be subject to EMDR therapy.
In my view the appellants have made good their argument in relation to the first ground.
The Crown's concedes that if it had been found or should have been found that EMDR presents the same or many of the same dangers as hypnosis, then her
Honour was in error in not proceeding in accordance with McFelin and Jenkyns and in posing the initial test of admissibility by reference to such. The concession in my view applies. Neither McFelin nor Jenkyns require. as a condition for the general applicability of the hypnosis safeguards, any threshold finding that hypnosis has in a particular case caused memory to be revived or enhanced or otherwise distorted.
If however,
I be wrong in the conclusion that I have expressed, that the evidence should not have been admitted, then in my view for many of the same reasons the evidence should have been excluded in the exercise of her Honour's discretion to exclude evidence upon the basis of unfairness. This is one of those cases where if the matter becomes one of discretion, and the onus is on the accused to exclude the evidence, that onus has been discharged.
If error of principle is shown, or the trial judge did not apply the correct test in the exercise of her discretion, or if her Honour failed to take into account, or properly to take into account, relevant facts which she herself found, this Court may interfere: House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499];
Webb versus The Queen. In the instant case, factors making it unfair to admit the evidence include the finding that it was impossible to reach a firm conclusion as to whether Mr. Thompson's session did precipitate an improvement in his memory; the fact that of Mr.
Thompson clearly falling within the category of people troubled by their memory and who would try to fill the gaps, and hence the risk of confabulation with or without EMDR; and the finding that whether the EMDR assisted in this process in his case could not be gleaned from the evidence. Next there is the fact, that appears to have been accepted, that his treatment was incomplete. Her
Honour found (at 553) that this might possibly have caused an "enhancement" of Thompson's memory. The highly important matter of the absence of taking notes (a minimal requirement or procedural safeguard: see Hurd) meant that there were no clear reference points in relation to Mr.
Thompson's account of the assault, and hence caused some uncertainty as to the effect of the EMDR upon his memory.
The absence of such notes also created difficulty in cross-examination and in testing the matters of confabulation and suggestibility, and whether or not Mr. Thompson's state of consciousness altered or whether he was even in an induced trance: see Hurd's case. There was uncertainty whether in fact in his case the EMDR revived and/or enhanced
Mr. Thompson's memory. Because of significant divergence between the evidence of Mr. Miletic and Mr. Thompson as to what occurred during the EMDR session, indeed especially the length of the session, the absence of notes taken during the EMDR session or notes taken of it thereafter (a statement of Mr. Miletic came into evidence one year later), and the absence of notes during any other consultation prior to the EMDR session it was difficult thoroughly to test the extent of Mr. Thompson's recollection immediately before the EMDR session. It is clear that he did not have the recollection presently claimed, pre-EMDR, and significantly there was a committal in the meantime of the accused. Many of the general risks associated with hypnosis to which I have referred would also be relevant to the exercise of the discretion. The EMDR session took place after the committal at a time when Mr. Thompson knew he was to be an essential witness and at a time when he knew who would be the accused to stand trial for offences against him.
If the matter be considered not as one of admissibility but of discretion, in my view the discretion miscarried essentially on the ground of unfairness to the accused. Conclusion .
The first ground of appeal has been made out.
In my view the situation may be summarised as follows: 
If a prosecution witness undergoes hypnosis (for the purpose of enhancing his memory of events) there is no rule that the witness' evidence of the events is inadmissible. The per se rule of inadmissibility or the rule of admissibility are not rules that apply in this State in the case of a witness subject to hypnosis. However, the onus lies on the proponent of the evidence to prove that it is safe to admit the evidence. The same rule applies in the case of an accused who seeks to lead evidence from a defence witness. However, in relation to the evidence of an actual accused person who has been the subject of hypnosis there is no such onus in his case and his evidence is admissible per se. The Crown concedes that the law as stated in McFelin and
Jenkyns applies in the case of hypnotism. 
In relation to the rule of evidence there is no distinction to be found between the use of hypnosis for therapeutic purposes on the one hand and its specific use for investigative or forensic purposes on the other. The rule is the same in each case. 
The procedural guidelines in McFelin (as adapting and adopting the
Californian Evidence Code) are to be applied so far as is reasonably possible to cases where a witness is the subject of hypnosis. The first guideline in
McFelin, namely of disclosure that a witness has been the subject of hypnosis, is generally an essential rule. The guideline in relation to the recording of the session and keeping a record of the session is likewise generally an essential requirement. The procedural guidelines and the approach reflected as above should in general apply to defence witnesses as well, save for the accused. 
EMDR, generally considered, presents the same or significantly the same dangers or inherent dangers or risks in relation to possible unreliability of memory as hypnosis presents, such that the same guidelines or procedural safeguards as apply in the case of hypnosis should apply to EMDR. 
Once it be found that EMDR has been applied to a prospective witness, then, because it presents the same or significantly the same dangers or inherent dangers or dangers of like kind and nature as hypnosis presents, the onus lies on the proponent of the evidence of the witness the subject of EMDR (whether Crown or accused) to prove that it is safe to admit the evidence.
This onus does not lie on an accused who has been subject to the EMDR procedure. His/her evidence is per se admissible.
Once the witness has been shown to have been subject to the EMDR procedure, the guidelines or procedural safeguards of the type considered in
McFelin (adopting the Californian
Evidence Code) and Jenkyns should be applied and adopted as far as reasonably possible. 
The general guidelines and procedural safeguards should be applied before any particular consideration is given to the reliability of the evidence of the witness the subject of the EMDR process. The two-issues-approach adopted by her Honour (at 550) (1: Did the EMDR produce a distorted memory? OR 2: did the EMDR reinforce an already distorted memory?) is not the correct approach at the initial stage of the enquiry when a witness has been subjected to the
EMDR procedure. The initial question and correct approach is that dealt with in McFelin and Jenkyns: see also the Californian Evidence Code, Browning and
Hurd's case. In my opinion her Honour did not apply the correct or proper test for admissibility.
Had the initial correct question been posed, and properly considered and answered, the evidence of Mr. Thompson ought not to have been admitted. The whole of his evidence was inadmissible and should have been rejected. 
Further or alternatively if the evidence of Mr. Thompson was admissible, then as a matter of discretion the whole of it ought to have been excluded on the ground of unfairness. 
The whole of Mr. Thompson's evidence was not admissible and would not be admissible at a new trial.
 
GROUND 
This ground is that the learned trial judge erred in her directions in relation to complicity.
The fourth and final direction was given on 3 November 1993 after the jury sent a note to her Honour. The redirection was in the following terms: "The Crown case is that although it was not at all the primary object of the prisoners who entered the wing office to wound an officer with the intention of really seriously injuring him, nevertheless their common enterprise or common design extended to the use, if necessary, of extreme force against an officer whom they could not subdue otherwise, without the use of extreme force; and that this extreme force encompassed not only the use of a knife, but its use to intentionally inflict really serious injury. The Crown does not have to go so far as proving that any of the participants actually had this in mind as something that would happen, that would definitely happen, or even that it would probably happen, so long as they realised that in the heat of the moment it was something which might become necessary during the course of carrying out this joint enterprise.
And I suppose this, in a sense, brings me back to the phrase which I used earlier last week and which you asked me about yesterday, that if any of them contemplated, foresaw in advance, the possibility of the situation escalating to the point where one of their number might wound an officer with the intention of really seriously injuring him, then so far as that person was concerned the common venture with which he entered the wing office included, if necessary, the commission of that offence." (pp 281-282 transcript)
This final formulation was not challenged by the defence at the trial.
It is common ground that the direction was effectively a common purpose direction. It was submitted by the appellants that because the case was one where it was alleged that all the accused 'with one possible exception were present when the stabbing took place, where there was a specific intent alleged, namely an intent to inflict grievous bodily harm, that in the circumstances the jury should have been directed in terms of joint enterprise rather than common purpose and that it was inappropriate to refer to the doctrine of common purpose at all. It was also submitted that because of the way the Crown had opened the case against the accused, the Crown was in effect locked into solely a joint enterprise case. It was then submitted that even if the direction was a correct direction to the jury, the alleged multiplicity of directions given to the jury (four, it was said) would inevitably have confused the jury.
 .
For the Crown it was submitted that because of the unusual factual circumstances, the direction concerning complicity was one not easy of formulation in the first place.. The Crown pointed to the fact that it had not been asserted by the defence that the introduction of an element of common purpose caused the accused prejudice. It argued that the concepts of "joint enterprise" and "common purpose" were not "two hermetically sealed compartments" and that the Crown, having in its opening referred to joint enterprise, had not made some form of irrevocable election which excluded it from relying upon common purpose, irrespective of the reality of the matter.
In my view the Crown was correct in its submission that there is no strict separation between joint enterprise and common purpose.
In McAuliffe versus R (HC, 28 June 1995, unreported) the High Court said as follows (at 4-5): "The doctrine of common purpose applies where a venture is undertaken by more than one person acting in concert in pursuit of a common criminal design.
Such a venture may be described as a joint criminal enterprise. Those terms -common purpose, common design, concert, joint criminal enterprise - are used more or less interchangeably to invoke the doctrine which provides a means, often an additional means, of establishing the complicity of a secondary party in the commission of a crime. The liability which attaches to the traditional classifications of accessory before the fact and principal in the second degree may be enough to establish the guilt of a secondary party: in the case of an accessory before the fact where that party counsels or procures the commission.
of the crime and in the case of a principal in the second degree where that party, being present at the scene, aids or abets its commission. But the complicity of a secondary party may also be established by reason of a common purpose shared with the principal offender or with that offender and others. Such a common purpose arises where a person reaches an understanding or arrangement amounting to an agreement between that person and another or others that they will commit a crime.
The understanding or arrangement need not be express and may be inferred from all the circumstances. If one or other of the parties to the understanding or arrangement does, or they do between them, in accordance with the continuing understanding or arrangement, all those things which are necessary to constitute the crime, they are all equally guilty of the crime regardless of the part played by each in its commission."
Accordingly, in practice, it is not necessary to give the term "joint enterprise" a meaning exclusive of and distinct from the doctrine of common purpose. Therefore, the appellants' submission that the Crown was precluded from relying on a common purpose case because it opened in terms of joint enterprise does not amount to a legitimate complaint.
In respect of the appropriateness of introducing the common purpose concept, R versus Clough [(1992) 28 NSWLR 396] urges restraint in introducing the doctrine of common purpose. In that case, Hunt CJ at CL states that the Crown case may be unnecessarily complicated by the concept and it is usually necessary only where the accused was not present and assisting at the commission of the crime and where the crime committed was only incidental to the prime object of the common criminal venture. This accords with his
Honour's view in R versus Stokes and Difford [51 A Crim R 25] at 36 that "(i)t is (at the very least) unnecessary for a case based on common purpose to be put to the jury where the crime in fact committed is the very crime for the purpose of which both or all accused are alleged to have combined."
In the Court of Criminal
Appeal decision in R versus McAuliffe (CCA, 11
November 1993, unreported) the Chief Justice said (at 9): "The decision of this Court in R versus Mills and Sinfield [(1985) A Crim R 411] establishes that the doctrine of common purpose MAY be used as an appropriate concept for establishing and explaining criminal complicity in cases where the offence committed was that agreed upon between co-offenders; its usefulness is not limited to cases involving foundational crimes and incidental crimes." (emphasis mine).
Analysis of these cases leads to the conclusion that, in the instant case, it was not inappropriate for her Honour's final direction to be in terms of common purpose.
It was an appropriate way of putting the Crown case.
Introduction of the common purpose concept did not cause unnecessary complication.
Finally, the appellants submitted that the question of confusion of the jury was the most powerful point in their submissions on complicity. The jury sought clarification of a concept perhaps difficult to formulate in lay terms.
However it is not apparent that there was a potential for confusion created by her Honour's directions, nor is it apparent that there was actual confusion on the part of the jury.
After the final formulation of the complicity direction was delivered, the jury wrote a note. Counter to indicating any further uncertainty as to the law, it stated: "Thank you for your assistance in clarifying points of law.
We are now at a point where fact remains our stumbling block." (p 290 transcript).
Clearly the jury did not express confusion about the final formulation.
The note indicates they understood it. The earlier directions given by the trial judge in her summing up would not have confused the jury, given the clarity of the final redirection.
Accordingly, the ground of appeal concerning the directions on complicity is not made out.
 
GROUND 3
That her Honour erred in her direction to the Wry on the prison informant evidence
Each of the three prison informants gave evidence that on various occasions they observed the appellants at particular locations or doing particular acts which inculpated them in the attack and escape attempt.
Redirection was sought in terms of the decision in Clough and of McHugh
J in Pollitt <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 558: (Summing] up 73-4). The common complaint central to each of the appellants' submissions is that her Honour's directions to the jury about prison informants did not include a corroboration warning.
Her Honour declined to give or include such warning stating (at 73 su): "I am not going to go into corroboration, not in relation to this evidence. The corroboration requirement there relates specifically to the verbal, to it being verbal."
The appellants relied upon the passage in the judgment of McHugh J in
Pollitt (at 616) where his Honour suggested that a corroboration warning is required. He stated that: "If the informer alleges that he SAW OR
HEARD the accused do or say something which incriminates the accused, It will be dangerous to act on the allegation unless the doing of the act by the accused or the making of the statement is substantially confirmed by independent evidence." (emphasis mine).
Six out of the seven judges in Pollitt expressly confined their remarks to evidence of a confession or admission in gaol. There is considerable doubt whether a full Pollitt direction needs to be given where the prisoner gives evidence other than of a confession or admission in gaol: see Clough where
Hunt CJ at CL expressly referred to evidence of "confessions".
In
R versus Herring (CCA, 5 September 1994, unreported) the evidence was of a conversation with the accused in which the accused inter alia asked the prisoner witness to assist in concocting an alibi. This might be considered to be closely analogous to an oral confession, or at least amount to an oral admission of guilt. Herring affirmed that a corroboration warning should be included in a prison informant direction.
The decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal in R versus Hudd (CCA, 9
December 1994, unreported) is to the effect that
Pollitt does not apply outside of cases where an informer alleges that an accused whilst in prison "confessed to a crime with which the informer had no connection".
The general thrust of the above decisions is thus against acceptance of the submission advanced by the appellants that the trial judge should have given a corroboration direction. What her Honour said is in accordance with apparent established authority, although not necessarily in accordance with perhaps the more expansive approach of McHugh J in Pollitt. What
McHugh J said, when properly understood and read in context, may not be inconsistent with the majority views. In any event, a determination as to its meaning and application may properly be left for another day.
However, I do not consider that this is a case where it is appropriate or necessary to consider the matter of the need for a corroboration warning further. I say this because the appeal was primarily concerned with the ground relating to the admissibility of the EMDR evidence. Argument was essentially confined to this ground. In relation to that ground I have concluded that there should be a new trial. At best this third ground is also only a new trial ground and not a verdict ground. In the circumstances, I do not consider that it is necessary or desirable to resolve the point in a case such as the present. It is sufficient to say that I would not order a new trial on this ground alone. Indeed, were it necessary so to decide, I would be disposed to conclude that her Honour's directions were sufficient.
 
GROUND 4
The verdicts against Jamal, Baragshoun and Haines were unsafe and unsatisfactory
Jamal submitted that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory, relying upon a combination of one or more grounds of appeal including the ground that
Mr. Thompson's evidence was inadmissible.
Even leaving aside the evidence of Thompson, there was a strong Crown case against Jamal. Jamal in his unsworn statement told the jury that he had escaped earlier in the day under a meal truck. The Crown called prisoners
Watson and Jenkins who said they had seen Jamal in gaol at the time when on
Jamal's version he would have been at large. Contrary to Jamal's version
Jenkins saw Jamal climb the ladder and go over the wall first. Wet blood consistent with that of Mr. Thompson's was found on clothing said by the Crown to have been worn by Jamal at the time of his escape over the wall and discarded following his escape. Jamal's fingerprints were found on a glass in
Bargashoun's cell when Jamal was not an inmate of the wing. Witnesses called by the Crown said Jamal's claimed independent method of escape clinging to the underside of the meal truck was impossible. Further, in assessing the weight to be given to the Crown evidence the jury was entitled to take into account the fact that Jamal chose to make an unsworn statement rather than giving sworn evidence.
Bargashoun submitted that the verdict against him was unsafe and unsatisfactory also upon a combination of one or more grounds of his appeal.
There was strong evidence against Bargashoun (apart from that of Thompson).
Bargashoun also made an unsworn statement.
Tillott did not rely upon this ground in written or oral submissions.
Haines also submitted that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. It was submitted on behalf of Haines that the case involved an identification dispute.
However, it seems to me that putting aside the evidence of Thompson, the Crown case against Haines was a strong one. The evidence of Doyle was that one of the assailants in the Wing Office was Haines. Doyle knew Haines. The prisoner Jenkins said he saw Haines running along side-the ladder as it was carried out to the sterile zone. He knew Haines. Officers Rosan and Dippel identified Haines as one of the men holding the ladder. Haines made an unsworn statement.
Further putting to one side the evidence of Thompson
I am of the view that this ground of appeal advanced on behalf of Jamal, Haines and Bargashoun should not succeed.
In reaching this conclusion I have regard to the principles laid down by the High Court in M versus The Queen [(1994) 126 ALR 325], applied by this Court
Regina versus McKnoulty (CCA, 6 February 1995, unreported); see also Regina v
Pullen (CCA, 7 March 1995, unreported) and Regina versus L.F.M. (CCA, 27 March , unreported).
This ground fails and should be rejected.
Other grounds of appeal have been advanced in relation to the individual matters. In my opinion it is not necessary to deal with them insofar as none of them would result in an acquittal of any of the accused in relation to any of the charges.
The orders which I propose are as follows: 
TILLOTT  (a) Appeal allowed.  (b) Conviction quashed.  (c) New trial ordered. 
RAINES  (a) Appeal allowed.
Conviction quashed.  (c) New trial ordered. 
JAMAL  (a) Appeal allowed.  (b) Convictions (other than conviction upon plea of guilty to  escape) quashed.  (c) New trial ordered. 
BARGASHOUN  (a) Appeal allowed.  (b) Convictions (other than conviction upon plea of guilty to  escape) quashed.  (c) New trial ordered.
JUDGE3
JAMES J I have had the opportunity to read in draft the judgment of Abadee J and I agree with his Honour's reasons and conclusions.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/83.html  
