

The Public Trustee versus Joyce Elderfield and Anor Re Estate of Vera Gertrude
Poole [1996] NSWSC 78 (26 April 1996) 
THE PUBLIC TRUSTEE versus JOYCE ELDERFIELD AND ANOR RE ESTATE OF VERA GERTRUDE
POOLE /94 
FRIDAY 26 APRIL 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES PROBATE DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a strange dispute. The question is what is the last will of the late Vera Gertrude Poole, who died on 30 July 1993.

There is no doubt at all that at Dee Why on 3 June 1983 Vera Poole made a will in the Public Trustee's usual form, in which she gave the whole of the residue to her husband provided he survive her for 30 days, and if he did not then one-half of the residue was to pass to Mr and Mrs Bertram and the other one- half to Mr and Mrs Elderfield.

After the testatrix's death there was found in her premises a duplicate of the will in which there had been ruled through the last five lines, being cl 5(b), which was the gift of residue to Mr and Mrs Elderfield. The five lines appear to be crossed out using a ruler or other straight line guide, and the deletion is signed in a spidery hand "Vera G Poole" both on the left and right-hand margins of the document and the date in the same ink "26 Feb. 1988" is inscribed apparently in the same hand.

There was no witness who put his or her name to the document as altered on 26
February 1988. There is no evidence as to the circumstances in which the alteration was made.

There is before the Court some medical evidence as to the testatrix's general health, but as up until her death nobody appreciated what she had purported to have done on February 1988, there is no direct medical evidence as to what was the testatrix's mental capacity on that day.

The general picture given by the evidence is that, certainly by 1990, the testatrix was suffering from moderate to advanced dementia. Her general practitioner, Dr Diana Weston, feels fairly sure that that would have been the case in 1988. An earlier doctor treating her thought that the testatrix would have had no problems about testamentary capacity in June 1983, but was certainly showing at least early signs of dementia in February 1988.

After death the solicitors for the parties consulted specialist doctors in the field but, as is often the situation, those specialist doctors had only very scanty records on which to base their opinions.

Dr McMurdo refers to hospital notes made in 1986 and 1989 that the testatrix was suffering from a dementing illness. His view is that there appeared to be no doubt that she was suffering from a dementing illness which started at least in 1986, and that her condition would have gradually deteriorated. He says that whilst this was so, there was a possibility that the alteration could have been made in a lucid state of mind because she firmly believed that she should exclude the Elderfields from her beneficence and may have had sufficient capacity to understand the process of revoking or remaking her will.

Dr Davis thought that it was clear that on the material he had the testatrix was unable to possess testamentary capacity in 1988 and there could be no possibility of there being lucid intervals. I did not think, with respect, that Dr Davis presented clearly in the witness box today. It may be that he was a little unwell today when he gave evidence, but I must confess that I did not have that much confidence in the evidence which he gave. I think it would be safer to rely on Dr McMurdo's view.

Were it not for the inclusion of <case> in the Wills Probate and
Administration Act 1898 it would have been clear that the alteration that was made by the testatrix was ineffective. This must follow from <case> of the
Act.

Section 18A(1) provides that: "A document purporting to embody the testamentary intentions of a deceased person, even though it has not been executed in accordance with the formal requirements of this Act, constitutes a will of the deceased person, an amendment of such a will or the revocation of such a will if the Court is satisfied that the deceased person intended the document to constitute his or her will, an amendment of his or her will or the revocation of his or her will." 
It is not completely clear whether this case should be classified as a case of partial revocation or the making of a new will, but it matters very little how one classifies it.

There is authority for the proposition that revocation of a will requires the same degree of mental capacity as the making of a will, Re Richards <case>; [[1911] VLR 284], 287. However, A'Beckett, J made it clear that that proposition was one that applied "generally speaking".

I thought at one stage that it may be that the intention to revoke a gift in a will did not require as much evidence of mental capacity as would be required for the making of a whole new will. When one is making a new will one needs to have a fair understanding of what one's property is and who has claims on one's beneficence, whereas this is not necessarily the case if one is merely deleting a bequest, particularly one pecuniary legacy.

It is also clear that a person's mental capacity to make some decisions in life, such as to get married, is less than is required for the making of a valid will. A stark illustration of this is the two cases involving the estate of Park versus Park (No 1) [[1953] 2 All ER 408] confirmed on appeal at p 1411 of the same volume, where the testator's marriage was upheld, and Park versus Park (No 2) [[1954] P 89], where his will made on the same day was held to be invalid.

However, whilst there may be some lesser degree of mental capacity required to revoke a specific bequest or legacy, that would be irrelevant here. In the instant case the testatrix's husband pre-deceased her by a month, so the contingent gifts over to the Bertrams and the Elderfields took effect. Each was to be given a distinct one-half share of the residue, so that the effect of the deletion or revocation of the gift to the Elderfields would have produced a lapsed share of residue and an intestacy as to that lapsed share.

It seems to me that when one is dealing with such a situation one needs to direct one's mind to the same matters as should be in one's mind when one is making an actual will, so that the degree of mental capacity is the same.

The authorities show that the onus is on the person propounding the informal will to show that apart from the formal defects it is the free will of a capable testator. Hodgson J said in Roggenkamp versus Bowd, 11 August 1995, unreported, that the Court has to be positively satisfied on the balance of probabilities that there was testamentary capacity. To my mind, the highest that the case goes to support the 1988 informal will is that it might possibly be valid because there could have been a lucid state of mind at the time. I do not consider this sufficient to enable me to find that there was testamentary capacity as at 26 February 1988.

Mr Hallen, who appeared for the plaintiff said everything he could have said in support of the will. He pointed to five factors; (a) that the gift to the
Elderfields is ruled out apparently with a ruler; (b) that the lines start and stop appropriately; (c) that the alteration is signed not once but twice; (d) the alteration is dated; and (e) the document was found in an official looking manila envelope. He says that when one looks at those factors, together with the doubt of the testatrix's health, one should be able to say on the balance of probabilities that the testatrix's state of mind was sufficient to show mental capacity on 26 February 1988.

I acknowledge that these factors are relevant, but to my mind, in light of the general medical evidence, they do not weigh sufficiently for my mind to find testamentary capacity. Matters which lead me to discount these factors are that we do not know what the circumstances were in which the alteration was made. We do not know, for instance, whether the lines were ruled by the testatrix or by some friend who happened to be with her at the time. We do not know who put the document into the manila envelope or why it was that the testatrix signed twice. It is no one's fault that we do not know that, we just do not in fact know it.

Accordingly, in the circumstances I am unable to find that the so-called 1988 will is the last will of the testatrix. There should be a grant of probate of the will of 3 June 1983 and the matter should be referred to the Registrar to complete the grant.

As to costs, it is clear that both the plaintiff and the defendants should get their costs. The only question, to my mind, is whether it should come out of the disputed one-half or out of the general estate, but if no one says anything I will just order the costs of both parties be paid out of the estate and leave it to the executor to work out how he should account for it.
 * * * 
