

Maiolo versus Read and Ors Matter No 20159/97 [1997] NSWSC 94 (26 March 1997) 
Last Updated: 3 March 1998 
George Maiolo versus Robert Read & Ors /97 March 1997 
Abadee J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - George MAIOLO versus Robert READ & Ors 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings call for the delivery of immediate judgment. The plaintiff on the best of evidence, regrettably, has little time left. He has few days available to him before he dies of a very nasty gastric stomach cancer described as a being signet ring undifferentiated adenocarcinoma and which is a rapid growing cancer of the stomach. The circumstances thus require that the court give immediate judgment, as I have said. It is important that if the plaintiff is to succeed in the action that judgment be given prior to his death. The measure of damages, and this is clearly accepted by both parties, is significantly different if the plaintiff is to recover damages in his life time as opposed to damages being recovered by his estate. It is against this background that the court has been given an awesome responsibility to resolve the matter forthwith at the close of extensive and helpful submissions from both counsel. There has been a considerable volume of evidence, to say the least. A formidable volume of written materials has been tendered, a large amount of oral evidence has been given by numerous experts in the field. This is not the occasion or the time to shrink from the giving of a decision, for the reasons that I have but briefly stated. 
The plaintiff commenced proceedings in this Court against two defendants on 28
February 1997. He applied for an expedited hearing on the basis that he then had up to one month to survive. Proceedings were initially brought by the plaintiff against two specialist gastroenterologists, as a matter of history, one Dr Read, the other the present defendant Dr Rahme, and now the sole remaining defendant in the proceedings.

The court granted the plaintiff an expedited hearing to permit of the action to be heard in his life time and upon the basis of the estimate that it would last some four days. The estimate has been substantially complied with. The complex hearing has, in fact, really lasted some seven days or so, which I consider is reflective of the skill and ability with which the proceedings have been conducted on both sides. It is appropriate to say that the case was given priority and accommodation. It has been case managed and subject to directions and orders to permit of the proceedings to conclude in the plaintiff's lifetime.

It is also apposite that I should make the observation that both parties want a judgment from me and, indeed, are entitled to a judgment from me forthwith whilst the plaintiff still remains alive. That, of course, imposes considerable pressure upon the court. Nevertheless, I have formed certain views and do not shrink from giving an extempore judgment right here and now.
That said, it is also appropriate to say that I believe that with the directions that have been given and the cooperation from both the parties remaining in the instant proceedings that justice has been done and that each party has had the fullest of opportunities to put before the court all relevant materials touching upon both the issue of liability and the issue of damages. There has been no application for adjournment, there has been no suggestion made that any prejudice has arisen to either of the parties in consequence of the expedition with which the proceedings have been associated.

It is also appropriate for me to comment upon one other matter. At this stage the transcript will reveal significant questioning by me of the numerous witnesses called to give evidence in the proceedings. I make no apologies for this. No objection was taken by either of the parties to my adopting such a course. Indeed, perhaps it might be thought that in adopting such a course, some people might think that this is somehow or other a transgression of the principles associated with the adversary system. However, in the instant case, there has been a need to perhaps not look merely at the traditional principles of the adversary system, but to look at the need for, first of all, a determination of the proceedings during the course of the plaintiff's lifetime; secondly, a need for me to monitor the case to ensure that that it was completed before Easter; thirdly, that by questioning, I could master and get on top of the considerable volume of technical expert evidence that has been adduced of an oral and written nature, and, finally, to ensure that I could give the judgment that I am now giving prior to the plaintiff's death.

In a case of this nature, it is, I consider, of considerable importance for the trial judge to remind himself of the absolute need for detachment in relation to the determination of the issues in the case. Human nature, I suppose, could very much influence a judge unconsciously in arriving at a particular decision. Human nature, I suppose, could create the possibility of unconsciously bringing in a verdict in order to compensate the plaintiff for what the plaintiff has suffered for a short period of time, but which human nature, if not controlled, could cause injustice to the defendant. The defendant is a gastroenterologist who has an entitlement to his good name and his good professional reputation. Hence, the need, I believe, to once again remind oneself of the requirement to put aside feelings of prejudice and sympathy either way and to ensure that in my determination I should approach the matter in a calm, dispassionate, and fair manner. I remind myself of those matters to ensure that justice is done to both sides, and that justice is done uninfluenced by feelings of prejudice, sympathy, or emotion.

Against this background I now turn to the nature of the proceedings. The plaintiff, as I have said, instituted proceedings against two gastroenterologists by way of statement of claim to this Court on or about 28
February. By that statement of claim the plaintiff has alleged that he has suffered a cancer which will cause or contribute to his death. Alternatively, if he has not suffered a cancer in consequence of the negligent acts or omissions on the part of the defendant it is alleged that in any event the defendant's failure to perform certain treatment in a particular way caused or contributed to, if not the development of a carcinoma of the stomach, at the very least, it caused a derivational loss of opportunity to undergo certain treatments for the cancer, either by way of palliative resection or, alternatively, by way of pain relief. I have just described in a fairly general way the way the plaintiff has put the case at the trial and pleaded the case in his further amended statement of claim.

The plaintiff also asserts a cause of action as and against the remaining defendant in contract, alleging that apart from the cause of action founded upon negligence there has, in any event, be a breach of a contract or of a contractual duty on the part of the defendant in relation to the treatment of his medical condition in circumstances which it will be necessary to recount.

The plaintiff's case as and against the sole remaining defendant - Dr Read having "disappeared" (as a party), from the case during the course of the proceedings - is that the second defendant carried on practice as a specialist gastroenterologist, that he was consulted on or about 26 March 1996, 14 May , and 10 September 1996 for the purposes of treatment and that on each of the occasions, to which I have made reference, the second defendant performed what is known as endoscopies on the plaintiff. It is alleged by the plaintiff that in performing the endoscopies on him that the remaining defendant, who is the second defendant in the proceedings, was negligent or in breach of his duty to the plaintiff or in breach of his contractual duty to the plaintiff.

It is appropriate here if I record the particulars of negligence and/or breach of duty relied upon by the plaintiff at least to the extent that such are particularised in the plaintiff's amended statement of claim dated 25 March
As and against Dr Rahme it is submitted that he failed to carry out a biopsy, that in performing a biopsy whilst the plaintiff was taking a course of drug by the name of Losec, that such biopsy was performed in the context of a course of Losec which had the capacity to mask organisms resembling
Helicobacter pylori (H - pylori).

The plaintiff further alleges that the defendant failed to perform endoscopies in such a manner as to identify that the plaintiff had developed or was developing carcinoma of the stomach. Next, it is asserted that the defendant failed to tell the plaintiff that a legitimate gastroenterological school of opinion was to the effect that biopsy ought to be performed in the case of all endoscopies.

Ultimately, having regard to the way the case was conducted before me, the particulars of negligence have, in fact, been contracted in a number of respects, which I will turn to in due course. The plaintiff asserts that as a result of the negligence and/or breach of contractual duty on the part of the second defendant, the plaintiff developed carcinoma of the stomach which is incurable and will cause his early death. It is also asserted in the amended statement of claim that had the second defendant performed a biopsy, it is probable that this bacterium condition known as H-pylori would have been detected and could have been treated with the result that the plaintiff would not have developed carcinoma of the stomach. It is appropriate to say that in respect of this last matter, that it has not really been relied upon for the purposes of establishing a breach of contract or, alternatively, negligence; in other words, the allegation by agreement really disappeared as being an important allegation in the circumstances of this case.

As I have said, in the course of this judgment so far, it is indisputable that the plaintiff is suffering from a condition known as signet ring undifferentiated adenocarcinoma which is an aggressive cancer of the stomach.

Before dealing with the evidentiary matters, perhaps it is appropriate for me to make another observation now that I have dealt with the statement of claim and the allegations contained therein. Because of the time constraints and the importance of taking the plaintiff's evidence, this was done by way of an examiner being appointed and evidence was taken some few weeks ago from the plaintiff in front of an examiner and touching upon the issues of both liability and damages. The transcripts of that evidence together with a film of the plaintiff giving such evidence is part of the proceedings for me in the instant case.

There is really here no dispute about the applicable principles of law to a case such as the present. In Australia it has been accepted that the standard of care to be observed by a person with some special skill or competence of the ordinary skilled person exercising and professing to have that special skill but that standard is not determined solely or even primarily by reference to the practice followed or supported by a responsible body of opinion in the relevant profession or trade. Even in the sphere of diagnosis and treatment, the heartland of the skilled medical practitioner, the
Bollen principle has not always been applied. (See Rogers v
Whittaker <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 479] at 487).

In Rogers versus Whittaker, the High Court also dealt with the question of duty of care and breach. At p 483, the court said as follows: "The law imposes on a medical practitioner a duty to exercise reasonable care and skill in the provision of professional advice and treatment. That duty is a `single comprehensive duty covering all the ways in which a doctor is called upon to exercise his skill and judgment'; it extends to the examination, diagnosis, and treatment of the patient and the provision of information in an appropriate case".

As the court also observed at p 483, it is important to give content to the duty in the given case. It has not been suggested in the present case that the duty varies according to whether the plaintiff pleads his case in negligence or pleads his case in contract. Against that background it is appropriate to also return to what the High Court said in Whittaker's case, again at p :
 "The standard of reasonable care and skill required is that of the ordinary skilled person exercising and professing to have that special skill, in this case, the skill of an ophthalmic surgeon in specialising corneal and anterior segment surgery." 
Well, in the present case, one would substitute for the words, "the skill of an ophthalmic surgeon", the words, "the skill of a specialist gastroenterologist." The principal issue in the instant case before me really relates to the question of whether there was a breach of duty on the part of the now sole defendant in March of 1996 and/or in May of 1996. The way the case has been argued nothing really seems to turn upon what did or did not occur at this examination in September of 1996. Both parties in the interest of time have gone straight to what they perceive to be the real issues and that is whether in March of 1996 or in May of 1996 and more particularly in
May of 1996 the defendant was in any breach of his duty of care in the treatment of the plaintiff and whether such treatment caused or contributed to either the cancer or, alternatively, deprived the plaintiff of having a certain treatment for an existing cancer, if one was present, as at March and/or May of 1996.

It is appropriate to refer to some brief facts. The plaintiff was born on 16
June 1953 and is now aged 43. He was born in Italy and came to Australia in
He was married to his current wife in December 1974 and he and his wife have had four children. Initially, the plaintiff worked on a farm, but subsequently left his farm and commenced work at Harris Farm markets. In 1986 he commenced a florist business at the Martin Place Station. In September of he commenced a florist business at North Sydney known as Fields of
Flowers. That business appeared to have been a successful one for the plaintiff, his wife, and family.

It appears that in August of 1995 the plaintiff suffered from what appears to have been an epigastric pain. He consulted a general practitioner who referred him initially to Dr Read. It is appropriate to record the fact that Dr Read is no longer a party to the instant proceedings with proceedings against him being resolved last week and with a verdict being entered in his favour. It appears that Dr Read saw the plaintiff at his Pennant Hills Endoscopy Centre and carried out an endoscopy in August 1995. It seems to be that there was a suggestion made that the symptoms were consistent with reflux, that he should lose weight, cut down on fatty food, use Mylanta. No biopsy was performed at that endoscopy.

The plaintiff apparently followed Dr Read's advice, but continued to suffer abdominal pain of an intermittent nature - sometimes he had it and sometimes he did not. It appears that he then returned to his general practitioner who suggested that he should in turn see Dr Read. The long and short of the matter is that he did not go back to Dr Read. He consulted a different general practitioner who referred him to Dr Rahme, the sole remaining defendant, in
March of 1996. It appears that on that date, Dr Rahme performed an endoscopy but took no biopsies. It is not asserted, for the purposes of treatment in
March of 1996, as I understand Mr Rush's concession, that any failure to take biopsies in March of 1996 represented some negligent act or breach of duty on the part of Dr Rahme. It appears that Dr Rahme took a detailed history from the plaintiff, conducted a gastroscopy and expressed an opinion as to what he considered to be the plaintiff's condition as at March 1996.

It is appropriate if I briefly refer to a report, indeed, what one might think as a contemporaneous report, written by Dr Rahme to the plaintiff's general practitioner in March of 1996. That report indicates that the plaintiff had given Dr Rahme a history that he had been suffering from intermittent epigastric pain with occasional retrosternal burning. This had been occurring daily and often awakened him at 5 am and the pain was relieved by eating.

The plaintiff, or alternatively, the referring general practitioner, provided to Dr Rahme a history that the plaintiff had had partial relief in the past with a drug by the name of Amfamox and, more importantly, a drug by the name of Zantac. There has been much discussion about the latter drug and it will be necessary to refer to that drug in greater detail. However, for the purpose of making an observation at this point of time, as I understand it, in general terms Zantac as at March of 1996 was a drug which inhibited the secretion of acid into the stomach.

A further history was obtained from the plaintiff or from the referring doctor. A physical examination was conducted. There was mild tenderness in the epigastrium and no other abnormalities were detected. Importantly, a gastroscopy was conducted by Dr Rahme and I quote the finding: "In the oesophagus there were linear superficial ulcers involving the lower 1 cm of the oesophagus. This was associated with a small hiatus hernia. No stricture formation or bleeding was seen. The stomach and duodenum were normal." 
Dr Rahme concluded that although the symptoms were somewhat unusual, they could be explained by the presence of the condition known as reflux oesophagitis. He recommended that the plaintiff attend for follow-up treatment. He prescribed a drug known as Losec, 20 milligrams twice a day for at least six to eight weeks. Specifically, Dr Rahme advised the general practitioner to the effect that he would like the opportunity to review the plaintiff and, "Repeat endoscopy in eight weeks to check on healing." 
I am satisfied that the reason for recommending a further endoscopy in May of was for the stated purposes appearing in this letter.

It appears that after the plaintiff was put on treatment by way of Losec, which is also a drug which inhibits the secretion of acid in the stomach, a more modern drug - if I may put it that way - than Zantac. The plaintiff's pain was very much reduced between March and May of 1996. Indeed, it appears that between March and May of 1996 that whilst the plaintiff was on Losec, his pain did in fact disappear.

The plaintiff returned to see Dr Rahme in May of 1996. At that point in time he was still on the drug Losec. He had been referred back for gastroscopy or a further gastroscopy by the general practitioner.

In May of 1996 Dr Rahme obtained a history that the plaintiff's symptoms had improved with Losec which had been administered twice daily in accordance with the advice given by Dr Rahme in March of 1996. A gastroscopy was performed whilst the plaintiff was still on the Losec treatment. Indeed, as will be gathered, a gastroscopy had been performed in March of 1996 apparently whilst the plaintiff was still on a regime of treatment, as I understand it, being a treatment involving the use of the drug Zantac.

Dr Rahme, in May of 1996, not only obtained a history of improvement of symptoms - and I am satisfied that the symptoms had almost disappeared in the period March to May of 1996 - but he further carried out the gastroscopy which he foreshadowed he intended to carry out when he saw the plaintiff in March of
In other words, the gastroscopy, in my view - and I so find - was the implementation of that which had been proposed in March of 1996, namely, that there should be an endoscopy or gastroscopy some eight weeks later to check on the healing of the linear superficial ulcers in the lower 1 centimetre of the oesophagus.

As I have said a gastroscopy was performed by Dr Rahme. It revealed that the linear superficial ulcers had disappeared and that the oesophagus was almost completely normal. Not only had the linear superficial ulcers disappeared but it appears that on gastroscopy no hiatus hernia was seen either. In the stomach moderate erythematous antral gastritis, or a redness condition, was apparently seen. On this occasion he took biopsies but the biopsies were taken for a specific purpose, apparently being for the condition H-pylori.

I am satisfied that the reason for the taking of the biopsies was because Dr
Rahme had become privy, and promptly privy, to an article that had been published in the New England Journal of Medicine, a very highly respectable medical journal, on 18 April 1996. That article is apparently a controversial article which I will return to in due course.

Two things may be said in relation to Dr Rahme's carrying out of a biopsy.
First of all, he became aware of the controversial article very promptly and he responded to it, even though as at the time of the gastroscopy in May of it was quite clear that many gastroenterologists of the highest repute in this country would not necessarily even have been aware of the publication of this controversial article about one month before.

In relation to the conduct of the biopsy, Dr Rahme gave evidence, p 240, as to the reason why he did the biopsy. It was, first of all, against, as I understand it, the background of this article that had been published in April but, more significantly, against that background that he did the biopsy looking for the condition of gastritis. He said in his evidence (at p 241) that in May it was the first time he had seen the article in terms of atrophic gastritis.

In May 1996 Dr Rahme recommended a treatment or a continuance of treatment with Losec advising that if the symptoms were controlled the dose could be reduced. He also advised that if gastric biopsies were positive for H-pylori he should have triple therapy with Losec, 20 milligrams twice daily, for a period of one week. He said, "Recent studies suggest that long-term treatment with proton pump inhibitors" - which I understand are drugs which paralyse the stomach's ability to secrete acid, which is the most powerful way of removing acid from the stomach - "in the presence of H-pylori, gastritis predisposes to atrophic gastritis with an increased risk of gastric cancer." He also stated that it was now his "practise to eradicate H-pylori if present in those requiring long-term treatment for reflux oesophagitis".

The evidence would suggest that the plaintiff in September of 1996 returned to
Dr Rahme. A third endoscopy was performed. The plaintiff apparently was then sent by the general practitioner to a Dr Borody. In October of 1996 it appears a CT scan was performed. In December of 1996 the plaintiff was admitted to the
Seventh Day Adventist Hospital. He underwent an endoscopy. He ceased taking
Losec and was told that he had a carcinoma of the stomach which would need surgery. He was advised that upon laparotomy there had been revealed a cancer which was inoperable.

As I have said, the plaintiff has but a few days to live and it is against this background that I am giving this judgment immediately without reserving on the matter.

I now turn to the plaintiff's submissions. The plaintiff's case is that he was, in effect, referred to Dr Rahme for a second opinion; that as at March of there was a history of pain which was significant, which pain was consistent with the presence, so it was said, of peptic ulcer disease. It was submitted that the presenting symptoms in March of 1996 were also consistent, as I have said, with peptic ulcer disease, notwithstanding the views expressed by Dr Rahme in that report that in fact in March of 1996 in the oesophagus there were linear superficial ulcers which had given rise to the presence of reflux oesophagitis and that was the condition that he reported on to Dr Hung, the general practitioner.

The plaintiff alleges that in March of 1996 he was taking the drug Zantac, which is an antisecretory medication and less powerful than the drug Losec.
The drug material being the MIMS 1994, suggested that Zantac may mask symptoms associated with carcinoma of the stomach; that where a gastric ulcer is suspected that the possibility of malignancy should be excluded before the therapy with Zantac tablets or ingestion is instituted. It was argued that drugs that reduce acid secretion can sometimes heal malignant ulcers and that the dosage of drug on which the plaintiff was on in March of 1996 could alleviate or mask symptoms of gastric ulcer.

The defendant, so it is said by the plaintiff - and I do not believe that there is any real dispute that this is so - accepted that the symptoms presented were also consistent with peptic ulcer disease and was aware of the ability of Zantac to mask symptoms of a gastric ulcer. The plaintiff alleged that the defendant was aware of the necessity to exclude the presence of an ulcer before commencing therapy with Zantac. It has been claimed that the defendant should have suspected the presence of a peptic ulcer, that he did suspect it and that he could not exclude the presence of such an ulcer if in fact the patient was on Zantac at the time of endoscopy. Indeed, it was submitted that as at March that an endoscopy ought not to have been then performed whilst the plaintiff was still being administered with the antisecretory medication of Zantac.

As regards the situation in May - and this is perhaps the more significant period - the case put against the defendant is that the defendant prescribed
Losec in March of 1996 and knew that Losec could mask the presence of gastric ulceration, that the administration of Losec at the twice daily prescribed rate would make it more unlikely that the ulcer would be detected. It was submitted that before the plaintiff was put on Losec or long-term use, steps pr actions should have been taken by the defendant to exclude the potential for malignancy.

Also relied upon by the plaintiff is the warning in the well-known pharmaceutical journal MIMS for Losec headed, "Undiagnosed Cancer". It is as follows: "Warning: The possibility of malignancy should be excluded before therapy with Losec is instituted." It is claimed that because the plaintiff was on Losec in May of 1996 that there was at least a loss of opportunity of the endoscopy performed in that month demonstrating the possibility of the presence of a malignant ulcer. The particular case now advanced against the defendant is that he at no stage performed an endoscopy for the examination of the stomach in the absence of an antisecretory medication, and thus the possibility of malignancy was never properly excluded either in March or indeed in May.

The plaintiff alleges that it was incumbent on the defendant to perform an endoscopy that would give as completed picture as possible and that the claim of the defendant during his evidence that he had excluded a mucosal lesion of the stomach on his first endoscopy in March of 1996 prior to commencing Losec was a fallacious one. Thus it is submitted that the defendant, in performing the endoscopy in March of 1996 and again in May of 1996, acted against proper medical teaching and pharmaceutical advice.

Again, it was submitted by Mr Rush QC that the defendant, having never performed or examined the stomach absent the presence of antisecretory medication, might end up with a false "negative" - if one may put it this way - and deny the plaintiff the opportunity of a malignancy being excluded.

It was also argued on behalf of the plaintiff that the defendant was under a heavy onus to exclude ulcer and malignancy and that by the performing of endoscopy in the presence of Zantac in March and Losec in May such obligation was never properly fulfilled and that the defendant was thereby negligent.

Mr Rush also submitted that as a consequence of the negligence of the defendant, the plaintiff at least lost the chance of detection of a stomach cancer in March or May 1996, the opportunity of stomach resection operation to remove the cancer, and alternatively as well, the opportunity of perhaps having a pain relief regime in the event that no resection was capable of being performed. It was submitted that there was strong support for the proposition that Losec prevented the ulceration and diagnosis of cancer. It was argued that there was good evidence to support the proposition that if a gastric cancer ulcer had not been masked and had been present, it would not have been missed and would have been diagnosed as cancer in March, and more particularly so in May.

Mr Rush asserts that I should find that the performance of the endoscopy in
March and May and September - although I do not think September really has much to do with the matter - was negligent in that in the presence of the medication of Zantac or Losec, gastric ulcer, and therefore malignancy, could not be excluded. That submission is, for reasons that will appear, a submission that I do not accept. However, I am prepared to make a finding, and would do so, on this evidence that the plaintiff in March, and indeed May, of did in fact suffer from a stomach cancer of the type that has been prescribed.

Next, Mr Rush argued that I should make a finding that the failure to exclude gastric ulcer, and therefore malignancy, in March, made it incumbent to do so in May, ie to stop the Losec prior to the May procedure. I would not make this finding. Indeed, I do not consider it appropriate to do so for reasons which will become apparent.

Next, it was submitted that the May procedure, in the absence of Losec, would have demonstrated an ulcer and malignancy and that it is possible, without the plaintiff being on Zantac in March a malignant ulcer would have been demonstrated. I would not make the findings that have been urged upon me.

For reasons that will appear, I am of the view that there was no breach of duty on the part of Dr Rahme either in March of 1996, or alternatively, in May of 1996. Again, for reasons that it is not necessary for me to repeat, I do not think that whatever was done in September of 1996 really has much to do with the matter, if anything to do with the matter at all. However, even assuming that there was to be a finding of breach of duty, there is another problem that would need to be addressed by the plaintiff, and that is the issue of causation.

The plaintiff's case is that there was a breach of duty particularly in May of and/or in March of 1996. The plaintiff's case is that the breach of duty has a causative role in the problem with which I am presently concerned. The primary case of causation is advanced by reference to an oncologist, Dr
Rutovitz. Alternatively, there is a case advanced by reference to the issue of causation that the plaintiff had lost a chance or opportunity of appropriate surgery or pain relief treatment.

There are difficulties with the plaintiff's case in relation to the matter of causation and to the extent that it relies upon Dr Rutovitz' evidence. Mr Rush submits that the treating oncologist was of the opinion that the cancer had developed some six to nine months prior to diagnosis, that the undifferentiated adenocarcinoma signet ring cell cancer was an aggressive one and that on the basis of this evidence, if cancer had been resected in March or May of 1996, then the plaintiff had a better than 50 per cent chance of survival for five years and if the plaintiff had survived five years he would then have had a normal life expectancy.

The competing oncological view of Dr Langlands was that the cancer had been present for some time prior to August of 1995 and had been present even before the complaint of symptoms. In my view the evidence of Professor Langlands I find more convincing and/or explanatory of the situation than that of Dr
Rutovitz. I say this despite Professor Langlands inability to explain the absence of pain between March of 1996 and May of 1996 during which period of time the plaintiff was on Losec medication.

The plaintiff puts an alternative case, and allegedly by reference to evidence of Professor Langlands, which he says would support a proposition that the plaintiff would have had a more favourable prognosis with a resection of the stomach in March or May of 1996, if there had been no peritoneal deposits in the peritoneal cavity. Well, I can say before turning to the defendant's case that this is not a submission that I would accept and to the extent that it is based upon the evidence of Dr Rutovitz where it is in conflict with the evidence of Professor Langlands, Professor Yeomans, Dr Falk and Dr Storey or any of them, I would prefer the evidence of those doctors and each of them.

Mr Rush has put the plaintiff's case also upon the basis that an alternative view that I could adopt is that because the progression of cancer was so uncertain that I could rely upon an observable sequence of events. He referred to the decision of the High Court in Adelaide Stevedoring Company Limited v Forst <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 538] at 563.

I would not adopt the approach that has been commended, or argued by Mr Rush in a case of this nature where one is concerned with the murky area of the development of not merely the rare gastric stomach cancer, but of even the sub-specie category of cancer that I have already described as having been found in this plaintiff.

Mr Rush submitted that I should make findings that the resection of the plaintiff's stomach cancer in either March or May of 1996 would have given the plaintiff between a 30 and 50 per cent chance of survival for five years, or alternatively, that the plaintiff had been denied the opportunity of palliative resection and early treatment of his cancer.

These arguments were advanced upon the basis that if the plaintiff had been diagnosed and he could have been diagnosed or at least had the opportunity of being diagnosed as having cancer in May, palliative surgery could have been performed, and further that the plaintiff was denied the opportunity of such palliative resection treatment. Further or in the alternative, at the very least, so it was submitted, the plaintiff lost the opportunity for pain relief for a closed period from June or July of 1996 to December of 1996, when the pain relieving effect of Losec was less and that the pain increased as a consequence of the development of cancer. I do not accept the arguments again for reasons that will further appear in these reasons.

Where there is conflict between the view of Dr Rutovitz and the doctors called on behalf of the defendant, it seems to me that having regard to their evidence and having regard to my evaluation of their respective demeanours in the witness box, which I am entitled to, whilst in no way not suggesting that
Dr Rutovitz' views were not genuinely and properly held, nevertheless, I prefer the views of the doctors called by the defendant's jointly, separately or in the alternative.

That I am entitled to have regard to the demeanour of the various witnesses, accords with the decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of Public
Trustee & Ors versus The Commonwealth of Australia, (20 December 1995, unreported). In that judgment Mr Justice Mahoney dealt with questions as to how one goes about determining what expert evidence may or should be accepted in a trial, the methodology involved in that, it is further held that in determining whether or not one expert should be accepted over another, one could have regard to the "demeanour" of the expert witness.

This case is a most sad one as I have said. It is a very difficult one to determine at this stage in the plaintiff's life, having regard to his pending death and the sadness associated with it. I am conscious of these matters, but nevertheless, in the circumstances of this case I believe that the defendant has made good its case that there was no negligence, no breach of contract, and further that there was no causal connection between the plaintiff's carcinoma and his pending death, and what was done or not done by Dr Rahme in
March or May, 1996.

I now propose to deal with the defendant's submissions to show why I should accept them, and as to why I consider the plaintiff fails in the action. In my view, both Dr Marshall and Dr Borody called on behalf of the plaintiff ultimately accepted, when taken to the actual treatment that had been administered in March of 1996, that such was reasonable and appropriate.
Indeed, when cross-examined I am of the view that Dr Marshall also accepted that appropriate treatment was given by Dr Rahme in May of 1996. Dr Borody alone ultimately stated that he did not believe an endoscopy should even have been performed in May of 1996. That is a view that I reject. Where there is conflict between the views of Dr Borody and the defendant's doctors, and I say where there is a conflict, I consider that the views of the defendants doctors should be accepted rather than the views of Dr Borody. In arriving at such a conclusion I have particular regard to my evaluation and assessment of Dr
Borody's evidence as well as my evaluation and assessment of his demeanour in the witness box. In my view, the following matters may also be regarded capable of being established by the evidence; that the plaintiff presented as a non-ulcer dyspepsic patient in March of 1996. To that extent there is support also to be found in the views of Drs Marshall and Borody. The
Australian Gastroenterology Institute guidelines published in October of , (Exhibit 1), current at the time, did not recommend biopsy in a non- ulcer dyspepsic patient. To this extent I accept Dr Yeoman's evidence and the matters contained in his report of 18 March 1997.

I have already mentioned the subject Helicobacter-Pylori, which is otherwise known as H-Pylori. I accept the evidence of Dr Marshall that the role of helicobacter-pylori in a non-ulcer dyspepsic patient, and the plaintiff presented as such in March of 1996, is unproven, and is not related to the oesophageal ulcers which were discovered in March of 1996. I accept the evidence of Dr Marshall and indeed Dr Borody on this point, that the responsible gastroenterologist who has a patient presented with chronic dyspepsia with no ulcer disease, would in March of 1996, be looking for other diagnosis rather than assuming that helicobacter-pylori was the cause.
Ultimately, Dr Borody seemingly accepted this view. Dr Marshall's view was also supported by his own internet document which has been tendered in evidence before me, which is Exhibit 8.

I am satisfied that in March of 1996 the plaintiff suffered from symptoms found on endoscopy in the oesophageal area, and which were consistent with the pain that he was describing. To this extent there is some consistency in viewpoint of Drs Borody, Dr Marshall and Professor Yeomans. I also accept that it was within the range of acceptable medical practice for a gastroenterologist as Dr Rahme was, to treat, and initially treat the patient for his oeophageal ulcers and reflux. It was the obvious course of treatment and the first thing treated in the patient presented with symptoms of the plaintiff that he did. Dr Marshall would even support this proposition. It was also appropriate, in my view, for the plaintiff to be treated with a drug
Losec, because Losec was likely to relieve the pain. Again to the extent that there is consistency of viewpoint, I would refer to the views of Dr Marshall,
Dr Borody and Professor Yeomans. I also accept the submission put on behalf of the defendant that given that on endoscopy that there was no evidence of gastric ulcer, the warning in MIMS (Exhibit D), under the heading then "Undiagnosed Malignancy", did not make it unreasonable for Dr Rahme to prescribe Losec in March of 1996. I accept the evidence of Dr Marshall and of
Professor Yeomans in relation to this matter. I also accept the evidence of Dr
Storey who indicated the appropriate warning was to general practitioners from treating the symptoms with Losec or Zantac without arranging for an endoscopy or other tests.

I also consider that notwithstanding the warning, that given the history of pain, the dose of Losec prescribed was also appropriate. Again, there is some consistency of viewpoint to be found in the evidence of Drs Marshall, Borody and Professor Yeomans. I agree and I make the finding, that for a patient such as the plaintiff requiring relief from pain in March of 1996, the presence or otherwise of Helicobacter-Pylori was very much a side issue (see Drs Marshall,
Borody and Professor Yeomans) and as well as being at least a side issue in relation to any matter of causation. Indeed, it is appropriate to say that Mr
Rush did not really submit to the contrary, arguing however, whilst it was not a causative factor, nevertheless, it was relevant to the issue of breach, and the appropriate course of treatment that should have been given, or could have been given in March of 1996.

I also find that it was not unreasonable for Dr Rahme to make a diagnosis of the possibility of reflux oesophagitis and to commence the patient on Losec without first doing a biopsy for helicobacter-pylori. Indeed, such a view was propounded by Dr Marshall, the co-discoverer of the Helicobacter-Pylori bacteria, and is a view also supported by reference to his own Helicobacter-
Pylori internet memoranda, if I may call it such, that was in existence in .

Indeed, it would appear that what Dr Rahme did in 1996 in March, was the very type of treatment which the helicobacter-pylori foundation run by Dr Marshall, recommended for patients presenting with symptoms found in the plaintiff.

I agree that in this case the plaintiff's witnesses were not really ultimately critical of the way in which Dr Rahme treated the patient, or the plaintiff in
March of 1996 (see Dr Marshall and indeed ultimately Dr Borody) who appears, at least in his evidence at the trial, to have departed at least in part from some suggested views to the contrary in reports that he had prepared for the purposes of this litigation.

In Dr Storey's opinion the treatment was appropriate. In Professor Yeoman's opinion the treatment was appropriate. I regard the treatment as having been appropriate in March and indeed, May of 1996 and I find no breach of duty on the part of Dr Rahme in relation to his treatment.

It is also appropriate for me to say that I have regard to the evidence given by Dr Rahme in the witness box. He was cross-examined, and very efficiently if
I may say too, in relation to what he did in March of 1996 and what he did in
May of 1996. I had the opportunity of observing him being questioned at length. I had the opportunity of hearing his responses to the questions. I have had the opportunity of evaluating his demeanour. It is appropriate for me to say that I accept Dr Rahme's evidence in relation to what he did and why both in March and in May of 1996.

I turn now to the situation in May of 1996. I have already indicated that in
March of 1996 following the first endoscopy, Dr Rahme foreshadowed to the general practitioner that he would need the opportunity to review the plaintiff and to repeat the endoscopy in eight weeks to check on healing. The healing referred to was the healing of the linear superficial ulcers in the lower one centimetre of the oesophagus. In other words, what was being contemplated as early as March of 1996 was a repeat endoscopy and a repeat endoscopy for a specific purpose to check on the healing process, under a regime of Losec which had been prescribed as an anti-secretary drug or medication by Dr Rahme in May of 1996. In my view, if the reason for the second follow-up endoscopy was to see how the Losec was performing, check the healing effect on the oesophageal ulcers, as I believe it was, and I accept Dr
Rahme's evidence that that was the purpose, then the correct thing for the gastroenterologist to do was to endoscope the plaintiff whilst on the same dose of Losec; see also the views of Dr Marshall and even on this point Dr
Borody.

I am satisfied that the reason for the May endoscopy was plainly for follow-up purposes, and was to check on the healing process for the condition found and described in the March 1996 report. In my view, it was proper and reasonable for Dr Rahme to perform an endoscopy in May of 1996 whilst the plaintiff was on Losec. Indeed I also accept that by reference to Dr Marshall's evidence, it was necessary or indeed, at least reasonable that the plaintiff could be on
Losec for the purposes of doing the checking by endoscopy.

As I have said, the plaintiff came to Dr Rahme in May with a history of an absence of pain between March and May. When I consider the evidence of Dr
Marshall I am satisfied that he did the biopsies which he described, see pp to 228, to also check that the plaintiff did not have the type of gastritis that had been referred to in the article by Kuiper that had been published in the New England Journal of Medicine in April of 1996. I am satisfied that he recognised the possibility of false negatives insofar as a biopsy might not show H-pylori to be present.

I am also satisfied that in May of 1996 perhaps even Dr Rahme was ahead of many gastroenterologists in terms of his prompt response to the New England
Journal of Medicine article of April of 1996. I agree with the submission that Dr Marshall did not criticise Dr Rahme for taking biopsies in May of , or for taking biopsies whilst Losec was being administered in 1996, and that at least in Dr Marshall's view that such course of treatment was perfectly proper practice.

I also accept with the views expressed by Drs Marshall, Professor Yeomans, and on this occasion Dr Borody in May of 1996, that the possibility of existence of Helicobacter-Pylori bacteria was once again very much a side issue. Indeed,
I did not really understand Mr Rush this morning in his oral submissions to submit to the contrary.

I would find that, Dr Rahme was ahead of many of his colleagues in recognising the possibilities raised by the Kuipers article, Exhibit 10, in the New
England Journal of Medicine issue of April 1996. I accept Dr Professor
Yeoman's evidence to that effect. I also accept Dr Storey's evidence to similar effect. I accept Mr Dr Rahme's evidence that he had become familiar with that article and it was that article that he referred to as answering the reference of recent studies in his report to the general practitioner dated 14
May 1996.

I agree with the defendant's submission that the main issue was the treatment of the plaintiff's pain, and that doctor Rahme recognised the possibility of a false negative and that it was appropriate for biopsies to be taken while the plaintiff was on Losec, that at that time many gastroenterologists would not have biopsied whether the plaintiff was on Losec or not, presumably because they would not even have been aware of the Kuipers article in April 1996.

I also accept Professor Yeomans evidence and I regard him as being a most impressive witness who gave his evidence in a most detached manner. I have seen him, I have heard him. I also accept Professor Yeoman's view that the treatment administered by Dr Rahme in May was appropriate. Indeed, I accept Dr
Storey's view to similar effect.

It is appropriate if I deal with the subject of detectability of the plaintiff's cancer. As I have said, the plaintiff suffered from a type of cancer which is described as a signet ring poorly differentiated, which I understand to be carcinoma. Medical evidence in relation to this perhaps can be summarised as follows: The type of cancer from which the plaintiff suffered spread within the lining of what is called the mucosa of the stomach. That type of cancer can reach an advanced state without being detectable on endoscopy. I accept Dr Rutovitz's view in relation to that particular matter.
I also accept Dr Marshall's view that the plaintiff's type of cancer involving intramuscular spread is more accurately described in the Gastroenterologist
Surgeon Operation Report, Exhibit B, is a reference to a cancerous condition where the cancer is spread laterally within the walls of the stomach. The diffuse signet ring carcinoma is a type that often spreads in the lining of the stomach walls rather than presenting initially as a lesion in the stomach.
The tumour was, I am satisfied, present in May of 1996, and I am satisfied that it was present in March of 1996, but I would conclude on the basis Dr
Yeoman's evidence that it was probably in the deep layers of the stomach and hence not detectable on endoscopy.

The cancer is apparently characterised by early and extensive infiltration of cancer cells through the mucosal and submucosal linings of the stomach, and there may be nothing visible on the mucosal aspect when gastrological testing is performed. I accept Dr Storey's evidence in relation to that matter, and I accept Professor Yeoman's view that the infiltrating or diffuse type of cancer is notoriously the most difficult to diagnosis because it only involves the inner lining of the stomach, and late in the course of the disease, and sometimes, not at all.

I am satisfied that the cancerous lesion found ultimately developed on the greater curvature of the stomach, where the stomach distends in what was said to be a nice type of manner. Given that according to the medical records, and indeed, I accept, Dr Rahme distended the stomach on endoscopy it is unlikely that he would have missed a cancerous lesion had it been there to be seen. I am satisfied that Dr Rahme at the time of performing the endoscopy was a skilled gastroenterologist including performing endoscopies. He gave evidence that he has now performed, as I understand it, some two thousand endoscopies up to the present time.

I am satisfied that the area in which the cancerous ulcer was found in
December of 1996, was an area of which Dr Rahme had a direct view when this endoscopy entered the stomach. I accept Professor Yeoman's view that the cancer probably would not have ulcerated by May of 1996, even had the plaintiff not been on Losec, and he put that likelihood in the range of 80 per cent.

I regard Professor Yeomans as being well qualified to express that view having regard to his involvement with the drug Losec when it was introduced into the
Australian market, and in terms of his knowledge of its use.

Indeed, even Dr Borody accepted that the cancer may not have ulcerated by May of 1996. I accept Dr Storey's view that had the Losec healed any gastric ulcer, the scar would still have been visible, see also the views of Dr Storey and of Professor Yeomans. The fact that there was no scarring to be seen on four separate endoscopies would rather suggest that there was perhaps no ulcer to be seen whether healed or otherwise. I accept Dr Falk's view that peritoneal deposits do not show up on endoscopies.

I turn now to the submissions made by the defendant, as to the alleged failure to exclude gastric ulcer by withdrawal of Zantac before commencing on Losec in
March of 1996. In one sense it is an issue that seemingly arose for the first time in the cross-examination of Dr Storey and repeated in cross-examination of Dr Rahme.

I believe that the submission or the argument advanced is really properly based on an erroneous interpretation of Exhibits D and J being the MIMS references for both Losec and Zantac. I accept the evidence of Professor
Yeomans on this subject. He was involved in the formulation of warnings and he said that they were essentially for medico-legal reasons. The effect of the warning is that it is desirable for an endoscopy to be performed prior to the institution of therapy with drugs, and also the evidence of Dr Storey.

There is some support for those views by Dr Marshall, (at p 142), when he said that given that on endoscopy there was no evidence of a gastric ulcer, it was not unreasonable for Dr Rahme to prescribe Losec in March of 1996. A similar point was made by Dr Storey. He said it was not common practice to check gastric ulceration before prescription of Zantac. It was neither his practice nor experience.

Dr Rahme, however, was also cross-examined in relation to the matter. He was aware of the warnings of the nature published in MIMS concerning Zantac and
Losec. He also made the valid point in my view, the point was that it is the performance of the endoscopy that excludes the gastric ulcer. He also said that the presence of gastric ulcer could be excluded by endoscopy even when the patient was on Zantac because the patient had pain.

If a gastric ulcer had not been present and had healed with Zantac, it would not have caused the pain of which the plaintiff complained. I accept this evidence of Dr Rahme. In my view, it has not been established by the plaintiff that there was breach of duty on the part of Dr Rahme in one or more respects whether in March 1996 or whether in May 1996 or even in September 1996. I believe that the balance of the defendant's preponderance of medical testimony, which I accept, was that the treatment in May was appropriate and the treatment in March was equally appropriate. To the extent that it is suggested by Dr Borody that it might be otherwise and that no endoscopy should have been carried out in May, I reject that, Dr Borody's criticism. It is true that I am not bound to accept the views of the medical profession in whole or in part for reasons that appear in the High Court judgment in Rogers v
Whittaker. The court has a role in this matter and cannot leave it to the doctors to determine whether or not Dr Rahme was negligent. However, in this particular case, I see no reason to differ from the views that have been expressed, essentially by the defendant's doctors, but to some extent even supported by the plaintiff's doctors, that Dr Rahme was not in breach of duty, whether in contract or in tort, in March or in May 1996.

I now turn to the subject of causation. Having found that there was no breach of duty that could well be the end of the matter. Nevertheless, I do not consider that I should leave the issue of causation at large. In my opinion, the evidence would support the view that the plaintiff's cancer was present, albeit, not observable on endoscopy in a cancerous state in March 1996.
Indeed, if I may so, there is almost universal accord in relation to that matter. To the extent that there is not, I accept the evidence of Dr Falk, Dr
Storey, Professor Langlands and Professor Yeomans.

I am satisfied that it was very likely in March that the plaintiff did have a stomach cancer and that this was based on known rates of growth and the size of deposits that were in the omentum already outside the stomach. Dr Storey's evidence was to the like effect, as was Professor Langlands' evidence, that it was highly probable that the plaintiff had an advanced cancer in March 1996. I accept their evidence. I accept the evidence of Professor Yeomans to the effect that on the balance of probabilities the tumour was present already in the stomach of Mr Maiolo even as early as August 1995, and that such an opinion is based on known approximate rates of growth of gastric tumours and other gut tumours. I regard Professor Yeomans' evidence as being significant in this area. Like all of the doctors, he is highly skilled and specialised.
However, when one looks at his curriculum vitae and strength of his expertise, and having regard also to my evaluation of his evidence in the witness box, I really do have no hesitation in making the finding that I have just made.

Where there is conflict between Dr Rutovitz and the other doctors, then I would reject Dr Rutovitz' views as being essentially alone in his expressing the contrary view to the preponderance of views expressed by the defendant's doctors. There is, perhaps, some force in the submission that he was, in any event, forced to withdraw his view in cross-examination. In any event, Dr
Rutovitz' view, where it conflicts with those of Professors Yeomans and
Langlands, Dr Storey, and Dr Falk, the treating surgeon, and who actually saw things at operation, I reject the views of Dr Rutovitz. I accept the evidence of Dr Falk that the plaintiff had had his cancer for a long time, significantly back in March 1996 and probably in the order of three or four years. To that extent, it seems to accord with the views of Professors
Langlands and Yeomans and Dr Storey. I reject the view of Dr Rutovitz to the effect that he thought that its presence in 1995 was too remote.

The next question arising for consideration in this somewhat lengthy judgment, but which needs to be urgently given, is whether the plaintiff's cancer had spread out from the stomach and into the peritoneum and other parts of the abdomen by March 1996. It is significant that I should make some findings in relation to this matter, because it not only goes to the issue of causation, but in the event that I were to also find relevant causation, it would go to the issue of damages.

Dr Falk's evidence was that considering the doubling time and likely rate of the cancer, which he found at operation, he would have expected that in March the plaintiff had peritoneal deposits at that stage and it was unlikely to change the course of the disease. Professor Yeomans' evidence was that it was most likely there was a secondary in the omentum in March 1996, if it was two centimetres in December 1996, after Dr Falk's laparotomy. Professor
Yeomans' view that the cancer would have been present in the peritoneum in
March 1996 and Dr Storey's view, which I accept, that it was likely that at that time the cells in the peritoneal cavity would have been apparent to the naked eye or the microscope by March 1996.

Dr Storey gave evidence that because the plaintiff had extensive peritoneal disease at the time of laparotomy, it was likely it had spread, in the early stages, in the peritoneal cavity many months before. Indeed, Dr Storey made it clear that these comments that it had spread to the peritoneum were comments also applicable in March 1996. Professor Langlands' opinion was equally as strong that there had been involvement of the cancer in the peritoneum for a very long time prior to diagnosis. In cross-examination he rejected the proposition that there was no peritoneal involvement in March or May 1996.
Indeed, in cross-examination, Dr Rutovitz was forced to ultimately concede that given the two centimetre deposits of cancer in the peritoneal cavity, if one had reference to the concept of doubling times, it would have been probable that the two centimetre deposits would have been in existence, albeit in smaller form, back in March 1996. In any event, even if his views be otherwise, I believe that the preponderance of views, which I accept from the defendant's doctors, put Dr Rutovitz' view out on a limb, in relation to this subject and I do not accept his evidence.

I accept the defendant's evidence that once the cancer had spread outside the stomach wall into the peritoneum and other parts of the abdomen that there was no hope of a cure. Indeed, Professor Yeomans said that once there was a spread of cancer into the peritoneal cavity or outside the stomach there was no hope of a cure. Professor Langlands' evidence was that no surgeon would attempt resection of obvious invasion to the peritoneum. Dr Storey's evidence was that once cancer was in the peritoneal cavity that there was no hope of a cure. As
I have said, there is compelling evidence that as at March and May, the cancer had spread into the peritoneal cavity and outside of the stomach. There is thus some support for the view that once the cancer had spread outside the stomach wall into the peritoneum and other parts of the abdomen that there was no cure to be found.

Even in the evidence of Dr Marshall at (p 131), there is reference to this subject. I find that the plaintiff's cancer was incurable by March of 1996. I accept Dr Falk's evidence that given the extremely bad carcinoma that the plaintiff had, and the extent of the peritoneal disease would not have expected that the plaintiff would have undergone a curative procedure in March , or even that any curative procedure undertaken in that month would have been unlikely to have cured the plaintiff. I accept the evidence that the plaintiff would have been likely to have died within twelve months of March in any event.

I also accept the evidence of Dr Falk that had the diagnosis of cancer been made in March 1996, that considering doubling times and the likely rate of growth in the cancer, that he, would have expected in March 1996 that the plaintiff had peritoneal deposits at that stage and that which would have been unlikely to have changed the course of the disease, he would not have expected the plaintiff to have had a resection in March 1996, given the condition that he believes the cancer was in at that time. As I understand it, the secondaries at that stage were of significant and were significantly present outside of the stomach itself. Professor Yeomans was quite firm that it was likely that the plaintiff's cancer would not have been curable as at March
Dr Storey also expressed the view that because there was an advancement of the cancer outside the stomach, that in this particular type of cancer with which this case is concerned, there is an unlikelihood of curability as opposed to treatment because the particular type of cancer had a propensity for early dissemination within the peritoneal cavity. Professor Langlands' views were to the similar effect, namely, that it was unlikely that the plaintiff had curable cancer in March 1996. Really, all doctors called by the defendant, in one or more respects, asserted that the cancer was incurable in
March 1996. To the extent that Dr Rutovitz has suggested to the contrary, I do not accept his views, inter alia, for reasons already given.

In respect of Dr Rutovitz, I have regard to his evidence, (p 65), where ultimately in cross-examination he was forced to make concessions in relation to the peritoneal deposits of cancer. To the extent that Dr Rutovitz differs from other doctors called, I do not consider that he had the same level of expertise as the other practitioners called. But, in any event, leaving that to one side, I do not consider that his evidence can stand, either in supporting the primary submission of causation advanced by Mr Rush for the plaintiff or the second submission, which is advanced and to which I have earlier made reference, although the question of whether or not there was a failure to detect or eradicate Helicobacter pylori in March 1996 is not one that really did in the result arise in the case. It seems to me that the evidence would point to it not being related to the outcome. However, in any event, Mr Rush does not seem to suggest that it was a matter of significance in relation to the outcome. Clearly, that is correct in the circumstances of this case, having regard to the nature and extent of the cancer present in
March and May 1996 and its spread in each of those months.

In my opinion the issue or matter of causation should thus also be resolved in favour of the defendant. Next, it has been submitted by Mr Rush, that I should in the event of finding for the defendant still nevertheless proceed to deal with the issue of damages. I consider that it is appropriate that I should in case this matter goes elsewhere.

I do not find, as I have said, any breach of duty by the defendant. I would not find that there had been negligence in the plaintiff losing opportunities of having the malignant ulcer diagnosed. I would not find that there was any breach of contractual retainer to the effect that there was a chance that the diagnosis of a malignant cancer may have been made in March and/or in May , and which chance was lost by any alleged breach of duty on the part of
Dr Rahme in either or both of those months. I find the issue of causation in favour of the defendant.

Mr Rush submitted that I should nevertheless find a breach of contractual retainer. For reasons that I have indicated, I do not consider that there was such a breach or that if there was, that the plaintiff is entitled to damages in contract, for the loss of the chance of the diagnosis of the malignant cancer in March and/or May 1996. As I understand it, Mr Rush's submission is essentially put to me by reference to the evidence that was also given by Dr
Rutovitz, whose evidence I have indicated I do not accept.

When one looks at the schedule of damages that have been put before me by both the plaintiff and the defendant, that the schedules of damages do have a number of scenarios in common. Even assuming that I be wrong in my view that there was also no breach of any duty, I would not, for the purposes of assessing damages, consider it appropriate in any event, even assuming that there was a breach of duty or breach of a contractual retainer, to award damages by reference to either an assumption of normal life expectancy or by reference to resection possibilities which have been described by both the parties as being scenarios one, two, three in the schedules.

For reasons that I have already given, I do not consider that the matter of palliative resection arises. I accept Professor Yeomans' evidence, in particular, in relation to this. I also add, in relation to that last observation, that in the circumstances here, there is nothing to indicate that resective surgery would have been done for the purposes, for example, of permitting any obstruction to eating to be removed by that surgery.

My findings would suggest therefore that there should be no award of damages, even assuming breach of duty or breach of contract, by reference to not only scenarios one, two, and three, but also to scenario number four, as it is so described by the parties. Were the situation one where there was a breach of duty or breach of contract, then in my view, had the plaintiff established a case of negligence or breach of contract, I consider that any appropriate measure of damages in that situation would be a measure of damages reflected by scenario number five advanced by the plaintiff. This was to the effect that even if there had been no resection, that the plaintiff nevertheless, assuming a breach of duty had been established, would nevertheless have been denied the opportunity of pain relief for the closed period from for June or July 1996 to
December 1996.

On that basis, assuming the plaintiff had established liability, I would accept Mr Rush's submission that the appropriate award of damages would have been the sum of $40,000 by reference to scenario number five. I would reject the defendant's submission that there would be no award of damages for scenario number five or the pain relief scenario, absent a resection, assuming the plaintiff had been entitled to a verdict.

I now conclude these lengthy remarks. Before doing so it seems to me that having regard to the way the case has been conducted, the massive amount of material that has been put before me, the oral evidence that has been given by numerous experts in the area that justice would not have been done to the parties had I not given my reasons in a somewhat extensive manner. I make no apology for such reasons, nor for the length of this extempore judgment which is a judgment that had to be given in the circumstances of this case and at this point of time.

There will therefore be a verdict for the defendant and judgment accordingly.
I order the plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs. The Exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
