

Regina versus Carroll Matter No Cca 60327/95 [1996] NSWSC 549 (15 November )

Last Updated: 16 February 1999 `REGINA versus JOHN CARROLL` `CCA 60327/95` `15 November 1996` `Meagher JA, McInerney J, Hulme J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` `NATURE OF JURISDICTION: APPEAL FROM JOB DCJ` `FILE NO/S: CCA 60327/95` `DELIVERED: 15 NOVEMBER 1996` `HEARING DATE: 1 MAY 1996` `PARTIES: REGINA versus John CARROLL` `CORAM: MEAGHER JA, McINERNEY J, HULME J` `COUNSEL:` `Crown: P G BERMAN` `Respondent: T J GOLDING` `SOLICITORS:` `Crown: S E O'CONNOR` `Respondent: T A MURPHY` `CATCHWORDS: ARMED ROBBERY - UNSWORN STATEMENT OF ACCUSED ` `- EVIDENCE OF WIFE OF ACCUSED ` `EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED` `ALLOWED/DISMISSED: CONVICTION - DISMISSED; SENTENCE - DISMISSED` 
REGINA versus John CARROLL 
JUDGMENT 
HULME J: On 5 December 1994 the Appellant was convicted in the District Court on a charge that on 10 August 1990 being armed with a pistol and a shotgun he robbed an employee of Carmen Furniture Pty Ltd of a sum of approximately $40,000.00. He appeals against that conviction and seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed. 
Not in issue in the appeal was the fact that an armed robbery occurred as I have described, the money stolen being the payroll of the company at that time. The issue before the jury was whether the accused was one of the two persons who participated in the robbery. Although these persons had been observed at the scene there was no direct evidence from the observers identifying the Appellant. The Appellant made an unsworn statement and his wife was called to give evidence as to the Appellant's activities at the time of the robbery - activities inconsistent with his presence at the scene.

The evidence adduced by the Crown tending to implicate the Appellant fell into three categories. The first was evidence that the Appellant's car was seen shortly after the robbery in a street near to where the robbery occurred.
Later on the day of the robbery, the Appellant's wife reported that the
Appellants car had been stolen, in effect during the previous night. This aspect of the evidence in the trial, although relevant, does not of itself take the Crown case very far and indeed none of the grounds of appeal related to it.

The second aspect of the evidence against the Appellant was a taped conversation between the Appellant and a police informer fitted with a listening device. On 20 September 1990 the Appellant was spoken to by the police concerning the robbery. He then denied any involvement. On 15 April the informer, who gave evidence, was fitted with a listening device the transmissions from which were recorded on a tape which, and a transcript of which, were tendered in the proceedings. During the course of the conversation so recorded the Appellant described in some detail the robbery.

There was no challenge to the accuracy of this evidence. Rather did the
Appellant, in an unsworn statement to the jury, seek to explain his knowledge of these details by asserting that a Detective Irwin had provided the
Appellant with documents and other information concerning it and asked the
Appellant "if I could find any information in regards to this or in any other matter and to give him a call on a (phone) number". It was common ground that the Appellant had assisted the police in the past. The Appellant said that in the taped conversation "I spoke... as far as my memory went to what the police spoke to me about and to what I read in the documents, and the point I didn't know I adlibbed, trying to be as convincing as I could, because a person in my position trying to find out information, if they make a slip up they are placed in a very vulnerable position." 
The first ground of appeal asserts that the trial judge was wrong in ridiculing this account of why the Appellant told the informer details of the robbery. The suggested ridiculing occurred after the trial judge had summarised the Crown case, had read in full the Appellant's statement to the jury and summarised the evidence given by the Appellant's wife. His Honour then said, "both Counsel have addressed you.... at some length, but I am certainly not going to go over their submissions in any great detail. But as I said before, what the Crown puts to you clearly is this, that she says it is insulting your intelligence that the accused, in attempting to find out who had committed an armed robbery, would confess to his good friend that he had done it, and she says how on earth by telling Mr (X) that he had committed the armed hold up was that going to find out who had committed a robbery. She said what was he expecting to do. Mr (X) said "hey, hold on just a moment, you didn't do that, it was me, or you didn't do that, it was me." The Crown puts to you, you just can't accept that and that it would be insulting your intelligence...
 "Well that is the Crown's submission on a very important part of the Crown case." 
It was further submitted that His Honour's remarks represented an unfair appreciation of what the Appellant had said in that it ignored that part of the Appellant's statement as asserted that the police had requested him to find out information concerning "this or in any other matter" 
This last point has some substance because it is clear from the extract I have quoted above that the accused did assert that it was not only the subject crime in relation to which Detective Irwin sought assistance and it is not inconceivable that one way in which information might have been obtained by the accused was to induce the person to whom he was speaking to believe that they were brothers in crime. Consciousness of the wider field of enquiry would to a significant degree invalidate the criticism in His Honour's remarks.

On the other hand His Honour was engaged in recounting a criticism made by the
Crown and one no doubt answered, so far as it could be, by the solicitor for the Appellant in his address to the jury. Furthermore, when one has regard to the terms of the taped conversation it is apparent that there was no attempt by the Appellant to seek anything that could be regarded as relevant information from the informer. Although, for the reasons I have indicated I think that there was error in what His Honour said, in the circumstances it was not of a nature calculated to inspire me to allow the appeal.

The second ground of appeal concerns a conversation in a police vehicle shortly after the Appellant was arrested on 24 May 1991 and which formed the third aspect of the Crown case. In the car was the Appellant, a Detective
Sergeant Nimmo and Detectives Fabris and King. According to Detective King's evidence the following conversation occurred:- 
Nimmo: "John, you took a mate of yours to the hospital. He was wired up." 
Appellant: "I was only big noting." 
Nimmo: "No one big notes about a big stick up." 
There was some other conversation followed by: 
Nimmo: "What have you done with the money from the stick up at Carmen
Jewellers.

Appellant: Carmen Jewellers?" 
Nimmo: "Sorry furniture." 
Appellant: "I just can't keep money." 
By means of leading questions evidence was adduced from Detective Fabris in substantially identical terms. Detective Sergeant Nimmo was not called. There was evidence that he was no longer with the police force and had been ill for some considerable time. The Appellant in his unsworn statement denied there was any such conversation.

His Honour referred to this evidence in his summing up, attributing it to
Detectives King and, mistakenly, Nimmo. His Honour recorded that the evidence had been subject to attack by the solicitor appearing for the Appellant and then gave this direction- "If you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that that was said you would disregard that. If you are not satisfied you disregard that and look at the principal part of the Crown case which is of course the tape, the accused's voice." 
In that in this passage the trial Judge sought to have the Jury apply the criminal onus of proof to only one of the strings to the Crown's bow, His
Honour erred in the Appellant's favour but this is not enough to answer the two complaints that are made concerning His Honour's treatment of the evidence which I have quoted. On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted firstly, that His Honour was wrong to suggest that the principal part of the Crown case was to be found elsewhere and, secondly, that he erred in not giving the jury a warning in accordance with the decision of the High Court in McKinney & Judge versus R <case>; [1991 CLR 468.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=1991%20171%20CLR%20468 "View LawCiteRecord" )

There is nothing in the first of these criticisms. The Judge had properly told the jury that questions of fact were to be determined by the jury and the jury alone. His characterisation of one part of the Crown case as more important than another, even if wrong, could not reasonably be thought to have any significance on their decision making. But in any event it is clear that his reference to the tape as being the principal part of the Crown case was demonstrably correct. The length of the relevant part of the tape and the detail contained therein is, and must during the trial have been, much more significant than the three responses of the Appellant in the conversation with
Detective Nimmo which I have recounted.

I turn to the second complaint, that the trial judge erred in not giving the jury a warning in accordance with the decision of the High Court in
McKinney & Judge versus R. In that case it was held that, as a rule of practice "whenever police evidence of a confessional statement allegedly made by an accused while in police custody is disputed and the making is not reliably corroborated "the trial judge should warn the jury of "the dangers involved in convicting an accused person in circumstances where the only (or substantially the only) basis for finding that guilt has been established beyond reasonable doubt is a confessional statement allegedly made whilst in police custody, the making of which is not reliably corroborated". The majority of the Court also indicated some supplementary remarks which should normally accompany such a warning.

In this case the confessional statement was certainly not the only basis for finding that guilt had been established. Nor could it be described as substantially the only basis for such a finding. Both the terms of the taped interview and the limited ambit of the dispute concerning it lead inevitably to the conclusion that that interview was of far greater substance. Thus the circumstances of the instant case do not answer the description of those where, according to the High Court in McKinney & Judge versus R, a direction as outlined in that case is required.

Furthermore in R versus Small [(1994) 33 NSWLR 575] at 601
Hunt CJ at CL, with whom the other members of the court agreed, said that "So far as I am aware, it has been the constant view expressed by this court that the rule of the warning elaborated in McKinney versus R is not required in cases where the disputed confession was not the only (or substantially the only) evidence against the accused". Subsequently in Lawson versus R (unreported, HC 8 December 1994) special leave was sought from the High Court in order to review the decision in R versus Small. In refusing leave the High
Court said:- "The Applicant seeks special leave to appeal in order to extent the rule of practice in McKinney & Judge versus R <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 468] to any case in which the Crown relies on contested evidence of a confession made to police officers where the confession is not confirmed by another witness.

The limits of the rule have already been stated at page 476 of the report and it would be futile to grant special leave to appeal. Accordingly, special leave is refused." 
In light of those remarks and the cases cited and reasons advanced in R v
Small itself, it seems to me that the matter should be regarded as beyond argument in this Court. This was reinforced in R versus Heuston [(1995) 81 A
Crim R 387.] Where Hunt CJ at CL said at 401-402:- "A McKinney type of direction may sometimes be required in a case where the confessional evidence is not the only (or substantially the only) evidence of guilt - where, for example, the only other evidence is a matter of strong dispute or consists of the evidence of the accomplice. Whether such a direction should be given in those cases will depend upon the circumstances of the particular case, as Small's case makes clear." 
On the other hand it has been recognised - and was in R versus Small itself - that there are situations where a warning in, or similar to, the terms of that adverted to in McKinney should be given. An example cited is a case where the only other evidence of guilt is the subject of strong dispute. The adoption of this approach, as does the test in McKinney itself, involves an assessment by the presiding judge of the strength of the Crown case. Given that a jury may reject all of the matters thought by a trial judge to be substantial or not the subject of strong dispute - leaving themselves with only the confessional statement - logic argues in favour of a McKinney or like direction being given in every case. However that was not the approach of the High Court in McKinney, nor of this Court in cases such a R v
Small and it does not seem to me that this is the occasion for a re- examination of the approach.

In this case I think it would not have been inappropriate for such a warning to be given. The conversation which I have recounted was short. It occurred, according to the police evidence, in circumstances where there was no possibility of persons other than police being present. It occurred after the appellant had been told only the bare facts of his arrest and the reason and where his only response had been to the effect, "I don't believe it.".
Furthermore the recording of the suggested conversation by the police was not calculated to inspire confidence in the accuracy of their evidence. It was not recorded at the time but only by one of the three police officers concerned while they were involved in another operation some hours afterwards in another part of Sydney. In the interim they had been to Maroubra Police Station, to the Sydney Police Centre, to lunch at Chinatown and back to the Police Centre and Detectives King and Fabris both said that it was their practice to record conversations as soon as possible after they occurred. The circumstances in which the conversation occurred have many of the characteristics which inspired the remarks of Deane J in Carr versus R <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 314] and which were a significant influence on the majority in
McKinney.

On the other hand, it may be noted, if the police officers had been minded to fabricate a confession by the Appellant, they could have made up a far more damaging one than that which I have quoted above.

However, for the reasons I have indicated, and in particular because of the terms of the taped interview and the limited ambit of the dispute concerning it, it cannot be said that the learned trial judge in this case erred in not giving a direction in accordance with McKinney & Judge versus R.
Accordingly the appeal against conviction fails.

I turn to the appeal against sentence. His Honour indicated that, but for the matters to which I am about to refer, he would have imposed a sentence of 12 years penal servitude, including a minimum term of 9 years. There is no complaint with His Honour's starting point and indeed there could not reasonably be one. The maximum penalty under Section 97 of the Crimes Act for the offence of armed robbery is 20 years and the Appellant has an appalling record. The basis for the appeal against sentence is that, although His Honour reduced the sentence he would otherwise have imposed to 10 years and the minimum term to 7½ years because of assistance which the Appellant has provided to the police from time to time, this reduction was wholly inadequate. It was submitted that the authorities indicate that something of the order of 30 to 50% should have been allowed.

The principle of allowing a discount from the sentence which would otherwise have been imposed is not new. It existed at least as far back as James and
Sharman [(1913) 9 Cr App R 142] where the court reduced a sentence imposed for burglary from seven to three years remarking "he deserves the term of seven years imposed but the court reduces it to three for he betrayed the thieves; it is expedient that they should not be persuaded to trust one another, that there should not be honour among thieves." 
There are a number of comparatively recent cases in this court wherein consideration has been given to the rationale for the principle, the weight to be given to various factors associated with it and the approach which the courts should adopt in seeking to apply the principle in a particular case. It is not necessary that I undertake another lengthy dissertation on these topics but there have been some observations made in those cases to which it is appropriate to refer because they have a relevance here.

In R versus Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243] it was recognised:- "1. Because of the benefit derived by the community from the provision of assistance to the authorities an appropriate reward for providing it should be granted whatever the offender's motive may have been for giving such assistance.
To encourage such assistance, the reward should be given if there has been genuine co-operation whether or not the assistance in fact turns out to have been effective.
If the motive with which the information is given is genuine remorse or contrition, that circumstance may warrant greater leniency but remorse and contrition are not necessary to obtain a discount in the sentence.
The consequences to the offender of having given assistance must also be taken into account. These will include any threat to his safety, and the conditions under which a sentence will need to be served.
There is no fixed tariff against which a discount for assistance to the authorities can be judged, the possible variations between cases being infinite." 
In a more recent case, Many [(1990) 51 A Crim R 54] it was made clear that detrimental consequences to the offender are also not a condition of entitlement to a discount but such consequences may themselves go to afford a reduction.

Subsequent to these cases statutory authority for reduction on account of assistance to the authorities was given by Section 442B of the Crimes Act which was enacted in 1992 and which provides:- "(1) In determining the sentence to be passed on a person convicted of an offence, a court may reduce the sentence it would otherwise impose, having regard to the degree to which the person has assisted, or undertaken to assist, law enforcement authorities in the prevention, detection or investigation of, or in proceedings relating to, the offence or other offences.

A court must not reduce a sentence so that the sentence becomes unreasonably disproportionate to the nature and circumstances of the offence.

In deciding whether to reduce a sentence and the extent of any reduction, the court is required to consider the following matters: ...

The significance and usefulness of the offender's assistance to the authority or authorities concerned...

The truthfulness, completeness and reliability of any information or evidence provided by the offender; 
The nature and extent of the offender's assistance...; 
Whether the offender will suffer harsher custodial conditions; ... any danger or risk of injury to the offender... resulting from the assistance; 
Whether the assistance... concerns the offence for which the offender is being sentenced for an unrelated offence." 
A number of features of this section should be noted. The section imposes a different criteria to that outlined in Cartwright. As stated by Hunt CJ at CL in Yenice versus R [(1994) 72 A Crim R 234] at ,
 "..... the judge is now required to consider, inter alia, not only the significance but the usefulness of the assistance given." although, "That requirement of <case> does not mean that no discount can be made for the assistance given where the prisoner has been unable to establish the usefulness of the information provided. The section is not expressed in terms that a discount may only be made if the information has been shown to have been useful to the authorities. But it does mean that the extent of the discount must be less where the usefulness of the information has not been established." 
The terms of sub-section (2) also merit emphasis. The limit of the discount is such that the ultimate sentence must not become "unreasonably disproportionate" to the nature and circumstances of the offence - see C [(1994) 75 A Crim R 309] at -6.

Notwithstanding the principle that there should not, and indeed cannot, be a fixed tariff for assistance to the authorities, and that the discount to be allowed in a particular case is just as much a matter of discretion as many other aspects of the sentencing process, it is clearly desirable that there be a measure of uniformity in the court's approach to the topic. This is reflected in the remarks of Mahoney JA in Cartwright at 245, and more recently by this Court in Huang versus R [(1995) 78 A Crim R 111] at .

The reasons which inspire the court's desire for consistency in sentencing generally seem to me to apply with equal force on the subject topic.

In these circumstances it is appropriate to reflect on some other cases for guidance although the difference in the law introduced by Section 442B must be borne in mind when cases decided under the earlier regime are considered. In
Cartwright (at p 255) reference was made to R versus King [(1985) 82 Cr
App R 120] at 123 wherein "the English Court of Appeal referred to a tariff for discounts in that country of between one-half and two-thirds of what was otherwise an appropriate sentence, according to the particular circumstances". The Judgment of Hunt and Badgery-Parker JJ continued "We believe that there may well be some cases where less than one-half discount would be appropriate. But the magnitude of the discount given is nevertheless very apparent." 
Their Honours then referred to a number of cases where discounts varying between about 45% and two-thirds were given and held that the discount allowed by the trial judge to the appellant before them should be increased from one- third to one-half. The assistance given was described as "extensive", "full and frank" and "made willingly". The assistance was regarded as demonstrative of remorse and had resulted in Mr Cartwright's life being under threat with the consequence that he was placed under special protection in gaol. The extent of Mr Cartwright's assistance appears on page 247 of the report.

In Many the appellant acquired, after the commission of the offences with which he was charged and prior to his trial, information of a plan to commit murder. He passed this information on to the authorities and later gave evidence against the conspirators. He provided further information concerning three other murders by one or other of the conspirators and in relation to one of these also gave evidence. In consequence he was placed in "very restricted" custody and it was accepted that his actions were at great risk to himself and not inspired by self interest. Demonstrably they were not a manifestation of contrition for his own offences most of which were of a sexual nature but one of which was strangling with intent to murder. The discount allowed was approximately one-third of the sentence regarded as otherwise appropriate, the court indicating that had contrition been demonstrated the discount would have been substantially higher.

In R versus Kelly [(1993) 30 NSWLR 64] the applicant for leave to appeal had his overall sentence reduced from 3½ to 3 years and the minimum term reduced from 2 years to 18 months, Mahony JA who delivered the court's Reasons observing that in that case the discount given should not be large. The details of the Applicant's co-operation with the police are not apparent from the report but it would seem it had some relationship to the subsequently committed offence.

In R versus Foster [(1992) 25 NSWLR 732] the
Applicant was sentenced on two charges of supplying and cultivating cannabis plants being not less than a commercial quantity. On each charge the trial judge imposed concurrent minimum terms of 3 years and concurrent additional terms of 1 year. The trial judge said that, as a result of assistance to the police by the Applicant, he deducted 12 months from the sentence which would otherwise have been imposed, although it is not clear whether this was from the overall sentence or the minimum term. As was said by Carruthers J, the discount was thus either 20 or 25%. The Court of Appeal refused to increase it.

Unfortunately the report does not indicate the extent of the assistance rendered by the appellant in that case beyond the words of Carruthers J that "the quality of assistance in the instant case is not to be equated with the assistance rendered in R versus Cartwright". (The subsequent appeal to the
High Court - see (1993) 67 ALJR 550 - does not bear on the subject issue.) 
In Huang where the prisoner's co-operation with the authorities was described as "extensive" and "exceptional in its completeness and its extent", the Court of Criminal Appeal held that a sentence of 5.5 years (including a minimum term of 2.5 years) imposed on a charge of supplying not less than a large commercial quantity of heroin offended against the terms of Section
B(2) of the Crimes Act and increased the sentence to a minimum term of 6 years with an additional term of 3 years. By comparison with the 14 year sentence the trial judge said he would have imposed but for such assistance, the discount was reduced from 60% to about 35% although, insofar as this figure may be treated as a guide in other cases, it is fair to say that it appears to me that it was the terms of Section 442B(2) rather than a judgment of the value, by example or reward, of the offender's assistance which were the limiting factor.

I turn then to the Appellant's situation. His Honour recorded that the
Appellant has been a police informer for many years. For some of the information which the Appellant has provided to the authorities he has previously been rewarded and had that assistance taken into account on a previous occasion. Correctly His Honour regarded the Appellant as entitled to no further consideration on that account. The matters relevant for present purposes may be summarised as follows:- 
In early 1989 he supplied information which led to the arrest of several persons and the seizure of approximately 10kgs of cannabis leaf.

On three occasions in or about October and November 1994 the Appellant provided police officers with information concerning a murder in Sydney.
Although it would seem that at least some of this information was already known to the police there was no suggestion that the Appellant was aware of that fact.

The Appellant supplied information which led to the arrest and conviction of a person for armed robbery.

The Appellant provided information as to the whereabouts of another person wanted for armed robbery which information led to that person's arrest.

The Appellant provided information in relation to an importation of heroin.

The Appellant provided information concerning a quantity of cannabis.

The Appellant informed the police of the whereabouts of a notorious criminal. The information was correct but by the time it was acted upon the person had moved on.

The Appellant provided information, at the time of sentencing still being investigated concerning another murder.

The Appellant gave information about another armed robber.

As His Honour recorded "there is no doubt that the prisoner has provided substantial assistance to the police in relation to matters unrelated to his own crimes. It is clear also that a deal of the information has been significant, useful, truthful and reliable, matters to which Section 442B (3) requires that attention be given. The information does not concern the offence in respect of which the Appellant was being sentenced. The trial judge recorded that Appellant has elected not to serve his sentence in protective custody, relying on the details of his assistance being kept confidential. For myself, I would infer that, in terms of paragraph (h) of Section 442B(3), there must be some risk of injury to him resulting from his assistance.

I would judge the assistance to the authorities, and the disadvantages to the offender, in a number of the cases to which I have referred, as significantly greater than in the case of the Appellant here. On the other hand, it does seem to me that the two years (total) or 16.67% discount allowed by the trial judge is, to a substantial extent, too low for the assistance to the authorities which the Appellant has given and that this Court should interfere.

Judged by the standard of the earlier cases mentioned I am of the view that the discount which the Appellant should be given on account of his assistance lies in the range of 25-30% of the sentence otherwise appropriate. For the terms of 10 years (total), 7.5 years (minimum) and 2.5 years (additional) imposed by the trial judge I would substitute terms of 8.5, 6.5 and 2 years respectively.

In my view the appropriate orders are:-
The appeal against conviction be dismissed,
Grant leave to appeal against sentence,
Quash the sentence imposed by Judge Job and in lieu thereof, sentence the
Appellant to penal servitude for a minimum term of 6 years and 6 months to date from 5 December 1994 and expiring on 4 June 2001, and to an additional term of 2 years to commence on 5 June 2001 and expire on 4 June 2003.

MEAGHER JA: In this matter, I have had the benefit of reading in draft the judgment of Hulme J. With great respect, I agree with his Honour that the appeal against conviction must fail. However, and with equal respect, I am unable to agree with his Honour's remarks on severity of sentence. 
The gist of his Honour's reasoning is that the trial judge, who allowed a two- year discount because of the appellant's assistance to the police, should have discounted the sentence even more generously.

His Honour's approach, in my view, reflects two serious errors. In the first place, it does not pay sufficient respect to the trial judge's exercise of his discretion. The trial judge made no mistake in fact or law. The appellant was convicted, and rightly convicted, of the offence of armed robbery, for which offence Parliament has prescribed a maximum penalty of twenty years. Further, this was a particularly ugly example of that offence. Yet further, the appellant's record is, as his Honour noted, "appalling". In these circumstances the trial judge's conclusion that, apart from discounting, he would have imposed a sentence of twelve years' penal servitude, whilst within his Honour's range, must be considered a little lenient. For his Honour the trial judge to have reduced that figure of twelve years to ten years in order to express his appreciation for the appellant's assistance to the authorities, is itself a major indulgence. There is no reason to conclude it is insufficiently indulgent. The authorities say that a discount should be allowed. It was. They say that the discount should be substantial. It was.
When there is no mis-statement of fact or law involved, an appellate court has no business to tamper with the details of the trial judge's considered conclusion.

The second mistake is to reduce a sentencing exercise to a sort of mathematical game. There is no principle of law which requires us to state that this matter of discounting, or indeed any other matter of discounting, should be expressed in the form of some precise mathematical percentage. The percentage is to be chosen by the trial judge from case to case in accordance with what he perceives are the requirements of justice, and it is nothing to the point to complain that the percentage chosen is more or less than the percentage chosen by some other judge, in other, and necessarily different, cases.

I would dismiss the application for leave to appeal against the severity of sentence.

McINERNEY J: I have read the draft Judgments of Meagher JA and Hulme J. I agree with Hulme J that the appeal against conviction should be dismissed. Whilst I would grant leave to appeal against the severity of sentence, I agree with Meagher JA that the appeal against sentence should be dismissed. * * * 
