

M Ziebell versus Metal Manufacturers Ltd [1996] NSWSC 339 (7 August 1996) 
MICHAEL ZIEBELL versus METAL MANUFACTURES LTD /92 
WEDNESDAY 7 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an action by the plaintiff, Michael Ziebell, against the defendant, Metal Manufactures Ltd, claiming damages for personal injury suffered by the plaintiff on 6 June 1989 in the course of his employment by the defendant. The defendant admitted liability, and the hearing before me was limited to an assessment of the damages which should be awarded to the plaintiff. The assessment of damages is subject to the provisions of [Pt 5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/index.html#p5) of the [Workers' Compensation Act, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).

The only witnesses who gave oral evidence at the hearing were the plaintiff, the plaintiff's de facto wife, and the plaintiff's general medical practitioner, Dr Lenehan. At the hearing there was very little challenge made by counsel for the defendant to the plaintiff's evidence-in-chief.

The plaintiff said that he was born on 7 March 1955. He was "not much of a student" at school and he left school at the age of fifteen. The plaintiff has never had any formal vocational training. However, the plaintiff worked as a labourer in the Australian Capital Territory at the Electricity Authority for fifteen years.

The plaintiff met and began living with a young woman named Tonette Dodd. They have never married but have regarded and continue to regard each other as husband and wife and I will refer to Tonette Dodd as the plaintiff's wife.

In 1988 the plaintiff and his wife moved to Wollongong. They bought an old house in need of renovation and repair and the plaintiff commenced working on renovating and repairing the house. In January 1989, after a spell of casual work, the plaintiff obtained employment with the defendant, working mainly as a crane chaser.

Before the accident the plaintiff took part in a number of sporting or outdoor activities, including playing golf, rock fishing, social squash, riding a trail bike and going dancing with his wife at a club. He described himself before the accident as happy and active and as having a good memory and good powers of concentration.

On 6 June 1989, the date of the accident, the plaintiff was working near a machine known as a drawbench. While the plaintiff was endeavouring with a wrench to engage and free a long pipe which had been caught in chucks on the machine, the pipe was suddenly driven against the plaintiff's right thigh, pinning him against a wall. The plaintiff said in his evidence-in-chief - "I was dancing around on one leg and I just saw the blood coming out, and I thought I lost my leg, and my head just fell back on the concrete and hit my head on the floor." 
There was also a blow to the plaintiff's left leg.

As a result of the accident the plaintiff lost consciousness. The plaintiff had very little recollection of events occurring after the accident. However, it appears from medical reports admitted into evidence that he was taken by ambulance to Wollongong Hospital and that on the morning of 6 June he was operated on by Dr Elliott, an orthopaedic surgeon, and Dr Mason, a general surgeon.

In his report of 4 March 1992 Dr Elliott said that the plaintiff sustained a severe crush injury where the right lower limb was almost amputated through the mid thigh region. Dr Elliott performed an open reduction and internal fixation of the fractured femur with a plate and screws. Dr Mason then repaired the femoral artery, vein and nerves.

On 21 June 1989 Dr Mason performed a debridement of the infected wound on the plaintiff's thigh. In operations performed on 5 July 1989 and 21 July 1989 Dr
Krishna, a plastic surgeon, used a muscle flap from the plaintiff's biceps and skin from the left thigh to cover the fracture site, the plate and a large raw area on the front of the right thigh extending into the groin and to remove necrotic soft tissue.

The plaintiff was first seen by Dr Manohar, a rehabilitation expert, on 14
August 1989. By 16 August 1989 the plaintiff was able to ambulate on crutches.
A long leg caliper had been applied to assist ambulation. The plaintiff wore the caliper for about eighteen months. He found the caliper "pretty awkward" and the caliper caused chafing to the skin.

On 16 August 1989 the plaintiff was transferred to the Lawrence Hargrave
Hospital for extensive physiotherapy, occupational therapy and rehabilitation.
The plaintiff remained at the Lawrence Hargrave Hospital for about a month. He said in evidence "they couldn't do much for me".

In his report admitted into evidence Dr Elliott described the plaintiff's post-operative course as "stormy". Dr Elliott noted that chronic infection of the right femur occurred. The plaintiff said in his evidence that he suffered from infection of the blood and tissues in the leg and also from osteomyelitis. On 25 January 1991 the plate and screws were removed from the plaintiff's femur and the infection in his leg then gradually subsided. The plaintiff wore a caliper again between January and March 1991.

In October 1989 the plaintiff had become a patient of Dr Lenehan, a general practitioner. In his report of 25 June 1991 Dr Lenehan noted that the plaintiff's wounds had been continually discharging blood and pus and his right leg and foot had been swelling. Between his discharge from the Lawrence
Hargrave Hospital and his attempted return to work in January 1990, the plaintiff was able to do "virtually nothing". He found it very difficult to sleep. He found that he had "lost a lot of memory" and his concentration was impaired.

In January 1990 the plaintiff made an attempt to do clerical work with the defendant. The plaintiff found that if he sat at a desk his right leg became swollen. The modesty board of the desk at which the plaintiff was sitting was cut out and a stool placed in such a position that the plaintiff could sit with his leg elevated on the stool. The plaintiff found that his "memory and concentration were very bad". In February 1990 the plaintiff had a fall which caused him increased pain in his leg and he has had a number of falls since.

In about the middle of 1991 the plaintiff began working for the defendant operating a vertical saw. The job involved standing and sitting and the plaintiff's pain kept getting worse. Finally, Dr Lenehan certified that the plaintiff was unfit for work. Since then the plaintiff has not done any work for the defendant or for anyone else.

According to the plaintiff's wife's evidence, in late 1991 the plaintiff took his first steps without using crutches or a caliper. In early 1992 the plaintiff was referred to Dr Steward, a specialist in pain management. Dr
Steward considered that the plaintiff had two sorts of pain; one in the upper leg which was probably a nerve entrapment and one in the lower leg, which was possibly a reflex sympathetic dystrophy. Dr Steward performed three procedures with a view to relieving pain: a nerve entrapment injection, a lumbarsympathetic block and a right sympathectomy at the level of L3-L4 but none of these accorded the plaintiff any relief from pain.

In April 1992 the plaintiff began hydrotherapy and found that it gave him some relief. He has continued to carry on his own hydrotherapy at his mother-in- law's swimming pool.

The plaintiff's wife had not intended to have any children. However, she thought that having a child might give the plaintiff an interest in life. She became pregnant and on 30 June 1992 gave birth to a son. The plaintiff is attached to his son.

Before the birth of the child the plaintiff's wife had stopped living with him all the time. However, the relationship between them has remained amicable and she still spends a lot of time with the plaintiff, visiting him almost daily.

In 1994 the plaintiff saw a psychiatrist, Dr Kaplan, and he later on underwent psychological testing. In 1995 Dr Elliott had retired. Dr Lenehan referred the plaintiff to Dr Courtenay, an orthopaedic surgeon in Sydney.

The plaintiff's employment by the defendant was not formally terminated until
March 1996. The plaintiff has talked to people about jobs and has looked in the local newspaper for jobs but he does not think that there is any job he can do. The only work he has ever done has been physical work. He does not think that he has the concentration to do clerical work or any course or work involving study. He has not applied for a job or registered with the
Commonwealth Employment Service.

The plaintiff said in his evidence that he still constantly experiences pain in his right leg from the knee to the ankle. The pain interferes with his sleeping. In cold weather the plaintiff's right foot becomes very cold. The plaintiff can no longer ride a motorcycle but can drive a modified car. He has driven to Sydney to keep medical appointments with doctors in Sydney. However his wife said in her evidence that on these trips the plaintiff has to stop frequently and that after the trip he is tired and cranky. The plaintiff cannot run. He is able to walk for some distance even without his walking stick, but not on unfamiliar terrain or on sloping ground or on steps. When he walks he has to keep his leg stiff and his gait is peculiar. He wears a special type of shoe which was recommended to him by Dr Manohar. The plaintiff is unable to do any rock fishing, although he has done some fishing from a boat. His sexual relationship with his wife is not as good as it was before the accident. He does a little gardening, sitting down. From time to time he sits by himself in a dark room.

The plaintiff sees Dr Lenehan every two to three months. The only medication he is currently taking is Panadeine Forte and fluid tablets. He has a massage once a week, which gives him some benefit.

The plaintiff suffers from irritation in his left leg, from which skin was taken for the plastic surgery on his right knee. As previously indicated, he also received a blow in the left leg at the time of the accident but he said in evidence that, apart from the irritation from the scarring from the skin graft, he does not presently have any trouble with his left leg.

In cross-examination it was suggested to the plaintiff by counsel for the defendant that there were various sorts of jobs the plaintiff might be able to do but the plaintiff replied that he thought he would be unable to do any of the jobs, on such grounds as his pain, his inability to stand for long, his poor memory or his inability to concentrate.

The plaintiff's wife operates a flower stall selling artificial flowers in a local market four days a week. The plaintiff sometimes goes and sits near his wife's stall. He said that on occasions, but "not real often", when his wife is away from the stall temporarily for a few minutes, he has served a customer. While the plaintiff's wife is temporarily away from the stall, other stall holders maintain a watch on her stall.

The plaintiff's de facto wife, Tonette Dodd, gave evidence in the plaintiff's case. She described the plaintiff before the accident as happy-go-lucky, well motivated and the person who between the two of them made the decisions for them and the person who attended to payment of household bills. Since the accident the plaintiff appeared to his wife to be vague, forgetful and without any drive or sense of humour. Since she stopped living all the time with the plaintiff she has continued to visit him almost daily. She said, "He gets depressed all of the time. He does not seem to have any motivation. He is defeated." 
The plaintiff's wife said that the plaintiff suffers from cramps while he is sleeping and will get up at night screaming. His eyes always look bloodshot because he never gets enough sleep and when the plaintiff has marital intercourse the plaintiff is in a great deal of pain. She said that the plaintiff might visit the flower stall sometimes once or twice a week, sometimes three or four times a day. She said that the plaintiff did not generally help with selling flowers and otherwise did nothing to help her in conducting the stall.

Dr Lenehan, the plaintiff's general practitioner, gave oral evidence in the plaintiff's case. Dr Lenehan said that he recommended the massage for the plaintiff's leg which the plaintiff is receiving, because by stimulating and stretching the muscles in the plaintiff's leg the massage is helping his mobility and keeping his pain down. Massage also helped the plaintiff's mental state. Dr Lenehan considered the plaintiff's mental state had deteriorated dramatically.
 "He has just become very vague, very depressed, very wihdrawn, very negative about life in general. Nothing has anything for him. His only function in life has been virtually to sit at home and watch the child. Not being able to participate in other physical activities, picking up the child through to just playing ball with him, is a major psychological setback. His self image is totally shot. He has no quality of life as he sees it, and that's one of the major things, his depression from his injury. He is no longer a whole human." 
Dr Lenehan said that the nerves in the plaintiff's leg had been damaged.
 "The nerves and the arteries of the leg were totally gouged out. He is actually missing part of his artery." 
Any sort of further injury to the plaintiff's leg, even trivial, could cause significant further pain for the plaintiff. As regards the plaintiff's sleeping, Dr Lenehan said - "What happens to Mr Ziebell is that his depression has got him so down his normal sleep pattern is totally disturbed...People who are depressed have very poor sleep patterns and also don't have the normal mental stimulation of the day...He has nothing to do. His mind just wanders all day, then by night time there is not enough to actually get him to sleep." 
Colder weather would cause the plaintiff particular difficulty because the muscles and nerves are covered only by a thin layer of skin, and without fat protection the nerves are very susceptible to cold. It is difficult for the plaintiff to move about on irregular surfaces, because the plaintiff has no real ability to correct himself if he slips, even slightly. The plaintiff does not have the ability to manipulate steps confidently. The plaintiff would present as a high risk employee to any employer because of the high risk of further injury. Dr Lenehan gave evidence about the likelihood of problems developing in other parts of the plaintiff's body. He said - "If we're talking about the low back I expect within ten years he will have pain problems, premature arthritis and wear and tear of the lower back. His biomechanics is - the way he walks from the muscles and the bones is now abnormal, so there are going to be abnormal stresses and strains on joints.
They wear out. The cartilage that protects the joints is good for a couple of years, then it will wear, and when the bone grinds bone on bone we have pain.
 ...

The hip will definitely go and in a very short time because of the strain of having to walk the way he does, and then the other hip is also under threat because it's got to take anything up to 90 percent of the weight at different times, so again his biomechanics is all out of kilter. So the joints are going to wear abnormally very much like cars wear abnormally if they're out of alignment." 
Dr Lenehan considered the plaintiff is unable to work. He had on two occasions referred the plaintiff to Dr Manohar, the rehabilitation expert. There was no further medical action which would help the plaintiff gain any extra function.
It would be difficult for the plaintiff to work in a shop, because even prolonged sitting would cause pain. It was put to Dr Lenehan in cross- examination that the plaintiff might be able to obtain work as an attendant at a car park. Dr Lenehan replied - "From my experience of that job I still say he would have great difficulties.
If he was just sitting in a booth, the fact that those carparks are extremely cold, he is going to get nerve and muscle and bone pains related to cold. He is in a double bind, he needs to move a bit to keep the activity but if he sits for too long he will get pains from lack of movement, but then if he is expected to walk all over a carpark checking cars, I would say he is not going to be capable of that." 
Dr Lenehan was then asked - "So he might be suited to the job if he could remain in the booth collecting the parking fees but not if he had to travel around the carpark?" 
He replied - "If it was a booth of this size he would be in trouble because the leg is not going to tolerate confined spaces, he is still going to need to move the leg gently and passively." 
He was asked, "What about a job driving", and he replied - "I would say he probably would start experiencing pain if he was having to do anything like getting in and out of a car or alight from a truck frequently, it's going to put strain in the leg; the twisting and the pushing off to get into and out of a car with his right leg will cause him pain in a fairly short time." 
In 1994 the plaintiff was seen by Dr Robert Kaplan, consultant psychiatrist.
In his report of 18 November 1994 Dr Kaplan noted a history given by the plaintiff's wife of the plaintiff undergoing a complete change of personality since the accident. Since the accident the plaintiff had been depressed, apathetic, moody and indifferent. Dr Kaplan considered that the most notable feature of his interview of the plaintiff was the plaintiff's "baffled, muddled comprehension. He frequently had difficulties understanding my questions and appeared to have very poor concentration." Dr Kaplan concluded that - "from a psychiatric point of view...there was evidence of marked emotional blunting, loss of initiative and difficulty in comprehending new information." 
Dr Kaplan thought that the plaintiff could be suffering from either an organic personality disorder or a severe depressive illness but that further investigations would have to be carried out before any definite conclusion could be reached. There was no further report from Dr Kaplan.

Mr Peter Rawling, clinical neuropsychologist, who made a neuropsychological assessment of the plaintiff in April 1995, considered that the plaintiff's memory failure was psychogenic and that the plaintiff's passivity, lack of drive and growing dependence on his wife were symptomatic of depression. Mr
Wenzel, clinical and consultant psychologist, considered that the plaintiff did not appear to have suffered any long lasting cognitive deficits as a result of his head injury. However - "Given the severity of his depression, his chronic pain, his disfigurement reaction and overall coping with life in general, I consider Mr Ziebell's prognosis as being very poor. This relates both to his capacity for future work and also his life in general." 
Dr Dyball, a psychiatrist who saw the plaintiff on behalf of the defendant on March 1995, found assessing the plaintiff "extremely difficult". The plaintiff was "not a particularly articulate man". The plaintiff was not accompanied by his wife at the interview with Dr Dyball and Dr Dyball did not have the assistance of receiving a history from her. Nor did he have the results of any neurological investigation of the plaintiff. I prefer the views of Dr Kaplan to the views of Dr Dyball that "on the surface (the plaintiff) seems to be coping" and that the plaintiff "shows no signs of undue anxiety or depression".

In a report dated 24 January 1995 Professor Richard Jones from the Department of Rehabilitative Medicine at Prince Henry Hospital concluded, inter alia: "Mr Ziebell suffered very severe injuries to his right leg in an alleged industrial accident on 6.6.89. There was substantial loss of tissue from the anterior compartment of the right thigh, causing failure of knee extension, and there are probable injuries to nerves supplying the distal right leg, resulting in weakness and altered sensation. In addition, he has a marked gait abnormality because of the failure of extension of the right knee in the swing phase of ambulation. There are major cosmetic abnormalities and a pain syndrome has developed." 
I have taken into account the other medical evidence in the case, including the reports of Dr Courtenay, Dr Henke, Dr Wilding and Dr Bodel. I have already summarised the evidence of the plaintiff, his wife and the medical witnesses.
Without attempting to be exhaustive, I will summarise some of the more salient aspects of the evidence which I accept.

The plaintiff suffered a severe crush fracture to his right femur and extensive soft tissue injuries in the accident on 6 June 1989. The right femoral artery, vein and nerves were severed. He also received a blow to his left leg and a head injury. He lost consciousness. He was admitted to hospital and underwent operations on his leg by an orthopaedic surgeon, a general surgeon and a plastic surgeon. Later he spent about a month in a rehabilitation hospital. He suffered from continuing infection to his leg until after a plate, which had been inserted by the orthopaedic surgeon in an operation in June 1989, was removed in January 1991. The plaintiff has a permanent loss of a high percentage of the use of his right leg. He has some percentage loss of the use of his left leg. The plaintiff is able to walk unassisted, but generally uses a stick. He is unable to walk unassisted on unfamiliar ground or on ground which is not regular or on steps. When the plaintiff walks he has a right foot drop and he walks with a peculiar gait. He is at risk of falling and suffering further injury to his leg. Because of the biomechanical strains imposed by his leg injuries, he is likely to develop arthritis, which will be painful, in his back and hips and other parts of his body. The plaintiff's right leg is seriously disfigured and the plaintiff is self conscious about the appearance of the leg. The plaintiff has suffered and will continue to suffer from severe pain in the right leg.

Since the accident the plaintiff has suffered from poor memory, inability to concentrate, disturbed sleeping patterns and severe depression. The plaintiff is unable to take part in sports and outdoor pastimes such as golf and rock fishing, activities which he enjoyed before the accident.

As regards damages for non-economic loss, counsel for the plaintiff submitted the plaintiff's case represented up to eighty per cent of a most extreme case and hence the plaintiff should be awarded up to eighty per cent of $180,000, the maximum amount. Counsel for the defendant conceded the plaintiff's case represented more than fifty per cent of a most extreme case. I consider that I should find the plaintiff to be seventy per cent of a most extreme case and I award $126,000 as damages for non-economic loss.

It was agreed that past out-of-pocket expenses amounted to $83,671.81, which had been paid by the defendant under the [Workers' Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), and a further amount of $368 which had not been paid, making a total amount for past out-of-pocket expenses of $84,039.81.

It was agreed that damages for past loss of earning capacity would be $175,940.47, unless I found that in the past the plaintiff had had some residual earning capacity which he had failed to exercise. I was informed that the sum of $175,940.47 took into account amounts which the plaintiff had earned working for the defendant after the accident, doing clerical work or operating the saw. In my opinion the plaintiff has not in the past had any residual earning capacity which he failed to exercise and hence damages for past loss of earning capacity will be $175,940.47.

It was agreed that damages payable under the principle in Fox versus Wood were $20,329.87.

It was agreed that damages for future loss of earning capacity should be assessed on the basis that the plaintiff was at present forty-one years old, that if he had not been injured he would have worked to age sixty-five, a period of twenty-four years, that the amount the plaintiff would have been earning should be taken to be $596 net per week, that the multiplier is 737.9 or 737.8 and that a discount for contingencies of at least fifteen per cent should be allowed. Counsel for the plaintiff contended that the plaintiff had no residual earning capacity and that the discount for contingencies should be limited to fifteen per cent. Counsel for the defendant contended that I should find that the plaintiff has some limited residual earning capacity and that I should give effect to such a finding by increasing the reduction for contingencies to twenty-five or thirty per cent. Counsel for the defendant pointed to evidence that since he last did any work for the defendant the plaintiff has not applied for any job or registered with the Commonwealth
Employment Service. Counsel referred to [s
L](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151l.html) of the [Workers' Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), while conceding that there was no evidence that the plaintiff had been made aware that he was required to take the steps set out in subs (2) of [s
L](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151l.html) (see [s
L(3)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151l.html) 
Counsel for the defendant also sought to rely on some parts of the report of
Dr Courtenay, the orthopaedic surgeon to whom Dr Lenehan had referred the plaintiff in 1995. Dr Courtenay believed that far more attention should be placed on the plaintiff's rehabilitation and on attempting to get him back to some sort of useful employment. Dr Courtenay thought that the "rehabilitation people" and Dr Lenehan had been frustrated in dealing with the plaintiff.
Although the relevant part of Dr Courtenay's report is garbled, he does appear to express the view that there were some things the plaintiff could do vocationally on a part-time basis.

I have reached the conclusion that the plaintiff has no residual earning capacity or, alternatively, that his residual earning capacity is so slight that it is already allowed for in a discount for contingencies of fifteen per cent. A discount for contingencies as high as fifteen per cent, although conventional, is by no means obligatory. The psychological testing of the plaintiff by Mr Wenzel showed the plaintiff to have a low average intelligence quotient of about 84. He left school at fifteen: He has no formal educational training. Before the accident he had only ever worked as a labourer or as a factory worker doing physical work. He is clearly incapable of doing physical work. The plaintiff spends much of his time sitting with his leg elevated to relieve the continual pain, yet from time to time he needs to stand and move around and gently exercise the leg, and this "double bind," as Dr Lenehan described it, would make it difficult for the plaintiff to work in a sitting down job in a confined space. Within the next few years the plaintiff is likely to develop arthritis in his hips and knees. I accept Dr Lenehan's evidence that the plaintiff is very vague, very depressed, very withdrawn and very negative. He suffers from memory loss and inability to concentrate and has shown that he has little aptitude for clerical work. The plaintiff would be unable to work at any premises which had slippery or irregular floors or which required him to go up and down steps. If the plaintiff was to apply for a job he would present badly at an interview. Dr Kaplan in his report said that the most notable feature of his interview with the plaintiff was the plaintiff's "baffled, muddled comprehension". Having observed the plaintiff giving evidence, I would fully accept this part of Dr Kaplan's report. Any prospective employer would have to take into account the risk if he employed the plaintiff of the plaintiff falling or bumping himself and suffering a further injury. I am satisfied that the plaintiff goes and sits near his wife's flower stall for something to do and for company and that he does very little by way of assisting his wife to conduct the stall.

The plaintiff has undergone appropriate medical treatment. He has attended a rehabilitation hospital and he has made two post injury attempts to work for the defendant. Although Dr Courtenay thought that there were some occupations the plaintiff could follow on a part-time basis, Dr Lenehan did not hold out any hopes of the plaintiff obtaining employment. Dr Bracken, an orthopaedic surgeon who saw the plaintiff in 1991, thought that it was probable that the plaintiff would remain permanently unemployed. Professor Jones considered the plaintiff's capacity for work was severely adversely affected, that substantial clerical duties were beyond the plaintiff's educational capacity and that the plaintiff would have problems adapting to menial work in an office. Mr Wenzel, psychologist, thought the prognosis for the plaintiff's capacity for future work was very poor. I assess damages for future loss of earning capacity at $373,820.

At the conclusion of the hearing I directed that counsel should lodge written submissions in relation to claims for future out-of-pocket expenses, the cost of future handyman's and gardener's assistance, domestic assistance, and cost of home improvements necessitated by the accident. Counsel for the plaintiff lodged written submissions. Counsel for the defendant replied, stating that he accepted that the items claimed by the plaintiff were reasonable. I accordingly allow those items as set out by the plaintiff.

Future out-of-pocket expenses should be allowed as follows: Remedial massage $26,544; general practitioner visits $2,566; pharmaceutical expenses $5,666; special footwear $13,626; other medical expenses $15,000; costs for further surgery $25,000; psychological counselling $5,440; occupational therapy $18,000.

Handyman's and gardener's assistance: Handyman $11,060, gardener $14,546.

I allow gratuitous domestic assistance as follows: Past gratuitous domestic assistance $7,503.61; future gratuitous domestic assistance $19,598.32; home improvement expenses $10,000.

I have assessed various heads of damages as follows: Non-economic loss $126,000.00 
Past out-of-pocket expenses $84,039.81 
Past loss of earning capacity $175,940.47 
Fox versus Wood $20,329.87 
Future loss of earning capacity $373,820.00 
Future out of pockets $111,842.00 
Handyman and gardener $25,606.00 
Gratuitous domestic assistance $27,101.93 
Home improvement expenses $10,000.00 
There will have to be a deduction for Workers' Compensation paid to or for the plaintiff, and it may be that I have not yet taken into account some item or items which should be taken into account. I will accordingly not yet attempt to direct entry of judgment for any particular figure. If there is no application for a different costs order, there will be an order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs.
 (End of original judgment) 
Since giving my initial judgment I have been informed by junior counsel for the plaintiff that the parties are agreed, consistently with the findings in my initial judgment, that the total amount of the various heads of damages awarded in my initial judgment is $954,680.08. From this amount a total amount of $280,345.56 should be deducted as representing workers compensation, producing a figure of $674,334.52 and that to this amount should be added an amount of $29,251.75 being interest which it is agreed is properly payable in accordance with the Workers Compensation Act, with the consequence that the total amount for which judgment for the plaintiff should be entered is $703,586.27.
 * * * 
