

Regina versus Bell Matter No Cca 60582/98 [1998] NSWSC 570 (8 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
REGINA versus PHILIP HAROLD BELL 
CCA 60582/98 October 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Abadee J, Ireland J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
HEADNOTE 
The appellant appeals from two interlocutory judgments. The first rejected an application for a permanent stay of trial, on the basis that pre-trial publicity would deny him a fair trial. The second rejected an application for separate trials of courts in the indictment.

Held:
The kind of publicity in question is capable of having an impact on potential jurors. However, there are mechanisms by which such impact can be ameliorated. This was not the extreme case in which, by reason of the cumulative effect of the publicity, the accused would be denied a fair trial.
See Glennon <case>; [(1992) 173 CLR 592] at 605-606; Ivan Milat NSWCCA 26 February 1998. There was no error in the exercise of discretion by his Honour. The experience of trial judges is that jurors approach their task in accordance with the oath they take, that they listen to directions they are given and implement them:
Glennon <case>; [(1991-92) 173 CLR 592] at 603 per Mason CJ and Toohey J; Hinch versus Attorney-
General (Vic) (No 2) <case>; [(1987-88) 164 CLR 15] at 74, per Toohey J; Murphy <case>; [(1988-89) 167 CLR 94] at 99, per Mason CJ and Toohey J; Yuill [(1993) 69
ACrimR 450] at 453-454; R versus VPH NSWCCA 4 March 1994. The trial judge correctly applied these principles.
As to the second judgment his Honour's discretion did not miscarry.

Order 
Appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus Philip Harold BELL 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: This matter comes before the court pursuant to the provisions of [s5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) seeking leave to appeal from two interlocutory judgments of Judge Davidson of the District Court. The judge has provided a certificate pursuant to [s5F(3)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) referring in general terms to the nature of the judgments and the contentions that are made to challenge those judgments. The certificate is as follows: "[Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) 
R -v- Phillip Harold Bell 
In the District Court held at Sydney 
Judge's certificate [(s.5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) (b)) 
The 8th day of October 1998 
I hereby certify that the annexed judgments are proper ones for the determination on appeal by the Court of Criminal Appeal upon the following grounds:- 
A. Application for permanent stay
The trial of the accused on 38 counts is now due to commence on Monday October next. The length of the trial has been variously estimated but it seems that it is likely to take some 5 to 6 weeks. There is another trial due to commence against the accused on 4 January 1999 involving three complainants. It is the intention of the Crown to mount up to ten trials if that course becomes necessary. It is convenient that the question of a permanent stay be determined at the outset since this will affect the trials listed and pending.
I have rejected the accused's application that the indictment be permanently stayed and my judgment is challenged.

B. Application for separate trial of counts in the indictment
The indictment proposed to be presented by the Crown contains 38 counts consisting of various forms of sexual offences alleged to have been committed against five named persons.
The Crown in addition to the five complainants proposes to call two additional witnesses to give evidence in respect of these charges pursuant to
S97 or S98 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) and further submits that in respect of each of the charges or groups of charges in respect of each complainant the evidence of the other complainants will be admissible on the same basis. 
I have held that the evidence is admissible pursuant to S97 of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) and that I am satisfied that there is no reasonable explanation consistent with innocence either on the basis of collusion or otherwise for rejecting that evidence.
Accordingly and notwithstanding the complexity of the indictment involving as it does 38 charges, I have held that the application for separate trial of the counts in the indictment fails (see S365(2) Crimes Act).
My judgment is challenged.

C. It is contended that I have erred in law and/or fact in relation to the above matters.

Judge." 
The first of the matters raised before us was a judgment delivered this morning in which his Honour rejected an application made on behalf of the accused for a permanent stay. In submissions to this Court, Mr Webb of Counsel made it clear that the basis for the permanent stay was that the pre-trial publicity that had occurred over a considerable period of time, at least from to date, was such that the accused could never get a fair trial.

The trial is set down for Monday of next week. It is of significance that nothing said in this Court should cause further prejudice to a fair trial, or indeed go beyond that and ground yet another application of this character next Monday. Those who report these proceedings and this judgment should do so with caution.

In these circumstances it is not necessary for me to set out the considerable volume of media publicity which was before his Honour in the form of an affidavit of the solicitor for the applicant and also video tapes, three of which have been played to this Court. A number of the exhibits before his
Honour have been handed up to the court. Counsel for the applicant did not question, other than in one typographical respect, the summary of the publicity that is contained in Judge Davidson's judgment handed down this morning. It indicates a considerable range of prejudicial (some extremely prejudicial) material over the period of time from 1993, much of which unquestionably pre-judges the guilt of the accused, which has yet to be determined.

This kind of publicity is unquestionably capable of having an impact on persons who constitute juries. However, there are mechanisms by which such impact can be ameliorated.

The nature of this application for leave to appeal is that it would constitute an appeal from a discretionary judgment of Judge Davidson. There are well- known limitations on the preparedness of a court of criminal appeal to interfere with the exercise of a judge's discretion in matters of this character. It is essential that decisions of an interlocutory character are allowed to proceed so that the course of criminal justice in this State is not interfered with unduly by continuing appeals from interlocutory decisions. Be that as it may, as a test, even a higher standard would, in my opinion, be satisfied in this case.

His Honour in his reasons for decision set out in full the relevant principles. No challenge has been made to the principles as his Honour expounded them. The cases on which his Honour relied are the appropriate cases. In particular, the judgment in Glennon <case>; [(1992) 173 CLR 592], to which his Honour referred, and also the judgment in
Yuill [(1993) 69 ACrimR 450] @ -454, to which his Honour also referred. They set out the relevant principles. His Honour has given every indication that they are the principles that he has applied.

Before this Court a number of matters were referred to as indicating an error of the relevant character affecting the exercise of his Honour's discretion and sufficient to enliven this Court to exercise the discretion afresh.

The first was that his Honour had made a reference to the mitigating effect of time with respect to at least some of the materials before him. The nature of that reference in his Honour's judgment was as follows: "I accept the submission of the Crown that a great deal of the publicity on which Mr Webb relies is so remote in point of time to mitigate its serious threat to a new trial." 
Some of the material goes back to 1993. Unquestionably it is powerful material of a prejudicial character. Nevertheless, because of the passage of time between 1993 and now, which his Honour described, it is material which is unlikely to be remembered in its detail by potential jurors, notwithstanding the power of it in its original presentation, as shown to this Court in its repetition.

The submission made on behalf of the appellant was to the effect that this publicity ought to be understood as a continuum over the entire period and that jurors would have in mind, in particular, certain specific aspects of the publicity, to which I will come in the next suggested error.

It was suggested that by reason of the cumulative effect of all the publicity, this was the extreme case which has been envisaged in prior decisions.
Reference was made to the decision of the court in Glennon <case>; [(1992) 173 CLR 592], and specifically the following passage @ 605-606: "On the other hand, a permanent stay will only be ordered in an extreme case and there must be a fundamental defect 'of such a nature that nothing that a trial judge can do in the conduct of the trial can relieve against its unfair consequences' (34). And a court of criminal appeal, before it will set aside a conviction on the ground of a miscarriage of justice, requires to be satisfied that there is a serious risk that the pre-trial publicity has deprived the accused of a fair trial. It will determine that question in the light of the evidence as it stands at the time of the trial and in the light of the way in which the trial was conducted, including the steps taken by the trial judge with a view to ensuring a fair trial." 
It was submitted that this was such an extreme case and that there had been no others. Glennon itself involved a Roman Catholic priest who was convicted of a sexual offence against a girl. It was attended by considerable publicity.
One would have thought the extent of publicity, although perhaps not equal to that of this case, was nevertheless of a substantial order.

The matter has also arisen in the context of the case of Ivan Milat. In a decision of this Court delivered on 26 February of this year, but unreported, an appeal was dismissed from the conviction, including a point raised as to the inability of Milat to obtain a fair trial by reason of pre-trial publicity. The then Chief Justice, Gleeson CJ, with whom Meagher JA and Newman
J agreed, dismissed this submission, in the course of which he said: "Some of the arguments advanced by the appellant are tantamount to saying that, in the events that happened, it was impossible for him to receive a fair trial in front of a jury, and that if he could not have a trial without a jury he should never have been put on trial at all. I would reject this. The criminal justice system, of which trial by jury is an integral part, often has to function in circumstances of intense publicity potentially prejudicial to an accused person. Various mechanisms, including, where necessary, proceedings for contempt of court, are available to protect the integrity of the system.
Ultimately, however, it is the capacity of jurors, properly instructed by trial judges, to decide cases by reference to legally admissible evidence and legally relevant arguments, and not otherwise, that is the foundation of the system." 
This raises the second aspect said to have constituted an error in the exercise of discretion by Judge Davidson; which was to the effect that the difficulties in this case could never be mitigated by any direction. This submission particularly relied on two themes in the material which was before
Judge Davidson. First, the jury would be aware of prior convictions on similar matters and, secondly, that there were many more charges than the five complaints which were the subject of charges before Judge Davidson.

I am by no means satisfied that potential jurors will recollect matters with that degree of detail on the basis of the extent of publicity to which reference has been made. In any event, jurors are by direction enjoined to deal only with the evidence before them and which has been tendered in court.

These are matters of considerable significance in the proper administration of justice and in recent years the prior tendency to regard jurors as exceptionally fragile and prone to prejudice has not carried the day in appellate courts. This is based on a considerable body of experience by trial judges in the criminal justice system which has convinced trial judges that the jurors approach their task in accordance with the oath they take, that they listen to the directions they are given and implement them.

The matter arose, for example, in Glennon, where in the joint judgment of
Mason CJ and Toohey J the following appears @ 603: "Likewise, the suggestion that there was a substantial risk that at least one juror would have acquired knowledge, before the verdict was given, of the respondent's prior conviction was again a matter of mere conjecture or speculation. The mere possibility that such knowledge may have been acquired by a juror during the trial is not a sufficient basis for concluding that the accused did not have a fair trial or that there was a miscarriage of justice.
Something more must be shown. The possibility that a juror might acquire irrelevant and prejudicial information is inherent in a criminal trial. The law acknowledges the existence of that possibility but proceeds on the footing that the jury, acting in conformity with the instructions given to them by the trial judge, will render a true verdict in accordance with the evidence." 
As Toohey J observed in Hinch versus Attorney-General (Vic) (No 2) <case>; [(1987-88) 164 CLR 15] @ 74: "It may also be that earlier decisions have given too little weight to the capacity of jurors to assess critically what they see and hear and their ability to reach decisions by reference to the evidence before them." 
Similar issues arose in the context of the trial involving the murder of Anita
Cobby in the case of Murphy versus The Queen <case>; [(1988-89) 167 CLR 94], where in the joint judgment of Mason CJ and Toohey J, their Honours referred to the ability of a court to take various steps to overcome the effects of media publicity in what they describe as "sensational" cases and went on to say @ 99: "It may be that in a particular case none of these remedies will be fully effective. But it is misleading to think that, because a juror has heard something of the circumstances giving rise to the trial, the accused has lost the opportunity of an indifferent jury. The matter was put this way by the
Ontario Court of Appeal in Reg. versus Hubbert ((1975) [29 CCC 2d 279] at 291): 'In this era of rapid dissemination of news by the various media, it would be naive to think that in the case of a crime involving considerable notoriety, it would be possible to select 12 jurors who had not heard anything about the case. Prior information about a case, and even the holding of a tentative opinion about it, does not make partial a juror sworn to render a true verdict according to the evidence'." 
Furthermore, in the case of Yuill his Honour Kirby ACJ said the following @ -454: "Courts will assume that jurors, properly instructed, will accept and conform to the direction of the trial judge to decide the case solely on the evidence placed before them in the court: see Demirok <case>; [(1977) 137 CLR 20] @ 22. There is an increasing body of judicial opinion, lately expressed, to the effect that whatever pre-trial publicity exists, jurors when they take on the solemn responsibility of the performance of their duties in the courtroom, differentiate between gossip, rumour, news and opinion which they hear before the case and the evidence which they hear in the court in the trial for which they are empanelled. Judge Herron made observations in this case which indicate that such is his conviction and experience. His Honour's expression of opinion parallels that of many other judges." 
I agree with the remarks of Kirby ACJ.

In the present case Judge Davidson expressed the same views (after having referred) in the course of his judgment to some of the authorities to which I have referred in the following conclusion: "I am also constrained by authority to hold that the presumption that jurors will conscientiously abide by directions of law given to them must apply." 
A similar case arose in R versus VPH, an unreported judgment of this Court of 4
March 1994. It involved an amount of extremely prejudicial publicity a few years before the trial relating to the proposed trial, in which the accused was in charge of a children's home in Sydney, involving allegations of gross sexual and physical abuse perpetrated by the then appellant. As can be seen from the name of the case, it occurred at a time when the identity of the appellant was regarded as a matter that should not be published.

In that case Judge Armitage, also a judge of the District Court, heard an application for a permanent stay of proceedings on the same lines as that with which this Court is here concerned. Gleeson CJ, with whom Newman and Sully JJ agreed, indicated as follows: "The pre-trial publicity to which I have made earlier reference occurred back in 1988 and 1989. It was extremely prejudicial in its content. The possibility that the appellant might have been innocent of the charges made against him does not seem to have been given even fleeting consideration by the media when they reported the allegations. There is however, and regrettably, nothing particularly unusual about prejudicial pre-trial publicity and the delay that has elapsed for other reasons between the time of the publicity and the present will go a long way towards eliminating this adverse effect.

The jury will be given appropriate directions to confine their attention to the evidence that is put before them. Our entire system of the administration of criminal justice depends upon the assumption that jurors understand and comply with directions of that character." 
In my opinion, with respect to this first subject of appeal the trial the trial judge applied the relevant principles. I can see no error in the way he has either expressed those principles or in his application of them to the present case.

For these reasons, leave should be refused with respect to the first matter.

The second judgment of his Honour involved an application for separate trials of counts in the indictment. The written submissions which were filed in the court, and which were elaborated on to some degree orally, stated that his
Honour had erred in holding that the probative value of the additional complainants in the trial - that is, additional to one complainant, there being five - outweighed the prejudice occasioned to the accused, because of the inference that could be drawn by the jury in terms of tendency of the accused.

These submissions were made to his Honour. His Honour was well aware of the need to exercise the discretion in accordance with the principles now reflected in s101(2) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). The question of whether or not evidence has a prejudicial value which outweighs its probative value is a matter of judgment. No aspect of his Honour's weighing of the matters has been referred to as indicating error of the character which allowed his discretion to miscarry.

I have read his Honour's reasons. His Honour seems to have dealt with the matter in accordance with the provisions of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) and proper authority. I can discern no ground for interfering with the exercise by his
Honour of his discretion. This ground of appeal also fails.

I am of the opinion that leave to appeal should be refused.

ABADEE J: I agree. 
IRELAND J: I also agree. (Mr Tedeschi submitted that under s5F once the applicant had a certificate from the judge, he did not require leave. The court had to deal with the appeal.) 
SPIGELMAN CJ: There were certain references I made during the course of my reasons to leave to appeal. Mr Tedeschi of Counsel has indicated that once there is a certificate pursuant to s5F(3), questions of leave do not arise. I did indicate at the outset of my reasons that the certificate purported to be a certificate of that character. 
Section 5F(3)(b) states that a person may appeal if either the court gives leave under s5F(3)(a) or under (b): "... if the judge of the court of trial certifies that the judgment or order is a proper one for determination on appeal." 
The certificate I have incorporated in my reasons for decision does contain a certificate that the annexed judgments are proper for determination on appeal.
So I would withdraw use of the word "purported". Mr Tedeschi was correct to draw my attention to the fact that leave was not required.

None of the reasons I have outlined earlier turn on the question of leave. The basis for the intervention of the court in terms of interfering with the exercise of a discretion by a judge are well established and the limitations are well-known.

For the reasons I have given, no error of that character has been identified in either of his Honour's judgments.

Accordingly, the order of the court is that the appeal will be dismissed.
 * * * 
