

National Australia Bank Ltd versus Woods and Ors Matter No 13254/96 [1997]
NSWSC 275 (29 July 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
National Australia Bank Limited versus Woods & Ors /96 July 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /96 - National Australia Bank Limited versus Woods & Ors 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 25 July 1996. There are five defendants. The claims made by the plaintiff arise out of financial accommodation provided to R & D M Woods Pty Limited (the company). The plaintiff alleges default pursuant to a Guarantee and Indemnity (the Guarantee) dated 29 August 1994. Default judgment has been entered. The default judgment as against the first, second and fifth defendants took effect on 12 December 1996. The judgment as against the third defendant took effect on 30 October 1996. The default judgment as against the fourth defendant took effect on 30 September 1996. The judgments entered against the third, fourth and fifth defendants relate to a monetary sum. Application has been made by these defendants to have the default judgment set aside. The Notice of Motion was filed on 8 April 1997. 
Whilst a number of affidavits have been filed, the volume of the material placed before the Court is relatively scant. The third, fourth and fifth defendants (the defendants) have sworn affidavits and have been cross- examined. There are affidavits from their solicitor. The plaintiff relies on an affidavit sworn by Mr Linton (which annexes a copy of the Guarantee and a
Historical Company Extract search). Exhibits have been tendered.

Due execution of the Guarantee is not in issue. It seems that the defendants knew that they were signing a Guarantee of the financial obligations of the company to the plaintiff. None of them has said that they did not understand the nature of a Guarantee. Each of them executed the Guarantee in the office of Mr Cluff (a solicitor). He provided them with some explanation as to its contents. The defendants had an understanding that, in the event of default by the company, a sale of the assets of the company and of the home of their parents would satisfy the indebtedness to the plaintiff. Their execution of the Guarantee was witnessed by Mr Cluff. He provided a, "Certificate from guarantor's solicitor" in the following terms:- "* I certify that I am a legal practitioner instructed and employed by this guarantor independently of the Bank and the customer.
 * I certify that I explained the effect of this guarantee and indemnity to the guarantor who appeared to be aware of and understand the obligations of the guarantor under this guarantee and indemnity, and executed it in my presence." 
In the affidavits, the defendants set out their respective versions of the circumstances in which the Guarantee came to be executed by them. The affidavits set out other matters relating to their personal circumstances which are advanced in support of a claim for relief pursuant to the Contracts
Review Act, 1980 (the Act). This is the only arguable defence and/or cross- claim advanced on behalf of each of them.

The third, fourth and fifth defendants are children of the first and second defendants. At least two of them are married with their own families.

During the period between 1981 and 1997, each of the three defendants was a director of the company. Each of them holds a share in the company.

The third defendant was 39 years of age at the time of the execution of the
Guarantee. She describes herself as being a Customer Service Officer. She was an employee of the company and looked after the wages, purchasing and accounts of the company.

The fourth defendant was 41 years of age at the time of the execution of the
Guarantee. He describes himself as being a Purchasing Officer. He was not an employee of the company.

The fifth defendant was 38 years of age at the time of the execution of the
Guarantee. She describes herself as being an Accounts Officer. At the time of the execution of the Guarantee, she was not an employee of the company. Prior thereto, she had been an employee for many years.

I shall now refer to some of the matters which are referred to in the affidavit evidence and relied on as advancing the prospects of obtaining relief under the Act. The reference to these matters is not intended to be exhaustive.

Generally speaking, it is said that the Guarantee was not read, it was a subject of short explanation, there was a lack of independent legal and financial advice and lack of appreciation of the reality of the risk to which they had been exposed.

It is said that the first defendant made the decisions for the company. It is said that the Guarantees were signed following an approach made by him to each of the children. It is said that there was a lack of knowledge as to the amount of the principal debt. It is said that each of them had a lack of business experience.

It seems that Mr Cluff was a solicitor who may have acted for the company and for each of the guarantors. It seems that he may have been well known to members of the family. He is not associated with the plaintiff. The evidence provides minimal information as to the relationship between the plaintiff and the company. It seems that the Guarantee was obtained as part of the process to effect a change of banking arrangements. The principal security given may have been the home of the first and second defendants. Existing arrangements with the Westpac Bank were to be replaced by refinancing from the plaintiff.
During oral evidence, it emerged that the company had carried on a newsagency.
The first defendant had told the third defendant that this was the last chance for the business. Despite what may have been said to the contrary, the three defendants would have had some knowledge of the financial circumstances of the company.

All defendants admit service of the Statement of Claim. In the affidavits, each of the three says that they gave the process to their father who led them to understand that he would see Mr Cluff and sought it all out. The third and fifth defendants said that they assumed that their interests were being looked after until served with a bankruptcy notice. The fourth defendant said that he saw a solicitor called Bob in Mr Cluff's office. He says that he did not file a Defence because he had been told that he "had no defence" and he followed that advice. The present application was brought after service of bankruptcy notices.

Although the evidence is relatively sparse, in respect of certain of this affidavit evidence, a somewhat different picture emerged during the oral evidence. In the light of this material, explanation offered in the affidavits cannot be accepted.

I shall briefly refer to what was said in oral evidence. The served process was referred to Mr Cluff's office. A meeting took place with someone at his office. The meeting was attended by certain members of the family. Advice was given to them. A decision was taken not to defend the proceedings. This decision was reached because of the costs involved and other factors. It was thought that the sale of the parental home would satisfy the plaintiff's debt.
One of the defendants referred to a "plan" during her oral evidence. It appears that the home may have been sold leaving a shortfall. Bankruptcy notices were then issued. The bankruptcy notices led to the three defendants approaching their present solicitor and subsequently, the present application was brought.

The application is resisted on two principal grounds. Firstly, it is said that the alleged defence is utterly hopeless. Secondly, it is said that the default has not been satisfactorily explained.

The Court has a discretionary power to set aside the judgments. The discretion is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case and so that justice is best done between the parties. The applicants bear the onus of satisfying the Court that the power should be exercised in their favour.

It seems to me that, when regard is had to the relevant circumstances of this particular case, the applicants have failed to discharge that onus. I consider that justice is best done between the parties by dismissing the Notice of
Motion.

During the argument, reference was made to various of the decided cases dealing with applications for relief under the Act. It is unnecessary to embark on any consideration of the cases. The approach taken by the Court is well known (see, inter alia, Younan & Anor versus Beneficial Finance
Corporation Limited (Court of Appeal, 21 November 1994)). The making of a decision to exercise the power given under the Act involves two stages. Each case is going to turn on its own particular circumstances.

In this case, the evidence can be described as both sparse and unhelpful. It might be thought that there was a selective presentation of material calculated to convey a certain picture to the Court. The deficiencies in the evidence leave the defendants well short of identifying an arguable defence on the merits. I am not satisfied that the defendants have a bona fide defence on the merits. In these circumstances, it would be futile to grant the relief sought.

The plaintiff puts itself forward as an innocent party. This stance is consistent with the evidence. The material relating to the plaintiff is minimal. The execution of the Guarantee seems to have been part of the process of the plaintiff becoming the new banker to the business. There is no evidence as to knowledge had of the company, its business and/or the family. There is nothing to suggest that it knew of or ought to have known of matters deposed to in the affidavits. Presumably, it required certificates from an independent solicitor. It received Certificates from Mr Cluff (as part of the executed
Guarantee). If the Certificates are incorrect, there is nothing to suggest that it had knowledge or ought to have known that this was the case. On the evidence, it was entitled to rely on the Certificates. The Court is reluctant to exercise its powers against an innocent party (see, inter alia, Beneficial
Finance Corporation Limited versus Karavas [(1991) 23 NSWLR 256] at 277 and Esanda Finance Corporation Limited versus Tong & Ors (Court of Appeal, unreported, 8 May 1997)). I am not satisfied that any of the three defendants have an arguable case for relief under the Act. Indeed, it seems to me that the claims for relief are bound to fail.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The third, fourth and fifth defendants are to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion. The exhibits are to be returned.
 * * * 
