

Portal Software versus Bodsworth [2005] NSWSC 631 (27 June 2005) 
Last Updated: 11 July 2005 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Portal Software versus Bodsworth <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 3250/05  
HEARING DATE{S): 24/06/05  
JUDGMENT DATE: 27/06/2005  
PARTIES: 
Portal Software International Pty Ltd  v 
Jason Bodsworth  
JUDGMENT OF: White J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Plaintiff: R Alkadamani 
Defendant: A Hartcher (sol)  
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff: Haywards 
Defendant: Watkins Tapsell  
CATCHWORDS: 
RESTRAINT OF TRADE - Application for an interlocutory injunction restraining former employee from working on Telstra account while employed by competitor of plaintiff Term in employment contract restraining employee from contacting or dealing with plaintiff's clients - Plaintiff makes specialised software for a small pool of clients - Launch of new product and tender with Telstra pending - Employee provided technical assistance to sales team and was possessed of information which would be very valuable to a competitor -
Evidence that confidential information was disclosed to the new employer -
Whether Restraints of Trade Act applies Construction of clause with reference to business carried on by plaintiff - Held that restraint clause was prima facie reasonable - Balance of convenience favours the plaintiff - Injunction granted.  
ACTS CITED:  [Restraints of Trade Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/)  
DECISION: 
See Para 46 of judgment.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
DUTY JUDGE LIST  
WHITE J  
Monday, 27 June 2005  /05 Portal Software International Pty Ltd versus Jason Bodsworth  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: This is an application by the plaintiff for an interlocutory injunction to restrain a former employee from dealing with one of its customers, Telstra, during the employee's new employment with a competitor.  The plaintiff specialises in providing billing software for the telecommunications market. Portal Software Inc, which I take it is the plaintiff's parent company, markets itself as a mobile provider of billing and revenue management solutions for communications and media companies.  The plaintiff employs software engineers to code and develop Portal software continuously, for use by telecommunications companies in respect of billings and the launching of new products. In Australia, its client pool is small. It has three major customers: Telstra, Optus and Vodafone; and a handful of smaller clients. Each of its contracts with its customers is valuable, ranging in value from between $9 million and $25 million. Telstra is one of its major customers.  On 23 September 2002, Portal Software Inc announced a ten-year licence arrangement which would allow Telstra to launch new online and data products without the need for additional investment and billing infrastructure.  The defendant was employed by the plaintiff as a senior solutions specialist. He entered into his employment contract in about November 2002, to be effective from 1 December 2002. His duties, as outlined in his contract of employment, included providing technical assistance in the plaintiff's making of software sales, by demonstrating the technical and functional components of the plaintiff's products and software. He was initially employed at a salary of $130,000 per annum. He was entitled to participate in a sales incentive plan valued at up to $43,334 per annum, and to be considered for bonuses.  In his last year of employment he received a bonus of about $200,000 before tax.  His contract of employment included the following terms:  "9. Confidentiality and Proprietary Information.  
Exclusivity 
Employee agrees to devote Employee's work time and effort for the exclusive benefit of Company and not to engage in any other professional activity for the duration on this contract without the expressed written approval of the
Company..  
Confidentiality and Non-Competition Undertaking 
Employee shall not directly or indirectly disclose to any person or association, any trade secret or confidential information concerning the business of the Company and its personnel, without the written authorization of the Company.  ...  
Employee expressly agrees that in the event this contract is terminated for any reason by either party, for a period six months from Employee's departure date within the States and Territories of Australia, not to:  ยง Enter the service of or start another firm that could compete with those services/products of the Company;  ยง Visit or contact the Company's clients or to deal with any individual or company that was a client of the Company for a period of 12 months preceding
Employee's departure date."  The contract also provides that:  "Australian law, both with respect to performance and its termination, governs this contract. Any dispute relating hereto shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Australian courts."  When the employment contract was entered into, the defendant was resident in
Singapore. He signed it overseas. It was signed for the plaintiff in Hong
Kong. The contract describes the employer as the plaintiff, and says that the plaintiff has its principal place of business in Sydney. However, it was the parties' intention that the defendant work for the plaintiff in Melbourne, which he did. He served its client, Telstra. He reported to a superior in
Sydney. Prima facie, the proper law of the contract is the law of Victoria.  The plaintiff's software could be modified to meet customers' specific needs. The defendant acquired an intimate knowledge of the features and capabilities of the plaintiff's products, which could be of great value to a competitor.  On 26 April 2005, the defendant gave notice of resignation to the plaintiff and he advised that he would be going to Amdocs. Amdocs is the name under which a company called Direct Technology Pty Ltd trades. It is a competitor of the plaintiff, and offers similar software to that offered by the plaintiff.  In the course of his employment by the plaintiff, the defendant was given access to detailed confidential information about the plaintiff's products.
This must have been contemplated at the time the contract of employment was entered into, having regard to the duties which the defendant was to perform.  From 29 March to 1 April 2005, the defendant was given training in the plaintiff's latest product offer called "P7." This training included training on how the product could be adopted for use by the plaintiff's customers.
During the week of 4 April 2005, the plaintiff attended briefing sessions from development specialists from the United States who described new features and capabilities of Portal software under development. He participated in presentations made to Telstra about those developments.  On 21 and 22 April 2005, he attended a sales and technical team meeting at which the plaintiff's employees discussed strategies for meeting the present and projected needs for all of the plaintiff's clients in Australia and Asia, including Telstra.  He resigned on the next business day.  The defendant had been negotiating with Amdocs since at least March 2005, if not earlier, for the taking up of new employment. He knew that if he disclosed those negotiations to the plaintiff, he would have been required to leave its employment and not participate in any of the meetings which he attended.  The plaintiff expects that over the next three to five years, Telstra will spend about $500 million in rationalising its billing process and infrastructure. Telstra has not yet committed to using the plaintiff's products and services in replacing its existing billing system. The plaintiff and Amdocs will be competing for this business.  During his employment, the defendant had dealings with many of the executives in Telstra, whom the plaintiff regards as instrumental decision makers with respect to new billing projects. There is evidence that the defendant has disclosed confidential information to Amdocs relating to the plaintiff's plans for the development of P7 software and the areas where changes are needed to meet Telstra's requirements.  As a result of the service of a notice to produce, the defendant produced a
CD of documents relating to the plaintiff's affairs, which had been copied onto his home computer. Much of it is commercially sensitive information. It includes pricing information, and a commercial proposal from the plaintiff for replacing Vodafone's wholesale billing platform. It includes a letter from
Telstra inviting the plaintiff to tender for a certain billing system, setting out the key functionality that Telstra requires. It includes a spreadsheet dealing with software bugs and faults and functionality fixes that Telstra has reported or requested in relation to the plaintiff's billing software. It includes the latest details of the plaintiff's billing software known as P7.
It also includes the names, telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of key
Telstra contacts, and confidential details of a Telstra plan to decommission a certain billing platform.  There was a good deal of other information, which could properly be characterised as trade secrets of the plaintiff, stored on the defendant's home computer.  The defendant said that there was an innocent explanation for having transferred this data from the laptop supplied by the plaintiff to him, onto his home computer. He said it was done in order to provide back-up in case his laptop computer crashed.  It is not necessary, and it would be inappropriate, to say whether this explanation should be accepted. Suffice it to say that there are grounds for apprehending that the defendant may disclose or make use of the plaintiff's trade secrets in the course of his employment with Amdocs, where he will be working in much the same role as he performed when employed by the plaintiff.
He will be providing technical support to Amdocs' commercial sales of billing software to Telstra.  The defendant gave four weeks' notice of his resignation. The plaintiff advised him that the last day of his employment would be 24 May 2005, but it did not require him to work from the period of 29 April to 24 May. It reminded him that his contract included a term that he not work for a competitor for six months.  The plaintiff has not sought an interlocutory injunction to restrain the defendant from working for Amdocs for six months from the termination of his employment, although that is part of the final relief which it seeks. The plaintiff sought an order, until further order, that the defendant be restrained from visiting or contacting clients of the plaintiff, and it sought an order restraining the defendant from disclosing confidential information.  The parties agreed on interlocutory orders relating to all of such matters, save whether the defendant should be restrained from visiting or contacting
Telstra. The defendant said that his work for Amdocs requires him to deal with
Telstra. It is the client to whom he provides services for Amdocs. If he is restrained from dealing with Telstra, it is likely, he says, that he will lose his job. He has two small children who have started school in Melbourne. Given the specialised nature of his skills, if he cannot work for Amdocs, he may be out of employment altogether, or may only be able to find employment overseas.
This would be a hardship.  As the restraint applies only for six months, a decision on this interlocutory application will, to a substantial extent, finally determine the parties' rights, unless a very urgent final hearing can be arranged. It is therefore necessary to consider not only whether there is a serious question to be tried, but also, when considering the balance of convenience, to assess the strength of the plaintiff's case. (Kolback Securities Limited versus Epoch
Mining NL [(1987) 8 NSWLR 533] at 536.)  Were this contract governed by New South Wales law, the issue would be relatively simple. Even if the restraint clauses which the plaintiff seeks to enforce are too wide, the particular breach which the plaintiff seeks to restrain is one to which a restraint against dealing with the plaintiff's clients could undoubtedly validly apply. However, I doubt that the [Restraints of Trade
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/) 1976 applies in this case, as the defendant was employed in Victoria under a contract which, prima facie, is governed by Victorian law.  The approach in these cases is to consider first what, on its proper construction, is the ambit of the restraint clause. Secondly, to determine if the defendant's conduct is covered by the restraint clause as so construed. If so, thirdly, to determine whether the clause as so construed is valid at common law. If not, fourthly to apply [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) of the [Restraints of Trade Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/) .
In this case I doubt that the last step is available.  The first and third steps are related, particularly in the context of covenants in restraint of trade in an employment contract. A clause is not to be read in a restrictive manner which the parties did not intend, (their intentions being ascertained objectively), so as to preserve the clause from invalidity. On the other hand, where a clause is ambiguous, it will be interpreted in a way which preserves its validity. It will also be construed by reference to the object sought to be achieved by the parties. Haynes v
Doman [(1899) 2 Ch 13], 24-25.  That will frequently lead to a clause being construed by reference to the business in which the employee is engaged for the employer. (See Butt versus Long <case>; [(1953) 88 CLR 476] at 487 and 490; Home Counties Dairies Ltd versus Skilton [(1970) 1 All ER 1227] and Heydon, The Restraint of Trade Doctrine, 2 ed, pages 108 to 112.)  The clause relied on restrains the defendant for a period of six months within Australia from visiting or contacting the plaintiff's clients, or dealing with anyone who was a client of the plaintiff within twelve months of the defendant's departure date. Two questions of construction arise. First, whether the reference to the plaintiff's clients should be confined to those clients with whom the defendant dealt during his employment. Secondly, whether the prohibition on contacting, visiting or dealing with clients extends to all contacts, visits or dealings for six months after the determination of his employment, or, whether it should be confined to a certain class or type of contacts, visits or dealings.  As to the first question, I see no basis for reading down the clause to only those clients with whom the defendant dealt during his employment. In my view it applies to all clients of the plaintiff.  However, in relation to the second question, the clause must be construed according to its object of preventing the employer's business being damaged by the activities of the employee after termination of his employment. As in
Butt versus Long and Home Counties Dairies Ltd versus Skilton, the kind of dealings which are prohibited are to be determined by reference to the nature of the business conducted by the employer which the clause was designed to protect.  The defendant sought to put what I consider to be an unreasonably wide complexion on the clause so as to demonstrate its unreasonableness. Literally construed, the clause would prevent the plaintiff from having contact with a telecommunications company for the supply of a fixed land line, or a mobile phone, or a personal broadband connection. But that is not a reasonable construction of the clause. In my view, the restraint on contacts, visits and dealings with the plaintiff's clients, applies to contacts, visits or dealings in connection with, or for the purpose of, the provision of software for a client's billing system, or the provision of services in connection with the provision or operation of such software. That is to construe the clause so as to apply to dealings of a kind referable to the nature of the business carried on by the plaintiff. I consider that that approach is consistent with the authorities, and is at least seriously arguable.  There is no doubt that the defendant is breaching, and threatens to continue to breach the clauses so construed. Is it seriously arguable that the clause so construed is valid? I think it is. Prima facie the term is void. It is valid only if it goes no further than is reasonably necessary to protect the interests of the plaintiff, and is reasonable in the interests of the public.  An employer is not entitled to be protected from mere competition from an employee. However, he is entitled to protection against disclosure or use of his trade secrets, or the use of a connection built up by the employee with the employer's customers. (Heydon, The Restraint Of Trade Doctrine, 2nd ed, page 66; Lindner versus Murdock's Garage <case>; [(1950) 83 CLR 628] at 633-4, 650).  This clause goes beyond restraining the defendant from having dealings with clients with whom the defendant himself dealt during his employment. I doubt that it could be supported on the ground of its being reasonably necessary to protect the employer's goodwill, except for the confidential information about the plaintiff's product and its customers' needs, which it would have been expected that the defendant would acquire during his employment.  The plaintiff does not sell a commonplace commodity or service to a large number of customers. It has specialised products which it sells in a small market. Its products are subject to constant revision and adaptation to clients' requirements. The defendant was well placed to understand the advantages and weaknesses of the plaintiff's products, and to take advantage of that knowledge in any dealings with the plaintiff's customers on his own account or for a competitor. He was, in fact, told about the plaintiff's strategies for all of its clients.  Prima facie, I consider that the clause against dealings with all of the plaintiff's clients for six months is reasonably necessary to protect the plaintiff's trade secrets. It is well established that trade secrets can be protected by clauses which go wider than merely prohibiting their use or disclosure, such as by restraining an employee from working for a competitor for a reasonable period. (See Littlewoods Organisation Limited versus Harris [(1978) 1 All ER 1026] at 1033; [(1977) 1 WLR 1472] at ; Kone Elevators Pty Ltd versus McNay (1997) ATPR 41 564; and
Woolworths Limited versus Mark Conrad Olson <case> at <case>).  I see no reason that a clause against non-solicitation cannot similarly be justified by the need to provide reasonable protection to an employer's trade secrets.  It is clear that if the restraint on contacts, visits and dealings is construed - as I think it should be - as being limited to such contacts, visits or dealings for the purpose of providing software to the plaintiff's clients for their existing or proposed billing systems, or of providing billing systems for the connection or such operation of software, that the clause goes no further than is necessary to protect the plaintiff's trade secrets and customer connection.  The defendant's solicitor referred to a decision in Tyser Reinsurance
Brokers Pty Ltd versus Cooper, (Young J, 7 December 1998 unreported), where his
Honour found that a restraint was void for uncertainty. However, that case turned on the terms of the particular clause and the absence of a definition of a key component of it. It provides no assistance to the present case.  For these reasons, I consider there is a serious question to be tried, that the defendant is in breach of the restraint, and that the restraint is valid.
The balance of convenience favours the plaintiff.  Although the defendant will suffer some hardship from the enforcement of the restraint, he went into his new employment with his eyes open. He received advice that the restraints were unenforceable, and took his chance. He has been well remunerated for his work with the plaintiff. There is no suggestion that he or his family face any identified particular financial hardship. The restraints apply only until 24 November 2005. If the defendant succeeds at the final hearing, he will be entitled to enforce the plaintiff's undertaking as to damages.  On the other hand, there is a real threat that the defendant will use the plaintiff's trade secrets in his dealings with Telstra in a way which may jeopardise the plaintiff's attempt to win new contracts of a substantial value. The plaintiff may well be unable to prove any such breach. Even if it could, the scale of damages to which it may be entitled is likely to be well beyond the defendant's capacity to pay. For these reasons, I consider that the injunction which is sought should go, but in a modified form to reflect what I have said as to the proper scope of the restraint clause.  Upon the plaintiff, by its counsel, giving the usual undertaking as to damages, I order that the defendant by himself, his servants and agents, be restrained up to and including 24 November 2005, or the final determination of these proceedings, or further order - whichever occurs first - from contacting, visiting or dealing with Telstra Limited or any of its officers, employees or agents for the purpose of providing, or in connection with the provision or proposed provision of software to Telstra Limited for any of its existing or proposed billing systems, or, for the purpose of, or in connection with the provision or proposed provision of services in connection with the provision or operation of such software.  The parties will have liberty to apply during the course of today for any modification of the terms of this order which they may consider to be appropriate, which is consistent with these reasons.  The costs of the application will be costs in the proceedings. The exhibits may be returned.  No party has made or foreshadowed an application for the proceedings to be transferred to Victoria as far as I am aware. I direct that the legal representatives of the parties confer to bring in short minutes of order, with a view to the matter being placed in the expedition list as soon as possible.  
COUNSEL ADDRESSED  I direct that the defendant file and serve his affidavits by 5pm on 30 June
I direct that the plaintiff's notice of motion for expedition and affidavit in support thereof be filed and served by 5pm on 28 June 2005, I stand over the proceedings to the expedition list on 1 July 2005.  
LAST UPDATED: 08/07/2005 * * * 
