

Commonwealth of Australia versus Graves [1996] NSWSC 626 (18 December 1996) 
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA versus GRAVES /95; DC 2373/89 December 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, SHELLER JA, GILES AJA 
CATCHWORDS: FALSE IMPRISONMENT - assault - respondent arrested by Federal Police on Commonwealth property - Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971 (Cth) - ss12(2)(c) and 22 - whether arrest lawful - trial Judge's findings not disturbed - Abalos versus Australian Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167] 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
The respondent was arrested by Federal Police officers at a bar at Sydney
International Airport. He was physically restrained, sustaining injuries to his back and neck in the struggle which ensued, and was taken into custody. He brought an action in the District Court against the police officers and the appellant, in which he claimed damages for false imprisonment and assault.

The trial Judge said that the appellant relied on s12(2)(c) of the Public
Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971 (Cth) (the Public Order
Act) as the source of its power to arrest the respondent, and that the arrest was vitiated by a failure to afford the respondent an opportunity to give a `reasonable excuse' for failing to leave the premises when directed to by the police officers. He found that the arresting constables had no reasonable grounds for believing that the respondent had committed an offence against s12(2)(c). The trial Judge did not discuss s22, which provided a power of arrest where a constable had reasonable grounds to believe that proceedings by summons would be ineffective, or that arrest was necessary to prevent persistence in or repetition of the offending conduct.

The respondent's account of what had happened to him on the night in question was largely rejected by the trial Judge, but he did accept that the respondent sustained the injuries complained of and awarded damages in his favour. The appellant argued that the award of damages was excessive, and submitted that the trial Judge erred in accepting medical evidence of the respondent's injuries, having rejected his account of the incident in question.

HELD: . Under s12(2)(c) of the Public Order Act, it is the duty of the person on Commonwealth premises, when clearly directed by a constable to leave them, to do so, unless that person has a reasonable excuse to remain there. The section does not require that before any direction is given to a person, the person have the opportunity, to which the trial Judge referred, to communicate that excuse. No power of arrest was conferred by this subsection.
Putting aside any vestigial common law power of arrest, the appellant could only have derived its power of arrest from s22 of the Public Order Act in this case. However, there was no evidence that the officers believed one way or the other that proceedings against the respondent by summons would not be effective or that the arrest was necessary to achieve the purposes set out in s22(b). Although the trial Judge did not consider this section in his judgment, his conclusion that the respondent was unlawfully arrested was correct and should not be disturbed.
It was open to the trial Judge to reject the respondent's account of the incident but accept that he had suffered bruising and the injuries to his back that he claimed. His Honour did not err in accepting the evidence of a doctor whom he had seen in the witness box and heard cross examined. This Court cannot interfere with the view his Honour came to about that evidence: Abalos v Australian Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167] at 178.

ORDER 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the judgment of Sheller JA. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons for those orders.
 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
At about 9.30 pm on 22 April 1987 the respondent, Brian Vincent Graves, was arrested by Federal police officers in the Au Revoir Bar at Sydney International Airport. In proceedings in the District Court he sued one of the Federal police officers, Uwe Reinhold, and the Commonwealth of Australia, Mr Reinhold's employer at the time, for assault, wrongful arrest and false imprisonment. On 29 August 1995 Acting Judge Cramer-Roberts, who heard the proceedings, dismissed the claim against Mr Reinhold saying he was satisfied that the respondent's physical restraint and arrest was effected not by Mr Reinhold but by other Federal police officers. This conclusion was not challenged on this appeal.

On the first day of the hearing in the District Court, the respondent amended his statement of claim to plead the Commonwealth's liability in respect of wrongful acts committed by other Federal police officers in the performance or purported performance of their duties. The officers concerned with the arrest of the respondent on the occasion in question were Constables Bell, Edmondson and Hunter. The trial Judge said that to justify the acts of its officers, the
Commonwealth relied on powers given to them by s12 (2) (c) of the Public
Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971 (Cth) (the Public Order
Act). He held that the purported arrest of the respondent by the three constables was vitiated by the failure to carry out the steps required by s12 (c), the source of power relied on to effect the arrest. Therefore the activities of the officers in physically restraining and taking the respondent into custody amounted to the torts of assault and false imprisonment. His
Honour assessed damages at $402,696.45 made up as follows: 
General Damages $ 85,000.00 
Interest thereon 49,563.50 
Past loss of earnings 65,857.87 
Interest thereon 76,803.45 
Future economic loss 100,465.84 
Aggravated damages 10,000.00 
Past out of pocket expenses 8,205.79 
Future out of pocket expenses 6,800.00 
TOTAL $402,696.45 
The jurisdictional limits of the District Court reduced the verdict to $250,000. The Commonwealth of Australia appealed from this decision.

APPEAL 
The Commonwealth, by its amended notice of appeal, challenged the bases for the findings of assault and false imprisonment and claimed that the award of damages was excessive. The respondent accepted that his Honour's award of interest on past economic loss should be reduced (ground 13) and that interest on non-economic loss should have been calculated only on part of the whole lump sum awarded and then at 2 percent per annum, not 7 percent per annum (ground 14). The respondent filed a notice of contention.

LEGAL JUSTIFICATION FOR ARREST 
A person who detains another person bears the onus of showing that the act of imprisonment was legally justified: Williams versus The Minister [(1994) 35 NSWLR 497] at 587. At the time the respondent was arrested, ss8 and 8A of the [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Cth) were in force. Section 8 provided that the powers of arrest without warrant possessed by a constable, or by any person, under the common law, with respect to breaches of the peace, might be exercised by any constable, or by any person, as the case might be, with respect to offences against that Act which involved any breach of the peace. The respondent's alleged offence was not against the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) but the Public Order Act. Section 8A provided that any constable might, without warrant, arrest any person, if the constable had reasonable ground to believe - that the person had committed an offence against a law of the Commonwealth or of a Territory; and that proceedings against the person by summons would not be effective.

Section 22 of the Public Order Act confers the power in slightly more extensive circumstances: "A constable may, without warrant, arrest a person for an offence against this
Act if the constable has reasonable ground to believe that the person has committed that offence and that: proceedings against the person by summons would not be effective; or the arrest is necessary in order to prevent persistence by the person in, or repetition by the person of, conduct of the kind constituting the offence, or the commission by the person of other offences against this Act." 
In Hatzinikolaou versus Snape & Anor [(1989) Aust Torts Rep 80-262], at 68,805-6, Kirby P referred to distinctions to be drawn between the provisions of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and s8A. His Honour said: "First the Federal Act is expressed in terms of what the constable `believes'.
The State Act refers to what he `suspects'. Secondly, the Federal Act requires the constable to have `reasonable ground' for the belief. The State Act merely requires `reasonable cause' for his suspicion. Thirdly, the Federal Act introduces an additional prerequisite for arrest which is not provided in the
State Act. This is that the constable must have reasonable ground to believe that proceedings against the person by summons would not be effective. This additional provision is important. It is included for a purpose. Before the potentially oppressive, disorienting and sometimes humiliating action of arrest is taken, the police concerned have to consider whether the more modern procedure of summons `would not be effective'." 
Acting Judge Cramer-Roberts proceeded on the basis, apparently advanced by the
Commonwealth, that the power to arrest in the present case derived from s12 (c). Relevantly, that subsection provides: "A person who: .........
 being in or on Commonwealth premises, refuses or neglects, without reasonable excuse, to leave those premises on being directed to do so by a constable, by a protective service officer, or by a person authorized in writing by a Minister of the public authority under the Commonwealth occupying the premises to give directions for the purposes of this section; is guilty of an offence, punishable on conviction by a fine not exceeding Two hundred and fifty dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, or both." 
Quite plainly, no power of arrest derives from this subsection. At its widest, the power in the present case had to be found in s22. The Commonwealth did not rely on any vestigial common law power of arrest. His Honour did not address the question of whether the conditions set out in s22 were met. He did express views about s12 (2) (c). He said that the alleged offender must not only be given the opportunity to indicate, by words or conduct, a refusal to leave or neglect in leaving, but he or she must also be given the opportunity to communicate, by words or conduct, an excuse. Only when this opportunity had been given and not before, was it for the constable to decide whether the excuse, if there was one, was reasonable. If the excuse was reasonable, there was no offence committed and therefore no power of arrest might be exercised under that sub-paragraph. If the excuse was not adjudged to be a reasonable excuse, the constable might give a direction to the offender to leave the premises. The offender must then be given a reasonable opportunity to comply with that direction. If the offender then refused or neglected to leave, the power of arrest became exercisable without the need for a warrant.

With the greatest respect I do not think this is how the subsection operates.
Pursuant to the subsection, it is the duty of a person on Commonwealth premises, when clearly directed by a constable to leave them, to do so, unless that person has a reasonable excuse to remain there; compare Smith versus Taylor [(1978) 24 ACTR 9] at 15 per Davies J. A refusal or neglect without reasonable excuse to comply with the direction gives rise to the offence under the subsection. What may be considered to be a reasonable excuse in a particular case is not explained and may be difficult to determine. However, the section does not require that before any direction is given to a person, the person have the opportunity, to which the trial Judge referred, to communicate an excuse. His Honour concluded that the purported arrest of the respondent was vitiated by the failure to carry out the steps required by s12 (2) (c), which was "the source of power relied upon to effect the arrest". This conclusion could only be sustained if his Honour meant that the officers had no reasonable ground for believing that the respondent had committed an offence against s12 (2) (c). His Honour said: "In my opinion, the Plaintiff should have been specifically asked for his own response to the question as to the reason why he was present on Commonwealth property. In the presence of the police at that time, his benign behaviour was in total contrast to that of Myers and the police had no reason to believe he would not have a reasonable excuse or that he would disobey a direction to leave." 
The appellant said that it relied upon s22 in the Court below and a passage from the transcript suggests that this is right. The respondent asserted that the appellant relied upon s12 (2) (c) of the Public Order Act as the justification for his arrest.

Putting aside any common law power of arrest, the appellant had no choice but to rely on s22 if it wished to justify this arrest. The difficulty is that it called no evidence to make good that justification. The police officers gave evidence. According to their evidence Constables Bell and Hunter went to the
Au Revoir Bar after Constable Bell received a complaint from a Qantas ground staff hostess. The respondent and his companion, Mr Myers, were standing at the bar. Constable Bell introduced himself, showed them his official identification and told them he had had a complaint about their behaviour. The respondent was affected by alcohol, but was not behaving in an offensive or disorderly manner before the struggle which ensued. The respondent and Mr
Myers were asked their reason for being in the airport and to be careful. When no reason was advanced they were directed to leave the airport. They were told that if they did not leave the airport they would be arrested. Mr Myers said: "Fuck off, wimps" to which Constable Bell replied: "You are both under arrest for failing to leave the airport." Mr Myers then ran away and was chased by
Constable Bell. After a struggle Constable Hunter arrested the respondent with the help of Constable Edmondson, who had by then arrived at the scene.

If it was necessary that the arresting constables have a belief that the respondent had committed an offence against s12 (2) (c) and in particular that the respondent had refused or neglected to leave the premises "without reasonable excuse", none of the police witnesses gave evidence of such a belief. If it was sufficient that there was reasonable ground for such a belief, his Honour found that they had no reason for it. As his Honour remarked, the reasonable excuse for the respondent's presence at the bar was self evidence. So far as the police could observe, he was merely having a drink at a public bar. Again there was no evidence from any of the police officers that they had a belief one way or another that proceedings against the respondent by summons would not be effective or that the arrest was necessary to achieve the purposes set out in s22 (b). This being so, it seems to me that, although his Honour did not address the question, the conclusion, on the findings he made, that the appellant had not justified the arrest was correct. Accordingly the arrest was unlawful and the respondent falsely imprisoned.

DAMAGES 
The trial Judge rejected the respondent's account of the incident which centred on Mr Reinhold's unprovoked attack upon him. His Honour said this: "It might be said at this point that the Plaintiff has a serious credibility problem as his allegations against the First Defendant have been rejected and the evidence of the other police largely accepted. Notwithstanding his
Counsel's valiant efforts to keep out the defendants' evidence against the
Plaintiff that the Plaintiff was intoxicated, there is little doubt that he was affected. The police evidence was that Myers caused the trouble and that the Plaintiff was initially passive, his behaviour being impeccable, so far as they could see. However, it is obvious that in total disregard of his own safety, he violently over-reacted when arrested, even though it turns out he was being wronged. He was fighting and cursing the police in the Au Revoir
Bar, yelling at a group of 20 Asians in the lounge and thereafter continuing to yell obscenities at police officers at the Mascot station until, as
Sergeant Richmond thought, the effects of alcohol had begun to wear off.

In my view, it is reasonable to overlook the Plaintiff's failure to recollect events with accuracy or to properly identify the police involved as being attributable to his state of insobriety, his pre-occupation with violent activity in the struggle, his vomiting, the pain of being manhandled and no doubt, the indignation of being arrested when he had done nothing wrong, especially as it was Myers who was the cause of the trouble." 
The trial Judge referred to the respondent's evidence that his left arm was grabbed and twisted and then bent and pulled so high up his back that he tipped forward almost hitting his forehead on the ground. In the continuing struggle the back of his neck was grasped, squeezed and forced forward, so that he was doubled over, thrashing around and trying to break free of the arm hold, whilst the second man grabbed the right arm, and held it out straight in a twisted position. His Honour was not satisfied that a choke hold was applied to the respondent. The respondent said that while then vomiting he would have fallen to the ground if he had not been held up by the arms from behind. He was then punched or "kneed" in the back as much as a dozen times. He was handcuffed and marched away by Constable Edmondson with his hands held high up his back, on tip toes and his head forced towards the ground, asking to be let up. He said this grip was "quite firm but not as heavy duty" as his earlier treatment. He was very violent and aggressive at Mascot Police Station and was swearing at the police. He was charged at 10.50 pm.

No formal complaint of any injury was made to Sergeant Richmond although the opportunity was given to do so. The respondent was bailed at midnight. He and
Mr Myers went to Canterbury Hospital not, he said, because of his injuries but because Mr Myers wanted treatment for an injury of his own. The hospital was closed at that time so the respondent went home. Over the next few days bruising appeared over the entire region of his arms, all over his back and on the neck. The respondent described it as very deep black long-lasting bruising which took almost six weeks to disappear. He did not seek medical attention for this because he thought he was just bruised and did not realise that he had been more seriously injured. He took no medication and did nothing but rest. The trial Judge said: "I accept this as a reasonable explanation for not seeking immediate medical attention. The Plaintiff's prior lifestyle was that of an active sportsman involved in Rugby League, weight training and his work was of a labouring type. Dr Seaton said that in his experience there is a kind of `macho' cult amongst some boxers and footballers whereby pain is ignored and that the
Plaintiff was such a person." 
For the first four weeks he remained in Sydney. His girlfriend, now his wife, gave him massages and hot water bottles. The defendant submitted that she made no mention of his bruising, but the question was not raised by either party in her evidence. His Honour said: "Although there was no other evidence of the bruising, I accept that this was a violent struggle and that the Plaintiff did suffer severe bruising but not to the extent alleged on the back, neck or throat. It is not possible to say how it occurred, particularly as I have rejected the alleged assault by the
First Defendant and a stranger, and there is no allegation that Constables
Edmondson or Hunter punched and kneed him in the back and I would not so find.
However, the Plaintiff did say he was thrashing around amongst tables and stools." 
The respondent then went to Kempsey where he spent eight months on holiday.
The trial Judge said: "I accept his evidence that he there saw a local general practitioner about once a month but only received medication. It was not until he say Dr Margaret
Holloway on a visit to Sydney on about 7 August 1987 that x-rays were taken.
By this time some three and a half months had passed since the accident." 
The appellant submitted that his Honour here erred by finding, contrary to the respondent's evidence, that he had seen a local general practitioner at
Kempsey before he say Dr Margaret Holloway on a visit to Sydney in August
I do not think that his Honour expressed any such conclusion.

The trial Judge continued: "Dr Holloway had been the Plaintiff's general practitioner prior to the assault. She had seen him for a chest complaint on 22 January 1985 and had a chest x-ray taken which clearly showed his thoracic spine.

She had also seen him for pain in his neck on 23 June 1986, only 10 months before the assault on 22 April 1987, as a result of which she had x-rays taken, which showed no injury to his neck.

When she saw him on 7 August 1987 the Plaintiff complained of aching and pain in his neck and back. She prescribed anti-inflammatory medication and referred him to Dr Bannister, orthopaedic surgeon." 
The respondent's neck and back continued to be very sore and troublesome. The pain became worse at night, making sleeping difficult. In winter, the pain seemed to worsen. His left shoulder did not bother him so much and returned to normal.

X-ray reports of the respondent's back both before and after 22 April 1987 were in evidence. On 22 January 1985 Dr Keightley reported: "There is a little anterior wedging of the bodies of T7 to T9. This is most likely the result of previous Scheuermann's Disease, and is of no significance.

There is some apparent backward slip of the body of T11 on T12. Formal views of the thoracic spine would be needed to evaluate this further. Previous trauma would seem the most likely cause." 
On 23 June 1986 Dr Barbara Read reported: "There is straightening of the cervical curve consistent with muscular spasm.

No bony injury seen.

Minimal spondylitic changes are present with a little roughening of the adjacent interior borders of C5/6.

Intervertebral disc spaces and intervertebral foramina normal." 
On 7 August 1987 Dr Read reported again: "CERVICAL SPINE: There is a mild scoliosis convex to the left. A very early disc lesion is present at the C5/6 level which shows minimal narrowing and very early lipping laterally on the right side of the upper border of C6.

Old injury to the outer end of the left clavicle noted.

THORACIC SPINE: There is anterior compression of the body of T8 on the right side and minor compression of the lower border of T7 and upper border of T9.
In this region there is a mild scoliosis of the spine convex to the left.

There is also irregularity of the anterior surface of the body of T12.

The upper and lower borders of the vertebral bodies from T6 to T12 show minor irregularities consistent with old Scheuermann's disease.

The appearances are those of superadded trauma.

LUMBAR SPINE: There are defects of partes interarticularis of L5 with very slight spondylolisthesis of L5 anteriorly on S1. These defects could be due to old stress fractures.

A small anterior herniation of the disc between L4/5 into the antero-superior margin of L5 is noted and minor irregularities are present in the upper and lower surfaces of the lumbar vertebral bodies consistent with extension of the
Scheuermann's disease.

There is also a smooth disc impression on the upper surface of S1. The intervertebral disc spaces are within normal limits. Sacro-iliac joints normal." 
On 3 July 1989 Dr Michael Stern gave the following x-ray report: "There is a minimal lower thoracic scoliosis convex to the left. There is some wedging, particularly lateral wedging of the vertebral bodies in this region most markedly affecting the T7-8-9 and T11 vertebral bodies. There is irregularity of the bony end plates in this region with Schmorl's nodes formation and the appearances suggest Scheuermann's disease. Clinical correlation is recommended." 
The doctors qualified for the respondent and those qualified for the appellant expressed different opinions about the cause of the changes seen in the x-rays. The trial Judge said: "There is a divergence of opinion about the Plaintiff's and the Defendant's doctors as to whether the x-rays changes in the thoracic spine are really due to trauma or Scheuermann's disease. However, I was impressed with the reasoning of Dr Seaton and his conclusions which are supported by the opinion of Dr Bannister that the Plaintiff's injuries to his neck and spine are consistent with superadded trauma.

I accept Dr Seaton's revised opinion that the assault aggravated the minimal spondylitic changes at the C5/C6 disc, making them symptomatic. Before he saw the pre-injury x-ray of 23 June 1986 he was of the view that the assault may have caused the disc lesion. I also prefer his opinion formed after comparing x-rays of the dorsal spine taken on 22 January 1985 with that of 7 August 1987 that in the first there was little arterial wedging of compression of the bodies T7 to T9 which was quite different to the major wedging shown in the later x-ray. That opinion was that the wedging was traumatic and not idiopathic or a natural progression.

I also accept Dr Seaton's explanation as to why the Plaintiff has a full range of neck and lumbar movement. This explanation was that the severe impairment in his back, dorsal spine and neck, the disc injury or wedging of which is obvious to the x-ray `eye', does not manifest itself unless the back is put under load or stress. He has not done heavy work since the assault and has rested the back a lot.

I also accept his opinion that the spondylitic changes in the spine were of traumatic origin since he would not expect degenerative changes in a 28 year old." 
Although the appellant's notice of appeal challenged the awards of damages made for non-economic loss and past and future economic loss as excessive, Mr
Hislop QC, who appeared for the appellant, accepted that even if all these challenges succeeded, a reassessment would not reduce the verdict below $250,000.00. The appellant put its argument for a new trial on damages on broader grounds. Counsel emphasised that his Honour had rejected the respondent's account of the incident and submitted that therefore he should have looked more closely than he did at the respondent's complaints of bruising and continuing and persistent pain. I would repeat at the outset what was said by Lord Sumner in SS Hontestroom versus SS Sagaporack  <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167] at 178 when speaking of the power of an appellate Court: "...not to have seen the witnesses puts appellate judges in a permanent position of disadvantage as against the trial judge, and, unless it can be shown that he has failed to use or has palpably misused his advantage, the higher Court ought not to take the responsibility of reversing conclusions so arrived at, merely on the result of their own comparisons and criticisms of the witnesses and of their own view of the probabilities of the case." 
With the greatest respect it seemed to me that Mr Hislop's submissions invited us to engage in the very exercise which Lord Sumner deprecated.

The trial Judge was satisfied that there was an explanation for the respondent's failure to recollect events on the night of 22 April 1987 with accuracy. It was open to his Honour to reject the respondent's account of those events but accept, as he did, that he suffered bruising and the injuries to his back that he claimed. His Honour was not impressed by the argument that the respondent's wife had failed to mention the bruising and was satisfied that there was an explanation for the respondent's failure to seek medical advice before he did and failure to complain to the police sergeant on the night in question.

There was no error in his Honour's approach. Mr Hislop drew attention to the report of Dr Holloway of 23 June 1994. She wrote: "On 7 August 1989 he presented to me with a complaint of aching and pain in his neck and back. He stated that the onset of the back pain dated from the time he worked for the local council and that his neck had been painful since an episode at the airport when he had been arrested by police and had had his wrists handcuffed behind his back as they escorted him from the area.

On examination there was no obvious deformity and a full range of back and neck movement was present." 
She referred to the x-ray reports and said she had no knowledge of Mr Graves ever suffering with neck or back pain on other occasions. She concluded: "From both the clinical situation and the x-ray changes it is apparent that some significant trauma was sustained by Mr Graves between June 1986 and
August 1987 - to his lower cervical spine and most particularly to his thoracic spine." 
The main thrust of the appellant's argument was that Dr Seaton's conclusions were based upon an acceptance of the history the respondent gave him and in particular the respondent's account of what occurred to him on the night in question, which his Honour had rejected. Dr Seaton gave two written reports.
In the first, of 16 June 1994, he said: "The problem here of course, is that whilst it is easy for me to give you a report with regard to this man's orthopaedic and physical state, I am unable to help much in the history because, unfortunately, it is a history which is one which I entirely believe, but which is one of charging the Federal Police with unlawful assault and anyone would know that any such argument is thwart with difficulties. I can only tell it as it was told to me by your client.

He states that he is a 35 year old unemployed man, that he is married, and he looks after his son at home as a housemother. His wife works as a clerical officer for Canterbury Council. He himself was employed as a truck driver for the Canterbury Council just before the incident occurred. On 22 April 1987 he was farewelling a friend at the Mascot International Terminal in a bar there with a group of people. He was waiting for a friend to pick him up to take him home with another friend with whom he was drinking and he became involved with three plain clothes officers of the Federal Police. He states that there was no feeling of ill will between himself and these three policemen and that he was not intoxicated but had been drinking scotch and Coca-cola. For no apparent reason the three police officers were abusive to his friend and to himself and, in fact, as he was leaving the bar because of their abuse the three men assaulted him. He describes injuries that occurred to him when these police officers occasioned severe bodily harm whilst they were trying to arm lock both arms. He was involved in the struggle for 10 minutes and in the struggle because of the pain and a police officer attempting to choke him with a hand whilst others were holding his arms behind his back, that he vomited three times, projectile vomiting on to the floor. It would seem to be his description that the two or three policemen attacked him from behind and in that 10 minute period he was struck frequently in the back. He does not know if he was kneed in the back or punched in the back. But anyway he was twisted violently in the struggle trying to free his arm locked arms which were held in position by two separate officers, one of whom apparently was the most villain like, and who was the one that caused most damage, was a very large man.
 .......

On clinical examination he was strongly built squat man and the only injury that he had sustained, other than the injuries at the airport were when he was playing Rugby League at the age of 22 in a tackle he fractured his left clavicle. He had no knowledge of any back or neck injury, or thoracic injury, prior to the assault at the airport.

On examination of his cervical spine he had a full range of movement. There was no evidence of spasm and there was no evidence of brachial neuralgia with knee flexors, power and sensation normal in both upper limbs. On examination of his dorsal spine, it was found that he was suffering with a kypho-scoliosis in the mid dorsal region at the level of the lower angles of the scapulae.
This area was tender to percussion and he was tender on rotation at this level. On examination of the lumbar spine, once again, little could be found.
He had a full range of lumbar movement without spasm. There was no obvious stepping to indicate a lumbo-sacral spondylolisthesis, straight leg raising was normal, and there were no neurological deficits in his lower limbs.

His x-rays are difficult to interpret exactly. There was no doubt in my mind that prior to his assault he did have Scheuermann's disease which of course, is in no way caused by an assault. There is doubt in my mind however, about the C5/6 disc in the cervical spine because it appears on the x-rays of 7
August 1987 that the disc may well have been injured at the time of the assault because there is evidence of disc narrowing at this level with an osseous reaction at the posterior aspect of the disc which would seem to indicate the lesion was only recent. Again, it is difficult to interpret the x-rays of the dorsal spine dated 7 August 1978 [sic]. There is no doubt that he has evidence of adolescent dorsal kypho-scoliosis of some degree and that this is an idiopathic condition and not caused by assault. However, it would seem that even for a man who had played football in his younger days that the degree of compression of the 7th, 8th, 9th and 12th dorsal vertebrae is greater than one would expect in the normal case of Scheuermann's disease. I consider that it has been helped along considerably in its intensity on x-ray pictures by the compression injuries placed upon him during the time of his assault.

Lastly, it is difficult to know whether or not his lumbo-sacral spondylolisthesis with a forward slip of approximately 1mm was aggravated by or caused by the assault. Certainly, it would seem more likely that it was aggravated by the assault and not caused by the assault, but no one can prove or disprove this, it could be either way. There is no doubt, however, that even if this man had these conditions prior to the assault, and that is extremely unlikely in a 28 year old truck driver, then he was very vulnerable for further severe damage to be caused by such an assault and indeed, as a result of the assault, he has symptoms now which do not allow him to work in his usual capacity as a truck driver or manual worker, or indeed, even as a security officer. He has to find work at his age. One is hopeful that he will manage to find work as a Lead-lighter. Certainly, he has quite a severe impairment in his back, dorsal spine and neck as a result of the assault. He will never go back to his usual capacity of work as a truck driver and labourer." 
In his second report of 28 February 1995, Dr Seaton said: "Since last seen this man's condition has not altered that much. He still takes Physeptone, he is still unemployed, and he is still financially deprived. He has developed new symptoms and these are aggravation of symptoms in his neck. His neck is stiffer than it was and he is now getting pain radiating from his neck into the left shoulder and down the left arm involving the middle fingers of his left hand. As a result of this he saw his local doctor and CT scans were taken of the cervical spine on 23 February this year.
These CT scans were present today and I looked at them carefully, and they showed that he had a definite disc protrusion on his left side at C5/6 and that he had disc narrowing with nerve root canal occlusion at the C6/7 disc.
It is apparent, therefore, that he has quite severe pathology in his neck and it is more than coincidence that both these lesions are on the left side of his neck and therefore they must be the cause of his left sided brachial neuralgia.

He has been advised to swim for his back injury and he has done that but, unfortunately, that brought on the symptoms in his left arm from his neck and he has had to cease. It would look as if he will require surgery to improve the nerve root canal situation caused by disc and degenerative change in two levels in his neck, but surgery unfortunately at two levels is not a great success. Added to that, one has to consider the fact that he has an aggravation of Scheuermann's Disease not far below in his dorsal spine and that he had spondylolisthesis further down in his lower back so, altogether, his troubles would be by no means over if he had corrective surgery for his neck.

This man's situation is such that his condition is pretty desperate. He is only 36 years old but he is extensively disabled by multiple lesions in his back which, in my opinion, were aggravated and in part caused by the assault mentioned in my last report at the airport." 
Dr Seaton gave oral evidence, which I have carefully read. He was extensively cross examined. Dr Seaton agreed that the history the respondent gave him of what happened was consistent with his opinion about the respondent's condition. But, quite plainly, Dr Seaton's conclusions were based on what he regarded as the differences between the state of the respondent's back as revealed in the x-rays or the reports of them before and after 22 April 1987.
Before he wrote his first report he did not have the x-ray reports of the respondent's neck before the assault available to him. Asked about the doubt he expressed about the C5/6 disc in the cervical spine in his first report Dr
Seaton said: "Well, I, at that stage, did not have x-ray reports of his neck prior to the alleged assault.

Q. So? A. And I thought it may have been caused by the assault. But later I had information that I was able to obtain from his earlier treating doctors that he did have a disc problem there prior to the assault. So I then altered the attitude in the next report, that he had an aggravation of the disc as a causation of this.

Q. Which was the early x-ray that you had resort to? A. I had resort to an x-ray dated 23 June 1986, which I think is before the assault.

Q. Yes? A. And it was taken by his local doctor, Dr Holloway, at the request of Barbara Reid [sic], and she reports these x-rays do show minimal spondylitic changes at the C5/C6 disc, that is on 23 June 1986, and this preceded the assault.

Q. So you formed the view that the assault aggravated those changes? A. That is correct.

Q. Accelerated them? A. It made them symptomatic." 
Later in his evidence, Dr Seaton said: "After the assault, there is more compression in the vertebrae that are affected and the dorsal spine in Scheuermann's Disease, which would seem to indicate that the twisting and the injuries that he sustained in that incident aggravated the wedging of the vertebrae. And that is the reason I put that paragraph in.

Q. The early x-ray you referred to is which? A. In January 1985, Dr Keightley took an x-ray of the dorsal spine and it reads: `There is a little arterial wedging of the bodies of T7 to T9. This is most likely the result of previous
Scheuermann's Disease but is of no significance.' That is quite different to the x-rays that I saw that had been taken after the assault, when there was major wedging and there was great doubt in my mind as to whether it was traumatic or idiopathic. When I received the report dated 22 January 1985, I had to come to the conclusion that this wedging was indeed traumatic and not an idiopathic condition.

Q. Why did you come to the conclusion? A,. Because the report in `85, when compared with the x-ray report that I saw in `87, showed a very large difference in the amount of wedging.

Q. And that could only come from trauma? A. From trauma. And at that stage he had given up rugby league football.

Q. So certainly not a natural progression? A. No, it couldn't.

Q. Then bearing in mind those three x-rays to which you referred, 22 January `85 - one other I should refer you, you have also the x-ray dated 23 June ? A. Yes.

Q. That was of the neck? A. That was the one I was referring to when I was speaking to you about the doubt I had in my mind.

Q. That is right. So you had the x-rays of 22 January 1995 [sic], 23 June , and Dr Read's x-ray of 7 August 1987? A. I did.

Q. Doctor, I ask you to assume for purposes of this question that nothing happened to this man between `85 and `87, January `85 and August `87, except the events at the International Airport in April 1987; that he says nothing else happened to him in those ensuing years. Do you agree or disagree with this comment: From the x-ray changes, it is apparent - and assume for a moment that the same reports gave rise to this quote I am asking you to comment on -
From the x-ray changes, it is apparent that some significant trauma was sustained by Mr Graves between June 1986 and August 1987 to his lower cervical spine and most particularly to his thoracic spine? A. Yes. That is what I have said in my evidence." 
This evidence is but one example of a continuing theme which led Dr Seaton to say: "Everybody knows that the man has a weak, sick, twisted back." Asked whether there was any suggestion on either of the times that the doctor had seen the respondent that in his complaints he was not being genuine, the doctor replied: "Not at all." 
Mr Hislop relied upon the following passage in the doctor's evidence in chief: "I want to switch tacks and put to you an alternate version of what happened to this man in 1987 on 22 April. That all that happened was that his shoulders were grabbed, but then his arm, left or right, and then he was handcuffed, all with a minimum of fuss. If that's all that happened, could that explain those x-ray changes between 1985 and 1986 and August 1987? A. No it couldn't have unless, of course, the man was run over by a truck in between times. As I said to you, when you began the cross-examination [sic], it is something which I can't help you on because, you see, I said in the beginning, it all depends on who you believe. I was not there, I can't give you advice on that." 
Shortly after that the following interchange took place: "In the assault itself when the plaintiff was describing it in court, he said that he particularly noted, or he didn't say that, but he certainly talked about it, that he felt pain on the left side of his neck and the left shoulder region and it was his left arm that was first twisted and longest held, jammed up behind his back. Is there any significance about just what happened to him in the assault that ties in or doesn't tie in about your last sentence there?
A. Well, as I say, it is more than a coincidence that these lesions are on the left side of his neck, that's what I am referring to." 
Mr Hislop submitted that Dr Seaton's opinion could not stand if the respondent's account of what took place be rejected. But his Honour did not reject the respondent's evidence that there was a violent struggle and that he was badly bruised. The appellant's account of the incident was put to Dr
Seaton in cross examination as follows: "Q. You may have already answered this, I will put it to you again on the safe side, if the activity involved in this arrest was the struggling on his part and the attempt by the police officers to restrain him by putting his arms around his back and pushing him forward so as to minimise his mobility, those activities would not result in the conditions that Mr Graves has complained of today, would they? A. But you are giving me an incident in which obviously it would be. If you are pushing a man forcibly forward in that action you obviously are going to cause wedging in the spine. I mean - what are you saying? I mean if they pull you backwards, yes, and straightening him out, obviously they wouldn't have bent him forward, because you have said that they were bending him forward, which would obviously cause increase in the anterior wedging which we have been on about in the last two hours.

Q. The arm pain you say he has now is arising out of the C5/6, is that right?
A. I think it's coming from the C6/7 because that's where he had a disc protrusion.

Q. That is the injury of the neck, that it has been degenerated? A. No, that is the C5/6 that was degenerated, not the C6/7, that's a new lesion.

Q. And a lesion can be caused by natural progression, can it not? A. In the case of C5/6, yes, but not in the 6/7. That is due to a trauma. You don't get a disc lesion without degenerative changes without trauma." 
The last sentence of this answer meant that in the absence of degenerative changes "you don't get a disc lesion ..... without trauma". Dr Seaton had already said that you do not expect degenerative changes in a man of twenty- eight. This last passage of evidence, in brief form, puts beyond doubt what is apparent from the whole of Dr Seaton's evidence, namely, that in his opinion the condition of the respondent's back was explained by something that happened between June 1986 and August 1987. The only candidate suggested was the incident of 22 April 1987. I am not persuaded that his Honour erred in accepting Dr Seaton's opinion. His Honour had the advantage of seeing Dr
Seaton in the witness box and hearing him cross examined. This Court cannot interfere with the view his Honour came to about that evidence.

In my opinion the appellant's challenges to the award of damages fails.

CONCLUSION 
The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
GILES AJA: I agree with Sheller JA.
 * * * 
