

Fine Real Estate Network Pty Ltd versus Howell Matter No 4707/94 [1997] NSWSC (4 December 1997) 
Fine Real Estate Network Pty Ltd versus Howell /94 December 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /94 FINE REAL ESTATE NETWORK PTY LTD V HOWELL 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The matter currently before the court is a notice of motion filed by the plaintiff for an order that certain real estate belonging to the defendant, including 2 Vicar Street, Coogee, be charged in favour of the plaintiff in respect of the payment of costs. 
The proceedings, which essentially are between two real estate agents/developers who were previously in partnership, were begun in 1994.
There were considerable disputes as to fact and those questions were, by consent, referred to the Honourable R G Reynolds QC for determination. Mr
Reynolds QC found in favour of the plaintiff: his judgment shows that he did not accept the defendant. The referee published his report on 6 March 1996.

In March and April 1996 there were interlocutory proceedings before Bryson, J and McLelland, CJ in Eq, in which the plaintiff sought to freeze the defendant's assets. Bryson, J made an order to that end, which it is alleged that the defendant breached. On 10 April 1996, McLelland, CJ in Eq found that there had been a breach of the injunction. He did not consider it appropriate to impose any punitive sanction, but ordered the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the motion for contempt on an indemnity basis. His Honour then went on to say: "In response to what I have described as the casualness of approach by the defendant and by the defendant's advisers to the orders earlier made by the Court I think it is appropriate, in addition, to secure the plaintiff's position to the extent intended by the orders of March 1996 by ordering the imposition of a charge over the properties, 25 Fern Street, Randwick and 2 Vicar Street, Coogee with leave to the defendant to apply to terminate or vary that charge, the charge being expressed to secure payment to the plaintiff of any money found to be owing by the defendant to the plaintiff in these proceedings, and also to impose a restraint upon the defendant from increasing the indebtedness secured by the existing mortgages over the two properties to which I have referred." 
His Honour did not give any further reasons as to why he so ordered except that it is plain from what he said that the injunction granted by Bryson, J had not been efficacious because of the defendant's "casualness" and accordingly, a direct order was necessary to preserve the position.

On 30 August 1996, McLelland, CJ in Eq adopted the referee's report with some variations and ordered that the defendant pay to the plaintiff $445,395 and costs.

The property 2 Vicar Street, Coogee was sold and the proceeds were used to discharge a debt owing to the Westpac Bank and the balance and other moneys were used to pay the judgment debt due to the plaintiff but not the costs. The purchaser was a company associated with the defendant.

The plaintiff took bankruptcy proceedings against the defendant. These proceedings came into the Federal Court's list from time to time and on 19
February 1997 an order was made by Emmett, J which noted various matters and stood the bankruptcy petition over to 19 March 1997. The notes included - that the court was satisfied of the matters required to be proved for the purposes of making a sequestration order; and that the following agreement had been made between the parties - "(a) The Debtor consents to a charging order being made in a court of competent jurisdiction over all of his interest, whether held directly or indirectly and all of the interests of all companies controlled by him or of which he is a shareholder or member, to the extent of his shareholding or interest in such companies, in the following property ...".

Five pieces of realty were then mentioned, including 2 Vicar Street, Coogee and two other parcels referred to in the schedule to the notice of motion. In the same court before the same judge on 18 July 1997, the court by consent ordered that "The Debtor will cause charging documents to be prepared to reflect the agreement embodied in the court orders dated 19 February 1996." It seems common ground that "1996" was an error for "1997". In due course the bankruptcy petition became stale and was automatically dismissed under the provisions of the [Bankruptcy Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/).

The present position is then that the only moneys owing to the plaintiff under the judgment are its costs and the defendant has an appeal pending to the
Court of Appeal.

The plaintiff's bill of costs, I am told, amounts to some $500,000. I can assume from what Mr Robinson, counsel for the defendant has said, that for the purposes of argument, it is conceded that the plaintiff will succeed on his bill of costs for at least $200,000. Indeed, Mr Robinson made an open offer, which was not accepted by the plaintiff, that the defendant would not reduce his assets below $250,000.

The plaintiff's notice of motion originally claimed specific performance of the agreement noted by Emmett, J, or alternatively, an order under the inherent power that there be a charge on the defendant's real estate pending assessment of costs. When the hearing commenced, Mr Parsons, counsel for the plaintiff, made it clear that without waiving his putative claim for specific performance, he did not press it on the present hearing. However, he contended that the fact that the defendant gave his consent to a charging order in the
Federal Court as a condition of an adjournment of his bankruptcy petition was relevant to the exercise of the court's inherent power to enforce its orders or to a Mareva injunction.

Mr Robinson says that although he concedes some $200,000 will be due in costs after an assessment is made by a costs assessor, he says that Mr Reynolds QC and McLelland, CJ in Eq made errors in not allowing $200,000 or more as credits due to the defendant when working out the amount that was due to the plaintiff. Mr Robinson recognizes that at present there is a liability under a judgment of this court which is not the subject of a stay, but says it is relevant to consider that that matter is before the Court of Appeal. Mr
Parsons says as to that, that the so-called credits were in fact taken into account by Mr Reynolds QC and there is nothing in the point at all. I do not consider I need do anything more than merely record it.

Mr Robinson then says that no charging order can be made where there is an unascertained liability: there must be a sum certain. In the present case, the bill has not even been sent to an assessor and one cannot have a charging order in respect of an unascertained sum. He relies on A & M Records
Inc versus Darakdjian [[1975] 3 All ER 983.] That was a case under the English Administration of Justice Act 1956, <case> and is clearly authority for the proposition for which Mr Robinson cites it. However, it should be said that there is a whole string of cases that preceded it which are not pure statutory construction cases which come to the same result. In
Widgery versus Tepper [(1877) 6 Ch D 364], the plaintiffs had obtained, ex parte, a charging order against the defendants, charging a fund in court for costs yet to be taxed. The Court of Appeal held that the specific sum due to the plaintiffs not being ascertained nor the costs taxed, the charging order was irregular and must be discharged. This case was followed in Victoria in Wilkie versus Wilkie <case>; [[1905] VLR 80], where the headnote simply reads "A charging order cannot be given except for an ascertained sum and not for costs until such costs have been taxed." 
Mr Parsons says that while he recognizes that that is the strict law, nonetheless equity has always intervened to fill in gaps in procedure, or alternatively, there is an inherent power in the court to make a charging order in respect of costs yet to be taxed. He bases his submissions on Re
Shephard [(1889) 43 Ch D 131.] At 135,
Cotton, LJ said that the court can appoint a receiver by way of equitable execution, but it should be realized that what a creditor "gets by the appointment of a receiver is not execution, but equitable relief, which is granted on the ground that there is no remedy by execution at law." Bowen, LJ said much the same thing at 137 as did Fry, LJ at 138.

Insofar as the submission attempts to put that whenever execution at law is not possible there can be execution in equity, the submission is erroneous.
The best summary of what was decided in Shephard's case is given by
Millett, J in Maclaine Watson & Co Ltd versus International Tin Council [[1988] Ch 1] at 18-20. His Lordship's decision was affirmed in the Court of Appeal ([1989]
Ch 253) and in the House of Lords ([1990] 2 AC 418), but the present point was not considered on appeal. At 18, Millett, J says, "(i) that the court has no jurisdiction to appoint a receiver by way of equitable execution merely because in all the circumstances it would be a more convenient mode of obtaining satisfaction of a judgment than the usual modes of execution ... and that the special circumstances which would justify the making of an order must be such circumstances as would have enabled the Court of Chancery before the Judicature Acts to have intervened by way of injunction or the appointment of a receiver at the suit of the judgment creditor. ... what is required is that there should be some hindrance arising from the nature of the property which prevents the judgment creditor from obtaining execution at law, but which the appointment of a receiver can overcome." 
The present case is not one where the nature of the property means that there cannot be common law execution, the problem is, in the present case, that there is an unascertained amount due to the plaintiff because the costs have not yet been assessed.

However, equity will also intervene and grant equitable execution where there has been some matter against the defendant's conscience. A good example is
O'Neil versus Hart (No 3) <case>; [[1905] VLR 306.] In that case, a tenant for life personally took proceedings to preserve and salvage a settled estate. The court held that there should be an immediate sale of a sufficient portion of the estate for the purpose of defraying the costs. The judgment was affirmed; <case>; [[1906] VLR 14.] The rationale appears to be that there was a fund under the jurisdiction of the court, a person had taken a risk in protecting the estate at his or her own expense and was entitled to be reimbursed with costs out of the fund.

In the instant case I asked Mr Parsons what was his equity. He could not point to any. I think this was a proper response, as there is none.

Accordingly, Mr Parsons is thrown back onto his argument that there is an inherent power to make the order which he seeks.

In this respect, Mr Robinson asked me to remember that there is a very real difference between a charging order and a Mareva-type order. With the former, specific property of the defendant is charged, with the latter, there is no charge or security given at all. Mr Robinson says that what Mr Parsons is really attempting to do is, under the guise of a Mareva application, to make some application for an order giving him security.

Mr Parsons says that the court always has an inherent power to make sure that there are no gaps in its enforcement procedure. He says that in the instant case, to allow the defendant to continue to trade with his assets without security whilst there is this outstanding matter for costs would be to allow him to thwart the orders of the court as the plaintiff alleges he has continually done. Mr Parsons points to the breach of Bryson, J's order, to the order made by McLelland, CJ in Eq in April 1996, to the agreement noted by
Emmett, J in 1997 and the subsequent order of the Federal Court in 1997 and to the finding of Mr Reynolds QC that the defendant was not a person who could be accepted. He says that in all these circumstances it would be allowing the defendant to thwart the orders of the court if the court did not exercise its inherent power in imposing a charge over his property.

Mr Robinson, on the other hand, says that it must be remembered that whatever happened in the past, all the debt owing to the plaintiff has been paid, the only outstanding issue is the matter of costs which have not yet been assessed. There is no evidence of any evasion of this liability as is illustrated, if by nothing else, by the open offer. Furthermore, there is no evidence of any attempt by Mr Howell to decrease his assets and furthermore, it must be remembered that the defendant is a trader in land so that any charge on his trading stock makes his business life rather difficult. Mr
Robinson submits that because there is no evidence of any evasion of the costs liability or attempt to manipulate assets, a Mareva would not lie and a charging order does not lie for reasons previously given, and it would be wrong for the court to use its inherent power, if any, to make some sort of
Mareva charging order when the plaintiff could not obtain either a charging order or a Mareva.

There was some debate as to just what Mr Parsons meant by the inherent power of the court. It seems that he meant those powers as were described by Mason,
P as he now is, in his article "The Inherent Jurisdiction of the Court" [(1983) 57 ALJ 449.] It is not necessary to decide whether "inherent" is the correct description of the power Mr Parsons seeks to have me exercise. The authorities would tend to show that a distinction has to be made between (a) accrued jurisdiction such as that described in Philip Morris Inc versus Adam P
Brown Male Fashions Pty Ltd [(1981) 148 CLR 457], 475; (b) the implied jurisdiction of the court, that is, powers which are necessary to carry out the authority expressly granted to the court; and (c) the power which is essential to the existence, dignity and function of a court from the very fact that it is a court (Re Integration of the Nebraska State Bar
Association [275 NW 265], 267 (1937)). This last has been described as those powers which must "be conceded to the judiciary as a separate department of government because their exercise is deemed absolutely essential for the performance of the court's constitutionally mandated mission": Winters v
City of Oklahoma City [740 P 724], 728 (1987); see generally Stumpf, Inherent Powers of the
Courts, National Judicial College, Reno, 1994 pp 4-7.

On this analysis, what we are dealing with is implied, rather than inherent, powers, but as I have said, it matters little for the present purpose.
Furthermore, [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) would seem in any event to give statutory recognition to the court's otherwise implied powers.

One of the sections of Mason P's article, that commencing on p 452, deals with a series of cases where courts have exercised power to prevent steps being taken which would render judicial proceedings inefficacious. Illustrations of the exercise of that power are given, not only by the making of Mareva injunctions or Anton Piller orders, but also by cases such as Tait versus The
Queen <case>; [(1962) 108 CLR 620], where the High Court granted an injunction to prevent a convicted murderer being executed. There is no doubt at all that such a power exists and may be exercised. However, it is hard to see how it should be exercised in the present case. This is not a case for a Mareva order for the reasons given by Mr Robinson. It is not a case for a charging order. Although it may fairly be said, as Mr Parsons has said, that the defendant's conduct in the past has not been of an exemplary nature, nonetheless, as Mr Robinson says, there is no current default on his part.

Mr Parsons strongly relies on the decision of McLelland, CJ in Eq in April granting a charging order. He says that this order must have been made under the inherent power of the court and it is a good example of how judges exercise that power to prevent orders of the court being flouted. Mr Robinson, on the other hand, says that no precise reasons were given for that decision and it may well have been one of the very few aberrations that the former
Chief Judge ever became involved in. With respect, it seems to me that the
Chief Judge was merely exercising the power that courts have of making an order in contempt proceedings less than what is the strict measure of the law, that is, punitive action. It is always open to a court on a motion for contempt, in lieu of making an order for attachment or sequestration, to make an order defining conduct or otherwise ensuring that the court's process is obeyed. The charging order was merely a method of ensuring directly what the in personam order had not achieved because of the defendant's "casualness".

During the oral hearing, I asked whether there was any material on the law governing security for costs which might assist in the resolution of the instant question. Since reserving my decision, I have followed up this thought, but have not found any material that would assist except that it would seem that if money is paid in as security and the respondent obtains judgment, leave is required before the bond given as security is discharged:
Ockerby & Co Ltd versus Cohen Ltd <case>; [(1917) 19 WALR 94.] In that case, a successful plaintiff was repaid its security but then there was a successful appeal and the Full Court held that the security should have stayed in the court until an order had been made for payment out. The decision really does not take the matter any further.

Accordingly, it does not seem to me that I should make any order for a charge to be given as asked in the notice of motion.

This leaves three loose ends. First, the claim for specific performance has not been abandoned. The plaintiff will either have to argue that matter or have the present notice of motion dismissed. I note that Mr Robinson says that the basic flaw with the specific performance case is that there never was an underlying agreement as purportedly noted by the Federal Court.

The second is the effect of the Federal Court order of 18 July 1997. This
Court may in a proper case give a declaration as to the meaning of an order of a superior court, but ordinarily, out of comity, does not do so in respect of an order of a superior court of co-ordinate jurisdiction.

The third matter is that I granted an injunction up until the time of delivery of judgment restraining the defendant from entering into any agreement or undertaking for sale or transfer or encumbrance of the property. That injunction should be discharged as from today. There should be an inquiry as to damages caused by that injunction if the defendant applies by motion to a
Master filed within 14 days of the delivery of judgment; otherwise the inquiry will be deemed to be waived. I do this because it would seem probable that the damages sustained are of such small amount that the difference between party and party costs and solicitor and client costs in pursuing the matter is probably commercially not worthwhile and it is necessary to clear the list of matters which are not likely to proceed.

In case the plaintiff wishes to pursue specific performance, I would be prepared, if asked, to stand the balance of the notice of motion over to the
Tuesday next after delivery of these reasons, at 9.30 am. Otherwise the notice of motion should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
