

Meissner versus Regina (No 2) Matter No Cca 60603/96 [1997] NSWSC 476 (13
October 1997) 
Joseph Ladislus Meissner versus Regina (No 2) /96 October 1997 
Stein JA, Sully J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: District Court of New South Wales - Mahoney DCJ 
FILE NO: 60603/96 
DELIVERED: 13 October 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 8-9 September 1997 
PARTIES: Joseph Ladislus MEISSNER versus REGINA (No 2) 
JUDGMENT OF: STEIN JA, SULLY J, SPERLING J 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: P Byrne SC 
Crown: G E Smith 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Ken Gilson & Associates 
Crown: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: 
Application for stay of proceedings -refused - witness not available for examination - public interest immunity - no fundamental defect such that appellant will not receive fair trial 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 15 
Joseph Ladislaus MEISSNER versus REGINA (No 2) 
The appellant is awaiting trial on two counts of supplying heroin and appeals from interlocutory orders made by the trial judge. The trial judge had refused to stay proceedings until a particular person was available to be called as a witness, and refused to order a pre-trial examination of another witness.

On appeal: 
The appellant argued that the proceedings should be stayed on the ground that he could not have a fair trial unless a particular witness (whom the Crown does not intend to call, and whose identify and whereabouts are unknown) is available to give evidence. The witness was not to be called on public interest immunity grounds.

Agreement was reached on the issue of the pre-trial examination during the appeal.

Held: 
The fact that the particular witness, who has the benefit of public interest immunity, will not be available for interrogation by the appellant's counsel, does not necessarily mean that the appellant will be deprived of a fair trial.

No error by trial judge in refusing a stay of the proceedings.

Regina versus Meissner (No 1)  <case>; <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 75] applied 
Regina versus Basha (1989) 39 A Crim R 337 referred to.

ORDER 
Appeal dismissed.
 
Joseph Ladislaus MEISSNER versus REGINA (No 2) 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: The appellant, Joseph Ladislaus Meissner, is awaiting trial in the District Court on two counts of supplying a prohibited substance - heroin. Following arraignment, Mahoney DCJ heard and determined certain interlocutory matters raised in Notices of Motion moved by both the Crown and the appellant. On 13 September 1996 his Honour made a number of orders sought by the Crown, but declined to make the orders sought by the appellant and a co-accused Quian Li Zheng. On 1 November 1996 his Honour made further orders concerning the conduct of the trial and refused an application by the appellant to stay the proceedings. His Honour certified under [s 5F(3)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) that the various rulings he had made were proper for determination on appeal. 
The appellant's Notice of Motion dated 11 September 1996 had sought the following orders:
That proceedings be stayed until the Crown calls the person known under the pseudonym of "Gail" or makes her available to be called by the defence.
That there be a pre-trial ("Basha") examination of the witness known under the pseudonym of "George".

The Grounds of Appeal filed by the appellant on 11 October 1996 are as follows:
His Honour the learned trial judge erred in law and in the exercise of his discretion in holding that the evidence of "George" should be taken in camera under a suppression order and under a pseudonym.
His Honour had no jurisdiction to make the said orders.
His Honour erred in law and in the exercise of discretion in failing to order a preliminary inquiry into the evidence of "George".
His Honour erred in law in upholding the submission of public interest immunity for information into the background of "George" generally, and in relation to the particular matter in permitting the DPP to rely on edited material.
His Honour erred in law in upholding the claim for public immunity concerning information in the particular matter concerning the witness "Gail".
His Honour erred in law in failing to stay the proceedings for absence of the testimony of the witness "Gail", despite the concessions of the 
Crown that she was available to give evidence if necessary, and the unfairness resulting from the lack of a pre trial inquiry and the restrictions concerning the evidence of "George".

The matter was listed for hearing before the Court of Criminal Appeal on 28
August 1997 before a Bench differently constituted from the present one. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Paul Byrne of Senior Counsel, informed the Court that the appellant was pursuing only grounds 3 and 6.

It soon became apparent to the Court that ground 3 (as phrased) did not properly raise the point sought to be argued. Accordingly, a redrafted ground was prepared and handed to the Court. It is as follows: 
The learned trial judge erred in refusing the appellant's application for an order that there be a preliminary examination of the witness "George" on the voir dire (Regina versus Basha (1989) 39 A Crim R 337) because such an examination was necessary in order to determine questions relating to the admissibility of the evidence of George and Helen pursuant to the provisions of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) .

As a result of the District Court transcript being unavailable to the Court, the matter was adjourned by the Court to a reconstituted Bench.

As it turns out, we need not trouble further with this amended ground because the parties came to an agreement during the course of the hearing of the appeal. The agreement is as follows: 
The Crown agrees that at the trial of this mater it will not object to the calling of the witness George and witness Michelle Phillipson being the subject of a preliminary hearing in the absence of a jury to determine whether the evidence of a discussion with the appellant outside his Glebe premises should be excluded pursuant to the discretion to exclude the evidence under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) .

Accordingly, I turn to ground 6 concerning `Gail' and the application for a stay of the proceedings. This is not the first stay application made by the appellant. On 5 December 1994 the Court of Criminal Appeal dismissed an appeal from Kirkham DCJ refusing a stay of proceedings (Regina versus Meissner (No 1) [(1994) 76 A Crim R 81).] At that point in time the Crown did not propose to call two police informants whose pseudonyms are `George' and `Gail'. The position has changed since the judgment of the Court in December 1994 and the Crown now proposes to call
George, although his evidence is to be heard in camera. He will use the pseudonym `George', as well as receiving other appropriate protections. None of these matters is now the subject of the appeal. However, the Crown does not intend to call Gail as a witness. She is unavailable to the defence, and was not called at the committal proceedings. The essence of the submission on behalf of the appellant is that the failure to call Gail, necessarily renders the trial unfair to the appellant, and that his Honour was therefore in error in refusing a stay of proceedings.

It is unnecessary to set out the Crown case in detail because it is conveniently summarised by Carruthers J in Meissner (No 1) at 82-83. The issue which is claimed by the appellant to lead to the fundamental unfairness of the trial comes down to a critical conversation at Glebe on 1 October 1992.
Those present at the conversation were an undercover police officer, (using the pseudonym `Helen' but whose real name is Michelle Phillipson), George,
Gail, Victor Camilleri and the appellant. Helen was fitted with a listening device which failed, for technical reasons, to record the conversation. The
Crown alleges that in the conversation the appellant agreed to supply Helen with a `diamond', (1 ounce of heroin) and later with a further 80 `diamonds', through Camilleri. Helen can give evidence at the trial of the conversation.
So can the police informer, George. One may assume that Victor Camilleri can give evidence, but he pleaded guilty to charges arising out of the subject incidents and is serving a substantial gaol sentence. His credibility may therefore be open to doubt. As I have already intimated, the Crown does not propose to call `Gail' for reasons of public interest immunity, concerning, inter alia, her personal safety. The Court read a confidential affidavit of
Phillip Bradley, the Chairman of the NSW Crime Commission, sworn 12 September and tendered by the Crown. The affidavit was not made available to the appellant or his counsel. Having read the material I am quite satisfied that
Gail should not be obliged to give evidence at the trial.

On behalf of the appellant, Mr Byrne submits that the failure or refusal of the prosecutor to call Gail renders the proceedings an abuse of process. There is no doubt that Gail can give relevant evidence. Mr Byrne submits that her evidence would materially assist the appellant. It is submitted that if the application of the rules relating to public interest immunity results in the
Crown not making Gail available to give evidence, then the appellant cannot receive a fair trial, and the proceedings should be stayed.

In Cain versus Glass (No 2) [(1985) 3 NSWLR 230] at 254
McHugh JA said: 
The appellants also argued that the proceedings constitute an abuse of process while the prosecution refuses to disclose the names of witnesses who can give relevant evidence. The appellants accept that the calling of witnesses is a matter within the discretion of the prosecutor. But they contend that, when relevant witnesses are not called, the court has the power to declare the proceedings an abuse of process and to stay them. It is enough to say that, if the prosecution has a duty to protect the identities of informers, its failure to call them in circumstances which would reveal their identity cannot possibly be regarded as an abuse of the process of the court. Otherwise the failure to call an informer who could give relevant evidence would always constitute an abuse of the process of the court.

These observations were followed by the Court in Meissner No 1 at 89-90. For my part, I cannot conceive how the failure of the Crown to call Gail at the trial makes that proceeding an abuse of process.

This finding does not dispose, however, of the argument of the appellant that, without Gail's evidence, he cannot obtain a fair trial. In the absence of
Gail's evidence, it is submitted that the trial will inevitably be unfair to the appellant. The submission is put on the following basis. The appellant challenges the veracity of the version of the conversation alleged by Helen, the undercover police officer. He denies the conversation took place. Along with George, Gail did not give evidence at the committal proceedings. However,
Gail did give evidence at the Royal Commission into the NSW Police Service. It is submitted that the evidence she gave to the Royal Commission is significantly inconsistent with Helen's account; and that the appellant cannot present fairly and completely his defence, or challenge fairly and completely the Crown case, if he is deprived of the opportunity of demonstrating this significant inconsistency.

As to the critical conversation on 1 October 1992, Gail agreed she was present, but denied that the appellant was introduced to Helen. Gail said she observed no conversation take place between Helen and the appellant.

The confidential evidence to the Royal Commission which is relied on by the appellant is as follows: 
Q. Was there any conversation between Helen and Mr Meissner? 
A. No.

Q. None at all? 
A. None at all. He wasn't even introduced to her.

Q. Do you say then that at no time in that two minutes was there any conversation between Helen and Mr Meissner? 
A. No, none at all.

Q. And if there had been conversation between them, would you have noticed it from where you were, from where you were looking and what your attitude was? 
A. I would have seen it. I don't even recall an introduction. It just all happened so very quickly, and he came from nowhere. We were just totally unprepared.

Q. But if it had happened, would you have seen it? 
A. Oh, yes.

A little later, in answer to a question which put Helen's version of the conversation to her, the witness said: 
A. I cannot comment on that, because I didn't hear any of it, but then I was in shock at seeking Joe there, and I've stepped back out of the picture and there was conversation, but I wasn't paying attention to the conversation, because I knew that Helen was there with a tape-recorder in her bag, which I saw in her bag - assuming that she was getting all of this on tape, so I stepped out of the picture again and I really wasn't paying attention.

Q. -- you moved back a few steps? 
A. I moved back physically. I was shocked because Joe had arrived and 
Joe wasn't supposed to be there, as I told Victor.

Q. So did you hear any conversation like the conversation I just read to you from Joe? 
A. I really - no, but I wasn't listening.

Mr Byrne submits that this material is unequivocal as to there having been no introduction of the appellant to Helen, and no conversation with the appellant as alleged by Helen. It is submitted that this evidence materially assists the defence of the appellant since it contradicts Helen's account. It is further submitted that it could lead a jury to a reasonable doubt that the conversation, which is crucial to the Crown case, took place.

The Crown submitted that Gail's evidence to the Commission about the conversation on 1 October 1992 did not stop at what is quoted above. We were invited to read on. For example, the witness agreed that she knew of the code for `diamonds'. This reference was followed by: 
Q. Do you think that if you had heard Mr Meissner use that code in this meeting outside the warehouse on this day, that the fact that he used those same code words would have stayed in your mind - 
A. But that was sort of mentioned, though, wasn't it, when Victor said to 
Joe, "They are here to buy some jewellery." And something was said about going to the pub. He'd go. He didn't have any money, something about, "Put money in the bank", something - I really cannot recall.

Prior to Gail's appearance at the Royal Commission, she was interviewed by an investigator attached to the Commission. The interview was recorded. In this interview Gail made extensive reference to the subject conversation. She made reference to the code for heroin which the appellant and Victor Camilleri had.
With regard to the code she said: 
Make sure you put the money in the bank, codes, you know, between the, you're not going to openly say well, you know, if you're going to give them dope, make sure you get the money. Is he.

Gail is recorded as saying immediately thereafter that the appellant did not speak to Helen, but did have a limited conversation with George.

Later in the interview Gail was asked: 
Q. Joe was present during the conversation and wasn't party ...was he party to the conversation? 
A. The conversation went like this. What are you doing here? Oh they've come to buy some jewellery. Jewellery...Then the conv...then we sort of walked outside and Victor says we're going to the pub. Joe says I would come with you but I don't have any money.

Q. Alright, and what happened after that.

A. And then they talked. They did their thing. Well you take money out of the bank, or you put money in the bank, you know, and...

Q. Who talked? 
A. This is a conversation between Victor and Joe.

A little later: 
Q. So what was the discussion about? 
A. About jewellery. Put the money in the bank for the jewellery.

Q. But you understand jewellery to mean drugs.

A. Something around...

Q. Is that right? Is that fair to say? 
A. No because Vic...because Joe asked Victor what we were doing there.

And Victor told Joe that we'd come to buy some jewellery.

Q. So you're suggesting maybe that Joe Meissner thought that it was only a jewellery transaction taking place? 
A. That's right.

The Crown submits, that when Gail's evidence relating to the conversation at the Royal Commission, and her interview by the Commission Officer, are examined, it is apparent that Gail does not say that the conversation did not take place. According to the Crown, the witness indicates that Camilleri and the appellant talked in their code for heroin. She mentions more than once that reference was made in the conversation to `jewellery' and `money in the bank'. The Crown submits that George's evidence both fleshes out the conversation about jewellery, being the code for heroin, and supports Helen's version of events.

It is further submitted that Gail's evidence at the Royal Commission does not `change the whole scenario' as suggested by counsel for the appellant.
Reliance is also placed on the evidence in the Crown case that within 10 minutes of the alleged conversation the appellant left the scene and was observed by police to place a small package of heroin behind a brick in a retaining wall in the garden bed of a house nearby. Camilleri then walked to the location and removed the package from behind the brick and handed it to
Helen, in the presence of George and Gail. Helen paid Victor $8,000. This transaction led to a meeting in a restaurant at Brighton the following day between Helen, George and Victor Camilleri and another person, Terry Johns.
Johns agreed to supply 75 ounces of heroin to Helen at a nearby hotel the next day. The Crown alleges that this supply occurred by Camilleri to Helen and
George on 3 October 1992. The Crown relies upon this context for the initial conversation in the street at Glebe on 1 October 1992.

The Crown submits that, in reality, Gail only disagrees about the introduction, not the gist of the conversation. Moreover, the Crown maintains that Helen made notes on the day in question, once she realised that the tape recorder was not working.

The Crown, therefore, submits that the trial can be a fair one to the appellant without Gail, given the interests of public interest immunity, which we accept. In an effort seeking to ensure that there is fairness to the accused, the Crown offers to tender the relevant admissible parts of her evidence which was given in confidence to the Royal Commission, and the
Commission record of interview, regarding the subject conversation and other matters relevant to the police investigation, if the appellant consents to this course. Specifically, this would include Gail's unequivocal answers, relied on by the appellant, that there was no introduction, and no conversation between the appellant and Helen, as well as her subsequent evidence about the alleged conversation.

Mr Byrne submits that such a tender would be an unsatisfactory solution for his client and would not solve the fundamental problem of Gail's evidence. He submits that he cannot cross-examine a piece of paper. He is also concerned about the `editing' of the evidence by the authorities.

One thing is certain about the trial. There will be a contest as to the admissibility of the evidence of Helen and George. Whatever occurs in relation to their evidence can be expected to affect the attitude of the presiding
Judge in relation to the failure to call Gail. This Court cannot second-guess what might thereby occur at the trial. What I am able to conclude at this time on the basis of the material brought to our attention, is that it is not apparent that the appellant will be deprived of a fair trial. It does not follow, as night follows day, that in the absence of Gail, the appellant will not receive a fair trial. In Jago versus District Court  <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 23] Mason CJ observed that to justify a permanent stay of criminal proceedings: ... there must be a fundamental defect which goes to the root of the trial `of such a nature that nothing that a trial judge can do in the conduct of the trial can relieve against its unfair consequences' (quoting Wilson J in Barton v
The 
Queen <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 75] at 111).

In my opinion, this principle has not been demonstrated to have been breached.
I am not persuaded that his Honour was in error in refusing to stay the proceedings.

At one point in the submissions made on behalf of the appellant, reliance was placed on [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s130.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) and the weighing of competing interests inherent in ss (1) and (5). I cannot see how the failure or refusal of the prosecution to call Gail at the trial is a matter which arises under [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s130.html)
The section speaks of the public interest in admitting into evidence information relating to matters of state. Under [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s130.html) the court weighs the competing public interests and may decide to direct that the information not be adduced as evidence. This is the not the situation which arises before us.

Accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed.

Joseph Ladislaus MEISSNER versus REGINA (No 2) 
JUDGMENT 
SULLY J: I agree with Stein JA. 
Joseph Ladislaus MEISSNER versus REGINA (No 2) 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: I agree with Stein JA. * * * 
