

Drinkwater versus Caddyrack Pty Ltd Matter No 3970/96 [1997] NSWSC 431 (25
September 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
DRINKWATER versus CADDYRACK PTY LTD /96 September 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Two Messrs Drinkwater and two Messrs Kyrwood invented and patented a device to hold golf clubs firmly in their place whilst being carried. They formed a company, Caddyrack Pty Ltd, to exploit the invention. The shares in Caddyrack Pty Ltd were actually held by companies who were the trustees of the parties' family trusts, that is to say, Lustray Pty Ltd in the case of the Drinkwaters, Gavros Pty Ltd in the case of T Kyrwood, and Gedrot Pty Ltd for G Kyrwood. Later, as will become clear, two other companies, Caddyrack Inc and Caddyrack International Pty Ltd, were incorporated, the former by John Drinkwater to exploit the device in the USA and the latter by the Kyrwoods to exploit the device generally as will appear later in these reasons. 
There is no doubt that the Drinkwaters on the one hand, and the Kyrwoods on the other hand, fell out. The Drinkwaters say that the dispute was resolved on July 1996. On that day the parties, that is, the Drinkwaters on the one hand and the Kyrwoods on the other, entered into a deed which recited, inter alia: "6. The parties are desirous of settling all matters between themselves and settling the repayment of the debt to Great White Shark 
Enterprises." 
The deed then provided that the Drinkwaters would have certain rights including "the exclusive non assignable rights to the patent and trademark of the 9 slot rack and bag in Continental North and South America and including
Hawaii" and the rights to market, manufacture and distribute in those areas.
The Drinkwaters would take responsibility for half the debt payable to Great
White Shark Enterprises. The Drinkwaters would transfer to the Kyrwoods all their shares in Caddyrack Pty Ltd save that Peter Drinkwater or his nominee would retain 5% of the issued shares and they would resign as directors of
Caddyrack Pty Ltd. The deed seemed to envisage that John Drinkwater and
Caddyrack Inc would take over the territory of the Americas, that Peter
Drinkwater would take over the rights for Korea and that the Kyrwoods would have the rights for the rest of the world excluding the Americas and Korea.
The Kyrwoods were to be responsible for the other half of the debt to Great
White Shark Enterprises and they would transfer their shares in Caddyrack Inc to the Drinkwaters or their nominees.

Clause 6 of the deed provided that the Kyrwoods would "replace within fourteen days the security over the residential property of Peter Drinkwater at 44
Skye Point Road, Coal Point currently held by the National Australia Bank provided all conditions in this agreement have been satisfied. Peter
Drinkwater is to make that property or any substitute property available for security for Caddyrack Pty Limited if required and Peter Drinkwater is to have priority security by way of a fixed and floating charge over the assets of
Caddyrack Pty Limited the security to be released within twelve (12) months from the date of advance. If Peter Drinkwater fails to provide such security then his shares in Caddyrack Pty Limited will be transferred to the Kyrwoods." 
Clauses 12, 13 and 14 of the deed were as follows: "12. That Drinkwaters pay to International Tool and Gauge up to $20,000 for the upgrading of the Australian tool and when the upgrade is complete will exchange the United States of America tool for the Australian tool with each party being responsible for the freight
When the United States of America tool is in Australia, 
Caddyrack Pty Limited agrees to be bound on the same basis as 
Caddyrack Inc in Cl 8 hereof.
John Drinkwater agrees that he will not move the tool in the 
United States for a period of three (3) months provided that the 
Kyrwoods and International Tool and Gauge provide a letter relinquishing all interests (if any) in such tool within seven (7) days of the date hereof. This clause will not merge on completion." 
The other provisions of the deed really do not concern me in the present case.

It is necessary to explain some of the terms used in the deed.

The caddyrack is an insert placed into golf bags to organise and protect golf clubs. It is formed by a moulding device which was manufactured by
International Tool and Gauge Pty Ltd (ITG). This device is known as "the tool". The parties had two tools, one being used in Newcastle, New South
Wales, and the other in the United States of America. The tool in the United
States of America was superior in that not only did it manufacture the 9 slot caddyrack, but it could also manufacture lefthanded caddyracks. The purpose of clauses 12 to 14 of the deed was that after the provisions of the deed had been worked out, the tools in both areas would be the same. Thus, the
Australian tool would be upgraded at the Drinkwaters' cost in Australia and then transferred to the United States where it would be used by the
Drinkwaters for their American and Korean business and the American tool would be exchanged for it.

The reference to "Great White Shark Enterprises" is to the fact that a well- known golfer agreed to promote the caddyrack in exchange for a considerable sum of money. The Drinkwaters and the Kyrwoods were not able to pay this money and as at the date of the deed there was a considerable amount owing to Great
White Shark Enterprises, the company under which the golfer traded. The parties hoped to negotiate with Great White Shark Enterprises the payment of what was owing over 18 months. The promotion agreement promised by Great White
Shark Enterprises had come to an end, so that the amount that was being liquidated was a fixed debt in respect of a past period.

An amended statement of claim was filed in court at the opening of proceedings. This statement of claim named as plaintiffs the Drinkwaters,
Lustray Pty Ltd and Caddyrack Inc. The defendants are named as Caddyrack Pty
Ltd, the Kyrwoods, Caddyrack International Pty Ltd, Gedrot Pty Ltd and Gavros
Pty Ltd. Since 5 August 1996, Caddyrack International Pty Ltd has been owned by Gavros Pty Ltd and Gedrot Pty Ltd and has assumed most of the business previously carried on by Caddyrack Pty Ltd. The defendants filed a cross claim against the plaintiffs.

I think, for convenience, it is easier to refer to the disputants as the
Drinkwaters and the Kyrwoods; in each case unless I state otherwise these expressions will refer to all the plaintiffs/cross defendants and all the defendants/cross claimants respectively.

The relief sought in the statement of claim includes a prayer that the court make orders that - the Kyrwoods procure a discharge of the mortgage over Peter Drinkwater's home; an order that Caddyrack Pty Ltd be restrained from selling Caddyrack products to Caddyrack International Pty Ltd; a declaration that Gavros Pty Ltd and Gedrot Pty Ltd hold their shares in
Caddyrack International Pty Ltd on trust for Caddyrack Pty Ltd; an order that the Kyrwoods pay Caddyrack Pty Ltd, or alternatively the
Drinkwaters, damages for breach of fiduciary duty; and that Caddyrack Pty Ltd be wound up under <case> of the Corporations Law.

The cross claim essentially seeks an order for specific performance of the deed of 26 July 1996, including a transfer of shares in Caddyrack Pty Ltd to the Kyrwoods and an order that the United States of America tool be delivered into their custody in exchange for the Australian tool.

I should note as the final preliminary matter that there was an earlier "settlement" of the differences between the parties which led to litigation, and on 16 July 1996 Brownie, J made a declaration that the Drinkwaters were directors of Caddyrack Pty Ltd. It was following that judgment that the
Drinkwaters and the Kyrwoods entered into further negotiations and about 22
July 1996 the Kyrwoods' solicitor was provided with a document from the
Drinkwaters proposing a settlement.

The Kyrwoods' solicitor, Mr Doyle, says that on 26 July, 1996, there was a meeting at the home of Mr Cornwell, solicitor, in Merewether. Mr Doyle left that meeting at about 11 am and returned to his office. At 4 pm that day the
Kyrwoods met Mr Doyle in his office in Newcastle with a draft document and about an hour later he went with the Kyrwoods to Mr Cornwell's office in
Newcastle where negotiations took place until about 9.30 pm. Mr Cornwell's secretary was working that night and she amended the document on her word processor as and when changes were required. At about 9 pm the agreement was signed and this was followed by celebratory drinks.

At least in hindsight, it is clear that the deed is inadequate for the purpose for which it was designed. At the very least, each party has interpreted it differently and has not done what the other party thought should have been done under the deed. The Drinkwaters take the view that either there was never any settlement, or alternatively, the settlement deed has been terminated. The
Kyrwoods take the view that there ought to be specific performance of the settlement, or if it has been terminated, then the Drinkwaters should pay damages. The Drinkwaters, as a backup remedy, seek that Caddyrack Pty Ltd be wound up. However, before this is done they want Caddyrack International Pty
Ltd to disappear from the scene and its assets and business revested in
Caddyrack Pty Ltd. The Drinkwaters would be content if they were to receive the value of their shares in Caddyrack Pty Ltd on the basis that Caddyrack Pty
Ltd owns the business currently being operated by Caddyrack International Pty
Ltd.

The proceedings were tried by me on 10, 11 and 12 June 1997, Mr B Coles QC and
Mr M Ashhurst appearing for the Drinkwaters, and Mr J Campbell QC and Mr S W
Climpson appearing for the Kyrwoods. After I had prepared my draft reasons, the defendants asked to reopen their case to adduce further evidence. This was opposed, but, after hearing counsel on 22 September, I permitted that further evidence to be admitted and then further considered the matter.

In his opening address, Mr Coles QC said that the first issue in the proceedings was whether there had been default over the discharge of the mortgage over Peter Drinkwater's home. That involved looking to see whether the settlement was conditional, and if so, what were the conditions. It was clear that one of the conditions was that Great White Shark Enterprises would agree to an instalment plan in respect of its debt. It had done so and repayments had continued so that this matter was not a problem. A second condition was that John Drinkwater, who was operating Caddyrack Inc in
California, would receive some shares from a third party and this also had been performed.

The dispute that seemed to have arisen was over clause 12 which contemplated arrangements to exchange the tools. The plaintiffs' position was that clause was not a condition of the agreement to which the obligation relating to the security over Peter Drinkwater's property was to be subject. However, the
Drinkwaters, allegedly repudiating their contractual obligations, had refused to do anything about performing the agreement until they had received the tool from America. A dispute had arisen as to the timetabling of the exchange of tools and the Kyrwoods had asserted that the Drinkwaters should pay up front the $20,000 for the upgrading of the tool whereas the Drinkwaters said the upgrading was the responsibility of Caddyrack Pty Ltd and they would pay the $20,000 once the tool was upgraded. Mr Coles QC said that the plaintiffs' position was that in the absence of performance of the agreement, the
Drinkwaters were back in the position that they were in before the settlement, that is, they were directors of Caddyrack Pty Ltd and that they were entitled to participate in its business and not have that business made worthless by the activities of the Kyrwoods conducting the same business through Caddyrack
International Pty Ltd.

The evidence shows that on 24 September 1996, the Kyrwoods gave a notice to the Drinkwaters in the style of a notice to complete. The notice recited the agreement and that the Great White Shark Enterprises condition and the other condition had been satisfied and then stated: "Take Notice that:- the Kyrwoods are ready, willing and able to complete the 
Agreement and will hand over executed transfers of the shares in 
Caddyrack Inc and will replace the security over the residential property of Peter Drinkwater at 44 Skye Point Road, Coal Point and will exchange the die situated in Australia for the die situated in the United States (or arrange for it to be freighted simultaneously); you, the Drinkwaters, are required to attend at the offices of Caddyrack Pty Limited at 10 Murray Street, Hamilton at pm on 10 October 1996 with:- (i) signed Resignations as 
Directors (ii) signed Transfers in Caddyrack Pty Limited; (iii) the die used for manufacturing caddyracks located in the 
United States (or arrange for it to be freighted simultaneously)." 
The notice then said that in default of compliance, "the Kyrwoods will either sue you for damages and/or seek specific performance of the Agreement." 
On 10 October 1996, Peter Drinkwater and his solicitor, Mr Hewitt, attended the office of Caddyrack Pty Ltd. Mr Hewitt's letter of 16 October then says to the Kyrwoods' solicitors, "Your clients were unable to complete the agreement for various reasons including inter alia they did not have the share transfer transferring shares held by Caddyrack Pty Ltd to John Drinkwater and Peter
Drinkwater in accordance with clause 3.4 of the agreement dated 26 July.
Further, your clients were unable to settle at the appointed time of 3.00 pm.
Accordingly, your clients have not been ready willing and able to settle the matter since August 1996.
 "We confirm that the writer reserved our clients' rights in relation to such failures at the commencement of the meeting at approximately 3.30 on 10
October last. Following that statement `without prejudice' negotiations were undertaken so as to ascertain if an alternative settlement could be effected.
 "We note that your clients have now refused any alternative form of settlement. Our clients rely on your clients' failure to complete the agreement in accordance with your notice and that you have thereby repudiated the agreement of 26 July 1996." 
Mr Doyle, the Kyrwoods' solicitor, says that Mr Hewitt telephoned him about 10 am on 10 October and said that Mr Hewitt maintained that under the agreement, until the tool was upgraded, the Drinkwaters did not have to settle. The solicitors argued then as to what the agreement meant as to the payment of $20,000 to upgrade the tool. There was then some discussion as to whether
International Tool and Gauge would give a firm price for the work. They did, indicating the price was between $18,000 and $20,000 and Mr Doyle faxed a copy of this to Mr Hewitt, but did not hear back from him.

Mr Hewitt denies Mr Doyle's version. He also denies that there was ever any fax and has produced his firm's reception log for its facsimile machine for 9 to 11 October 1996.

Mr Hewitt says that he arrived at the office of the first defendant at 2.55 on October. At approximately 3.05, the Kyrwoods attended the office (which was the office of Rees Pritchard, accountants for the Kyrwoods) and Mr Hewitt asked them whether Mr Doyle was attending. Mr Terry Kyrwood said, "He's on his way". At about 3.25 Mr Doyle arrived and a meeting took place at which were present Peter Drinkwater, Terry and Geoffrey Kyrwood, Craig Doyle, Phillip
Hewitt, Stephen Pritchard, who was the accountant for the first and second defendants, and a female clerk from the office of Brian Cornwell, Mr Cornwell being Geoffrey Kyrwood's solicitor.

Mr Hewitt says that he told Mr Doyle, "This meeting was called by you to complete the agreement of 26 July. It was supposed to occur at 3 o'clock. You served the notice to complete requiring us to be here at 3 pm to complete the agreement. It is now 3.25 and you have now only just arrived. I reserve my clients' rights in respect of your failure to comply with your own notice."
The parties then agreed to talk off the record, following which Peter
Drinkwater and Phillip Hewitt left the room. Upon their return to the room, the clerk from Mr Cornwell's office had left and the package she had been carrying, which Mr Hewitt thinks contained share transfers, was in the possession of Steven Pritchard. Mr Doyle then said to Mr Pritchard, "Do we have all of the share transfers for Caddyrack Inc?" Steven Pritchard looked through the documents that had been given to him by Brian Cornwell's clerk and said, "No, I don't have the share transfer for Caddyrack Pty Ltd shares in
Caddyrack Inc. I do not know where it is. It may be with Brian Cornwell." Mr
Hewitt says that during the time he was at the offices of Rees Pritchard, no- one on the Kyrwoods' side made any reference to the notice of 24 September or required him to hand over any document or thing. The parties then agreed to hold further discussions the next day, which I assume came to no resolution.

On 15 October, the Kyrwoods' solicitors wrote to the Drinkwaters' solicitors referring to conversations on 11 October and to a draft that had been then prepared and saying, "Please note that our clients no longer wish to proceed with negotiations as envisaged by the draft.
 "Since August 1996 our clients have been ready, willing and able to settle the matter.
 "In your letter of 6 August 1996 you indicated that, subject to finalisation of the arrangements between Caddyrack Pty Limited and Great White Shark
Enterprises, your clients would be in a position to execute transfers and resignations as Directors.
 "We presume from that statement that your clients are also ready, willing and able to settle the matter.
 "As to the agreement, we are of the view that it is now unconditional in that the two pre conditions contained in it have been satisfied. ... Clause 12 of the Agreement relates to upgrading the Australian Tool. This clause was inserted to meet your client's apparent requirement that when the Australian
Tool was moved to America it would be capable of producing a product with an appearance as close to the American product as possible. The requirement for the upgrade is a requirement solely to meet your clients' needs and, if no longer required by your client, our client is happy to dispense with it.
 "During the 3 months originally envisaged as the time required to carry out the modifications, our client has always had the die available so that ITG could do the work.
 "However, it appears that little, if any, contact has been made by your clients with ITG to carry out any upgrading of the Tool. ... Immediately the upgrade is complete, the US Tool will be transported to Australia at your client's expense as envisaged by the agreement and immediately upon its inspection in Sydney by a representative of ITG and he being satisfied that the Tool is capable of producing marketable product, our clients will comply with clause 6 by payment to the National Australia Bank of $250,000.00 in return for which payment the Bank will confirm that it has no interest in Mr
Drinkwater's property at 44 Skye Point Road, Coal Point relative to advances afforded to Caddyrack Pty Limited. .... Please confirm your client's agreement with this proposal, whereupon we implement the share transfers forthwith and the resignation as Directors forthwith and assist your client to set in motion the modification of the Tool." 
To this, Mr Hewitt replied on 16 October to the effect that Mr Doyle had given a notice making time of the essence, and that the Kyrwoods were unable to complete the agreement at that time for various reasons including the fact that they did not have the share transfer ready. He noted that the Kyrwoods had now refused any alternative form of settlement and accordingly the
Drinkwaters relied on the failure to complete the agreement in accordance with the notice as a repudiation.

Mr Doyle responded to the effect that there was no repudiation and on 28
October followed that reply up with a letter enclosing share certificates. The letter of 28 October contained this provision: "When all the above matters have been attended to, when the US Tool is in
Australia, and provided that there have been no breaches of any other conditions of the agreement by your clients (such as sale of product outside of the exclusive areas), our clients will comply with clause 6." 
This was met with a reply that the Drinkwaters considered that the Kyrwoods had repudiated the agreement and expected that the orders made by Brownie, J on 16 July 1996 would now be implemented; if not, there would be an application for contempt of court. Issue was thus joined.

In his submissions at the conclusion of the case, Mr Coles QC put that clause was a condition of fundamental importance, that is, without the assurance of strict and literal performance of that clause, the Drinkwaters would not have executed the agreement. On its true construction, clause 12 was not a condition precedent to clause 6. The Kyrwoods knew that this was the case, yet they continued to assert otherwise and refused to complete until the American tool was exchanged with the Australian tool. Thus, by their actions they showed clearly that they intended to fulfil the contract only in a manner substantially inconsistent with their contractual obligations and no other way. This was a repudiation which the Drinkwaters could avail themselves of to terminate the agreement.

Mr Campbell QC submitted that the obligation to replace the security within 14 days was subject to compliance with all the conditions of the agreement including, at the least, the obligation under clause 12. In any event, the obligation to replace the security within 14 days was not one where time was of the essence. The failure of the Kyrwoods to replace the security over Peter
Drinkwater's house within 14 days of the date of the agreement was not a repudiation; indeed, it was not even a breach of the agreement. The conduct of the Kyrwoods at no stage showed an intention not to be bound by the agreement.
Insofar as the Drinkwaters have purported to terminate on the basis that the
Kyrwoods served a notice to complete and were not then in a position to comply with it, they have completely misunderstood the position. First, the notice was not a notice to complete. Secondly, the late arrival at the meeting of 10
October was of no consequence. If necessary, the Kyrwoods could have presented transfers at the meeting because they were both present and could have signed any necessary documentation. Indeed, the actions of the Kyrwoods in trying to force a settlement to occur by means of the notice shows a desire and willingness to perform, not a repudiation. Finally, it is not possible for the
Drinkwaters to take advantage of a situation brought about by their own wrong to justify a termination.

I believe that it is expedient to deal with the issue as to repudiation first.

As I indicated earlier, I believe that a comment made by one of the counsel in his closing address is apposite, that is, that the agreement was put together very hurriedly and does not contain sufficient detail to remove all ambiguities. Accordingly it is not surprising that the parties have reached different views as to the meaning of the document.

The key question is whether clause 6 is subject to a condition that it is not to come into effect until the Drinkwaters comply with clause 12 and associated clauses.

The first sentence of clause 6 is, so far as is relevant, "The Kyrwoods will replace within fourteen (14) days the security over the residential property of Peter Drinkwater ... provided all conditions in this agreement have been satisfied." What does "all conditions in this agreement" signify? 
The word "conditions" does not appear in the document at all, though the word "conditional" appears in clause 15, that is, that the agreement is also conditional upon a certain transfer of shares in Caddyrack Inc to John
Drinkwater, but it is clear that that is a condition precedent to performance rather than a condition precedent to agreement and in any event it has been performed. Clause 11 uses the words "This agreement is subject to" and then refers to satisfactory arrangements with Great White Shark Enterprises. Again this would appear to be a condition precedent to performance rather than to agreement and in any event this has been fulfilled. Nothing else in the agreement is termed a condition, but the word "also" in clause 15 suggests that although the word "condition" has not previously been used, other conditions are implicit in the agreement. One of those may well be clause 11.
The Kyrwoods say that clauses 12 to 14 are also conditions.

The verb "will" in clauses 1 and 3, which note the obligations of the
Drinkwaters and the Kyrwoods respectively, shows the position that will exist after the agreement is consummated. Again, clause 8, which provides that
Caddyrack Inc is to supply lefthanded caddyracks at cost to Caddyrack Pty Ltd, indicates that there is to be an immediate supply. So we have a contrast between the verb "is" in clause 8 and the verb "will" in clauses 1 and 3.

Clause 12 does not use any prefatory verb. One could read clause 12 as "It is hereby agreed as follows: 12. That Drinkwaters pay to ITG up to $20,000 for the upgrading of the Australian tool". Probably one should read the document this way even though the word "agrees" is tautologous if this construction is preferred as "agrees" is used in clauses 10, 13 and 14. The clause does not indicate when the Drinkwaters are to pay and this is in contrast to clause 6 which sets a period of 14 days, clauses 9 and 10 which deal with a period, and clause 14 which prevents John Drinkwater moving the American tool for three months from the date of the agreement.

It is hard to see how the parties could have intended that clause 12 should have been consummated within the 14 days mentioned in clause 6. There is not sufficient material to show that as at the date of agreement, the parties had any real idea as to how long ITG would take to upgrade the tool. Clause 14, however, would seem to give some flavour to the idea that it might take some months. Clause 12, however, does seem to have the flavour that $20,000 will be paid before the upgrade is complete, but it is difficult to construe this as a condition in the traditional sense of the word, ie condition as opposed to warranty, because anyone can pay the $20,000 (or more significantly up to $20,000) if the Drinkwaters do not and this usually indicates an obligation which is not essential. Indeed, the "up to $20,000" indicates to me that what was intended by the economy of language used in the clause is that when ITG made a proper demand for a fee, then the Drinkwaters would pay what was demanded so long as that did not exceed $20,000. This event might well be more than 14 days after the date of the agreement. It is then envisaged by clause that a further period of time will elapse between the date when the $20,000 payment is made and when the upgrade is complete and at that stage there will be the exchange of the tools which the parties might have expected would in itself take perhaps up to a week to arrange.

Mr Campbell QC drew my attention to the evidence that Mr Berrey of ITG made it quite clear that he was not willing to start work on upgrading the tool without a progress payment and that the Drinkwaters knew within a few days of July that ITG required a deposit. Mr Berrey's affidavit (DA23) says that
Peter Drinkwater rang him on 25 July and was told that it would cost between $15,000 and $18,000 to upgrade the Australian tool and certainly $20,000 would cover it, and that it would take 12 weeks to do the work. On 26 July, Geoffrey
Kyrwood also enquired how long it would take to change the die and how much it would cost and was told the same thing. Shortly after 26 July, John Drinkwater was told by Mr Berrey, "I will need some money up front before we start work.
I will need $10,000 now and the balance on completion of the upgrade" to which
John Drinkwater said, "Well that has to be sorted out". On 2 August ITG sent a letter to John Drinkwater by facsimile requiring a deposit of $10,000 with the balance of payment of $10,000 to be paid on completion. There was no reply.

The Drinkwaters say that they were not to pay the bill of ITG but merely to contribute to its payment so that there was no obligation for them to pay money until the upgrading was effected.

I must say that I do not agree with this last submission. It is not at all unusual for a supplier to ask for a substantial deposit for work of this nature and it seems to me that, so long as a demand is made for a deposit which is commercially reasonable, under a clause such as clause 12 there is an obligation to pay it. However, this conclusion has little bearing on the ultimate decision in this case.

It seems to me that the factual matrix makes it clear that both parties knew the upgrading of the tool would take about 12 weeks (which seems to tie in with clause 14). This goes a long way in showing that performance of clause 12 was not intended to be a condition within the meaning of clause 6.

Mr Coles QC, however, says that that another matter that must be considered is the earlier (February 1996) agreement to settle differences between the
Drinkwaters and the Kyrwoods. This agreement, which is recorded in the minutes of meeting of directors of Caddyrack Pty Ltd (DA14/A) provided - "2. Personal asset security from Peter and John to be transferred to the Kyrwoods as priority".

This again, Mr Coles QC puts, I believe, correctly, shows in the factual matrix that this was something which the parties were thinking of doing quickly rather than in the long term.

Next, Mr Coles QC relies on admissions allegedly made by the Kyrwoods as to the meaning of the document after it was signed. Under the principle laid down in L Schuler AG versus Wickman Machine Tool Sales Ltd <case>; [[1974] AC ], these matters could not be considered in construing the document. Mr Coles QC, however, submits that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) alters the position radically and that as this material is relevant, it now may be considered.

However, the so-called principle in that case is either a manifestation of the parol evidence rule, or alternatively, it is a finding that it is irrelevant in the construction of a document that facts may have occurred since the document was made or that parties have acted in a particular way after the document was made, or that the parties have made admissions after the document was made as to its true construction. There is considerable support for this lastmentioned view, because as Lord Reid said in Wentworth Street Estates
Ltd versus James Miller & Partners Ltd [[1970] AC 583], 603, "Otherwise one might have the result that a contract meant one thing the day it was signed, but by reason of subsequent events meant something different a month or a year later." 
Lord Wilberforce, in the Wickman Tool case said that the rule was one with the parol evidence rule (see p 261). It is very hard to credit the legislature with the intention of abolishing the parol evidence rule by the enactment of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) especially as the Act came into being after thorough consideration by law reform bodies.

It is certainly the situation that there has been growing dissatisfaction with the parol evidence rule and it appears to many modern lawyers that it is a rule which is based on serious misconceptions; see for instance, State Rail
Authority versus Heath Outdoor Pty Ltd [(1986) 7 NSWLR 170], 191-2.
Indeed, the rule seems to have been founded on the misconception that the only thing that is relevant when one is construing a contract is the objective intention of the parties. As has been pointed out, it is rather artificial to say that, where both parties to a contract clearly have a subjective intention as to the meaning of a term in the contract, this is completely irrelevant (I have paraphrased what DW McLauchlan has said in his note in [(1987) 113 LQR ], 241). See also The Karen Oltmann [[1976] 2 Ll
Rep 708], 712; Air New Zealand Ltd versus Nippon Credit Bank Ltd [[1977] 1 NZLR 218.] 
In the recent discussion contained in the disagreements between on the one hand, Brooking JA and the Victorian Court of Appeal, and on the other hand,
Santow, J of this Court (see FAI Insurance Co Ltd versus Savoy Pty Ltd <case>; [[1993] 2 VR 337]; Ryan v
Textile Clothing & Footwear Union of Australia <case>; [[1996] 2 VR 226] and Spurnwill Pty Ltd versus BAB Pty Ltd [(1994) 36 NSWLR )](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281994%29%2036%20NSWLR%20290 "View LawCiteRecord" ), it does not seem to be suggested on either side that there was a rule such as laid down in the Wickman Tool case: their difference was as to whether post-contractual conduct is receivable as an objective background fact where words used in an instrument are ambiguous. See also Trawl Industries of Australia Pty Ltd versus Effem Foods Pty Ltd [(1992) 27 NSWLR 326], 361-2;
Benjamin Developments Ltd versus Robert Jones Pacific Ltd [[1994] 3 NZLR ], ; Revlon Manufacturing Ltd versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation [(1997) 34 ATR 555], 567 and Hide & Skin Trading Pty Ltd versus Oceanic Meat
Traders Ltd [(1990) 20 NSWLR 310.]
Accordingly, I consider that I cannot take notice of any conduct of the parties or admissions made by the parties as to the meaning of the deed subsequent to its making.

Mr Coles QC puts that really what we have here is a contract in the fourth category of Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353], that is, "One in which the parties were content to be bound immediately and exclusively by the terms which they had agreed upon whilst expecting to make a further contract in substitution for the first contract, containing, by consent, additional terms": Sinclair, Scott & Co v
Naughton <case>; [(1929) 43 CLR 310], 317; Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd versus GR
Securities Pty Ltd [(1986) 40 NSWLR 622], 628.
Again, I think that that submission is correct.

Mr Campbell QC puts that the factual matrix to the 26 July agreement was that the parties were natural persons who were in deadlock. There had been a
February 1996 attempt to resolve the deadlock, but this had failed and led to the litigation before Brownie, J. The parties wanted a clean break and to divide the world markets between them. The parties knew that the modification of the tool would take about 12 weeks and when construing what is a reasonable time for clause 12 to be complied with, 12 weeks is the sort of period that should be considered as reasonable. It is to be noted that under clause 6
Peter Drinkwater is not to have his house completely unencumbered. He is to make it available for security for Caddyrack Pty Ltd, if required on security, with liquidated damages if he failed to do so.

A court is required to make as much sense of a commercial document as possible, provided that this does not result in a situation where it is completely a matter of discretion of one contractual party as to whether he or she would perform or not: Biotechnology Australia Pty Ltd versus Pace [(1988) 15 NSWLR 130], 143. It seems to me that the only words that could be conditions within the proviso to clause 6 are the obligations in clauses 11 and 15. Although there is a general principle that in commercial contracts time is of the essence, it is a matter of construction and it seems to me that where the parties understand that two conditions have to be fulfilled, they would not intend that a 14 day time period running from the date of the agreement is to be an essential period. Although it requires doing some violence to the actual words, clause 6 should be read as meaning within 14 days of 26 July or within a reasonable time in the nature of 14 days after performance of the condition with time not being of the essence. The conditions referred to in clause 6 do not cover the matters in clause 12 because the parties knew that these were likely to take some 12 weeks and this is just incompatible with something happening within 14 days. Furthermore, there is nothing in clause 12, as opposed to clauses 11 and 15, which suggests that it is a condition or that it is a matter which is to happen concurrently with clause 6.

Accordingly, the construction of clause 6 put by the Drinkwaters is the correct one. It follows that in reaching the opposite conclusion, the Kyrwoods have been asking for the agreement to be performed in a way differently to its true construction.

That, of course, is not of itself repudiation. There is no doubt, however, that a person who persistently insists on only performing a contract on his or her own (wrong) interpretation of the contract can be found to have repudiated the contract. In Satellite Estate Pty Ltd versus Jaquet [(1968) 71 SR ], 140, Walsh, JA said that he derived the following from the authorities:- "(1) The ultimate question is whether it should be concluded that one party acted in such a way as to evince an intention not to carry out the contract.

That intention need not be expressed in words but may be indicated by conduct.

The question is one of fact and, in deciding it, regard is to be had to the nature of the contract and to all the circumstances of the case ... .

It will sometimes be a matter of much difficulty to apply the law to the particular case ... .

The dictum of Lord Wright ... that `repudiation of a contract is a serious matter, not to be lightly found or inferred ...' ".

The persistent maintenance of an untenable construction of a contract on a matter of essential substance may amount to a repudiation: Summers versus The
Commonwealth <case>; [(1918) 25 CLR 144], 152, affirmed <case>; [(1919) 26 CLR 180.] 
In the Satellite Estate case, Asprey, JA said at 149, " `Repudiation' is a word which has a number of meanings ... . Where one party to a contract persists in maintaining that it will only perform an obligation of essential importance in accordance with an untenable construction of that obligation, that should be regarded as amounting to a total repudiation of the contract on the part of that party ... . The case may be different when there is a bona fide dispute as to the true construction of `a not very perspicuous document' ...". The last part of this passage is a reference to the judgment of Harman,
LJ in Sweet & Maxwell Ltd versus Universal News Services Ltd [[1964] 2
QB 699], , where his Lordship said, "I do not think that a person who maintains his view of the construction of what is, after all, a not very perspicuous document is repudiating because he says, `my view of it is this, and this I will do' and the other man says `well, my view is different'. Let them go to the court and have the matter determined as they can." 
In DTR Nominees Pty Ltd versus Mona Homes Pty Ltd <case>; [(1978) 138 CLR 423], 432-3, three Justices of the High Court said in respect of a mistaken view of a contract which had actually appealed to the first Judge who heard the case and was held bona fide, "Consequently it is a case of a bona fide dispute as to the true construction of a contract expressed in terms which are by no means clear ... . In these circumstances the Court is not justified in drawing an inference that the appellant intended not to perform the contract according to its terms or that it repudiated the contract." 
In Shevill versus Builders' Licensing Board <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 620], 625-6, Gibbs, CJ said that, "A contract may be repudiated if one party renounces his liabilities under it - if he evinces an intention no longer to be bound by the contract ... or shows that he intends to fulfil the contract only in a manner substantially inconsistent with his obligations and not in any other way. ... In such a case the innocent party is entitled to accept the repudiation, thereby discharging himself from further performance, and sue for damages ...".

In Laurinda Pty Ltd versus Capalaba Park Shopping Centre Pty Ltd <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 623], 634, Mason, CJ commented on this passage by saying, "There is a difference between evincing an intention to carry out a contract only if and when it suits the party to do so and evincing an intention to carry out a contract as and when it suits the party to do so. In the first case the party intends not to carry out the contract at all in the event that it does not suit him. In the second case the party intends to carry out the contract, but only to carry it out as and when it suits him. It is much easier to say of the first than of the second case that the party has evinced an intention no longer to be bound by the contract or to fulfil it only in a manner substantially inconsistent with his obligations and not in any other way."
Brennan, J said at 647, "Repudiation is not ascertained by an inquiry into the subjective state of mind of the party in default; it is to be found in the conduct, whether verbal or other, of the party in default which conveys to the other party the defaulting party's inability to perform the contract or promise or his intention not to perform it or to fulfil it only in a manner substantially inconsistent with his obligations and not in any other way."
This point was also made by Deane and Dawson, JJ at 657.

Mr Coles QC puts that the facts in this case show objectively a deliberate impression conveyed to the Drinkwaters, an insistence that the contract would only be performed as the Kyrwoods wanted it to be performed and not as it provided. He points to the notice of 24 September as an insistence that the agreement be performed other than its requirements, what happened at the meeting of 10 October, the letter of 15 October and then the forbearance of the Drinkwaters in not terminating until it was abundantly clear that the
Kyrwoods would not repent from their position.

The reference to what happened on 10 October means that I need to decide which of the versions of the meeting of 10 October, that of Mr Hewitt, or that of Mr
Doyle, I should accept, because their versions differ. It is not an exercise that I take part in without it being absolutely necessary because judges are not always infallibly able to assess credibility by the short exposure that a witness has in the witness box, and a finding of a professional man against a professional man that his evidence ought not to be accepted may have repercussions. However, where it is necessary to get at the true facts, this has to be done.

What was striking about the evidence of many of the witnesses in the instant case was that they were such literalists. Mr Hewitt, solicitor, was not a particularly good witness. He appeared to prevaricate by asking for details whilst he could consider his answer, and sometimes gave a negative answer to a question as to whether something was said in a conversation when the whole truth would have been that it was not said in that conversation, but was said on some other occasion.

Mr Peter Drinkwater again was another literalist, who adopted a similar ploy.
In his additional submissions on 22 September, Mr Climpson put that Mr
Drinkwater's credit was affected by the fact that despite his evidence in the witness box that the new 11 slot rack to be marketed as "Clubrack" was not proceeding, within a few weeks of that evidence there was a substantial advertising campaign for the Clubrack with a number of distributors handling the product. Mr Ashhurst says that this is of no value on credit as it was always clear that the matter which was holding up "Clubrack" was the shortage of funds brought about by the Kyrwoods' defaults. He submits that it is equally possible that an alternate source of finance was discovered. I do not think that this is a full answer, as the lead time necessary would make it more likely than not that the Clubrack was about to be launched at the time of the initial hearing. However, in the absence of further cross examination on the point, I do not consider that it would be fair to downgrade Mr Peter
Drinkwater's credibility on this score. Mr Ashhurst's explanation may be correct, and, even though he could have produced further evidence, the reason for not doing so is more likely than not because his clients require a speedy decision rather than for any other reason.

On the other side, Mr Terry Kyrwood, although not shaken in cross examination, did admit to some devious behaviour. Mr Norris, who was a solicitor in the same firm as Mr Doyle, was not a good witness. His general approach to giving evidence was to try and deflect cross examining counsel by bumping the issue back to the cross examiner. For instance, at T110, he was asked as to his understanding when he received a document to which the answer was that his understanding was as counsel put but "Do you have the document there? I will give you my comments on it if you like".

However, there is little purpose in saying which of the principal actors was the better witness. I will content myself with saying that I was more comfortable in accepting their evidence if it was supported by other evidence.
In actuality, it was the evidence of the solicitors which was more determinative of the case.

Mr Doyle, solicitor, gave his evidence in a very belligerent manner. He gave a poor impression in the witness box. It was difficult to believe that a person who is a solicitor whose letterhead describes him as an accredited specialist in business law would take some notes of a meeting which was obviously a vital meeting, annex those to his affidavit, yet never make any note of the vital conversations at the meeting. (See affidavit DA22/N). In my view, where the evidence of Mr Hewitt and Mr Doyle conflict, I must prefer the evidence of Mr
Hewitt.

Mr Campbell QC says that it is wrong to class the notice of 24 September as a notice to complete.

I really do not see how it can be looked at in any other way. It certainly was a very poorly drafted notice, but the only basis on which it could have been given was that a reasonable time for performance had elapsed, there was great and unreasonable delay warranting making time of the essence. The mere fact that the notice was so defectively drafted that it did not purport to make time of the essence, it did not specify a proper consequence of non-compliance with the notice and otherwise shows that the writer had never read Justice
Lindgren's book Time in the Performance of Contracts 2nd ed paras 499.20 and .21 which are referred to in Mr Campbell QC's submissions, is really beside the point. A party who can only issue a demand relying on a particular justification is estopped from denying that such justification exists:
Franklin versus Manufactures Mutual Insurance Ltd <case>; [(1935) 36 SR 76], .

The court does not look benignly on people who issue notices requiring other parties to contracts to perform and then allege that because of their own defective drafting the notice is invalid. Thus, in Abela versus Lawnside
Holdings Pty Ltd (1988) 4 BPR 9443, Cohen, J held that a vendor was not able to say that its own notice to complete was invalid where purchasers had suffered a detriment by relying on the notice as a threat which would put them in jeopardy if they did not comply with it; see p 9446. Although the matter is irrelevant to the main part of this case, I should follow what his Honour there said and consider that there is sufficient detriment in the instant case because of the Drinkwaters' actions after receiving the notice.

Mr Campbell QC then says that Mr Doyle and the Messrs Kyrwood being late for the settlement on 10 October is irrelevant and referred to my decision in
Paclyn Pty Ltd versus GP Harris Real Estate Pty Ltd (1987) 4 BPR 9267. I would agree with this submission, though it should be noted that recently the
Privy Council in Union Eagle Ltd versus Golden Achievement Ltd <case>; [[1997] 2
WLR 341](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1997%5d%202%20WLR%20341 "View LawCiteRecord" ), took a stricter view as to compliance with specification of a time of day in a notice to complete. My comment in [(1997) 71 ALJ 580] indicates that I adhere to my earlier view. It is, however, not necessary to deal with the matter in the present case.

Mr Campbell QC's next point is that what he calls "the prevention principle" operates so that the Drinkwaters cannot take advantage of a situation that has been brought about by their own wrong to justify a termination. Mr Campbell QC says that the prevention principle "has been recognized most often in the context where a party who is himself in breach of a clause in a contract and has thereby contributed to delay is not entitled to rely on a liquidated damages clause in a contract (Dodd versus Churton [[1897] 1 QB 562], 566, 567, ; SMK Cabinets versus Hili Modern Electrix Pty Ltd <case>; [[1984] VR 391]; Aurel Forms Pty Ltd versus Graham Karp Developments Pty Ltd <case>; [[1975] VR 202]; Percy Bilton Ltd versus Greater London Council [[1982] 1 WLR 794)."] However, he puts that the proposition has been more widely articulated in cases such as New Zealand Shipping Co versus Societe des Ateliers et Chantiers de France [[1919] AC 1.] He further submits that the principle applies both to stop a person relying upon his own wrong as a basis for alleging that a contract is terminated or frustrated, and also to stop a person relying on his own wrong to obtain a benefit under a continuing contract citing for this last proposition: Alghussein Establishment versus Eton
College [[1988] 1 WLR 587], 594 and TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd versus Hayden Enterprises
Pty Ltd [(1989) 16 NSWLR 130], 147.

The "role" which Mr CampbellQC attributes to the Drinkwaters is their non-co- operation in paying the $10,000 deposit to have the Australian tool modified.

There is no doubt that there is some such principle as Mr Campbell QC submits.
I do not consider that there is any general principle that a person cannot take advantage of his or her own wrong, though there are a series of instances where this is the result. In most situations, the reason is that there is an interdependence between the failed act and the wrong of the other party. Where there is no such interdependence, the principle does not apply.

The problem comes about by treating a maxim as if it was of universal application. It should be remembered that in Cheall versus Association of
Professional Executive Clerical and Computer Staff [[1983] 2 AC 180], 189, Lord
Diplock said, "This rule of construction, which is paralleled by the rule of law that a contracting party cannot rely upon an event brought about by his own breach of contract as having terminated a contract by frustration, is often expressed in broad language as: `A man cannot be permitted to take advantage of his own wrong.' But this may be misleading if it is adopted without defining the breach of duty to which the pejorative word `wrong' is intended to refer and the person to whom the duty is owed." 
With all maxims, one must look to see the underlying principles rather than rely on the verbal formula.

The verbal formula seems first to have been used in Coke on Littleton b, "If a man make a feoffment in fee, upon condition that the feoffee shall re-infeoff him before such a day, and before the day the feoffor disseise the feoffee, and hold him out by force until the day be past, the state of the feoffee is absolute; for the feoffor is the cause wherefore the condition cannot be performed, and therefore shall never take advantage for non-performance thereof. And so it is if A be bound to B that JS shall marry
Jane G before such a day, and before the day B marry with Jane, he shall never take advantage of the bond, for that he himself is the mean that the condition could not be performed. And this is regularly true in all cases." 
Accordingly, the first appearance of the rule was in the law of conditions, which I recently summarized in GPI Leisure Corp Ltd versus Yuill, Young, J - August 1997, as yet unreported.

The principle then appears in the 19th century in lease cases such as Red v
Farr <case>; [(1817) 6 M & [S ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s121.html)], [124](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s124.html)-[5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s5.html); <case>; [105 ER 1188], 1189-1190, where if a provision was in a lease that the lease was to become void on a certain event, such provision was construed as meaning the lease became void at the option of the innocent party, not the person who had brought about the failure of the event. That case was consistently applied, a 20th century example being Quesnel Forks Goldmining
Co Ltd versus Ward [[1920] AC 222.] 
A third, rather similar, situation is where a contract of sale says that a contract is to become void if, for instance, a plan is not registered by a certain time. A person whose fault brings about the non-happening of the event cannot rely on it and the contract is only voidable at the option of the innocent party: Suttor versus Gundowda Pty Ltd <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 418], 441; Barber versus Crickett [[1958] NZLR 1057.] 
Fourthly, the principle applies in liquidated damages clauses whereby a person is not entitled to rely on a clause where that person has done an act which must substantially delay completion. The principle is slightly different here because the act of, usually, the proprietor is not necessarily a wrong or a fault. Rather there is, as Brooking, J said in the SMK Cabinets case, either a presumption of law or an implied term that if the conduct of the proprietor, either innocent or otherwise, substantially delays completion, the proprietor will not be able to recover liquidated damages from the builder notwithstanding that the builder may have in fact disabled himself by his own delays from completing by the due date.

Fifthly, there is the principle of equity that equity will not give relief to a person with unclean hands where, because of the conduct of the plaintiff with respect to the very act or transaction on which he or she sues, it would be unconscionable to do so.

Sixthly, there are some rules of public policy upon which equity acts such as the rule that a person who causes the death of a person cannot benefit from that person's estate; see eg Re Crippen [[1911] P 108]; Troja versus Troja [(1994) 33 NSWLR 269.] 
Seventhly, there is a principle in contract law that if a person can terminate contract A if contract B comes to an end, then that liberty is only to be exercised if it was not the fault of the person giving the notice that contract B came to an end: TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd versus Hayden Enterprises Pty
Ltd supra.

The principle applies not only where someone is seeking to rely on a clause terminating a contract, but also where a party seeks to obtain a benefit under a continuing contract: Alghussein Establishment versus Eton College supra.

Eighthly, there is a principle of admiralty law that salvage is not claimable if it would mean that a person profited by his own wrong: The Kafristan [[1937] P 63], .

There may be other examples which I have overlooked.

It must always be remembered that the principle or congerie of principles are subject to certain limitations. These include - that apart from the prevention rule in liquidated damages claims, the wrong must breach a duty "that is owed to the other party under that contract; breach of a duty whether contractual or non-contractual owed to a stranger to the contract does not suffice": Cheall's case at p 189; the principle can usually be excluded by a clear contrary provision:
Micklefield versus SAC Technology Ltd [[1990] 1 WLR 1002], 1007; the principle does not operate to prevent a person taking an advantage from his own breach if no disadvantage is suffered by the plaintiff:
Thornton versus Abbey National PLC [[1993] TLR 111] (a decision of the English Court of Appeal where a consultant was to receive a replacement motor car at intervals of no more than 30 months, there was a late supply of a vehicle in 1985 but this did not prevent the 30 months running from the date of supply of the vehicle rather than the date from when the vehicle ought to have been supplied); the wrongdoing must be the "mean" or cause of the non-fulfilment of the condition now being sued upon: Nina's Bar Bistro Pty Ltd versus MBE Corporation
Pty Ltd [[1984] 3 NSWLR 613];
Yashima versus Carroll (1994) 6 BPR 13663, 13665.

The present case is not one where there were interdependent conditions. The case was not one where a person had to use exertion to obtain the release of a plan or the like. The matter of the tool was completely independent of the matter of removing the charge over Peter Drinkwater's home. The mere fact, if it be the fact, that the Drinkwaters were in breach of contract of clause 12 would not, within the meaning of the maxim, be a wrong which would prevent them from relying on clause 6. At the very worst there would be an action for breach of warranty against the Drinkwaters.

Having discussed, probably at too great a length, all these matters of detail, the question still remains on the facts of this case does the conduct of the
Kyrwoods indicate that they have insisted on complying with the contract only in the way which suits them and hence have repudiated the contract? 
I bear at the forefront of my mind the oft-repeated dictum that repudiation is not to be lightly inferred. I also bear in mind that the present contract was, in one sense, a provisional contract which did not spell out precisely the obligations of the parties because they intended that the contract would be replaced with a more detailed document in the near future. When this expectation was not realized, it was always a real possibility that someone would misunderstand the contract.

However, in my view the activities of the Kyrwoods which I have outlined show that they have moved beyond mere misunderstandings and taken the deliberate course of stating that they will only perform the contract in a particular way. Within the principles I have already discussed, that is a repudiation and the Drinkwaters were able to accept that repudiation and put an end to the contract.

In terminating the contract, the Drinkwaters were excused performance of any obligation that had not at that stage become crystallised and were entitled to sue in damages for the defaults before that time including loss of bargain.

The Kyrwoods' counsel submit that the Drinkwaters have affirmed the deed of 26
July. They point particularly to the Drinkwaters' activities in marketing the eleven slot rack under the name "Clubrack". They say that the Drinkwaters could only do this if the deed was still in force.

Mr Ashhurst sought to answer this point in two ways. First, he said that any conduct after the termination of the deed following the Kyrwoods' repudiation is irrelevant. Secondly, he said that one must be careful about the question of parties. He reminded me that, whilst there was an agreement known as the "Exploitation Agreement" restricting the parties' activities in marketing a
Caddyrack type product, the relevant intellectual property rights were vested, not in the Kyrwoods, but in a company registered in Guernsey known as Golf
Products Promotions Ltd.

Affirmatory conduct could be relevant for either or both of two reasons.
First, it, together with other evidence, could convince a trier of fact to reach the conclusion that the contract was not terminated. For this purpose, conduct after termination is irrelevant. Secondly, such conduct could also operate as an estoppel; see eg Franklin versus Manufacturers Mutual Insurance
Ltd <case>; [(1936) 36 SR 76.]
However, estoppel plays no part in this case as the Kyrwoods have not shown any reliance or proved any detriment.

Accordingly, I do not consider that the case is affected by any principle of "affirmation".

The conclusions I have reached makes it unnecessary to consider most of the other submissions that were made about breaches by the Kyrwoods. One matter, however, should be dealt with.

The deed provided that both sets of parties agreed not to be active in any way in marketing or distributing in the other party's territory for six months.
The Kyrwoods took part in the Orlando Trade Fair in the United States from 24 to 28 January 1997. Mr Campbell QC submitted, "The July agreement is governed by NSW law, so expressions as to time are governed by NSW law. Orlando time is of the order of 15 hours behind Sydney time." Thus, it was put, activity in
Orlando on 24 January 1997 was mostly on 25 January 1997 (Sydney time), so that most of the activities at Orlando were outside the six month period. This submission seems quite contrary to principle. Whenever a contract or a statute speaks of a day, it means the day according to the local time. So a statute which is to come into force on 1 January 1957 comes into force at Hong Kong at the first moment of that day in Hong Kong time notwithstanding that in England it would not come into operation until eight hours later: Regina versus Logan <case>; [(1858) 3 H & N 866]
Accordingly, what happened in Orlando, Florida, on 24 January 1997 took place on 24 January notwithstanding that in Sydney it was 25 January.

I now need to consider only one other aspect of the case, namely, the allegation of breach of fiduciary duty.

As already noted, the Kyrwoods have redirected the business activities and opportunities of Caddyrack Pty Ltd to Caddyrack International Pty Ltd, a company controlled by the companies which are the trustees of their family trusts and in which the Drinkwaters have no interest.

Mr Coles QC says that it is quite clear that such activities constitute a breach of fiduciary duty. Mr Campbell QC, on the other hand, puts that there is no breach of fiduciary duty. He says that there has been a renunciation by the Drinkwaters of any interest in Caddyrack Pty Ltd, and the agreement permitted the Kyrwoods to appropriate the undertaking of Caddyrack Pty Ltd and to do with it what they wanted.

It does not seem to me in the situation where I have held there to be a breach and a termination that this attitude of the Kyrwoods can be maintained. The transfers contemplated by the July 1996 deed were never put into effect and now never can be put into effect. Caddyrack Pty Ltd has accordingly remained in the joint control of the Drinkwaters and the Kyrwoods and the deflection of corporate opportunities cannot be justified in the manner claimed.

Mr Campbell QC's next point is that any fiduciary duty of the Kyrwoods is owed to Caddyrack Pty Ltd (which is not a plaintiff) and not to the individual shareholders such as the Drinkwaters. This submission at first sight is perfectly sound, being based on the principle of Percival versus Wright [[1902] 2 Ch 421.] However, that principle merely is that, "The relationship of director and shareholder, as such and without more, does not give rise to a fiduciary relationship between the director and the shareholder," per Mahoney,
JA in Glandon Pty Ltd versus Strata Consolidated Pty Ltd [(1993) 11 ACSR ],
His Honour went on to say, "However, I do not doubt that in some circumstances a fiduciary relationship may exist between a director purchasing a shareholder's shares and that shareholder ...". He cites examples.

Mr Campbell QC himself admits that there will be some cases where a fiduciary duty will be imposed between the directors and the shareholders, though he submits that this is only so in a very limited number of cases of which the present is not one. However, one of the cases cited by Mr Campbell QC,
Glavanics versus Brunninghausen [(1996) 14 ACLC 345], was actually a case where Bryson, J said at 360, that it is almost an absurdity in the case of a two person company to say that one of those persons owed a fiduciary duty to the company as a whole but not to the other. I also recall that I said in Hooker Investments Pty Ltd versus Baring Bros Halkerston &
Partners Securities Ltd [(1986) 10 ACLR 462], 463, that the rule in Percival versus Wright had been virtually discarded. There was no comment on that observation when the Hooker case went to the Court of
Appeal; see (1986) 5 NSWLR 157. Indeed, when there is a situation of what is virtually a dissolution of partnership whether between husband and wife, trading partners, shareholders in a company or otherwise, very often there is a fiduciary duty preventing one set of partners from diverting partnership assets to themselves; see Mordecai versus Mordecai [(1988) 12 NSWLR ], and Mesenberg versus Cord Industrial Recruiters Pty Ltd [(1996) 39 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281996%29%2039%20NSWLR%20128 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 138-9.

In the instant case, the matter is really academic. Either there is a fiduciary duty owed by the Kyrwoods to the Drinkwaters, or else it is one which is owed to Caddyrack Pty Ltd. Although Caddyrack Pty Ltd is not a plaintiff in the present proceedings, if an order is made under <case> that there be a buyout, then the court can order that in valuing the shares for the purposes of a buyout, the expert valuer can proceed on the basis that certain transactions are to be ignored or that Caddyrack International Pty Ltd is to be regarded as a wholly owned subsidiary of Caddyrack Pty Ltd. It is quite clear that this sort of order is within the scope of the section; see
Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society Ltd versus Meyer  <case>; [[1969] VR 1002.] 
I think I should stop here. I believe that the appropriate course is to publish these reasons and to ask for short minutes to be brought in. I would expect that the short minutes would contain a declaration that the contract contained in the deed of 26 July 1996 had been terminated as at the appropriate date and an order that a valuer be appointed to value the shares of Caddyrack Pty Ltd on the appropriate basis and that within a certain time after the publication of the valuation the Drinkwaters (or perhaps the
Kyrwoods) be at liberty to purchase the opposing party's shares at that valuation.

Doubtless when these short minutes are brought in there will be some discussion as to the details of the order and perhaps even discussion as to who should buy out whom. I note that Mr Coles QC said that his clients would rather be the buyer than the seller, but I have no note of what Mr Campbell QC said about that matter. As the Kyrwoods have failed to date, my inclination would be that they should pay the costs of the proceedings to date with further costs being reserved. I will not consider it at all amiss if on that date, after discussion, counsel ask me to find any further fact or to proceed further with some aspect of the case before the valuation is carried out.

To ensure that the matter is promptly considered, I will list the consideration of the short minutes of order for 9.30 am on Tuesday, 21 October
However, if this time is too inconvenient to counsel and they so communicate to my Associate no later than 15 October, some alternate date may be chosen.
 * * * 
