

Regina versus Kenneth Leslie Barber [1996] NSWSC 633 (18 December 1996) 
REGINA versus KENNETH LESLIE BARBER /96 
WEDNESDAY 18 DECEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
JAMES J, BELL AJ 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: Kenneth Leslie Barber has applied for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed on him in the District Court by his Honour Judge Court QC on 26 February 1996, following a plea of guilty to a charge of cultivating not less than a commercial quantity of prohibited plants, being cannabis plants, an offence under section 23(2) of the Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act. The number of plants stated in the charge was 434 plants. Under the Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act a commercial quantity of cannabis plants is 250 plants. The applicant asked Judge Court to take into account, and Judge Court took into account in sentencing the applicant, four further offences; possession of 274 grams of cannabis seeds, possession of 295 grams of cannabis, a separate charge of cultivating three cannabis plants and a charge of self-administration of a prohibited drug being cannabis.

Judge Court imposed a sentence of imprisonment for four years, consisting of a minimum term of three years to date from 22 February 1996, the date when the applicant had been remanded in custody, and an additional term of one year.
Under the Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act the maximum penalty for the offence of cultivating not less than a commercial quantity of cannabis plants is a fine of 3,500 penalty units or imprisonment for fifteen years or both.

The facts of the principal offence can be briefly stated as follows. On 7
February 1995 police executed a search warrant at a property at Mount Vincent which was being rented by the applicant. The applicant was at the property. In a room at the rear of the house on the property police found the cannabis plants growing in pots. Each pot contained a number of plants at various stages of growth. Within the room were two large high density lights, connected to a pulley system to raise and lower the heights of the lights. The floor of the room was lined with reflective type paper and black plastic and each of the windows in the room had been covered. When interviewed by the police the applicant denied owning the plants but he admitted having watered them. On 7 February 1995 the police found at the property at Mount Vincent 274 grams of cannabis seeds. That gave rise to the first offence of possession of a prohibited drug which was taken into account in sentencing the applicant.

After being arrested and charged with the principal offence the applicant was released on bail. On 13 June 1995 the police executed a search warrant at premises of the applicant at Mindarriba. The police found a total of 295 grams of cannabis in the premises. Police also found three cannabis plants which the applicant said he was growing for his own use. The applicant made admissions that he was using cannabis three or four times a day and had last used cannabis the previous day. These facts gave rise to the second, third and fourth offences which were taken into account in sentencing the applicant.

The applicant was born on 19 April 1941 and hence was fifty-four years old when he came to be sentenced by Judge Court. His prior criminal history was not extensive but it did include convictions in 1986 on two counts of supplying a prohibited drug, for which he had been sentenced to imprisonment for three years. In September 1993 he was placed on a recognizance for two years for possession of a prohibited drug and that recognizance was current when he committed the principal offence and all of the offences to be taken into account. The applicant had been on bail for the principal offence when he committed the offences with which he was charged on 13 June 1995.

There was medical evidence before Judge Court, which was accepted by his
Honour, that the applicant suffered from a number of medical conditions, including hypertension, obesity, diabetes, spinal spondylosis and moderately severe degenerative arthritis. There was also evidence that the applicant had consented to the making of an order under the Drug Trafficking Civil
Proceedings Act which involved the forfeiture by him of assets worth about $190,000. It was not suggested that the assets forfeited by him were connected with either the principal offence or any of the offences to be taken into account.

On this application the only real challenge which has been mounted against the sentence imposed by Judge Court has been that the sentence was manifestly excessive; that the sentence imposed by Judge Court would have been appropriate for the cultivation of a very much larger number of plants but was not appropriate for the cultivation of the number of plants being cultivated by the applicant.

The Court has been referred, both in written submissions and oral submissions, to a number of cases involving sentences for the cultivation of a commercial quantity of cannabis plants. We were referred by counsel for the applicant to the decision of a bench consisting of two Judges of this Court in the case of Regina versus MacPhail (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 18 November ). In that case, which involved the cultivation of 385 cannabis plants, an appeal against sentence was upheld, the sentence imposed by the sentencing
Judge of imprisonment for four years consisting of a minimum term of two years and an additional term of two years was quashed and a sentence of imprisonment for two and a half years, consisting of a minimum term of fifteen months and an additional term of fifteen months, was substituted. It was submitted by counsel for the applicant that the decision of this Court in MacPhail's case afforded some guidance as to what sentence should be imposed in the present case.

We were referred by the Crown to the decision of a bench of three Judges of this Court in Regina versus Metallides (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 23
February 1994) in which this Court dismissed an appeal against a sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Court of four years eight months for cultivating cannabis plants.

Sentences for cultivating prohibited plants are not of course to be strictly proportional to the number of plants cultivated. The number of plants cultivated is only one of the factors to be taken into account. An offence of cultivating in excess of 800 plants, while more serious, is only to a limited degree more serious than an offence of cultivating in excess of 400 plants.

I have reached the conclusion that, measured against the decision of this
Court in Metallides, the sentence imposed in the present case could not be said to be manifestly excessive and should be held by this Court to be within the range of sentences available to his Honour. Furthermore, in the present case, the sentencing judge was taking into account the four further offences.
The applicant had previous convictions for supplying prohibited drugs. The applicant was on a recognizance when he committed the principal offence and the applicant was on bail for the principal offence when he committed three of the four further offences to be to be taken into account.

I would propose that, while leave to appeal against sentence be granted, the appeal against the sentence be dismissed.

BELL AJ: I agree with those orders and the reasons therefor.

JAMES: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by me. * * * 
