

Foster versus Evans Matter No 4439/95 [1997] NSWSC 530 (31 October 1997) 
Foster versus Evans /95 October 1997 
Bryson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /95 - FOSTER versus EVANS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings arise out of a De Facto Relationship. The parties lived in a de facto relationship between 21 February 1987 and November 1987. Each had had an earlier marriage. The defendant has qualifications as a Mechanical Engineer but since 1978 he has carried on business as a Theatrical Agent, providing entertainment to hotels and clubs, mainly in the Illawarra. From 1985 for several years the plaintiff worked on a casual part-time basis as a disc jockey for the defendant. She had full time employment with Grace Bros as Senior Supervisor. The plaintiff qualified as a pre-school teacher in a two-year training course in 1994 and 1995. 
The parties lived together in the defendant's then home at 1 Lyre Place Mt
Keira. On 7 June 1987 they became engaged to be married and the defendant gave the plaintiff an engagement ring which was then valued at $6,500. The relationship ended because the parties were incompatible. Some traces of personal relationship continued for several years but the defendant was not prepared to resume the de facto relationship and they did not become reconciled or resume cohabitation. The plaintiff went to live at her parents' home at 203 Mt Keira Road, Mr Keira. The plaintiff was pregnant at the time of the separation and Tara Rochelle Foster, the only child of the relationship was born on 10 February 1988. The plaintiff has always had care and control of
Tara, while the defendant has had access to Tara under arrangements made between the parties; there has never been any order of any court relating to maintenance, care and control, custody or access.

The defendant has two other children, Leah Michelle Horwood who is now aged 29 years and David James Docherty, now Brizga who was born on 17 November 1989;
David's mother Jacqueline Docherty is now Mrs Brizga. Another daughter Karen
Leonne Evans, who was born on 9 September 1966 died of brain haemorrhage on 9
June 1990.

After their separation the defendant agreed to provide the plaintiff with accommodation, and after some communications about other premises the plaintiff leased a flat at 5/5 Gilmour Street, West Wollongong, for which the defendant paid a security deposit and the rent. The plaintiff lived in the
Gilmour Street flat from about January 1988 until January 1991. She then moved, with Tara, to premises which they still occupy at 86A Princes Highway
Figtree. The defendant refers to the dwellings there as Unit 1 and Unit 2.

Some of the plaintiff's claims arise out of the arrangements made for occupation or ownership of these premises. The litigation was precipitated by a notice to quit given by the defendant on 13 October 1995 requiring possession on 13 December 1995. It is an agreed fact that the current rental value of the accommodation occupied by the plaintiff is $170 a week. Part of the defendant's position is that by providing housing he has been meeting his obligations to maintain Tara, and that he is entitled and wishes to change to a situation in which he pays appropriate maintenance for Tara and does not provide accommodation.

As of 29 April 1997 the plaintiff's income was: 
Employment - Pre-School Teacher 2-1/2 days per week net after tax $238 per week.

Department of Social Security Family Allowance Supplement at the rate of $70.15 per week.

Department of Social Security Sole Parent Pension at the rate of $72.95 per week totalling $381.10.

The plaintiff made estimates of her weekly expenses and the latest figures, which related to the year 1996, estimated her expenses at $205 per week for herself and $130 per week for Tara.

The defendant gave in evidence a table of his assets when the relationship commenced; his assets were not enhanced by any contributions during the relationship. He also gave a table of his assets at present with his own estimate of their value. The principal assets are these: 
Property 86 Princes Highway, Figtree $190,000 
Property 20 Princes Highway, Figtree $190,000 
Property 14 Eastern Street, Gwynneville $150,000 
Property Calala Farm, Harriet Road, Calala, Tamworth $175,000.

Vacant land at Goonoo Goonoo Road, Tamworth $85,000.

Butterfly Music Warehouse Business $52,000 
Proceeds of sale of land at Coledale $235,000.

There were also money in a savings account, several vehicles and other personal effects. His estimate of the values was $1,151,187. He also gave a list of his liabilities which included a mortgage to National Australia Bank over 86 Princes Highway, Figtree at $149,000 and other liabilities including a bank overdraft and loans from his parents; the total of liabilities is $336,209. This would suggest net assets of about $815,000. It is unlikely that he will be called upon to repay loans totalling $127,809 from his parents, and on the other hand he has a moral responsibility, which his evidence was he intends to keep, to see his parents housed, and he has plans to do this by a dual occupancy development at 14 Eastern Street, Gwynneville.

The defendant gave estimates of his current income and expenditure which show that he has no surplus. Indeed accepting the reality of depreciation of $13,735 which was brought to account as a deduction in calculating his taxable income, his expenditure greatly exceeds his income.

Tara has had some counselling by a Psychologist at Centacare Catholic Welfare
Services and the psychologist in a report identified an unstable relationship with her father as one of the sources of difficulties. Counselling is useful and involves some expense; however the problems do not seem to be severe.

Number 86A is a brick-veneer tiled-roof dwelling with two carpeted bedrooms, a kitchen/dining area, a combined bathroom, a W.C., a laundry, a shower and a lounge room area. The overall floor area is approximately 99 sq m. There is a metal storeroom on the northern side and a roofed verandah at the front.

The other building - No. 86B or unit 2 - is described by the valuer witness as a garage/workshop and is about 6 metres west of the house. It is of two levels, of brick veneer and tile construction; its approximate floor area is sq. m. together with approximately 41 sq. m. of garages. It contains a kitchen/dining area, a bathroom/W.C. and a bedroom/living area on the first floor. It is an agreed fact that the property is valued at $190,000. It is heavily mortgaged.

The Statement of Claim was filed on 30 November 1995. The defendant makes a cross-claim for possession of the premises and payment of an occupation fee from 14 October 1995. Claims in the Further Amended Statement of Claim are to the following effects.

The Proprietary Estoppel Claim.

The claim is that 86A Princes Highway Figtree was built by the defendant as a home for the plaintiff and Tara to reside in permanently, and at the time it was constructed the defendant represented to the plaintiff that she would be entitled to occupy the home for life and that thereafter the property would be left to the benefit of their daughter. The plaintiff acted to her detriment in reliance on these representations in a number of respects and will incur substantial prejudice if the termination of the rights of the plaintiff and
Tara to occupy the premises takes effect (FASC paras 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and ).

The remedy claimed is an order that the plaintiff is entitled to remain in the premises with exclusive possession. Some other claims made may be appropriate remedies for a proprietary estoppel.

Maintenance of the plaintiff.

The plaintiff alleges that the defendant has not paid the plaintiff any money for her own maintenance and has not provided her with any benefits by way of income or support other than permitting her to remain in the premises. (FASC paras 18, 19, 21, 22 and 23). The plaintiff claims an order for maintenance at $100 per week for herself alternatively lump sum maintenance of $108,236 for the plaintiff and Tara. The claim for maintenance of the plaintiff is based on
Pt.3 Div.3 of the De Facto Relationships Act 1984, particularly subs.27(1): "... a court may make an order for maintenance (whether for periodic maintenance or otherwise) where the court is satisfied as to either or both of the following: that the applicant is unable to support himself or herself adequately by reason of having the care and control of a child of the de facto partners or a child of the respondent, being, in either case, a child who is, on the day on which the application is made: (1) ... - under the age of 12 years, ...".

Subsections 27(2) and (3) provide: "(2) In determining whether to make an order under this Part for maintenance and in fixing any amount to be paid pursuant to such an order, a court shall have regard to: the income, property and financial resources of each de facto partner (including the rate of any pension, allowance or benefit paid to either partner or the eligibility of either partner for a pension, allowance or benefit) and the physical and mental capacity of each partner for appropriate gainful employment, the financial needs and obligations of each de facto partner, the responsibilities of either de facto partner to support any other person, the terms of any order made or proposed to be made under section 20 with respect to the property of the de facto partners, and any payments made, pursuant to an order of a court or otherwise, in respect of the maintenance of a child or children in the care and control of the applicant.

In making an order for maintenance, a court shall ensure that the terms of the order will, so far as is practicable, preserve any entitlement of the applicant to a pension, allowance or benefit." 
Subsection (1) also empowers maintenance to be ordered where the applicant cares for a physically handicapped or mentally handicapped child under the age of 16 years, but that is not this case.

Claim for maintenance of Tara. (FASC paras 19, 20, 21, 23) The defendant does not dispute his obligation to provide maintenance for Tara. The dispute relates to the form in which he should meet that obligation. The plaintiff claims (claim 24(c)) $44,843.96 as arrears of maintenance, claim 24(d)(ii) lump sum maintenance for the future in one lump sum of $108,236 for maintenance for both the plaintiff and Tara; claim 24(e) an order for child maintenance under [Family Law Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) [s.66G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66g.html) of $95.82 per week, alternatively a lump sum of $52,000 for maintenance for
Tara under [s.66P(1)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66p.html) 
The claim that the plaintiff should remain in the premises is also put forward as an alternative to payment of maintenance for Tara.

The defendant's position, clearly stated in his oral evidence (t35, 36) is that he has always been prepared to pay maintenance for Tara and has always been able to afford it; that he is now providing accommodation as maintenance in kind and that although his weekly income at the time of the hearing would not support maintenance payments, he could pay proper maintenance from capital available to him. He said "Everyone runs at a loss occasionally." On a whole view of his resources he is quite able to meet any proper order for Tara's maintenance, and he has never suggested otherwise. When he gave evidence he held $235,000 on a term deposit in the Illawarra Credit Union being proceeds of a recent sale of land.

Claim for leave to proceed.

The time limit of two years from separation in subs.18(1) of the De Facto
Relationships Act 1984 expired in November 1989. Leave to apply may be granted on the hardship test in subs.18(2). Although the grant of leave was contested, in my opinion it is overwhelmingly clear that the plaintiff would suffer hardship if she were not able to have her claims considered, because during the period of two years available under s.18(1) her claim was allayed by benefits which the defendant then willingly provided by paying the rent on the flat occupied by the plaintiff and Tara, she was unlikely to improve her position and the advantages of bringing a claim were then masked. The defendant continued willingly to provide benefits in the form of accommodation, to an improved standard from January 1991 onwards, until his notice to quit of 13 October 1995 so that throughout that period it seemed that there was little to be gained from litigation. On the other hand the defendant has ample means to meet any proper order as his net assets after liabilities are worth over $800,000. I see no hardship in his position which would arise from granting an extension after he took active steps to change the form in which benefits were conferred almost six years after the expiry of the limited time. I am satisfied that greater hardship would be caused to the plaintiff if leave were not granted than would be caused to the defendant if it were granted. Leave will be granted.

Statutory tests.

Both parties have been resident within New South Wales at all relevant times.
The test in s.15 is satisfied. As there is a child of the parties, the test in s.17 is satisfied. My decision should observe the test in s.19 relating to the duty of the court to end financial relationships, and the test in subs.27(3) relating to preserving entitlement of the plaintiff to a pension, allowance or benefit.

Claim for compulsory acquisition compensation.

The plaintiff also claimed - claim 24(g) - that she should receive the proceeds of compulsory acquisition for road widening of part of the land at 86
Princes Highway Figtree. The defendant received $22,000 from the Roads &
Traffic Authority in 1996. The compulsory acquisition does not affect the accommodation available. This claim was not pressed at the hearing and in my opinion it did not have a basis. The defendant's entitlement to compensation is relevant to the value of his assets but otherwise compulsory acquisition has no importance.

Contributions to resources - subs.20(1)(a).

In the light of the way in which the hearing was conducted the plaintiff's claim must be understood as including a claim for adjustment of interests with respect to property under s.20. Section 20 prescribes completely in subparas (a) and (b) the matters to which the court is to have regard: Evans v.
Marmont <case>; [(1997) 21 Fam LR 760.] While the parties lived together the plaintiff bore almost all the expenses for household groceries and in that way made an indirect financial contribution to the financial resources of the defendant.
She also performed some household services for which the defendant might otherwise have paid, so that to some degree there were non-financial contributions to his resources. On the other hand he provided her with accommodation. Both parties were working full-time throughout the period of cohabitation. They often ate out, and the defendant bore the expense of this.
The defendant almost always had his laundry washed by an outside service at his expense. The defendant gave the plaintiff the engagement ring then valued at $6,500, and she still has it. The matters mentioned in para 20(1)(a) do not make it seem just and equitable that there should be an order adjusting interests in property in favour of the plaintiff; the balance of contributions of various kinds by both parties during the relationship was significantly favourable to her.
 "Family" in para 20(1)(b): contributions after separation.

Defendant's counsel referred me to observations of Powell J in Roy v.
Sturgeon [(1986) 11 NSWLR 454] at 464 in these terms: "So far as My Young's first submission is concerned, it seems to me that, although the provisions of <case> do not expressly limit the court to having regard to `contributions' made only during the course of the `de facto relationship', nonetheless there are indications in the Act, and, in particular, in <case> itself, that the range of relevant `contributions' should be regarded as so limited. Thus, both <case> and <case> of the Act expressly direct attention to the period `the parties to the application have lived together'. Even more to the point is the reference in <case>(b) to a partner's `contributions' as `homemaker or parent ... to the welfare of the other ... partner or to the welfare of the family ...' a reference which seems to me to contain within its own terms a limitation as to the period during which any contributions might have been made." 
In my respectful view para 20(1)(b) does not contain within its own terms a limitation to the period during which there was a de facto relationship as the period during which any contributions to the welfare of a family might have been made. "Family" is a word of very wide meaning and connotes many kinds of connections among persons, and many of these connections are irrespective of whether they form one household. It is inherently unlikely but it is not impossible that contributions of kinds referred to in paras (a) and (b) might be made to the property financial resources or welfare of another de facto partner after the relationship ended: people sometimes care for former partners. The possibility of a contribution to the welfare of a family including a child of the partners after the de facto relationship itself has ended can be clearly seen. I do not see what purpose would be served by limiting the contributions to family welfare which may be considered so as to exclude contributions made after a separation. There is to my reading no expression in subs.20(1) of an intention to limit the time at which contributions are to be made. Subsection 20(1) is unlike ss.15 and 17 in that subs.20(1) does not expressly direct attention to the period the parties have lived together. In my opinion a family there referred to could be a group of persons who do not live in the same household. Roy v. Sturgeon was not a case where the partners and their children formed a family; their children (of other relationships) seem to have been no more than visitors to their household; see p.460. Counsel also referred to Lipman v. Lipman [(1989) 13
Fam. LR 1] at 24, in which I find no assistance. I respectfully differ from Powell J's obiter dictum about the meaning of para 20(1)(b). In my opinion it is not required that a contribution under para 21(1)(b) be made during the relationship.

In my opinion the plaintiff, the defendant and Tara constitute a family within the meaning of para (b) even though there has not been any time during which those three persons have lived together in one household.

Contributions to welfare of family - subs.20(1)(b). 
With respect to the matters in para 21(b) the plaintiff has, over almost 10 years, made significant contributions to the welfare of Tara, and also of herself. Whatever money has been expended on Tara has been expended by the plaintiff; the defendant's only significant contribution has been accommodation. The plaintiff has had money available on meagre basis from the proceeds of a record shop business in which she was interested, from which she received $7,500 when the business failed and her business partner later became bankrupt. At one time she worked in the business but the business was not successful. Since she left work at Grace Brothers in January 1988 she has received Supporting Parents Benefit at most times, and other social benefits.
She spent some time as a student and after qualifying as a pre-school teacher she has had part-time employment. Although the amounts of her financial contributions to the welfare of Tara cannot be assessed on a clear basis, they have been considerable and have extended over many years, the whole of Tara's life. She has also made all contributions which have been made to the welfare of Tara in the capacity of home-maker or parent, as Tara has always been in her care in a household constituted by herself and Tara. While I would not wish to undervalue her contributions in the capacity of home-maker and parent it is difficult to express their value in money. It is probable that their value outweighs the value of the contribution which the defendant has made by providing accommodation for the plaintiff and Tara at first in a flat but since January 1991 at quite a good standard at 86A Princes Highway. The contributions of the kinds referred to in para 20(1)(b) made by each of the parties appear to me to be disproportionate and call for an adjustment favourable to the plaintiff of a kind referred to by subs.20(1). The care of
Tara has been the main use of the plaintiff's time since February 1988, much greater than the time given to work and earnings in the business which failed and as a student and a part-time teacher. In another situation her earning capacity would have supported her, but she has mainly lived on social benefits. This contribution ought to be recognized by an adjustment in a way which accepts the reality of her contributions and the period over which they have been made. There is no real basis for precise calculation and the selection of an appropriate amount must be made in a broad way. In my judgment an appropriate adjustment is a payment of $50,000.

Arrangements for occupation of 86A Princes Highway Figtree.

The plaintiff's evidence (para 19) is that in a conversation about July 1990 the defendant said "I'd like to build you and Tara a house on my land at 86
Princes Highway, Figtree. It will be a separate home for yourself and Tara to occupy. I want you and Tara to be close to me. If you like, I will build a house to lock-up and you can pay for the fit-out. We will kill two birds with one stone. I won't have to pay rent on Gilmour Street any more and I will see you and Tara more regularly." He also said "I'll pay for the house, I won't pay you any maintenance. The house will be in lieu of child maintenance. You will also have to pay all the land and water rates for the whole property."
The plaintiff agreed. Thereafter the defendant constructed the house. He did most of the work himself. It was completed by January 1991 and the plaintiff and Tara moved in. Earlier the defendant had built the other structure on the same block of land, without subdivision, and he has occupied and continues to occupy that structure as his dwelling.

The plaintiff says that after she moved into the premises the defendant in a conversation with her said "I will need to update my will since Karen's death.
Also, I will need to make some provision for Tara." The plaintiff said "What provisions are you going to make for Tara? The defendant said "I will be leaving the whole of this property to Tara. I will put it in trust for Tara's benefit. When she is 18 I will put the property into her name." 
The plaintiff's evidence is that relying on what the defendant said to her she stayed living in the house, did not make any claim against the defendant for maintenance or otherwise, and did not take up an opportunity to obtain less desirable housing from the Department of Housing. She also paid some municipal rates and water charges on the property; she did not pay all of them. The municipal rates were assessed on a concessional basis after she made an application dated 10 January 1992 to Wollongong City Council in which she asserted that the whole of 86 Princes Highway Figtree was subject to a life tenancy solely by herself, that the property was also occupied by Tara who was not an owner, and that she received a Supporting Parents Benefit. Since then rate notices have been directed to her and have been assessed on a concessional basis.

Some arrangement was made under which the accounts for water charges have been directed to the defendant in care of the plaintiff.

What the plaintiff says about arrangements for payment of rates is disputed and the defendant denies that he suggested that the plaintiff arrange for rate notices to be sent to her to obtain a concession. It is clear that from 1992 onwards the plaintiff paid most of the rates and water charges, although the defendant paid them until 1992 and has paid some since.

In cross-examination (t.7 and 8) she said her understanding of the arrangement was that the home at Figtree was to be for Tara, that it was Tara's house, and that by providing the plaintiff with this accommodation the defendant would be continuing to satisfy his obligations to provide accommodation for Tara.

When cross-examined about the reference to life tenancy in the application for concessional rates (t11) the plaintiff's explanation of what she believed was unclear. She said at one point that she believed she had a lifetime tenancy and at another point "I believed Tara had a life tenancy and I would move out when Tara was old enough to look after the house herself." Later she said "I believed that it was a life tenancy for myself and Tara and that's why I signed" and that she now believed that there is a life tenancy over the property for Tara and that the property was to be in trust for Tara; and that the interest she claims is that she invested money into the property; apart from that money the claim she makes to the property is made only for Tara.

The defendant's evidence is that at some time before June 1990 he told the plaintiff that he was thinking of moving an old house from 20 Princes Highway, which he owned, to 86 Princes Highway which he also owned, so that there would then be two houses on No. 86, and that he would put tenants in the house; that she later suggested that he let her come and live in the old house and that this would give him the opportunity to see Tara more often and there would be other advantages. He says she said "Also it will save you money on the maintenance you pay now for my rent because there won't be any rent. I'll just live in the house rent free instead of maintenance." After considering this for some time he told her "Yeah, it'll probably be o.k. We'll give it a try and see if it works out." Later about June or July 1990 he decided to build a new house and not to move the old house to the site, told the plaintiff of this and said "You can still live there with Tara. The deal will be that you can live there rent free in lieu of maintenance. You can pay me $20 a week towards outgoings and that will be all you pay." The plaintiff agreed and the defendant then built the house. He denies that there was a conversation about her completing the house from lock-up stage and says, and it is clearly right that he took the building project beyond lock-up stage. He says it was built to a finished stage apart from floor coverings, light fittings, curtains, blinds and floor tiles. It also needed internal painting. The defendant says that since the plaintiff took possession he has installed a new hot water service in the house and put in guttering and a verandah.

With respect to benefits for Tara the defendant's evidence is that at some time when he was to enter hospital for throat surgery he told the plaintiff that he did not want a fight over his estate if he died and that his lawyer had told him that the only way to avoid a fight was to get his will fixed up.
He said "I had left 86 Princes Highway to Tara, the farm to David and 20
Princes Highway to Leah. I ensured that the properties are tied up in trust until they are 21." The plaintiff said "That's good." He made a will dated 17
September 1991 which includes provisions to those effects, with a gift of 86
Princes Highway together with the household effects and contents to his executors on trust for Tara until she obtains the age of 21 years. There is also a gift of residue to surviving children. According to his evidence, he did and said nothing to create any interest of the plaintiff in the house, and apart from the provision in his will nothing to create a trust for Tara. The defendant denied that he had any obligation by agreement with the plaintiff to leave the property in trust for Tara and said that he was not proposing to tie up any property in a trust in a way that would stop him from dealing with it.

The defendant's affidavit evidence was to the effect that he was to build the plaintiff and Tara a house on his land, that it would be a separate home for them to occupy in lieu of child maintenance, and that the references he made to Tara having an interest in the property and to a trust related to the terms of his will and there was no arrangement to confer a present property interest, by trust or otherwise, on Tara; and certainly not on the plaintiff.
The defendant does not in his evidence suggest that he expressly reserved to himself any right or opportunity to bring the arrangement to an end, or to require the plaintiff and Tara to leave the house or to move to any other arrangement about Tara's maintenance.

In cross-examination (t49+) on the housing arrangement he agreed that in relation to the project of moving the old house from 20 Princes Highway he told the plaintiff that he wanted the plaintiff and Tara to be close to him and that the old house would be a separate home for the plaintiff and Tara to occupy.

The defendant and the plaintiff give completely different accounts of what the arrangements were about paying outgoings. The defendant says that he asked the plaintiff to pay him $20 per week to cover outgoings from the property; apparently this request was made about the time she went into possession; however she did not ever pay any such amount. He says that he paid the rates on the property at and after the time she moved in, that she made the arrangements for herself to pay rates, and to pay them on a concessional basis, without any agreement of his and that he allowed this to continue although on some occasion he made payments towards rates. When he found that the rate notices were issued in the plaintiff's name he decided, after speaking to his solicitor, to let her pay the rates and do nothing.

The defendant was aware that the plaintiff was improving the property with carpets, blinds, tiles and painting. The property was without guttering from some years and suffered from damp and mould. The defendant has installed guttering and downpipes although there is still one downpipe to be installed.
Evidence deals with a lot of relatively small aspects of arrangements about the dwelling, minor repairs and conflicts over them. These do not have sufficient importance to require detailed findings.

The defendant's view was that when the notice of termination took effect and he recovered the premises he should pay maintenance of $100 per week for Tara and that he would repay to the plaintiff the money which he had expended on the premises for which she could supply receipts.

In my finding, although it is not possible to make a precise finding about the terms of the parties' arrangements, there was an arrangement made before the plaintiff moved into 86A Princes Highway Figtree in January 1991 to the effect that the defendant would build the house there and that when completed it would be available for the plaintiff and Tara to occupy as their home on the basis that the defendant would provide accommodation there for the plaintiff and Tara in lieu of paying any money for Tara's maintenance, and in lieu of any other maintenance obligation he might have for either of them. There was some arrangement for the plaintiff to pay the rates and water charges or a contribution towards them; the defendant says $20 per week and the plaintiff says the whole; whichever was the true arrangement, the plaintiff was to bear far less than the rental value and there was to be a large net advantage which outweighed the maintenance obligation for Tara which was to be set off against it. It was obvious to the defendant, who was to build the house and actually did build it, that the plaintiff would have to incur expense to make the house comfortably habitable. Although there was no express agreement that this arrangement was to continue until Tara became self-supporting, there was no express arrangement to the effect that the defendant could unilaterally bring it to an end. In my finding it was in the contemplation of both parties that the arrangement would continue for as long as the defendant remained under an obligation to provide maintenance for Tara, and that for as long as that happened the plaintiff would have the advantage of occupation of the house and accommodation for herself as well as for her daughter. It is in this context that the plaintiff incurred significant expenditures in making the house reasonably habitable, expenditures which would not be incurred with a view to occupation for a short time or with a view to occupation which would be brought to an end at any time at the defendant's choosing.

I find that there was no representation or arrangement that the plaintiff or that Tara would have any ownership interest in the property, except for references to benefits to be given to Tara in the defendant's will. However in the circumstances of the parties at the time, the arrangements had the effect of representing to the plaintiff that she and Tara would occupy the house throughout the period when Tara was entitled to maintenance; I so find because provision of the house was to be in lieu of maintenance and it was obvious from the state of the house that the plaintiff would need to expend money on the house to make it suitable and convenient for occupation for the indefinite period during which Tara would be entitled to maintenance. It was of course obvious to the plaintiff who lived only a few metres away that work of various kinds was in progress, including painting the house by the plaintiff's father.
This work was performed and the expense of it was incurred in reliance on the indication that the plaintiff would have the benefit of the home with her daughter for an undefined but extended period, probably until about the time
Tara will turn 18 in 2006. The defendant is not legally bound by this arrangement in any which extinguishes his right to recover possession, but in my view it would be unconscionable for him to recover possession without taking measures which will put the plaintiff in the position she would have been in if she had not acted in reliance on these representations. One measure he should take is to meet his maintenance obligation for Tara by making payments; he has always been quite willing to do this on recovering possession. Another is that the defendant should have a lengthy period of notice to enable her to rearrange her circumstances and obtain other accommodation. As more than two years have passed because of this litigation, any further notice can be attended to by staying the effect of judgment for possession for several months. Another matter is that the defendant should pay to the plaintiff compensation for the work and expenses she has expended.

The defendant disputes the plaintiff's claims to have spent $25,432 on improvements and works to the house. The purposes for which moneys have been expended, listed in Annexure "E" to the plaintiff's first affidavit and totalling $25,432, vary widely. Some represent improvements to the property which will last indefinitely, some are of a kind which require replacement from time to time, such as carpets and painting. Money amounts are given for painting but in fact the work of painting was performed by the plaintiff's father, now deceased, who did not charge her for the labour; however she was able to obtain the use of his time, and this should be given some recognition as use of a resource available to her, although not at a rate for tradesman's wages. After making this expenditure the plaintiff would, if not now evicted, have been able to look forward to having the benefit of the work and exxpenditure for more than 8 future years. In my view the defendant should pay her compensation of $15,000 if she is now to be evicted.

Maintenance for the plaintiff. The plaintiff's continuing responsibilities for the care and control of Tara have the effect that in terms of s.27(1)(a) she is unable to support herself adequately. There has been a marked change in the amount of her time and attention which the plaintiff has brought to bear on earning income when her present situation of working 2-1/2 days per week is compared with her position supporting herself in employment with Grace Bros, and the difference must be attributed to her care of Tara. The defendant's provision of housing, now worth $170 per week, in satisfaction of maintenance obligation suggests that the defendant has recognised that his maintenance obligations extend beyond maintenance for Tara and included an obligation towards the plaintiff. As the appropriate maintenance for Tara currently is $100 per week, the implication is that the defendant has been providing maintenance for the plaintiff at $70 per week. It is inappropriate to award any other sum for the past. To carry maintenance for the plaintiff forward until Tara turns 12 in February 2000 and to produce a lump sum payment so as to resolve this maintenance obligation finally I propose to award $7,000. A lump sum and not a series of periodic payments is appropriate because it will be easier for her to qualify for social benefits with a small amount of capital which she can apply towards housing or some other asset than if she has an entitlement to periodic payments. The continuing communications between the parties will be relatively simpler if there is a lump sum and the maintenance obligation is thereby ended.

Maintenance for Tara.

Both parties put to me that the appropriate weekly sum for maintenance for
Tara is $95.82 per week. This figure was based, in some way which was not shown to me in detail, on figures published by the Australian Institute of
Family Studies. In my view however I should adopt $100 per week, which is the amount which the defendant proposed that he should pay in communications between the parties before the hearing, and the amount which he now pays in respect of his son David; in my view that is the appropriate sum in his personal circumstances. I decline to make an order for payment of a lump sum for Tara's future maintenance. In my view the question of Tara's maintenance should remain open to review in the light of circumstances from time to time, and the award of a lump sum might have unfortunate effects, as it would be preferable to foster a continuing interest and relationship between the plaintiff and his daughter rather than to make some order which might produce a clean break. A lump sum would be paid to the plaintiff, but the right to maintenance is for Tara's benefit and should be left in a form in which it can be reviewed and enforced whatever events occur in the future in the plaintiff's life.

Other claims.

The plaintiff also asked me to order payment of maintenance in respect of herself and of Tara for past years. The provision of accommodation, which was accepted by the parties as appropriate over a number of years, must in my view now be accepted as having been appropriate.

The plaintiff also asked me to order reimbursement to her of rates ($1130.93) and water charges ($2065.26) paid in respect of the property. These relate to the arrangements for periods which have passed and closed, the benefits of the
Municipal and water services have been obtained and used, and the subject should not be reopened.

The defendant claimed an occupation fee from the notice to quit until recovery of possession. In my opinion the provision of accommodation should be treated as satisfaction of maintenance obligations while occupation continues, and there should be no occupation fee. I will decide when possession should change hands and the orders should be enforced when I consider leave to issue a Writ of Possession.

On the plaintiff's claim: 
Orders: 
Pursuant to s.18(2) of the De Facto Relationships Act 1984 grant to the plaintiff leave to apply for an order under Part 3 of the Act.

Order the defendant to pay to the plaintiff the following sums: 
Pursuant to s.20(1) of the De Facto Relationships Act 1984 the sum of $50,000; 
Pursuant to s.27 of that Act, lump sum maintenance for the plaintiff herself for the period ending 10 February 2000 the sum of $7,000; 
As equitable compensation the sum of $15,000.

And give judgment for the plaintiff for the sum of $72,000 accordingly.

Order pursuant to [s.66G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66g.html) of the [Family Law Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) that the defendant pay maintenance for Tara Rochelle Foster a minor born on 10 February , that maintenance be at the rate of $100 per week until further order, and that maintenance be paid to Deborah Foster the mother of the child until further order.

Direct that judgment be entered and that order 3 take effect upon the defendant being put into possession of premises No. 86A also known as Unit 1,
No.86 Princes Highway, Figtree.

On the Cross-claim: 
Judgment for the Cross-claimant for possession of premises No. 86A also known as Unit 1, No. 86 Princes Highway, Figtree.

Liberty to apply for leave to issue a Writ of Possession.

Costs.

Order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of proceedings on the plaintiff's claim.

Order that each party pay his or her own costs of the Cross-claim.

NOTES OF COUNSEL'S FINAL ADDRESSES 
Knox (Plaintiff) written outline.

There is an issue whether the plaintiff's expenditure on the house was $25,432 or a lesser amount - there is a claim that this should be reduced in respect of the amount claimed for painting which was carried out by the plaintiff's father.

The claim for $108,236 is a rolled up claim of benefits for both the mother and the daughter.

It is clear that there was a discussion about the property and the plaintiff's future. The defendant says that at most the discussion was that he intended to leave the property to Tara.

The Institute of Family Studies figures are on a basket of goods approach and also on an expenditure survey - the Institute of Family Studies works both together.

The lump sum claimed was based on [s.66P(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66p.html) of the [Family Law
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/). There is also a claim under section 38(1)(d) of the De Facto Relationships Act.

There should be lump sum child maintenance to sever the financial relationship between the parties and to give certainty to the ongoing financial arrangements for the child. There can be no suggestion that the amount would be dissipated. The plaintiff's evidence is an indication that she would use the money appropriately. She would consent to an order that any amount be utilised for accommodation until the child is 18 years old. There has been a change of attitude by the defendant and he has moved from instructions to evict the plaintiff and the child to a position where he is prepared to make a consequential alteration to his will. There is nothing to stop him from evicting them but what he now intends comes in a surprising way as he only told us about that in evidence this morning.

McGRATH (DEFENDANT) CHRONOLOGY.

On the evidence the relationship lasted from March to November not February to
December as in the pleadings. The engagement ring was a contribution by defendant to plaintiff's assets.

In November 1987 discussion amounted to an agreement, a separation agreement which under the De Facto Relationships Act would not oust jurisdiction. Its key terms were that the defendant would set the plaintiff up in a flat and would pay the rent. It was an agreement in gross, not for any particular flat.
Both parties told the same story. The defendant paid rent except as to the last three months. There is a dispute about whether it was paid for the last three months. We submit that it does not matter whether he did as three months out of a long term arrangement made ten years ago ought not to affect any discretionary decision now. The defendant's evidence should be accepted on this subject.

Time to bring a de facto relationship's application expired in December 1989.
The parties were then happy with their arrangements. We submit that there was not a resumption of relationship.

Building the house cost him $35,000 to $45,000 and he did substantially all the work. See affidavit 17/4/96 para 25. He built the house to far beyond the lock-up stage - his evidence on this should be accepted as the more probable.

The key conversation in mid 1991 probably occurred prior to 17 September 1991 the date of the will. The parties agreed as to what occurred - both were talking about his leaving the whole of the property to Tara, meaning the house which the defendant lived in and the house which the plaintiff and Tara lived in on the single block of land. The only dispute is as to the precise terms of what was said. Both agreed that he said that he would leave the whole of his property in his will in trust for Tara; the dispute is whether it was on trust for her until she was 18 or 21. Nothing turns on this dispute. If it is important the court should find that the age mentioned was 21 years, because it agrees with the contemporaneous will. On this key point there is no difference and no room for any other interpretation of what happened. It is unfortunate that the plaintiff interpreted it as she did, that the notion that she would be benefited by a life tenancy etc is not supported by what was said. There is no room other than to accept the oral evidence of what happened.
 January 1992 
In making improvements the plaintiff was not relying on any representation made by the defendant but rather on the defendant's known affection for the child. Or alternatively or a simple misunderstanding of the conversation relating to the will.

The plaintiff's evidence in her first affidavit of 16 November 1985 paras 8 and 9 - the court should infer that her refusal to allow the child to go into the defendant's house led into a decision not to provide accommodation in that house.

Exhibit 2. The defendant did not resile from the agreement in November 1997.
He is prepared to pay maintenance and to pay for improvements. 25 and 26
December 1995. Claim under the De Facto Relationships Act s.20. Refer to Evans v Marriott. Assessment of what is just and reasonable having regard to contribution of the parties s.21(a) and (b). Other factors are only relevant to the extent to which they have an impact on the contributions referred to in ss21(a) and (b). They are not independently relevant. There is no para (c).

Probably the plaintiff's case under s.20 is that there are no contributions to justify any order being made. There are no significant contributions in terms of cooking, cleaning, purchase of groceries etc. It was a short relationship and her contributions do not have substantial weight. She does not claim that she makes any contributions at all to his assets during ;the relationship.
Both worked full time throughout the relationship. There was no increase in his assets which could be ascribed to her contribution. The defendant's financial contribution is substantially greater and it has been identified - the diamond ring costs $6,500. Accommodation, transport. In part he paid for groceries and they largely ate out. The court should find that s.20(1)(a) - the defendant's financial contributions substantially outweighed the contributions made by the plaintiff to the defendant's property or financial resources. The court should find that the non financial contributions were approximately equal and were slight. There is no justification for a s.20 order on the basis of contributions of the parties. See Evans versus Marmint <case>; [21 Fam LR 760] at 765 lines 2-5. There were shared activities and reciprocal benefits.

The contributions by the plaintiff later are not capable of being taken into account under s.20, but only in equity if at all. See Roy versus Sturgess [11 NSWLR ] at 464B - only contribution during the relationship. See too Lipman versus Lipman [13 Fam LR ] at 24 on the same line. This view should be followed.

There is no claim of parental care constituting a contribution under s.21. The contribution would have to be made to the welfare of the other de facto partner or welfare of the family etc. Parental care is not such a contribution because there never was a family composed of the three of them.

There is no room for expectation interests. This would be so on the evidence even if Dewier versus Kaljo was still in effect. See p746 contrasting the position of a wealthy man who did not employ his assets.

Estoppel. There can be no argument that the defendant must be held to a representation. What the defendant said to the plaintiff was correct and has always been right and there is no room for the operation of an estoppel. She has not altered her position to her detriment because of any representation.
She has acted on a mistake in her recollection. She suffered no detriment in passing up public housing - she would have to pay for public housing and it would not be as good. Her decision not to take up the public housing was a correct one as she has had years in good accommodation in a better area.

The plaintiff ??? the common intention that the defendant should get to know
Tara and have a better relationship. She made the choice and what followed was inevitable.

At the least the items prior to the making of the representation relied on came too early to be affected by the representation. The defendant has had the benefit of the work. The benefit to the plaintiff on defendant's receiving vacant possession is not a fair comparison. The value of her expenditure should be discounted by two thirds.

As for the claim for spouse maintenance under s.26 and 27, maintenance is intended to be hard to obtain, to be limited and to be short term only. This is a situation where the plaintiff has already had her rehabilitation. She has had good accommodation during her training course. She does not fulfil the criteria as she is well able to support herself adequately. The total income she receives is $422.23. She has $205 of personal expenses on the face value of Annexure A and this includes $30 for housing. She has $41 tax. Her current housing is valued at $170 but she only pays $15 per week for it. If the accommodation she received is reckoned at worth $155 per week her total receipts are $401. (She now receives rental accommodation for which she would have to pay $170 per week, she paid $15 per week in outgoings so the net benefit she received is $155 per week. The total available to her are $401 leaves a surplus.

We accept that there will be a child maintenance order of at least $95.82.

We submit that given that she has a surplus, she is unable to fulfil the criteria that she is unable to support herself adequately.

JUDGE - I would have to take $155 out to test adequacy.

McGRATH - You would also have to put in the rental element in the child maintenance. The defendant's taxable income is $23,834. A higher figure can be produced by adding back in the depreciation which she claimed in his tax return of $37,579. However depreciation is a real cost and his true income is $23,834. The court should operate on the basis of his sustainable income and his sustainable income is not much more than that of the plaintiff. His evidence about his income was attacked in cross-examination but his case about his income is supported by his answers.

If there is an order for spousal maintenance and for provision under s.20, in a proper discretion this would be best resolved by the original separation agreement in November 1989. That agreement should be given weight if an order is made under the De Facto Relationships Act.

As to child maintenance, the figure produced by the published figure is $95.82 per week. There is capacity to pay. The ceiling is removed where there is capacity to pay. See MIV <case>; [1986 FLC 91-716] at 75-207 to 275-208. The child's needs must be calculated.
The child is well and properly maintained, with school, dance classes, net ball, and lacks nothing materially as she is now. The Lee figures are of little relevance. There is evidence of the actual needs of the child from the plaintiff. The Lee figure should have nothing to do with this case. The claim for lump sum maintenance is subject to a legislative preference against it.
See s.66K(5) - the preference is for periodic payments. This is not a case where an income earning unit needs to be kept together.

See decision of the Full Court in the marriage of Luckey [97 FLR 103] at 107 - capital out of which to satisfy a periodic payment. See para 29.5(1)(o)A of the Practice Book - only when periodic maintenance is considered and discussed for a good reason should there be lump sum maintenance. This is brzgas evidence operated to support the view that payments made are regular. They are paid in advance in the first week for four weeks in advance.

As to leave to proceed under the De Facto Relationships Act, given Exhibit 2 and the offer of pocket child maintenance and the willingness to discuss and make restitution, there was no greater hardship for the plaintiff and for the defendant and leave ought not to be granted.

The plaintiff has a cash business but the evidence does not support the view that there has been any element of unrevealed income.

KNOX IN REPLY 
Under s.66K(5) the decision must be made by stages and there is not a preference for one kind of order or another.

There is no evidence that payments were made in advance and according to
Brzgas evidence there were no $500 payments.

Clearly there is no surplus in the plaintiff's hands in this case.
 * * * 
