

Short and Anor versus Murchison Services Pty Ltd Matter No 14662/96 [1997]
NSWSC 301 (12 August 1997) 
Short & Anor versus Murchison Services Pty Limited /96 August 1997 
Graham A-J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /96 - Short & Anor versus Murchison Services Pty. Limited 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The Defendant, Murchison Services Pty. Limited, ACN 003 302 449, is the corporate persona of a firm of accountants which is the Respondent to an appeal by way of stated case brought by the Plaintiffs, Lesley Lorraine Short and Lesley Short Orthodontics Pty. Limited (ACN 054 820 129) as Appellants, against judgments entered against them in proceedings Nos. 8446 and 8447 of 1994 in the Local Court of New South Wales, Downing Centre. The judgments were entered pursuant to reasons for judgment of His Worship Magistrate A.J.B. George Esq. dated 7 June 1996 and 3 September 1996. 
Dr. Short practises as an Orthodontist both in her own name, at Mudgee, and through her company, Lesley Short Orthodontics Pty. Limited, in Sydney.

In the period between December 1991 and March 1994 the Defendant provided accounting services to the First Plaintiff, Dr. Short and, in the period
February 1992 to March 1994, to the Second Defendant also.

According to the amended stated case the work performed by the Defendant for each of the Plaintiffs was "intermingled": work done in connection with the
Mudgee practice was generally performed for the First Plaintiff and work done in connection with the Sydney practice was generally performed for the Second
Plaintiff.

There was no express agreement between the Plaintiffs or either of them and the Defendant in respect of the quantification of the fees payable to the
Defendant for the provision of its services.

The Plaintiffs contend, and I do not understand the Defendant to dispute, that a term should be implied in each of the Plaintiffs' contracts of retainer with the Defendant that the fees charged by the Defendant for its services rendered would be reasonable. The Plaintiffs further contend and, again, I do not understand the Defendant to dispute, that the Defendant owed duties of care to each of the Plaintiffs to bring to bear reasonable skill and care in providing its accounting services to the Plaintiffs. In relation to the content of the duty of care Mr. Zammit of Counsel who appeared for the Plaintiffs submitted that in identifying the content of the duty it is necessary to have regard to the nature of the particular professional task or function involved and also the circumstances of the case (see Belsand Pty. Limited v. Bridgeland
Securities Limited (1995) Aust Reports 81-353 at 62,575-6 where part of the judgment of Deane J in Hawkins versus Clayton (1988) 164 CLR 539 has been quoted).

The proposition for which the Plaintiffs contend was not disputed.

Mr. Zammit invited attention to paragraphs 3, 6 and 10 of the section in the stated case dealing with the facts. These include a letter which apparently became Exhibit 1 before the learned Magistrate which stated in part:- "Dear Dr. Short, 
Thanks for the opportunity to meet you. After my review of your taxable and financial affairs I believe the taxation problem is symptomatic of your financial commitments and lack of adequate and timely reporting systems. As discussed at our meeting a business of your size needs to be preparing monthly cash flow and profit projections and comparing same to actual progressively during the year. A review by fee income probably allows sufficient control to be exercised as most costs are relatively fixed and can only change to any significant extent from changes in management policy. From past experience you have a person in Phillipa (Phillipa Faulkner) who is capable of preparing such information. This reporting combined with advice from ourselves has worked well in the past and I see no reason why it wouldn't work well in this situation." (The words in parenthesis are mine) 
The Defendant proceeded to advise the Plaintiffs in early 1992 that they should purchase an accounting computer software package known as "Attache" and further advised that there could be some initial "teething" problems with it but that it would benefit the Plaintiffs and reduce their accounting costs.
Attache was a "top of the range" accounting package. It was recommended to produce profit and loss statements and balance sheets both on a monthly and annual basis. It was envisaged by the Defendant that Phillipa Faulkner, the
Plaintiffs' bookkeeper, who had recommended the Defendant to the Plaintiffs, would use the Attache Package to prepare financial accounts and financial information.

As it transpires Phillipa Faulkner was unable to cope with the Attache Package which had been recommended by the Defendant to the Plaintiffs and the
Defendant became aware that there were significant problems with Phillipa
Faulkner's understanding and use of the Package.

Staff members of the Defendant began expending considerable time attempting to rectify the problems that Phillipa Faulkner was experiencing with the Package and, in August 1992 a report was apparently prepared for the Defendant by one of its former employees which included the following:- "This facility assumes the user to have a good knowledge of bookkeeping as standard journal entries can be copied in batches from one period to the next, accruals can be reversed by posted in reverse the following period or year and batches can be posted between entries. (sic) 
There is a $1,000 difference in the discrepancy in the trial balance printed before the deletions of the duplicated batches and the trial balance after the deletions by Phillipa.

It is very dangerous to delete entries as this can cause the general ledger to fall out of balance ..." 
In the foregoing context the learned Magistrate found, at least inferentially, that the duty of care owed by the Defendant to the Plaintiffs required the
Defendant to inform the Plaintiffs of an inability of which it was or ought to have been aware, of one of the plaintiffs' employees to learn and use an accounting software package if it had reason to believe that the plaintiffs were unaware of that inability. However, the learned Magistrate found that the duty owed by the Defendant did not require it to comment on or inform its client that it was aware, if that be the case, that one of the Plaintiffs' employees was less than competent in performing tasks allocated to her unless, as was not the case here, the retainer contained specific instructions to that effect.

There is nothing to indicate that the learned Magistrate misdirected himself in relation to the identification of the content of the duties of care owed by the Defendant to the Plaintiffs in this case. In the circumstances, no question of law arises in that regard (see The Australian Gas Light Company v. The Valuer-General <case>; [(1940) 40 S.R. 126] at 137-8; Azzopardi v. Tasman UEB Industries Limited [(1984) 4 NSWLR ]
at 150 and Collector of Customs v. Agfa-Gevaert Limited <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 389] at 394-398).

In the proceedings against the First Plaintiff the Defendant sought to recover $4,485.00 for unpaid fees which were outstanding and in the proceedings against the Second Plaintiff the Defendant sought to recover $7,598.20 for unpaid fees.

The Plaintiff's case in each matter was that the fees charged were "excessive" and that, viewed collectively, they involved an overcharge of $11,005.00. No apportionment was made of this alleged overcharge by reference to the specific accounts.

The Plaintiffs' cases were that the combined fees charged by the Defendant in the period December 1991 to March 1994 totalled $30,736.00 and that a reasonable charge would have been $6,000.00 per annum and $5,000.00 as a lump sum for ancillary work. On an assumed contract life of two years it is said that a reasonable charge would have been no greater than $17,000.00 from which it may be inferred, so the argument goes, that the Defendant overcharged the
Plaintiffs by a total of $13,736.00. The stated case does not reveal how the amount of $11,005.00 referred to above related to the figure of $13,736.00 and , as I have said, there was no apportionment of the amount of $11,005.00 as between the fees charged by the Defendant to the First Plaintiff on the one hand and the fees charged by the Defendant to the Second Plaintiff on the other.

The adoption of the Attache Software Package by the Plaintiffs was not a success because, so it would seem, Phillipa Faulkner was unable to operate it effectively.

In due course the programme was replaced by another software package known as "Cashman".

In their Cross-Claims the Plaintiffs alleged that the Defendant breached its duty of care to the Plaintiffs by failing to advise the Plaintiffs adequately on the installation of a bookkeeping system, failing to advise that Phillipa
Faulkner was not performing her duties adequately or at all, failing to detect that the Plaintiffs' books were not properly kept and failing to advise that a full-time bookkeeper was not necessary for a business the size and complexity of the Plaintiffs' businesses.

The learned Magistrate held that the Defendant was not in breach of its duty of care to the Plaintiffs in not (sic) advising the Plaintiffs to purchase and use the Attache Package; on the evidence he could not conclude that the Defendant was in breach of its duty of care to the Plaintiffs in not informing the Plaintiffs that it was aware that the Plaintiffs' employee, Phillipa Faulkner, was unable to learn or use the Attache Package; and there was no evidence that the Defendant was in breach of its duty of care to the Plaintiffs.

Each of these findings was challenged by the Plaintiffs in these proceedings.
In my opinion no questions of law relevantly arise in respect of any of the findings. Accordingly, the Plaintiffs' challenges to the findings cannot be raised on this hearing pursuant to section 101 et seq of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) as amended.

In dealing with the Plaintiffs' Cross-Claims the learned Magistrate said:- "The Court papers reveal that while the defendants lodged defences to the statement of claim by mail on 4th August 1994 it was not until September, 1995 that Notice of Cross-Claim was filed in the Registry. The speculative character of the particulars of the claim suggests that the cross-claim is more a strategic after-thought than a genuine attempt to redress by damages an actual loss experienced as a consequence of a legal wrong or breach of contract." 
In their respective Cross-Claims the Plaintiffs sought to recover $6,421.00 and $32,532.00 respectively as damages for the Defendant's alleged breaches of its duties of care. The evidence appears to have established that $5,312.00 was paid for the Attache Software Package and other moneys were said to have been thrown away by reference to the excessive expenditure on a bookkeeper.
The evidence supported a joint loss of $26,582.00 but there was no apportionment as between the respective Plaintiffs. In addition damages totalling $10,929.00 were sought to be recovered in respect of accountancy fees thrown away by virtue of the problems caused with the Attache Software
Package which had been paid by the Plaintiffs to the Defendant. Once again the evidence as revealed in the stated case as amended did not apportion the loss said to have been suffered as between the Plaintiffs.

Whilst the inference which the learned Magistrate drew as to the genuineness of the Cross-Claims may have been available to him it does seem to me that there is within it some speculation on His Worship's behalf. Other reasons such as the intervention of Counsel in the matter could explain a late, albeit genuine, making of Cross-Claims. Notwithstanding these observations, it does not seem to me that the learned Magistrate has relevantly fallen into legal error in reaching his conclusions as to duties of care and breaches to which I have referred above.

Having said that, there seems to me to have been a fundamental defect in the learned Magistrate's process of reasoning in respect of the Plaintiffs' claims that the amounts charged by the Defendant for their services, the recovery of which was sought in the proceedings, were excessive.

Two experts were called in the case, the Plaintiffs' current accountant, Mr.
Mathers, for the Plaintiffs and Mr. Arnheim for the Defendant.

On page 3 of his reasons for judgment of 7 June 1996 the learned Magistrate said:- "But it is Dr. Short who asserts inadequacies in the Plaintiff's work and excesses in his charges and in order to succeed in resisting the Plaintiff's claim the evidence must, on the balance of probabilities, displace that offered by the Plaintiff. In my view it does not ... The Plaintiff therefore succeeds on the claim and in the amount claimed." 
In my opinion the learned Magistrate has failed to correctly identify where the burden of proof lies. The case made by the Defendant was for the payment of fees for professional services. There was an implied term in the contract between the parties that the fees charged would be reasonable and plainly the burden of proving that they were reasonable remained upon the Plaintiff from beginning to end. As I read the learned Magistrate's reasons he has treated the onus as shifting to the Plaintiffs to establish that the fees charged were "excessive" and he has found for the Defendant because the Plaintiffs failed to discharge this burden.

Mr. Sternberg of Counsel for the Defendant submitted that it is implicit in the reasons for judgment of the learned Magistrate that he in fact applied the correct test even though he may not have mouthed it.

Plainly the learned Magistrate was disposed to accept Mr. Arnheim's evidence that the "fees charged were not excessive and within that expected by persons dealing with a professional firm of Chartered Accountants" and, inferentially, that the fees charged were reasonable. However, it is not for me to usurp the function of the learned Magistrate in correctly deciding the issue on the evidence and according to law. He has had the benefit of seeing the witnesses and hearing the evidence and he should be called upon to determine the issue correctly.

There is one other aspect of the judgment below which was attacked by Mr.
Zammit in his submissions. On page 2 of his reasons for judgment the learned
Magistrate said in respect of Mr. Mathers' opinion as to the quantum of the
Defendant's charges:- "... given the terms of the new [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) it is arguable that Mr. Mathers' opinion is more than marginally better than a lay opinion." 
Taken in their context these words seem to suggest that the learned Magistrate found that Mr. Mathers was partial to the Plaintiffs' cases, he was their current accountant and his opinion in respect of the reasonableness of the
Defendant's charges could not carry the same weight as an opinion expressed by a more independent expert.

If His Worship was suggesting that a person such as Mr. Mathers could not express an expert opinion and that because of his association with the
Plaintiffs his opinion must be treated as little different from that of a lay witness then the learned Magistrate has fallen into error. [Part .3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p3.3) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) cannot be construed to convert Mr. Mathers' expert opinion into that of a lay person in respect of the reasonableness of the fees charged. This does not mean that the partiality of an expert for a particular party's case cannot colour the evidence given by that party so as to make it less credible than it might otherwise have been.

When the learned Magistrate delivered his reasons for judgment of 7 June 1996 he only addressed the claim made by the Defendant against the second-named
Plaintiff. He found in favour of the Defendant in the proceedings before him directing a judgment for $7,598.20 together with interest up to judgment of $1,826.07 and $17,132.00 for costs, a total of $26,556.27. On 3 September 1996
His Worship delivered further reasons for judgment noting that he had failed to deal with the claim of the Defendant against the First Plaintiff. He proceeded to direct judgment for the Defendant against the First Plaintiff in the sum of $4,485.00 together with $1,390.10 for interest up to judgment. No order was made for costs in these proceedings, the full burden of the costs order having been imposed upon the Second Plaintiff in the proceedings against it. Accordingly a judgment was entered against the First Plaintiff for a total of $5,875.10.

In the stated case the Plaintiffs as Appellants have contended that the learned Magistrate's determinations were erroneous in law for some 19 reasons.
Mr. Sternberg for the Defendant submits that there were no errors of law but rather that what is claimed to be a series of errors of law are nothing other than claimed errors of fact which have been dressed up as errors of law.

It seems to me that there is considerable force in this submission in respect of many of the reasons relied upon. However, given the manner in which the appeal has been conducted before me it does not seem necessary or appropriate for me to deal with each and every one of the Plaintiffs' contentions seriatim. The ultimate question is whether the learned Magistrate's determinations were erroneous in point of law and in my opinion they were in the respects and for the reasons indicated above.

In the circumstances, the matter should be remitted to the learned Magistrate with the opinion of the Court on the stated case for determination according to law.

In relation to costs Counsel for the Plaintiffs has submitted that, if my findings were generally as indicated above, there should be no order as to costs and Counsel for the Defendant has submitted that the Plaintiffs should be ordered to pay one-half of the Defendant's costs with no order as to costs in respect of the remainder. I have also been referred to the relevant provisions in the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) as amended.

I should observe that the stated case has come before this Court as one case in respect of the two separate matters in the Local Court which were originally heard together. Much time was lost at the hearing before me as a result of deficiencies in the expression of the stated case which were overcome as best they could by amendments being made to the stated case with the consent of all parties in accordance with [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/index.html#p32)
Rule 7(1)(a) of the Supreme Court Rules.

In my opinion the proper order in respect of costs is that proposed by Mr.
Sternberg. Accordingly, the orders of the Court will be:-
The question asked in the stated case be answered in the affirmative.
The matter be remitted to the learned Magistrate, with the opinion of the
Court, to be determined according to law.
The Plaintiffs are to pay one-half of the Defendant's costs of the appeal.
The Exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
