

Regina versus Robert Andrew Haines [2004] NSWSC 1318 (11 April 2004) 
REGINA versus Robert Andrew HAINES /92 
Wednesday 13 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, JAMES J, IRELAND J 
SENTENCING 
Multiple offences - no error on the part of the sentencing judge - sentences not excessive.

ORDER Leave to appeal granted.
 Appeal dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: Robert Andrew Haines applies for leave to appeal against a number of sentences imposed by his Honour Judge Craigie in the District Court on 1 May 1992. The applicant is unrepresented and has put his argument to this court in the form of written submissions supplemented by some oral remarks this morning. 
I begin by saying that, because of the length of the sentences involved, the applicant should have leave to appeal, and his appeal should be considered on its merits.

The applicant has an extremely long and complex custodial history and has obviously spent a good deal of his life in prison. The matters that brought him for trial before Craigie DCJ and later for sentencing, arose out of what could only be described as a series of rampages upon which the applicant engaged during 1990. The applicant does not dispute the seriousness of his conduct and the objective features of the case can be seen from the lengthy remarks on sentence of Craigie DCJ.

I do not intend for present purposes to repeat the details of the offences other than to mention them in summary form when explaining the course which his Honour took. However, this judgment should be read together with the judgment of Craigie DCJ under appeal and additionally the judgment of Moore
DCJ of 28 September 1994, the relevance of which will appear a little later.

The applicant was dealt with at two separate trials both presided over by
Craigie DCJ in April 1992. There was a separate jury at each trial. When he finally came for sentence before Craigie DCJ he was also sentenced on a number of other matters in respect of which he entered pleas of guilty under s51A of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/).

There were, in substance, three separate episodes of criminality in 1990 in respect of which Craigie DCJ was sentencing the applicant. The first episode occurred in April 1990; the second episode occurred in September 1990; the third episode occurred in December 1990. At the time of the second episode the applicant was on bail following his arrest in relation to the matters the subject of the first episode.

The first episode, which was the subject of the first trial before Craigie
DCJ, involved an offence of stealing a motor vehicle and an offence of breaking and entering a shop and stealing four television sets from the shop.
The second episode involved the matters in respect of which the applicant entered pleas of guilty under s51A of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/); that involved twenty offences, including six offences of stealing motor vehicles and eleven offences of robbery involving stealing from a person. The third episode occurred in December 1990 and involved, amongst other things, one offence of stealing a motor vehicle and an offence of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm upon a police officer with intent to prevent the lawful apprehension of the applicant.

The sentences imposed by Craigie DCJ may be summarised as follows: 
First Indictment  --- 
Offence 
Sentence 
Expiring  
Steal motor vehicle 
FT 3 years to commence 13.4.92  .4.95  
Break, enter and steal 
FT 5 years to commence 13.4.92  .4.97  
The 51A Matters  
Stealing 
FT 2 years to commence 13.4.92  .4.94  
Possess implements 
FT 3 years to commence 13.4.92  .4.95  
Allowing self to be carried  in conveyance etc 
FT 3 years to commence 13.4.92  .4.95  
Stealing motor vehicle(x6) 
FT 6 years to commence 13.4.92  .4.98  
Robbery/steal from person  
FT 6 years to commence 13.4.92  .4.98  
Second Indictment  
Possess implements 
FT 3 years to commence 13.4.92  .4.95  
Steal motor vehicle 
FT 6 years to commence 13.4.92  .4.98  
Escape lawful custody 
FT 12 months to commence 13.4.92  .4.93  
Maliciously inflict GBH 
MT 9 years to commence 13.4.92  .4.2001  
AT 3 years  .4.2004  
All sentences were concurrent.

Subsequently the applicant appealed successfully against the conviction in respect of the last of the offences referred to above; the offence of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm. The Court of Criminal Appeal, after allowing that appeal, ordered a new trial; however, when the matter went back for a new trial the applicant, before trial, had a sentence indication hearing before Moore DCJ. Following that sentence indication hearing Moore DCJ re-sentenced the applicant in respect of the matter of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm. His Honour sentenced the applicant to penal servitude for a total term of ten years involving a minimum term of six years commencing on 12 January 1991 and an additional term of four years.

It may be noted that the practical consequence of the combined effect of the sentences imposed by Craigie DCJ and Moore DCJ was that, unusually, there was an overlap in the form of an excess of the fixed terms of six years commencing April 1992 over the minimum term imposed by Moore DCJ. The position in that respect is further complicated in that the applicant was later convicted of a quite separate offence involving assaulting a prison officer in respect of which he was sentenced to a fixed term of imprisonment for six months to commence at the expiration of the sentence imposed by Craigie DCJ. That appears to produce the consequence, from the applicant's point of view, that, subject to a favourable decision of the authorities dealing with the matter of parole, he may expect to be released from custody in September or October
I base that information on what the applicant told the court this morning. It is not suggested by the applicant or the Crown that anything turns upon the overlap to which I have referred.

The grounds of appeal upon which the applicant relies commence with a complaint that Craigie DCJ dealt with the applicant in a manner that produced disparity having regard to the way in which a co-offender named Genua was sentenced. Genua was a co-offender only in relation to what has been referred to earlier as the s51A matters. The applicant has told the court that Genua was sentenced to a term of twenty-seven months in custody and this is to be compared with the fixed terms of six years imposed by Craigie DCJ. From the applicant's point of view the difficulty involved in making a comparison with the treatment of Genua was that Craigie DCJ was sentencing the applicant in respect of a large number of offences and Genua was a co-offender in relation to some only of those offences.

In his reasons for sentence Craigie DCJ referred on a number of occasions to the principle of totality. By that his Honour meant that although the total maximum penalties to which the applicant was theoretically liable, amounted to some hundreds of years, in accordance with ordinary sentencing principles his
Honour was obliged to bear in mind the total effect of the sentences he was imposing on the applicant and to ensure that that effect was not disproportionate to the totality of the criminality involved in those offences.

I see no error involved in the approach which Craigie DCJ took in that respect nor do I consider that the sentences he imposed produced any relevant disparity having regard to the sentences imposed on Genua.

There is another problem facing the applicant in relation to the parity argument. As was earlier mentioned the applicant was on bail when the offences, the subject of the second episode, were committed. In fact the s51A offences were committed on six separate days whilst the applicant was on bail.
Whilst the applicant has pointed out that on one occasion Genua failed to appear in court when he was obliged to do so, that is really not comparable to the seriousness involved in this aspect of the matter from the applicant's point of view.

The second ground of appeal advanced on behalf of the applicant is that
Craigie DCJ gave inadequate weight to his pleas of guilty and to the time at which those pleas were entered.

I see no error in the way in which his Honour dealt with this matter in his remarks on sentence. His Honour took into account the pleas of guilty and there is nothing in the ultimate result produced that suggests he failed to give them appropriate weight.

Similarly, it is argued by the applicant that his Honour failed to give sufficient account to the pre-sentence custody served by the applicant. In this respect the applicant's argument may be prompted by favourable consideration given to him by Moore DCJ. In my view, however, it is not a fair criticism of the reasoning or the decision of Craigie DCJ to say he failed to reflect the pre-sentence custody served by the applicant.

In his careful remarks on sentence his Honour took full account of all the matters relevant to the exercise of his discretion in relation both to the terms that he was imposing and to their commencement dates.

The applicant's principal argument is that the total sentences imposed were excessive. The applicant presents before this court as a person who recognises - and I believe genuinely recognises - the seriousness of his past conduct and explains - and I believe honestly explains - the relationship between that conduct and his drug habits at the time. Nevertheless, I am bound to say, having regard to the major amount of objective criminality involved in the conduct of the applicant which I have earlier described as a series of criminal rampages, that it is not possible to conclude that the sentences imposed by Craigie DCJ, which are the subject of the present appeal, are excessive or beyond the range of a proper sentencing discretion.

It is unnecessary to repeat the information that has been put before the court in relation to maximum penalties which the law provides in relation to these offences. There is, however, one particular kind of offence which the applicant has committed on a number of occasions to which I want to make special reference, because it is easy for people to overlook the seriousness of offences of this kind. On a number of occasions the applicant committed the offence of snatching handbags from women as they were walking in the street.
That is a very serious interference with the peace which members of the community are entitled to expect as they go about their way. The violence of that form of activity is sometimes underestimated, especially if the women, the subject of the attack, let the handbag go without resistance. It is the experience of this court that sometimes when women resist that kind of violence they suffer even more serious physical consequences. Episodes of that kind constitute a very serious breach of the peace. The ultimate object of the criminal law is to keep the peace and to protect citizens as they go about their lawful business.

The applicant draws the attention of the court to the sentence imposed by
Moore DCJ and argues that the court should reconsider the penalties imposed by
Craigie DCJ in the light of what Moore DCJ did. That is a proper submission and I think the court should reconsider the sentences imposed by Craigie DCJ in the light of what Moore DCJ did. For my part, having reconsidered those, I consider they are appropriate and should not be interfered with by this court.

I propose the appeal be dismissed.

JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice.

IRELAND J: I agree also with the judgment of the Chief Justice.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the court will be as I have set out.
 * * * 
