

Regina versus Haynes Matter No Cca 60633/97 [1998] NSWSC 275 (29 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 `REGINA versus KEVIN JOHN HAYNES` `CCA 60633/97` `29 May 1998` `Studdert J, Black AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: I will ask Black AJ to give the first judgment. 
BLACK AJ: On 13 November 1997 this applicant was sentenced at the Lismore District Court by his Honour Judge Solomon in respect of three counts relating to drug matters. Counts 1 and 2 related to supplying a prohibited drug contrary to [s 25(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s25.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act, 1985](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/); count 3 related to cultivating a prohibited plant contrary to <case> of the Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act, 1900. There was a plea of guilty and the sentence imposed on this applicant was a minimum term of imprisonment for 18 months to date from 13 November 1997 expiring on 12 May 1999 and an additional term of eighteen months commencing on 13 May 1999 expiring on 12 November in the year 2000. 
The applicant appeared jointly with his wife and the facts were summarised by his Honour as follows:- "Insofar as the charges are concerned I am satisfied Christine Pauline Haynes and Kevin John Haynes acted in concert so as to commit each of the offences. I am satisfied that that concert was such that they were partners in the financial dealings concerning the cocaine and the cannabis and that they were the joint cultivators of the prohibited plants." 
He further said - "I am satisfied that each of the prisoners were involved in two actual supply of drugs; one supply was a supply of half a gram of cocaine with a value of $100 and the other was a supply of two pounds of cannabis leaf to a man,
Jones. I am satisfied that there were discussions in relation to the sale of at least one further ounce of cocaine. I am satisfied that the 51 plants were cultivated and to be used by the prisoners. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that some of that sum of 51 plants would have been used for the purpose of sale. I am satisfied that each of the prisoners was involved in a substantial degree in the sale of drugs. I come to that view having regard to the fact that Christine Haynes kept a list of the transactions that she and her husband made in respect of the sale of drugs. I do not find them to be large commercial dealings of drugs. They appear to have a small group of customers. They also appear to use the drugs in social situations with some of those customers. I do find that they themselves were users of cocaine and cannabis. The offences are extremely serious offences. The seriousness of the offences is reflected in the penalties as set out in the relevant legislation." 
In the result the applicant received the sentence to which I have already referred. In relation to Christine Haynes the learned trial judge originally proposed a sentence of periodical detention, but the resources of the State did not allow him to impose that in the Northern Rivers area. He then went on to impose upon her the maximum community service of five hundred hours in respect of the first count and placed her on a recognisance to be of good behaviour in respect of the second and third counts.

In so dealing with the applicant's wife the learned trial judge had taken a number of matters into consideration and found exceptional circumstances in her case which he found did not require the imposition of an immediate gaol sentence. The factors in relation to her principally concerned a report from a psychologist, which this court has had the opportunity of reading. It is clear from that report that the circumstances surrounding the detection of the offence and the length of time the matter had taken to reach court, not necessarily anybody's fault for there were other proceedings relating some listening device warrants, had caused marked injury to her mental health. The other factors that the learned judge took into account were very similar to the factors applicable to the applicant in this case, namely, the references referring to community work and active work in the community, particularly for the aged. The fact that his Honour was anxious to leave one of these parents available to cope for the children in truth was a factor available to either of these two people. In the result, having found the way he did in relation to the psychological report, his Honour added the care of the children in the scales in the favour of the wife.

It would seem to be reasonable to conclude that had the evidence from the psychologist been the other way, namely in relation to this applicant, then this applicant would have been entitled to that consideration. The point I seek to make is that that factor was available to either of the husband or the wife, so the distinction made arises from the psychiatric report. In the end result, for the reasons which I have already indicated, rather than a sentence of periodic detention his Honour in the case of Christine Haynes was obliged, because of the view he had taken, to impose the non custodial sentence which I have already set out, and that gives rise to the issue at the heart of this appeal by the applicant saying that the disparity is such that it gives rise to a justifiable sense of grievance on the part of the applicant.

The case of Lowe -v- The Queen <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 606] is authority for saying all courts should pay attention to the principle of parity, but it is to be emphasised that just because a particular applicant feels a sense of grievance it does not necessarily follow that that is a justifiable one. In this case, however, when one sees the stark contrast between the sentence eventually passed on Christine Haynes and the eighteen month term of imprisonment passed upon the applicant, I for my part find there is force in the contention on behalf of the applicant that the disparity is such as to give rise to a justifiable sense of grievance.

I should deal with two other matters raised on behalf of the applicant. They were that the sentencing judge failed to give full effect to the plea, having regard to the fact that a ruling in relation to listening device warrants might have made it more difficult for the Crown to obtain a conviction. That matter is expressly referred to in his Honour's reasons and in my judgment he gave full effect to those considerations.

The other matter put forward was the issue of delay. That again is expressly referred to by his Honour and it was the effect of the delay, coupled with the other matter relating to the listening devices, that gave rise to the distinction between the two parties in his Honour's mind. As far as this applicant was concerned in my view his Honour took into account the question of delay.

That, however, still leaves the issue of parity about which in my judgment, as
I have said, the applicant has a justifiable sense of grievance. The appropriate orders to redress that sense of grievance that I would propose is to alter the sentence imposed in the following way, namely, to impose a minimum term of imprisonment for twelve months to date from 13 November 1997 and an additional term of twelve months thereafter.

STUDDERT J: I agree with the proposed orders and with the reasons that have been expressed by Mr Justice Black. The formal orders of the court then would be these. Leave to appeal is granted. The sentence imposed on each of the three counts is quashed, in lieu thereof that the applicant serve a term of imprisonment of two years with a minimum term of twelve months commencing on 13 November 1997 and expiring on 12 November 1998 and an additional term of twelve months commencing on 13 November 1998, the applicant to be released on parole on 13 November 1998. 
The material which came to the Court in the sealed envelope could be sensitive if it got into the wrong hands. It is a narrow community to which it is related. I think the safest course is that I direct that the envelope be sealed, not to be opened without an order of a judge of this Court or an appropriate Court, and the document will be kept with the court papers.
 * * * 
