

Regina versus Tania Jane Beeby [1996] NSWSC 365 (23 August 1996) 
REGINA versus TANIA JANE BEEBY /94 
FRIDAY 23 AUGUST 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
COLE JA, STUDDERT J, SULLY J 
JUDGMENT 
SULLY J: In June of 1993, Miss Tania Jane Beeby, ("the appellant"), was tried in the Sydney District Court and upon an indictment charging her with having conspired with two named persons and with "divers other persons" to import into Australia a quantity of heroin being not less than the trafficable quantity as prescribed by law for that drug. 
The appellant contended that she was not guilty of that offence. The jury found that she was. She was thereupon formally convicted and sentenced to a substantial term of imprisonment.

The appellant now challenges that conviction, but has abandoned an application for leave to appeal against sentence.

Two grounds of appeal have been pressed. The Notice of Appeal propounds them as follows: "1. His Honour erred in allowing the admission of the six tape recordings referred to in his judgment of 20 April 1993.
His Honour erred in allowing the admission of transcripts of the said six tape recordings as per his judgment of 22 April 1993." 
The development of the arguments put for the appellant suggests that the real point of the appeal is a point related to the second of the two quoted grounds of appeal, but ground one has not been formally abandoned and it will be convenient to say something briefly about it.

It is not necessary for present purposes to go into the detailed facts of the
Crown case at trial. It is sufficient to understand that, as far as the Crown case against this particular appellant was concerned, the case depended essentially upon the alleged contents of those six tapes.

The appellant was tried jointly with the two alleged co-conspirators named in the indictment, and each of the three accused was separately represented by counsel.

On the first day of the trial, and before the formal arraignment of the appellant and her co-accused, the Crown Prosecutor indicated to the trial
Judge that all counsel were engaged in "some discussions as to a voir dire issue in relation to the admissibility of tapes and transcripts". The presiding Judge observed, correctly, that it was for him to say whether or not there would be a voir dire hearing, and his Honour sought to elicit from counsel for the parties the precise question or questions as to which it was thought that a voir dire hearing might be sought and granted.

There ensued a great deal of discussion between counsel and the Judge. Some of it is recorded, more or less verbatim, in the transcript that has been included in the Appeal Book; and some of it has simply been paraphrased in a very summary fashion. I have inferred from the contents of the transcript of that discussion that the point of law to which it was being suggested a voir dire hearing might be directed was that the tapes ought to be excluded, not because their contents were not relevant to the issues for trial, but because their contents were comprehensible in part and incomprehensible in part, so that the probative value of the comprehensible parts would be outweighed by the risk that those parts might be given a significance that in truth they did not have and that they might well be seen not to have, if only they could be presented in the context of the entire conversations recorded on the tapes.
Thus, as I would infer the intended argument to have run, a voir dire hearing should be permitted in order to enable the appellant and her co-accused to establish this risk of unfair prejudice and thereby to persuade the trial
Judge that he should exclude the tapes in their entirety, and in the exercise of his relevant judicial discretion to exclude unfairly prejudicial evidence.

His Honour granted a voir dire hearing, although I cannot see in the transcript any clear statement of that ruling and of the precise question or questions to be considered and determined upon that hearing. His Honour appears then to have listened to one in particular of the six tapes. That tape appears to have been selected with the agreement of all concerned; and to have been placed before his Honour upon the basis that it was the least satisfactory, in terms of its comprehensibility, of the six tapes. His Honour appears to have had available to him, and to have used as an aid in his own listening to the sample tape, a transcript of the alleged contents of the tape.

There appears, as best I can divine from the transcript, to have been general agreement that his Honour should both listen to that one tape as representative of all six; and that he should do so with the assistance, as he saw fit, of the transcript of which I have spoken.

In due course his Honour delivered, and as it would seem, ex tempore, a judgment in which he held that the six tapes were admissible, but that he would reserve for future consideration the allied question whether transcripts of the alleged contents of the tapes should be admitted also into evidence and so be available to the jury.

I should say, with all respect to his Honour, that what his Honour actually says about the admissibility of the transcripts, as distinct from the tapes, is somewhat confusing. Thus, and at page 3 of his judgment, his Honour says that: "It seems to me that I should admit the tapes and their accompanying transcripts into evidence in these proceedings".

But later, and at page 5 of the judgment, his Honour, after restating that the tapes and the transcripts should be admitted, says immediately thereafter, and in terms, that he "reserves" the questions: "- of the admissibility of the transcript, subject to the Crown establishing the qualifications of the person who made the transcript from the tapes"; and: "- of whether any transcript that is admitted into evidence should be placed before the jury".

Be all that as it may, a second voir dire hearing was held immediately after delivery of the judgment to which I have been referring. This time, the point of the voir dire was stated by his Honour to be: "whether I should admit into evidence transcripts of those tapes prepared by an undercover police officer using the name of Michael Dixon".

His Honour heard extensive evidence from Mr Dixon, and from a Detective
Sergeant Kaufmann of the Drug Enforcement Agency. In due course, his Honour gave ex tempore a brief judgment in which he admitted into evidence the challenged transcripts allegedly recording the comprehensible portions of all six tapes. His Honour delivered subsequently a considered statement of his reasons for that decision.

In that statement of reasons his Honour summarised, in a way convenient for present use, the evidence taken on the voir dire, and, in particular, the evidence bearing upon the question whether Mr Dixon might properly be accepted as an ad hoc expert witness, qualified to give evidence of the contents of the six tape recordings.

I do not understand it to be now submitted that what his Honour thus said misapprehends or misstates the evidence. His Honour said: "The six transcripts in question were compiled by the undercover police officer Michael Dixon from tapes of conversations he caused to be electronically recorded on the days in question. Not only was Michael Dixon present when those conversations were taped he was also a participant in the conversations. While in addition to the persons identified in those conversations there were some other persons whose names he did not know also present in some of those conversations. He has identified the voices of those persons who took part in each of those conversations (including the unnamed persons) by the initials V1, V2 et cetera.

In the course of his evidence on the voir dire in order to establish his qualification to compile those transcripts he stated that after each of the conversations were taped he returned to the office of the Drug Enforcement
Agency and in the presence of another police officer, Detective Sergeant
Kaufmann checked the tape recorder he had used to see that it had functioned properly and also listened to the tape as it was played back while a master copy of the tape was being made. He also stated that one of the purposes of playing the tape back was to give him an opportunity listen to it in order to hear what was audible on it. He also gave evidence as to the procedure that was adopted in order to preserve the tape and I am satisfied therefrom that the integrity of each of the tapes has been preserved since that time.

Mr Dixon gave further evidence that at a later date he took the master tapes to a transcription typist so that a transcription of each tape could be prepared and that at that time he again listened to each tape in order to identify to the typist the various voices on the tapes. In carrying out this exercise Mr Dixon conceded that he did not listen to the whole of each tape but only to such part of the tape as enabled him to identify the voices thereon to the typist. The next time that Michael Dixon listened to those tapes was on 14 September 1991 when with the aid of the transcripts which had previously been prepared by the police typist he again listened to the tapes in order to ascertain specifically what was said in the course of the conversations recorded on each tape. In performing that task Mr Dixon had available to him as an aid the transcript of the tape in question and which had previously been prepared by the police typist. I am satisfied from Mr
Dixon's evidence that on that day he listened to each tape to discern what was said thereon.

As the conversation recorded on each of the tapes is partly inaudible or unintelligible Mr Dixon says he had to listen to parts of the tapes repeatedly in order to satisfy himself as to what could be heard on them. From his evidence on the voir dire I am satisfied that Mr Dixon listened to each tape not only in order to ascertain what was recorded thereon but also as a result of his listening thereto over a protracted period of time was able hear the conversations he now says are contained in the six transcripts which it is sought to tender in these proceedings for the purpose recognised in Butera v
DPP <case>; [(1987-88) 164 CLR 180] and
Regina versus Player, an unreported discussion of the Court of Criminal Appeal of 14 June 1989.

As I have previously indicated I am satisfied from Mr Dixon's evidence that he has qualified himself as an ad hoc expert to compile each of those transcripts. I am further satisfied that because the tapes are partially inaudible and unintelligible that the transcripts should be admitted into evidence to aid the jury in understanding what conversations are recorded on the tapes which I have previously ruled should be admitted into evidence." 
As to the contention that the transcripts, even if strictly admissible, should be excluded in the exercise of his relevant discretion, his Honour says: "During the course of the application it was also submitted that I should exclude the six transcripts from evidence in the exercise of my discretion.
After careful consideration of this submission I do not think it appropriate that I should exercise my discretion in this way. I have come to this conclusion particularly bearing in mind the need to ensure that the jury should have before it every bit of assistance technical or otherwise which will enable it to perform the task which the law will assign to it. It seems to me after listening to one of the tapes in question that the more often one listens to it the more sense it makes and I think that the jury should have the assistance of transcripts prepared by a qualified person to aid them in the manner identified by Gleeson CJ in Player's case at page 6 of his judgment. It seems to be that the interests of justice require me to not to exercise my discretion in favour of the accused and to allow it to be tendered into evidence. In taking this course I do not think that any unfairness will be occasioned to the accused particularly bearing in mind the directions I will give to the jury in regard to the use it may make of the transcripts. For similar reasons I am satisfied that not only should I allow the transcripts to be tendered into evidence in these proceedings but I should also allow them to have access to those transcripts for the strictly limited reason identified by
Gleeson CJ in Player's case." 
For myself, I am unable to see that there was any error in principle made by his Honour in his decision, to which ground 1 pertains, to admit, not the transcripts, but the tapes themselves.

Whatever one might say about the imprecision of the way in which questions were formulated for decision upon the voir dire, the fact remains that his
Honour did exactly what the parties asked him to do; he listened to a sample tape upon which all were agreed as being representative, at least in a broad sense, of the comprehensibility of the whole of the material on the whole of the six tapes; and, as I have earlier remarked, his Honour, with common agreement, used a transcript.

His Honour expressed a view, and it is not contended that the view was not open to him, that he, having conducted that exercise, was able without the assistance of the transcript to hear portion of the material encoded on the particular sample tape; that he was not able to hear without the assistance of the transcript other of that encoded material; but that with the aid of the transcript he had been able to increase the amount of comprehensible material; and his Honour expressed the view, which again, as it seems to me, was clearly open to his Honour, that the impression left upon him from the exercise that he had carried out was that as one listened more and more to the particular tape, and so as one's ear became more and more accustomed to the flow of the sounds encoded upon the tape, so it would become progressively more and more possible to add to the sum total of the comprehensible portions of the material encoded upon the sample tape.

His Honour, as I have said, was in my opinion clearly entitled to form those views; and having regard to the way in which the issue as to the admissibility of the tapes, as distinct from the transcripts, was dealt with at the trial, I cannot see that there was any error of law manifested by the way in which his
Honour approached the very task that he had been asked by all concerned to perform.

In my opinion, ground 1 has not been made good.

The thrust of the argument put on ground 2 is that his Honour erroneously permitted Mr Dixon to be treated as an ad hoc expert witness and so to become, as it were, the vehicle for proof of what he, Mr Dixon, asserted to be accurate transcripts of the contents, in so far as those contents were comprehensible at all, of all six of the tapes of which I have been speaking.

The excerpts quoted above from his Honour's reserved reasons on the second of the two voir dires which his Honour permitted give sufficiently for present purposes an overview of the purport of the evidence on the voir dire respecting what Mr Dixon had actually done. He had listened, on the occasion in September 1991, to all six tapes. He had done so aided, broadly speaking, in two ways. He had been aided first by the availability to him of time and of specialised equipment of which he said that it was different from, and as I infer technically superior to some extent at least to, the equipment available in the recording itself.

He was aided as well by the fact that he had himself been present at many if not quite perhaps all, of the conversations supposedly caught on the tapes in question.

It is clear that the learned trial Judge, who heard Mr Dixon give evidence, and who heard that evidence tested thoroughly in the voir dire hearing, saw no reason to disbelieve what Mr Dixon had said by way of description of what he had done in connection with the review of the contents of the tape and the production, as best he could produce them, of transcripts available to assist in an understanding of what was encoded upon the tape. Once it was accepted that Mr Dixon had done what he said he had done, then for myself I cannot see why there was any error in law in permitting him to give evidence before the jury of those matters.

It was, of course, important, as the decision of the High Court in Butera makes clear, that such a course, if permitted, be accompanied by the giving to the jury of proper, and properly precise and emphatic, directions as to the very limited nature of the use that the jury might make of those particular transcripts.

It is not contended, as I have followed the arguments put this morning, either that his Honour did not give such directions, or that he gave them in some way which was insufficiently precise or cogent for the purposes then in hand.

It does not seem to me that this aspect of the present appeal is to be considered and resolved upon the basis of arid theoretical argument as to whether Mr Dixon was an ad hoc expert or, indeed, any other kind of expert.
Nor, as it seems to me, is the question at issue to be resolved by technical controversy deriving from the fact that Mr Dixon had been involved, as he had been plainly and very deeply involved, in the police operations which gave rise to the conversations caught allegedly on the six tapes. What is to be borne simply and steadily in mind is that there was at the point relevant for present purposes, which is 22 April when his Honour ruled upon the voir dire hearing, evidence in hand which clearly established that Mr Dixon had done, with advantages not available to the jury, things designed to bring into being an accurate transcript giving the best possible representation of what appropriate technology could raise and make comprehensible in, and out of, the tapes in question.

In those circumstances, as it seems to me, the ruling upon the voir dire has not been shown to have been erroneous in point of law. It is that ruling and that ruling only to which ground 2 in the grounds of appeal is directed.

In the light of the conclusion that I have expressed, it follows as of course that in my opinion ground 2 also has not been made good.

We were informed at the inception of this morning's hearing that the intended appeal proper is out of time and that it would be necessary for the Court to grant leave to appeal out of time. I am of the opinion that leave to appeal out of time should be granted, but that the substantive appeal, thus permitted, should be dismissed.

COLE JA: I agree. I would add only this. In Butera versus Director of Public Prosecutions for the State of Victoria <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 180] at 188 Sir Anthony Mason CJ and Brennan and Deane JJ, after referring to a trial judge's discretion to permit a transcript of tapes to be placed before a jury, the exercise of that discretion being determined after a consideration of the requirements of justice and any risk of unfairness to the accused, said: "The jury should be instructed that the purpose of admitting any transcript is not to provide independent evidence of the conversation but so as to aid them in understanding what conversation is recorded on the tape and they cannot use the transcript as a substitute for the tape if they are not satisfied that the transcript correctly sets out what they heard on the tape." 
I emphasise the words "what they heard on the tape".

It follows that a jury must be satisfied that the transcript which they have contains words which they can hear irrespective of how that transcript may have been obtained. If they are so satisfied, they may have regard to the transcript. If they are unable to determine the words on the tape even with the assistance of the transcript, they must disregard them. A direction to that effect was given to the jury on a number of occasions and there is no basis upon which this court should assume that such directions were disregarded.

It follows, in my view, that the contention that because a person who produced the transcript may have had some association otherwise with events the subject of the transcript the transcript becomes flawed, is seriously diminished. I would agree with the orders proposed.

STUDDERT J: I also agree with the orders proposed and I agree with what has been said by both Sully J and Cole JA.

COLE JA: The orders will, accordingly, be as proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
