

Wayne Victor Funnell versus Nrma Insurance Ltd [1996] NSWSC 447 (20 September )

Wayne Victor FUNNELL versus NRMA INSURANCE LTD /95 
FRIDAY 20 SEPTEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
Wayne Victor Funnell seeks to set aside the decision of a magistrate finding a verdict for NRMA Insurance Ltd in proceedings brought by Mr Funnell claiming a breach of an insurance contract and damages of $14,000. There was an agreed value policy with the subject motor vehicle having an agreed value of $14,000.
The policy provided that if the car was stolen and not recovered NRMA would pay Mr Funnell the agreed value. Mr Funnell asserted that the subject motor vehicle was stolen. This was in issue. The vehicle was taken from where it had been left on the Pacific Highway, Asquith, stripped and driven over a cliff into the Hawkesbury River.

NRMA raised the defence of fraud. At the end of the evidence its counsel conceded that it was not open to the magistrate to find fraud. The issue was then whether the vehicle had been stolen.

The case had a number of unusual features. The difference between the agreed value and the sale value of the car was probably no more than about $3000 to $4000. The plaintiff had a substantial panel beating business and he did quite a lot of work for NRMA. He was also a man of financial substance having assets in addition to his home in excess of $500,000. He had no criminal convictions.
He had everything to lose and but little to gain by making an incorrect claim.
On the other hand he left the vehicle on a busy public road at Asquith, some considerable distance from where he lived and worked in circumstances which could be described as unusual. The magistrate was faced with some difficult factual determinations.

I am not entitled to rehear the facts. I have to determine whether there was an error of law. That confines my role.

The magistrate found the following facts: "4. On 12.1.90, the vehicle was insured with NRMA Insurance Ltd...for an agreed value of $18,700...
The insurance was renewed from time to time...until 12.01.93, when it was renewed for an agreed value of $14,000 and subject to an excess of $300.
By January, 1993, the insurance valuation had been reduced to about $10,000. The Plaintiff's wife had had a discussion about this with the
Plaintiff and following that, one or other of them had made representations to the NRMA Insurance Ltd; resulting in the agreed value being increased to ...
$14,000.00 .(a) In mid 1993, the Plaintiff purchased another vehicle for $40,000 using funds borrowed from the ANZ bank.

In 1993 the Plaintiff had a financially very healthy business including owning unencumbered factory units at Erina having a value in the vicinity of $500,000.00 
The Plaintiff decided to purchase a Mitsubishi Pajero on behalf of his company in 1993.
The Ford Falcon Stationwagon was then surplus to his needs.
At about 7.30 am on 7.7.93 the Plaintiff drove the Stationwagon from his home to the vicinity of the BP Service Station at the intersection of Pacific
Highway and Jersey Street, North Asquith...The Plaintiff left the vehicle parked on the roadway...
By prior arrangement...the Plaintiff's father Norman Funnell had followed him to that location driving his own vehicle. Mr Funnell Snr stopped his vehicle in the vicinity, but out of view of the Plaintiff parking the stationwagon. After about 5 minutes, the Plaintiff joined him and they drove back to the Plaintiff's workplace.
The Plaintiff remained at his workplace till returning home about 5 pm where he remained until leaving for work the next morning.
At about 5.30 pm on 7.7.93, Mr Whittaker, the manager of Cliftonville
Lodge, Hawkesbury River, Lower Portland, heard sounds like something metal roll off a nearby cliff and splash into the river. Soon after, he heard and observed a small light coloured car being driven from that vicinity. He was unable to make any observation of the occupant or occupants.
At about 7.30 am on 8.7.93, the Plaintiff went to work from home with his employee Mr Miles and spent the day there. He was joined there about 12.30 pm by his friend Mr White who had brought a vehicle for repair by arrangement. Mr
White remained with the Plaintiff until knock off time, when he, the Plaintiff and Mr Miles went to the Terrigal Hotel for drinks. The Plaintiff and Mr White went to the Plaintiff's home after about an hour for dinner. By arrangement,
Mr White's wife joined the Plaintiff, his wife and Mr White for dinner and to stay the night.
On 8.7.93, Const Kenyon of the Hawkesbury River Police, received a report of a motor vehicle in the river near Cliftonville Lodge. He attended the scene about 1.30 pm and observed tyre tracks leading to the cliff edge and oil and petrol in the water. He called in the police divers.
 .(a) About 8 pm on 8.7.93, Const Kenyon, acting on information supplied by the police divers, phoned the Plaintiff at his home. Kenyon had a conversation with the Plaintiff about the Ford Falcon Stationwagon.

In that conversation the Plaintiff said to Constable Kenyon "He was unaware that the vehicle had been stolen as he had left it in a BP
Service Station at Hornsby on the afternoon of 7 July, 1993, with keys resting on top of one of the wheels so that a friend could sell the vehicle for him in
Sydney." Further, that there were no signs on the vehicle.
 "Is this a joke" or words to that effect.
 "That's impossible" or words to that effect.
 "How do you know it's my car".

During the telephone conversation Constable Kenyon believed the Plaintiff sounded amazed.

Constable Kenyon did not make notes at the time of the conversation.

His only note of the conversation was an Occurrence Pad entry dated 4pm on .07.93 (exhibit 7). This entry was a very short version of the conversation.

Other than the Occurrence Pad entry, Constable Kenyon's account of the conversation was from his recollection.

Constable Kenyon was never challenged that the statements he attributed to the Plaintiff were never stated by the Plaintiff at all or that he, Kenyon, had misunderstood what the Plaintiff was saying to him.

The Plaintiff claims that he does not have a good recollection of that conversation. He says he was affected by alcohol to some extent; he was shocked; he treated the conversation as a joke at first; and mistook the caller for a customer enquiring after a vehicle left for pick up after hours at his workplace with a key left on a tyre.
After that first conversation with Constable Kenyon on the 08.07.93, the
Plaintiff gave versions of the circumstances of leaving the vehicle in the
Asquith area on 07.07.93 to the police in a Stolen Vehicle Report, in his claim on the insurance company, to the insurance company's investigator, and in evidence to the court at the hearing. In these versions the
Appellant/Plaintiff says:- 
He left it parked at Asquith at 8.30 am on 07.07.93.

He had an intention of speaking to personnel at the service station about leaving it there but on seeing other vehicles parked in the area he had in mind, he parked it in the street outside the service station.

He locked the vehicle and took the key with him.

He left it with For Sale signs displayed front and rear.

He intended that if he did not sell it by leaving it at Asquith he would pick it up after a few days and take it to Sydney to sell.

In a statutory declaration sworn before Mr Pascoe, an investigator on behalf of the Defendant on 19.8.93 the Plaintiff stated he had not given anyone permission to take his motor vehicle.

The Plaintiff denied to the Defendant's investigator he gave anyone permission to remove his vehicle.

In evidence on oath on 22.06.94 the Plaintiff denied giving anyone permission to take his vehicle ...denied being involved in any way in the taking of his vehicle.
 ...stated his vehicle was taken without his consent.
The Plaintiff says those For Sale signs offered the vehicle for sale for $13,000.00 O.N.O and displayed the telephone number 043-677222, which was his workplace number.
The Plaintiff claimed he did not choose to advertise and sell the vehicle locally as on a prior occasion a purchaser had been a problem by keeping coming back to him.
The vehicle was not recovered from the river. The divers inspection showed it to be partly stripped with the lining and seats removed; the registration plates removed; and bearing a registration label which identified it as the Plaintiff's Ford Falcon Stationwagon." 
The magistrate's grounds of determination include: "3. The Court found that the defendant had not proven fraud on the part of the
Plaintiff, nevertheless, the plaintiff still bore the onus of proving his case (Simon v. NRMA Insurance Limited, unreported decision of the NSW Court of
Appeal of 22.10.91).
The evidence establishes that the Plaintiff gave two different versions of the circumstances of leaving the vehicle at Asquith prior to it being found dumped, partly stripped, in the river.

There are differences in the subsequent versions of the circumstances of leaving the vehicle at Asquith from the original account to Constable Kenyon in that:- 
He told Kenyon he left it in the service station whereas his present account is he had an intention of speaking to personnel at the service station about leaving it there, but, on seeing other vehicles parked in the area he had in mind, he parked it in the street outside the service station.

He told Kenyon he left it there on the afternoon of 07.07.93, whereas he now says, supported by his father's evidence to the Court, that he left it parked at Asquith about 8.30 a.m. on 07.07.93 
He told Kenyon he left it with keys resting on the top of one of the tyres, whereas he now says that he locked the vehicle and took the key with him.

He told Kenyon there were no signs displayed on the vehicle, whereas he now says he left it with For Sale signs displayed front and rear.

He told Kenyon he left it so a friend could sell the vehicle for him in
Sydney, whereas he now says if it did not sell he would pick it up after a few days and take it to Sydney to sell.

The earliest version to the investigating police officer did not necessarily lead to an inference the vehicle had been stolen from the Plaintiff as it involved "a friend" for whom the vehicle was allegedly left for pick up with a key on a tyre. If this version is correct, the Court would need to hear what, if anything, the "friend" did in connection with the vehicle after the
Plaintiff left it at Asquith.

No evidence was introduced to identify a "friend" for whom the vehicle was left for pick up and no person identified as such a "friend" gave evidence.

The Plaintiff's second version of the circumstances of leaving the vehicle at
Asquith could support a finding that the vehicle had been stolen from him.
The Court was not satisfied with any explanation the Plaintiff gave to explain the giving of the first version of events to Constable Kenyon.
The Court found both versions equally believable.
The evidence established an apparent motive in that the vehicle's agreed insurance value as $14,000.00 whereas the Plaintiff was offering it for sale for $13,000.00 O.N.O. and he had borrowed money to purchase his replacement vehicle.
Whilst the evidence established an alibi for the Plaintiff at the time the vehicle was apparently removed from its parking site at Asquith, it could not be said that there was no opportunity for him to be involved in its removal by prior arrangement with third parties.
In the end there was only the Plaintiff's word as to what actually happened.

There is no corroboration of either of the Plaintiff's accounts of the circumstances of leaving the vehicle at Asquith. His father who followed the
Plaintiff in another vehicle to Asquith was parked unsighted of the Plaintiff and his vehicle whilst waiting to return the Plaintiff to Gosford.
The Court had no way of judging which version of the Plaintiff was the correct one.
In those circumstances, the Court was not satisfied on the balance of probabilities the Plaintiff suffered the loss of his vehicle through it being stolen from him without his consent." 
I have had the advantage of the magistrate's reasons for judgment, the transcript of the evidence and the exhibits. The magistrate reserved his decision and a few weeks later published his written reasons. They indicate that he gave the matter careful attention.

An important aspect of the magistrate's decision was that he accepted the evidence of Constable Kenyon as to the conversation which he had with Mr
Funnell who did not deny what the constable had said. The magistrate was not satisfied with any of the explanations which Mr Funnell offered as to why he gave an account to Constable Kenyon which differed so much from the account he gave in evidence.

The magistrate was unable to decide whether the version which the plaintiff gave to Constable Kenyon was correct or whether that given in evidence was correct. He thought that they were each just as believable.

The magistrate thought that the version given to Constable Kenyon was not necessarily consistent with the vehicle being stolen. "The friend" was not called and there was no evidence as to what he had done and was authorised to do. As I understand the magistrate he held that the vehicle might or might not have been stolen and that he was unable to find whether it had been stolen.
Having regard to the evidence that view was open to him.

In his comprehensive and carefully argued submissions Mr Quickenden for Mr
Funnell contended that it was not open to the magistrate to take the view that it was just as believable that the vehicle had not been stolen. Counsel submitted that the version given to Constable Kenyon did not establish that the vehicle had not been stolen. There was nothing in what the plaintiff said to Constable Kenyon which would have authorised the stripping of the vehicle and its disposal. However, there was material suggesting that the vehicle was to be taken by a friend with the plaintiff's consent.

Ultimately the magistrate had to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the vehicle was stolen, that is, taken without the plaintiff's consent.
He was not so satisfied. It may have been but he was not prepared to hold that it was. He was deeply troubled by the version of events which the plaintiff had given to Constable Kenyon. Added to the different versions was the unusual place and way in which the vehicle had been left.

I regard the complaint that the magistrate did not give adequate reasons as being without substance. He made sufficient findings to dispose of the case.
It is clear why he found for the defendant. The magistrate was at pains to express himself with commendable restraint. That was appropriate in the present case.

Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that while the view could be taken that the plaintiff had been foolish the evidence did not go further. The plaintiff was at least foolish in the way he dealt with the car. On its own that may not have been sufficient to trouble the magistrate but that coupled with the different versions did.

The magistrate did not disbelieve the plaintiff's evidence. He held that in the circumstances while it may be correct he was not satisfied that it was correct.

The magistrate was correct in following the principles expounded in Simon v.
NRMA, Court of Appeal, 22 October 1991, unreported. He was bound to do so and so am I.

In Clark v. Flanagan <case>; [(1934) 52 CLR 416] at 428 Dixon J said: "the initial burden of proof is upon the applicant and the question whether he has so completely discharged it as to make a finding to the contrary unreasonable is not a question of law." 
His Honour took the view that this was a question of fact. No appeal lies to this Court on the question of fact. Those remarks are of direct application in the present case.

In Azzopardi v. Tasman UEB Industries Ltd [1985 4 NSWLR 139] at 156 Glass JA said "...alleged insufficiency of evidence to prove a fact always raises a question of law but alleged sufficiency of evidence to the point of conclusiveness cannot , since it assumes that the evidence has been accepted. The party not bearing the onus puts an argument, which assumes against himself that the evidence has been accepted, but submits that it is not capable of establishing the fact. The party saddled with the onus on the other hand cannot assume in his favour that the evidence is or ought to be accepted since this trenches upon the liberty of the tribunal of fact to accept or reject any evidence.
Finally, the burden of proof to which the applicant is subjected cannot be masked by the use of double negatives. A purported ground of appeal which submits that there was no evidence that or it was not open to find that the applicant was not injured constitutes a futile attempt to convert a question of fact into a question of law by inverting the onus of proof." 
It is not open to the plaintiff to contend, in the circumstances of the present case that the magistrate was bound to accept that the car was stolen.
He was not. The questions which this case raises are not questions of law but questions of fact on which no appeal lies.

I understand the disappointment, to put it mildly, which Mr Funnell feels and how anxious he is, as a matter of principle to overturn the magistrate's decision. His evident distress caused me to look at the matter with considerable care. I acknowledge that he has arguments of substance on the facts. The law does not permit me to re-try the facts. The decision on those remains with the magistrate and I express no view as to his decision on the facts. There has been no error of law. It is not a case where the magistrate has disbelieved Mr Funnell. Rather, it is a case where Mr Funnell was unable to satisfy the magistrate that what he maintained was, on the balance of probabilities, correct. The magistrate was left in the position where he could not resolve the situation.

Mr Funnell should not feel that there is any reflection on his character.

The summons must be dismissed with costs.
 [An application for indemnity costs made by NRMA Insurance 
Ltd was refused. As to this see separate transcript] * * * 
