

Smith versus Department of Defence Matter No 12035/96 [1998] NSWSC 101 (6 April )

Last Updated: 22 April 1998 
KELLY MAREE SMITH versus DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE /96 April 1998 
Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Name: Kelly Maree Smith versus Department of Defence 
Proceedings No: 12035/96 
Coram: Sperling J 
Date/s of Hearing: 3, 4, 5 November 1997 
Date of Judgment: 6 April 1998 
Catchwords: 
Limitation of actions - extension of time - personal injury - general principles relating to exercise of discretion - applicability of same to
Limitations Act 1985 (ACT) [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/act/consolact/la1985133/) (ACT), [s 36](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/act/consolact/la1985133/s36.html) 
Salido versus Nominal Defendant <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 541] 
Commonwealth of Australia versus McLean (28 July 1997, unreported) 
BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd versus Cinquegrana (CA 3 September 1997,unreported) 
BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd versus Giudice (CA 7 March 1997, unreported) 
Counsel for the Plaintiff: R W Tregenza 
Solicitors: Bale Boshev & Associates 
Counsel for the Defendants: H M Di Suvero 
Solicitors: Australian Government Solicitor 
No. of Pages: 39 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
In March 1987, the plaintiff, Kelly Maree Smith, was an officer cadet at the
Royal Military College Duntroon. At 8.00 am on 16 March 1987 a parade was called, requiring trainees to descend the stairs from the dormitory very rapidly. The stairs were wet from a "bish" held the night before. That was a condoned activity involving trainees attacking each other with, among other things, fire hoses. In consequence, the stairs were wet. While descending the stairs rapidly to attend the parade, the plaintiff slipped on a landing and fell heavily.

The proceedings 
On 15 August 1996, the plaintiff commenced proceedings in this court joining the Commonwealth of Australia as defendant and claiming damages for personal injury. I was informed that the proceedings were brought in this court rather than the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory by consent.

Any cause of action arising out of the accident accrued nearly ten years before the proceedings for damages were commenced. It was common ground that the relevant limitation legislation was the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/act/consolact/la1985133/) (ACT) which fixes a limitation period of six years. The statement of claim was very substantially out of time.

On 26 April 1996, the plaintiff had filed a summons in this court seeking an order extending the limitation period. The statute nominated in the summons was the NSW legislation. On 3 September 1996, an amended summons was filed nominating the ACT statute which, it is now agreed, is the relevant legislation.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/act/consolact/la1985133/s36.html) of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/act/consolact/la1985133/) (ACT) provides as follows: "36.(1) This section applies to any action for damages where the damages claimed consist of or include damages in respect of personal injuries to any person.

Where an application is made to a court by a person claiming to have a cause of action to which this section applies, the court subject to subsection and after hearing such of the persons likely to be affected by that application as it sees fit, may, if it decides that it is just and reasonable so to do, order that the period within which an action on the cause of action may be brought be extended for such period as it determined.

In exercising the powers conferred on it by subsection (2), a court shall have regard to all the circumstances of the case including (without derogating from the generality of the foregoing) the following: the length of and reasons for the delay on the part of the plaintiff; the extent to which, having regard to the delay, there is or is likely to be prejudice to the defendant; the conduct of the defendant after the cause of action accrued to the plaintiff, including the extent, if any, to which the defendant took steps to make available to the plaintiff means of ascertaining facts which were or might be relevant to the cause of action of the plaintiff against the defendant; the duration of any disability of the plaintiff arising on or after the date of the accrual of the cause of action; the extent to which the plaintiff acted promptly and reasonably once he or she knew that the act or omission of the defendant, to which the injury of the plaintiff was attributable, might be capable at that time of giving rise to an action for damages; the steps, if any, taken by the plaintiff to obtain medical, legal or other expert advice and the nature of any such advice he may have received.

The powers conferred on a court by subsection (2) may be exercised at any time notwithstanding - that the limitation period in respect of the relevant cause of action has expired since the cause of action accrued; or that an action in respect of such personal injuries has been commenced.
 ... (not relevant)." 
The hearing of the amended summons proceeded before me. I reserved my decision.

The evidence 
I was favourably impressed with the plaintiff. I accept her evidence as a reliable account of events. I find the facts as follows, based largely on the plaintiff's account of events, that of her present solicitor and the documentary material tendered.

The plaintiff was born on 16 November 1968. She was, accordingly, nineteen years of age at the time of the accident and is now twenty-nine years of age.
Before the accident, she was fit and healthy.

A written report of the accident, in brief terms, being dated 16 March 1987, is contained in the Department of Defence's documents.

The plaintiff was admitted to the Department of Defence's 5 Camp Hospital immediately following the accident, where she remained until 25 March 1987.
There, she came under the care of Captain Stones, a service medical officer.
Capt Stones advised the plaintiff that she had sustained only a soft tissue injury which might, however, take a number of years to resolve. He mentioned five to six years. The plaintiff was discharged from hospital to sedentary duties.

On 6 April 1987, the plaintiff was certified fit for full duty by Captain
Stones, that being some eight months after the accident. She was not, however, able to carry out full duties for a further three months, that is, until July
There is a record in the Department's papers of an examination by
Captain Stones on 7 July 1987, when an x-ray was ordered and the plaintiff was certified fit for full duties. The plaintiff continued to suffer pain in the lower back and hip. She returned to restricted duties, and so continued until discharged form the Army at her own request on 11 March 1988.

During the period April 1987 to March 1988 the plaintiff was kept under review by Captain Stones. She was also seen by the Duntroon medical officer and a psychiatrist, Dr Williams, to whom she was referred. Regular physical fitness tests were also carried out.

In October 1987, the plaintiff completed what she described as "claim forms" and lodged them with her commanding officer. No such completed forms came to light at the hearing. The plaintiff may have been mistaken on this score.

In March 1988, on discharge from the Army, the plaintiff went to live with her mother at Newcastle. She did not attempt to work for some months. As from July , the plaintiff did light work of various kinds with discomfort. She was expecting to have continuing trouble with her back because of the prognosis which Captain Stones had given her.

In November 1990, the plaintiff gave birth to a child.

In April 1993, a general practitioner, Dr Ratcliffe, arranged for x-rays and gave the plaintiff the same opinion as she had received from Captain Stones, that is, that she had sustained a soft tissue injury which should resolve in time. An orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Tarrant, to whom the plaintiff was referred by Dr Ratcliffe, was of the same opinion and recommended against further investigation in April 1993. Dr Tarrant sent a copy of his report to the
Compensation Section of the Department of Defence at Duntroon.

The plaintiff consulted a new general practitioner, Dr Hamidi, at a later stage. He referred her to Dr Isaacs, orthopaedic surgeon. She consulted Dr
Isaacs on 7 July 1995. Dr Isaacs told the plaintiff that she had probably sustained a severe soft tissue injury but that he would not exclude injury to the discs at L4-5 and L5-S1.

At that time, the plaintiff was pregnant with her second child. She gave birth to that child in October 1995.

An MRI, recommended by Dr Isaacs, was carried out in December 1995. In
February 1996, Dr Isaacs advised the plaintiff that the MRI showed damage to the spine at the L4-5 level. He said there was probably disc pressure on a nerve at that level. However, he advised against surgical intervention "unless things get really desperate".

In a report to the plaintiff's general practitioner dated 7 February 1996, Dr
Isaacs said - "I have seen Kelly today. She tells me that the pain in the back and radiating pain in both things remains more or less just the same. She is still finding it difficult to sit or stand in one position for a prolonged period, bend forwards and this in fact is interfering with looking after her baby.

The MRI study which was done 9.12.95 showed that there is minor dorsal annulus bulge at L4/5 causing minimal compression of the ventral aspect of the thecal sac at this level. This is complicated by some minor apophyseal joint degenerative change at both the L3/4 and L4/5 level. These changes are not significantly compressing the thecal sac nor are they encroaching into the lateral recesses.

Obviously she has a weakness of the annulus fibrosis of the L4/5 disc and some pressure on the thecal sac. Also she suffers from early degeneration of the
L3/4 and L4/5 discs. This is consistent with her present symptoms. Since her present symptoms of pain in the back were the result of an injury which she sustained on 16.3.87 and she had no problems prior to that, it is consistent with the history." 
At the foot of the letter the following words appear, "Copy Insurance
Company". It is to be inferred that a copy of the report was sent to the relevant Commonwealth agency.

The plaintiff said that, until February 1996, she was unaware of any disc injury and believed she had suffered only a soft tissue injury from which she would eventually recover. Although six years had now passed since Captain
Stones gave such advice, the prognosis was renewed subsequently by Dr
Ratcliffe.

The plaintiff did not consult a solicitor until April 1993. He advised the plaintiff that it would be necessary for her to obtain a full set of medical notes from the Army, from all doctors seen and from Medicare because a claim could be lodged, and that when she had all that material together he would be able to do something for her. The solicitor did not say what kind of claim he had in mind and gave no advice about the expiration of any limitation period.

The solicitor was not altogether inactive. On 7 July 1993, he wrote to the
Royal Military College, Duntroon, advising that the plaintiff wished to make a claim for compensation and requesting the forms. On 12 April 1994, when no reply had been received, he again wrote requesting the forms. When the forms were supplied does not emerge. There was a letter from the Department of
Defence dated 28 April 1994 which is referred to later but which is not in evidence. That might have been it. The solicitor wrote to the Department of
Defence on 8 August 1994, referring to the letter of 28 April 1994 and enclosing a claim for compensation signed by the plaintiff. The claim form is dated 1 August 1995. Receipt of the form was acknowledged by the Department of
Defence on 16 August 1995.

On 30 November 1995, the solicitor wrote to the Department of Defence complaining that no response had been received to the claim forwarded on 8
August 1995. On 1 December 1995, the Department of Defence wrote to the plaintiff's solicitor requesting further information, which the solicitor provided on 14 December 1995, including a detailed employment history covering the period since the plaintiff was discharged from the Army. On 15 February the solicitor again wrote to the Department of Defence complaining about the delay in processing the claim for compensation.

On 12 April 1996 the Department of Defence admitted liability to pay compensation to the plaintiff pursuant to the [Safety, Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sraca1988368/) . It seems, however, that the payment of compensation may not have commenced immediately. It was announced at the hearing before me, as an agreed fact, that the plaintiff had been in receipt of $318 per week compensation since May .

It is not apparent that the plaintiff's first solicitor ever turned his mind to the possibility that the plaintiff might have a claim for damages and it is to be inferred that he did not. He did nothing along those lines, which would have required prompt evaluation of whether there was a cause of action for damages and prompt evaluation of the prospect of obtaining an extension of the limitation period if the plaintiff had an arguable case for damages. It may be assumed that any consideration of these matters would have been communicated to the plaintiff. None was.

Meanwhile, in February 1996, before the notification was received that the plaintiff's claim for compensation had been accepted, the plaintiff became dissatisfied with her first solicitor and consulted Mr Hart, solicitor, on 13
February 1996. He advised the plaintiff that she appeared to have had a good claim for damages which was now statute barred, but that she might be able to obtain leave to proceed out of time if Dr Isaacs' opinion was new information about her medical condition. This advice was confirmed by letter to the plaintiff dated 19 February 1996. (It is apparent from the evidence to which I have referred that Mr Hart was, at first, proceeding on the assumption that the relevant legislation was the NSW statute. Hence the emphasis on the possibility of latent injury.) 
The plaintiff stated in her evidence that, until she consulted Mr Hart on 13
February 1996, she was unaware of any right to bring proceedings for damages.

The plaintiff now retained Mr Hart although, curiously, the original solicitor appears to have continued to act concurrently for a time. The Commonwealth's documents include a letter from him to the Australian Government Solicitor as late as 14 April 1997 forwarding a medical report dated 16 October 1996 by Dr
F Lumley, psychiatrist, who had examined the plaintiff in May 1996 at the request of her general practitioner, Dr Hamidi. However, for practical purposes, Mr Hart had conduct of the plaintiff's case from February 1996.

At a second conference with Mr Hart, on 22 February 1996, the plaintiff provided Mr Hart with a copy of Dr Isaacs' report of 7 February 1996.
Thereupon, Mr Hart prepared the summons for extension of the limitation period under the NSW legislation, together with an affidavit sworn by the plaintiff on 19 March 1996. The summons, as I have mentioned, was filed on 26 April , and was amended on 3 September 1996 to bring the claim for an extension of time under the ACT legislation.

I was informed that the summons for leave to proceed was not brought on for hearing straight away because of a decision pending in the High Court in relation to the effect of certain Commonwealth legislation. It is unnecessary to go into that, except to say that it was not disputed that delay since April was satisfactorily explained.

Under cross-examination, the plaintiff said that, after consulting the first solicitor in April 1993, it had taken her almost a year to obtain from the
Army the medical records which the solicitor sought. She saw the solicitor with the records. They completed an application for compensation. The plaintiff agreed that that was not until August 1985. It seems that it may have taken the plaintiff longer than a year to get the medical records together, as the solicitor requested. Alternatively, the solicitor may have been dilatory in having the claim form completed. This was not resolved.

The plaintiff gave evidence as to the names of the general practitioners she had consulted prior to consulting Dr Hamidi in 1995. She asserted that, up to that time, the medical advice given to her had consistently been that the only injury was a soft tissue injury. Her attention was drawn to the description of the injury in the claim form dated 1 August 1995, which was as follows: "Injury to back and lower back, L4-5 and L5-S1". The point escapes me. These are inter-vertebral levels in the spine. Injury at those levels does not necessarily imply injury to the discs themselves. The plaintiff agreed that she had given information about injury to those levels of the spine to her solicitor, who had incorporated the information in the claim form. Taxed with knowing at the time that there was injury to the discs at those levels, the plaintiff said she felt at that time it was so, but that it had not been medically proven to be so at that stage. She said that, as at August 1995, she had been informed by Dr Hamidi and Dr Isaacs that there was a possibility of degenerative change to those discs.

There is no serious inconsistency here. In July 1995, the plaintiff had been told of the possibility of pathology in the L4-5 and L5-S1 discs. She told the first solicitor of that. He included an assertion of injury to those discs in the claim form dated 1 August 1995. The plaintiff may have been complicit in that. It was what she felt to be the fact although she did not yet have evidence of it. In February 1996, disc pathology was confirmed. The plaintiff's credit was not embarrassed.

Taxed with whether the question of claiming damages or compensation was deferred when she consulted the first solicitor pending a review of the medical data, the plaintiff said she was unaware of the difference at that time. This was consistent with the plaintiff's assertion that she was not made aware of the distinction until she consulted Mr Hart in February 1996. It is also consistent with the absence of any indication that the first solicitor turned his mind to the possibility of suing for damages and the inference I draw that he did not.

It was brought out in cross-examination that, about three years before consulting the first solicitor, the plaintiff had consulted the Legal Aid
Office in Newcastle and had been given a list of solicitors. She had not gone to a solicitor at that time because, she said, she did not believe she had enough medical evidence to substantiate a claim. She said the only evidence she had was of soft tissue injury, as was known by the Army, and she believed that, if she had any rights arising out of that, the Army would have told her.
That shows a lack of sophistication, but it is evidence I accept as truthful.
The plaintiff was obviously uncertain about the situation or she would not have gone to the Newcastle Legal Aid Office. However, I accept that her stated reason for not following that through was her predominant state of mind at that time, namely, that she believed she had no rights in relation to a soft tissue injury that was liable to get better in time, and that she had no evidence of any other more serious injury. The plaintiff added that Dr
Ratcliffe had advised her against suing the Army and to get on with her life.
I accept that evidence also.

In the cross-examination of the plaintiff there was some play on the word "sue". The use of the word by the plaintiff in connection with Dr Ratcliffe's advice did not suggest to me that she was aware at that time of a distinction between claiming compensation and suing for damages. She apparently believed at that time, that to recover anything for her injury she would have to sue for it. That does not mean she knew the difference between two distinct forms of possible entitlement, one of which would be administratively determined and the other forensically.

She said, in cross-examination, that it was a barrister who recommended she consult the first solicitor. She agreed that the first solicitor had told her that she might have a basis for suing the Army. It appeared from this evidence that the plaintiff was persuaded to consult a solicitor despite her own view that she did not have a claim. She did so. That is understandable. Again, nothing turns on the use of the word "sue".

The plaintiff was taxed with a note she had given her first solicitor, urging him to complain to the Department of Defence about delay in processing her claim for compensation. It included the following, "Army should have advised me of compensation. I had no idea about sueing (sic) people or compensation".
This pre-dated the advice from Mr Hart but, for the reasons I have given, I do not see the plaintiff's note as indicating that she then knew the difference between a claim for compensation and a claim for damages.

The defendant tendered a report of a CT scan, dated 14 November 1994, ordered by Dr Hamidi, in which no disc pathology was noted. The plaintiff denied she was told by Dr Hamidi at that stage that there was nothing wrong with the discs. The report dated 14 November 1994 was not inconsistent with that evidence. It did not reflect on the plaintiff's credit or the reliability of her account of events.

The plaintiff admitted in cross-examination that she had cheated in order to pass Army physical fitness assessments following her injury. That did not, to my mind, establish a disposition to dishonesty reflecting on the reliability of her evidence in these proceedings.

In cross-examination, the plaintiff agreed she had hurt her back while pregnant with the first child and again while pregnant with the second child, and that she had suffered worsening pain during the balance of the pregnancy on each occasion. She admitted she had curvature of the spine since adolescence.

The MRI report, which is dated 9 December 1995, was tendered by the defendant.
The plaintiff said Dr Isaacs had read it to her. The report is not inconsistent with the plaintiff's evidence of what Dr Isaacs told her about her condition.

Two medical reports by Dr F Lumley, psychiatrist, were tendered. He examined the plaintiff in May 1996 and diagnosed a depressive illness, consequent on her back condition, which, in Dr Lumley's opinion, could be treated satisfactorily by her general practitioner.

Salient facts 
So far as presently relevant, the salient elements in this history of events, as I find them, are as follows.

The plaintiff received injury to the lower back in March 1987. There is evidence that certain discs were damaged and that she has had persistent pain ever since, with impairment of earning capacity.

The Commonwealth Department of Defence was informed of the accident immediately, and of how it had occurred.

During the period March 1987 to March 1988, the plaintiff was kept under close medical review by the Department. When discharged at her own request by the Army, the Department knew that she was continuing to suffer pain and disability.

The plaintiff believed, on medical advice, given in 1987 and again in , that she had received a soft tissue injury only which was expected to resolve in time.

The limitation period expired in March 1993.

In April 1993 she consulted the first solicitor.

In April 1993, Dr Tarrant sent a report to the Commonwealth referring to the persistence of the plaintiff's medical condition.

Prior to April 1993, the plaintiff believed she had no entitlement to recover anything from the Commonwealth for her injury.

In July 1993, the Commonwealth was informed that the plaintiff wished to claim compensation.

The form for this purpose might not have been forwarded by the
Commonwealth to the plaintiff's solicitor until April 1995.

In July 1995 or thereabouts, the plaintiff was informed by Dr Hamidi and/or Dr Isaacs that there was the possibility of disc pathology at L4-5 and
L5-S1.

On 1 August 1995, the plaintiff completed a claim form, which was sent to the Commonwealth on 8 August 1995, asserting injury at the L4-5 and L5-S1 levels of the spine. At the time, the plaintiff felt there was injury to the discs at those levels, but had no proof of that.

An MRI in December 1995 demonstrated disc pathology at L4-5. There is evidence that this resulted from the accident in March 1987.

In February 1996, the plaintiff consulted Mr Hart, solicitor.

Prior to February 1996 the plaintiff did not know she could claim damages as distinct from compensation.

In April 1996, a summons was filed seeking an extension of time in which to sue.

In September 1996, an amended summons and the statement of claim were filed.

The law 
In Salido versus Nominal Defendant [(1993) 32 NSWLR 524], Gleeson
CJ set out guidelines for the exercise of the court's discretion to grant leave to commence proceedings out of time under [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) . The guidelines were as follows (at 532): "1. [Section (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) confers a discretion which is to be exercised judicially, in a manner that furthers the purposes of the statutory context in which it appears. The immediate purpose, as with any limitation period, is to protect defendants against the injustice of stale claims; the statute is also aimed at promoting forensic diligence.
Bearing in mind those statutory purposes, the question is whether, in the circumstances of each individual case, the applicant for leave has demonstrated that it is fair and just that leave should be granted.
The diligence, or lack of diligence, shown by a plaintiff or a plaintiff's representatives, in ascertaining and asserting his or her rights will ordinarily be a material factor, as will the extent of the relevant delay, and the reason for it.
The nature and extent of any forensic disadvantage to a defendant resulting from a plaintiff's delay will also be material. The effect, if any, of the delay upon the defendant's ability to defend an action is a matter to be taken into account, and may in some cases be of decisive importance.
Leave under [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) may be refused if it would be plainly futile to grant it ..."(The balance of this guideline is not material to other legislation).

Kirby P and Powell JA, in separate judgments, promulgated guidelines which were conformable with those proposed by the Chief Justice.

That decision was subsequently treated as applicable to the discretionary aspect of applications to extend limitation periods generally.

Since then, the High Court has decided Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 541.] 
The Court of Appeal has drawn from that decision the principle that "the decisive consideration in the exercise of the discretion is whether a fair trial could be had", being a question "to be determined as at the date of the application": Commonwealth of Australia versus McLean (28 July 1997, unreported) per the Court at 3. The Court re-affirmed an extension of time granted below under the "latent injury" provisions of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) , subd 3 of Div 3 because there was no "prejudice of a significant kind" to the defendant in granting the extension and there was no substance in the suggestion that a fair trial would not be possible.

The phrase "prejudice of a significant kind" was from McHugh J's judgment in
Taylor, where his Honour said (at 551) that prejudice to the defendant arising from the passage of time could not always, in the nature of things, be affirmatively proved; prejudice could exist without the parties or anybody else realising that it existed; what had been forgotten could rarely be shown; important, perhaps decisive evidence can have disappeared without anybody knowing that it ever existed.

The reference to a fair trial also finds its source in McHugh J's judgment in
Taylor where his Honour said (at 555) that, once there is "the fact or the real possibility of significant prejudice" to the defendant, "it seems more in accord with the legislative policy underlying limitation periods that the plaintiff's lost right should not be revived than that the defendant should have a spent liability reimposed upon it".

A weighing up of the prejudice to the plaintiff if the application were refused, against prejudice to the defendant if it were granted, was held to be erroneous in McLean (at 2). I take that to mean that any prejudice to the plaintiff, arising from refusal of the application, was irrelevant.

In BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd versus Cinquegrana (3 September 1997, unreported) the
Court of Appeal held that "the issue of prejudice to (the defendant is) critical to the proper exercise of the discretion ... it is prima facie prejudicial to a defendant to grant an extension of time in respect of a statute barred claim" (per Mason P).

In BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Ltd versus Giudice (7 March 1997, unreported) the Court of
Appeal held that the mere existence of some records bearing on the issues in the case was not sufficient to discharge the applicant's onus of establishing that the defendant suffered no significant prejudice (per the Court at 11).

The inter-relationship between the actuality or possibility that a fair trial has been prejudiced by the passage of time and the actuality or possibility of significant prejudice to the defendant by the passage of time is not clear from these authorities. Is one a function of the other? Are they independent considerations? If so, is one of them pre-eminent? Are either consideration or both considerations the only consideration or considerations to be taken into account? 
A note of caution has been sounded against too ready an application of
Taylor to legislation other than that to which it related, the [Limitation of Actions Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/loaa1974226/) (Qld): per Kirby J in Taylor (at 569) and per Priestley and Powell JJ in
Cinquegrana (at 7 and 8).

It is difficult to see how under the ACT legislation, the two considerations I have mentioned could be the only considerations to be taken into account.
Section 36(3) lists six considerations to which the court must have regard.
Only one of them embodies either of the two to which I have referred, ie. par , prejudice to the defendant. The other paragraphs raise different matters for consideration, in some instances several matters within the one paragraph.

What bearing the line of authority to which I have referred can have on legislation such as the ACT statute is, therefore, a difficult question. It cannot exclude the considerations mentioned in <case>, but Taylor might over-lay the legislation with a pre-eminent consideration or pre-eminent considerations.

Discussion and findings 
In the present case, I propose to proceed on the basis that, under the ACT legislation, an applicant must discharge an onus of satisfying the court of both matters mentioned in McLean, that is, that there is no serious possibility that a fair trial has been prejudiced by the passage of time, nor that the defendant has been significantly prejudiced in its defence by the passage of time. I will then return to the provisions of <case>.

A significant feature of the present case to my mind is that it is a very simple case. The facts alleged in relation to liability are short and uncomplicated. The facts alleged in relation to damage and causation of damage are similarly short and uncomplicated.

A further feature of the case is that the defendant has been on notice of the accident since it occurred and has had the opportunity of informing itself both in relation to liability and damages.

No evidence was led of any specific prejudice to the defendant arising from such possibilities as the loss of documents or of witnesses, nor that any witness could no longer remember material facts of which they would have known.

In the nature of the case it is unlikely that any such prejudice has occurred.
As I have said, the fact of the accident was documented at the time. The plaintiff was treated initially at a Department of Defence hospital under the care of service personnel. Records of that kind are usually preserved. Absent evidence of loss or destruction, I would find that they are available. The plaintiff was kept under close review by service personnel until her discharge from the Army about a year after the accident. The same observation is to be made about records.

Thereafter, the plaintiff's medical condition was relevantly a symptomatic story until 1995. The objective controls are the usual ones, medical attendances and employment activities. The defendant knows the identity of doctors seen and of the plaintiff's employers. I would assume relevant and sufficient records have been preserved absent evidence to the contrary. The diagnosis of disc injury by MRI in December 1995 is a matter of record.

Debate as to causation is not impeded by the passage of time. Other possible causes of the plaintiff's condition were raised in cross-examination of the plaintiff at the hearing before me. The plaintiff frankly admitted to kyphosis since adolescence and to a worsening of her symptoms during pregnancy. That evidence is available to the defendant to make of it what it can.

Whilst there is always the possibility that evidence has disappeared that no- one knows about, that is very unlikely in the circumstances of this case.

It is also very unlikely, in a case such as this, that anything will turn on the recollection of witnesses which may be dimmed by the passage of time.

I am satisfied that, in the circumstances of this case, there is no serious possibility that a fair trial has been prejudiced by the passage of time and that the defendant has not been significantly prejudiced in its defence by the passage of time.

I turn then to the considerations specified in <case>.

The length of and reasons for the delay on the part of the plaintiff.

The delay between March 1987 and April 1993 (when the plaintiff consulted the first solicitor) is explained by the plaintiff's belief that she had nor right to recover anything from the Commonwealth for a soft tissue injury that was likely to resolve in time.

The delay between April 1993 and February 1996 was due to the first solicitor's failure to recognise that the plaintiff had a potential claim for damages and a possible entitlement to have the limitation period (which had just expired when he was first consulted) extended. The plaintiff was unaware during this period of any such potential entitlement to recover damages.

The second solicitor, Mr Hart, acted promptly to institute proceedings for an extension of time when consulted in February 1993. It is not disputed that the subsequent delay in bringing those proceedings on for hearing was for good reason.

In summary, there was initially approximately a six year delay due to the plaintiff's ignorance of her possible entitlement to recover damages. There was then a further delay of approximately three years due to the failure of the first solicitor to recognise that potential entitlement, the plaintiff continuing to be personally ignorant of it. That was followed by a further period of delay which is, however, not criticised.

The initial delay of six years was, in my view, excusable and is satisfactorily explained.

The subsequent delay of three years was not the plaintiff's fault. It was, on the evidence before me, due to fault on the part of the first solicitor in failing to recognise that the plaintiff had a potential entitlement to damages and in failing to institute proceedings promptly for an extension of time.

I hasten to add that the finding of fault on the part of the first solicitor is made for the purpose only of these proceedings and on the evidence before me. The solicitor has not had the opportunity of being heard. The finding should not be taken as one which reflects on his professional standing. It does not.

The extent to which, having regard to the delay, there is or is likely to be prejudice to the defendant.

I have found, in effect, that there is not nor is there likely to be prejudice to the defendant.

The conduct of the defendant after the cause of action accrued to the plaintiff, including the extent, if any, to which the defendant took steps to make available to the plaintiff means of ascertaining facts which were or might be relevant to the cause of action of the plaintiff against the defendant.

The defendant appears to have been tardy in responding to the plaintiff's wish to make a claim for compensation and in processing that claim. However, the evidence does not support any criticism of the defendant of a kind that would be relevant to this paragraph of <case>.

The duration of any disability of the plaintiff arising on or after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

On the evidence before me the plaintiff has suffered a significant disability in the low back since 1987 which it is now reasonable to expect is likely to be permanent. I do not find that the disability impeded the plaintiff's capacity to ascertain her legal rights or to prosecute her potential entitlement to damages.

The extent to which the plaintiff acted promptly and reasonably once he or she knew that the act or omission of the defendant, to which the injury of the plaintiff was attributable, might be capable at that time of giving rise to an action for damages.

So far as the plaintiff personally is concerned, there was no relevant delay once she knew that the accident might be capable of giving rise to an action for damages.

The steps, if any, taken by the plaintiff to obtain medical, legal or other expert advice and the nature of any such advice he may have received.

I have made findings about this topic. The plaintiff's failure to obtain legal advice prior to April 1993 is satisfactorily explained. There was no failure to take reasonable steps to obtain medical or other expert advice. The nature of the medical advice received contributed to the plaintiff's delay in obtaining legal advice until April 1993.

Of the considerations arising under <case> (a) to (f), those that count against the plaintiff are as follows: * The extent of the delay - a period of approximately ten and a half years from the accident to the hearing of the summons - of which only the last year was delay incurred for good reason. * The delay of three years from April 1993 to February 1996 attributable to fault on the part of the plaintiff's first solicitor, which I assume, for present purposes, is to be attributed to the plaintiff. 
It is arguable the prejudice which the plaintiff would suffer arising from a refusal to extend the limitation period is a relevant consideration under s
It does not have to arise under pars (a) to (f). The court is required to have regard to all the circumstances of the case. The argument arises from the presence of para (d) in <case>. Unless that is confined to the effect of a disability in impeding the pursuit of potential rights, it is difficult to see what function para (d) is intended to serve other than as a matter relevant to prejudice to the plaintiff. Such a confined construction of the paragraph is not one that commends itself to me. If the draftsman had that in mind, the paragraph would have referred to disability whether arising before or after accrual of the cause of action. But, be that as it may, I propose to assume, in favour of the defendant, that the Taylor - McLean line of authority applies and that prejudice to the plaintiff is not a relevant consideration.

If prejudice to the plaintiff were a relevant consideration, it may be material to take into account, in mitigation of such prejudice, that the plaintiff would be likely to have, on the evidence before me, a good cause of action against her first solicitor were the present application refused. It is difficult to see how a cause of action against the solicitor would otherwise arise for consideration. However, for the present purpose, I assume in favour of the defendant that it is an additional consideration to be brought to account against an extension of time that the plaintiff is likely to have a cause of action against her solicitor if the application for extension of time were refused.

I begin with my findings that there is no serious possibility that a fair trial has been prejudiced by the passage of time and that the defendant has not been significantly prejudiced in its defence by the passage of time. If either or both of these matters must be established for an extension of time under <case>, they are established to my satisfaction. At all events, I bring them to account in favour of an extension of time under <case>.

I then bring to account against an extension of time those considerations arising under pars (a) to (f) of <case> which I have mentioned as counting against the plaintiff and also the last mentioned consideration as to a cause of action against the first solicitor.

Having regard to all of the matters I have mentioned, it is just and reasonable to order that the period in which an action may be brought be extended sufficiently to validate the statement of claim filed on 23 September .

Recent authority 
Since preparing my judgment thus far in this matter, my attention has come to the decision of the Court of Appeal in The Council of the City of Sydney v
Zegarac (26 February 1998, unreported).

That was a decision in relation to subd 2 of Div 3 of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) .
Like <case> of the ACT legislation, <case> of that part of the legislation (in cases to which the subdivision applies) invests the Court with a discretion to extend the limitation period if it decides that it is "just and reasonable" to do so. Like <case>, <case> of the NSW legislation requires the Court to have regard to "all the circumstances of the case" and to particular matters which are then specified. These matters are similar to those specified in <case>. They include "the extent of the plaintiff's injury or loss" which corresponds with "the duration of any disability of the plaintiff arising on or after the date of the accrual of the cause of action" in <case>.

The judgments in Zegarac include more than one view concerning the applicability of Taylor to the relevant subdivision of the NSW legislation.

In granting an extension of time in Zegarac, Kirkham DCJ said: "It ultimately comes down to balancing the degree to which the defendant would be prejudiced by permitting the plaintiff, of whom (sic) it must be assumed from Dr Smith's report for the purposes of this decision, seriously affected by his injuries and disabilities to proceed with his action against the
Council of the City of Sydney. I think the greater evil would be to deny the plaintiff his day in court against the Council of the City of Sydney. It follows that I grant leave ...." 
In the passage preceding that extract, Kirkham DCJ referred to the plaintiff's injury and consequent disability, but only in reference to the defendant having been deprived of the opportunity of "observations or investigations conducted to test the plaintiff's claim".

Mason P said (at p 12) of the extract which I have quoted from Kirkham DCJ's judgment: "For reasons given above, I consider that reference to `balancing prejudice' is unsupported by the legislative scheme, unhelpful and potentially misleading. However, if the first sentence stood alone I would be inclined to treat it as a loose shorthand introduction to the ultimate judicial discretion flowing from what precedes that sentence. The real difficulty for the respondent lies in what follows. It shows that the respondent was ultimately relieved of the persuasive burden which the Act places upon the applicant for an extension of time. This was to invert the onus placed squarely on the respondent's shoulders by <case>." 
It is consistent with the judgment of Mason P that prejudice to the plaintiff was or would have been a legitimate consideration, although not the kind of balancing exercise which Kirkham DCJ had carried out and which, in Mason P's view, reversed the legal burden of proof. However, Mason P did not expressly say that such prejudice to the plaintiff was a legitimate consideration. His reference to the earlier part of Kirkham DCJ's judgment does not establish that that is what he intended to convey. Mason P's judgment appears to leave the point open.

In passing, I would observe that Mason P's treatment of Taylor seems to me, with respect, to caste doubt on whether McLean and other decisions of the
Court of Appeal have correctly drawn principles of general import from
Taylor, which are applicable to legislation such as the "latent injury" provisions of the NSW legislation (subdiv 3 of Div 3). However, Mason P did not go so far as to say that those cases were, in his opinion, incorrectly decided.

Priestley JA was of the opinion that the relevant part of the NSW legislation did, as had been envisaged by the NSW Law Reform Commission report LRC 50, require the Court, (in Priestley JA's words) "to balance the circumstances possibly causing injustice to the plaintiff if not granted an extension of time with the circumstances and merits of the defendant" (p 40). He distinguished McLean and other decisions of the Court of Appeal on the ground that they did not apply to the relevant part of the NSW legislation which was under consideration in Zegarac (pp 40-1). He concluded that "in saying that "ultimately he (Kirkham DCJ) needed to perform a balancing exercise ... he (Kirkham DCJ) was correctly doing what he was required to do" (pp 41-2).

Powell JA (at pp 33-5) was of the opinion that Taylor was applicable to the relevant part of the NSW legislation and that "to weigh the prejudice to a prospective defendant if an order be made against the prejudice to the applicant if an extension be refused" was wrong. Powell JA cited a passage from Taylor in which Toohey and Gummow JJ said that prejudice to the applicant if the application is refused cannot of itself be enough to warrant an extension of time. If it cannot be enough in itself and cannot be weighed against prejudice to the prospective defendant, it is difficult to see how it can be a relevant consideration at all. I think Powell JA impliedly supported the approach in McLean as I read the decision.

I do not, find a majority view in Zegarac which resolves the applicability of the Taylor-McLean line of authority to <case> of the ACT legislation.

Conclusion 
I have decided the present case on the basis that the Taylor-McLean line of authority does apply to <case> and applies in a way that would give it its fullest possible effect. On that basis, the plaintiff is, for the reasons I have given, nonetheless entitled to an extension of time. If, on the other hand, that line of authority does not apply to <case> and the prejudice which the plaintiff would suffer were the application refused is a relevant consideration, a fortiore I am the more satisfied that the plaintiff is entitled to an extension of time.

Orders 
An order will be made pursuant to [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/act/consolact/la1985133/s36.html) of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/act/consolact/la1985133/) (ACT) that the period within which an action may be brought on the cause of action pleaded in the statement of claim, filed on 23 September 1996 in proceedings
No. 12035 of 1996 in the Common Law Division of this Court, be extended to and including 23 September 1996.

The matter will be listed for mention to hear any application that may be made for an order for costs.
 * * * 
