

G B Menczer versus M S Bruinsma [1996] NSWSC 338 (7 August 1996) 
GRACE BERNADETTE MENCZER versus MARGARET SANDERS BRUINSMA /96 EQ4809/94 
Wednesday 7 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MEAGHER, BEAZLEY JJA, SIMOS AJA 
CATCHWORDS: INTERPRETATION OF INSTRUMENTS - Admissibility of extrinsic evidence - Deeds - Arrangements between mother and daughter - handwritten agreement created prior to entry into deed 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED WITH COSTS 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: The Court is in a position to give judgment and I ask my sister Justice Beazley to give the first judgment.

BEAZLEY JA: This is an appeal from a judgment of Mr Justice Santow involving the construction of two deeds, the first entered into on 23 April 1980 and the second on 5 February 1993. The effect of the trial judge's judgment was that the 1980 deed remained on foot but the 1993 deed had been terminated by reason of the appellant's breach of one of its terms. His Honour's orders gave effect to those two findings. 
The appellant raised twenty-eight grounds of appeal. Most of those grounds were abandoned at the commencement of the hearing, leaving only two issues for determination. Firstly, whether the 1993 deed abrogated the 1980 deed and, secondly, whether his Honour erred in awarding the respondent indemnity costs.
There is also a consequential costs order in respect of proceedings on 6
September 1995 that needs to be dealt with.

Before dealing with the two issues, it is appropriate to deal briefly with the facts. The parties are mother and daughter, the mother being the plaintiff in the proceedings below and the respondent on the appeal. As events turned out, both became widowed within two years of each other and at least from then they lived together with the appellant's four children in a property at Bondi which is owned by the appellant. Sometime in about 1979 or 1980, the mother loaned a sum of money to the daughter to allow extensions to be made to the Bondi property. There was a dispute as to the amount lent which his Honour, the trial judge, found unnecessary to determine as the parties had entered into a deed which was to reflect the arrangement which they intended to govern the fact of the loan. That deed is the deed of 23 April 1980 to which I have referred.

As the terms of that deed and also of the 1993 deed are relevant to the determination of the issues in the case, the terms of each should be set out in full.
 Deed "DEED made the Twenty-third day of April, One thousand nine hundred and eighty BETWEEN MARGARET SANDERS BRUINSMA of 110 Surry Street, Darlinghurst in the State of New South Wales (hereinafter called "the mother") of the one part AND GRACE MENCZER of 101 Ocean Street South, Bondi in the said State (hereinafter called "the daughter") of the other part NOW THIS DEED
WITNESSETH that the parties hereto for themselves and their respective legal personal representatives and assigns hereby mutually covenant and agree as follows:-
The daughter hereby acknowledges having received from the mother by way of loan the sum of FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS ($50,000.00) on terms that the loan shall be free of interest and repayable in the manner described in Clause hereof.
The mother may by notice in writing to the daughter at any time after the sale by the daughter or her legal personal representative or assigns of the property known as 101 Ocean Street South, Bondi and comprised in Certificate of Title Volume 11500 Folio 204 (hereinafter called "the said property") make demand for repayment of the loan in which event the daughter or her legal personal representative or assigns shall pay to the mother in satisfaction of the loan an amount equal to Thirty percent (30%) of the net proceeds of sale of the said property.
The daughter shall permit the mother to reside in the said property in a bedroom of her choice and to have the use of the facilities of the said property including a garage space for so long as the mother desires to make the said property her place of residence.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have hereunto set their hands on the day and year first hereinbefore written.

SIGNED SEALED AND DELIVERED ) by the said MARGARET SANDERS ) 
BRUINSMA in the presence of: ) 
SIGNED SEALED AND DELIVERED ) by the said GRACE MENCZER ) in the presence of: )" 
The parties lived together in the Bondi property until about 1993. Sometime shortly before then and probably during 1992 the daughter expressed an interest to move to the Byron Bay area. The mother eventually agreed to move to Byron Bay with the daughter and also to finance the move there by selling two properties which the mother owned, one at Blackheath which was sold for $104,000 and another at Darlinghurst which was sold for $375,000 at the end of for the purposes of purchasing a property in the Byron Bay area.

On 5 February 1993 the mother purchased a property in the Byron Bay area at a location known as Brooklet for $290,000 together with a tractor for $10,000.
The property comprised 17 acres and in addition to a residence on it there was a small farming operation which it was intended the daughter would carry on with the assistance of the daughter's son, Benny.

In order to put some formality into the arrangement by the purchase of the
Brooklet property the mother and daughter entered into an arrangement which they reduced to writing in the early part of 1993; they called that writing a "mother and child agreement". That recorded that the mother would provide moneys from the sale of the two properties to which I have referred for the purposes of buying a property in the Byron Bay area, that the new property would be bought in the mother's name but that the mother would respect the daughter's wishes about the management of the property. This mother and child agreement also recorded "The left over money shall be mine as I may need to buy myselve (sic) into a retirement village". The agreement further provided that the mother would make a Will leaving all her possessions to the daughter and also that when she sold the property she would give twenty percent of the net proceeds of sale of the property to the daughter in cash. The mother and daughter, however, were not prepared to leave the agreement in the form of the mother and child agreement; rather they consulted a solicitor for the purposes of formalising the agreement between them. It was thus that the 1993 agreement came into existence, the terms of which are as follows: "THIS DEED made this 5th day of February 1993 between MARGARET BRUINSMA of Ocean Street South Bondi in the State of New South Wales ("the Mother") of the one part and GRACE MENCZER of 101 Ocean Street South Bondi in the said
State ("the Daughter") of the other part.

RECITES 
A. The Daughter is the registered proprietor of the property at 101 Ocean
Street South Bondi ("The Second Property").

B. The Mother and Daughter presently reside at 101 Ocean Street South Bondi.

C. The Daughter intends to reside on land purchased at Lot 10 Fernleigh Road,
Brooklet in the State of New South Wales ("The Property").

D. The purchase monies for The Property are provided from the sale the
Mother's former property at 110 Surrey Street, Darlinghurst.

E. The Mother is the registered proprietor of The Property and the Daughter is to remain the registered proprietor of The Second Property.

F. The Mother has expressed the desire to secure for herself residential accommodation.

WITNESSES that the parties hereto for themselves and their respective legal personal representatives and assigns hereby mutually covenant and agree:
In consideration of the Daughter residing at The Property and doing all such things as are necessary to fully maintain that property from income from the property to arrange ;to pay all rates, taxes, costs, charges and running expenses as and when they are due and the balance if any is to be re-invested in the property and indemnifying the Mother against all such rates, taxes, costs, charges and running expenses the Mother will allow the Daughter to reside at The Property.
The Mother agrees to provide in her Will that the Property is to pass to the daughter upon the death of the Mother free of all funeral debts and testamentary expenses which are to be borne by the residue of the Mother's estate.
In consideration of the Mother allowing the Daughter to so reside at the
Property the Daughter agrees to allow the Mother to choose to also reside at either the First or Second property and to reside at either property and have the use of adequate facilities of either property for so long as she maintains residence subject at all times to the provisions of Clause 4 below.
Should the daughter wish or need to sell the Second Property the daughter is to make alternative residential provision for the Mother as is suitable to the needs of the Mother and more particularly should the Mother wish to go into a retirement home and not at that time have sufficient funds to purchase into the retirement home then the Daughter will provide such monies as are necessary to make up the difference between the Mother's monies and the sum required to enter the said retirement home.

Signed by the said ) 
Margaret Sanders Bruinsma ) before me: ) 
Signed by the said ) 
Grace Menczer ) before me: )" 
As events would have it the relationship between the parties broke down whilst they were living at the property at Brooklet and that breakdown subsequently led to these proceedings.

I should record also as part of the factual background that in the meantime the Bondi property remained in the name of the daughter although, of course, neither the mother or daughter were living there during the time that their relationship was maintained at Brooklet.

Turning now to the first question on the appeal, namely, did the 1993 deed abrogate the 1980 deed - counsel for the appellant submitted that it was clear as a matter of construction that the 1993 deed was intended to be a final arrangement between the parties in relation to their accommodation needs. As such it abrogated the 1980 deed. It was a concomitant part of the submission that the 1993 deed was inconsistent with the terms of the 1980 deed so that the former could not stand. Central to the appellant's argument was the proper construction of the phrase "Mother's monies" in the fourth clause of the 1993 deed. Counsel for the appellant submitted that upon a proper construction of the deed this phrase meant the moneys the mother had at the time of entering into the 1993 deed. He subsequently said that the phrase meant such of those moneys that were left at the time that the events in clause 4 came into play.
Counsel submitted that this construction of the phrase "Mother's monies", was ambiguous and on its face was explained by extrinsic evidence, and in particular he relied upon the hand-written mother and daughter arrangement which preceded the entering into of the 1993 deed. He submitted that the phrase in the mother and child agreement "the left over money" made it clear that the construction for which he contended was the proper construction of the phrase "Mother's monies".

In my opinion the court should not construe the phrase "Mother's monies" in the 1993 deed by reference to the hand-written mother and child agreement for two reasons: 
Firstly, I do not consider that the phrase "Mother's monies" in ambiguous. It means such moneys as the mother had at the time that the events being called for came into play; 
Secondly, the 1993 deed was not and was not intended to be the mere formalisation of the prior mother and child agreement.

At the time that the parties consulted the solicitor he advised them that the mother and child agreement "was not fair" and asked whether he could make some suggestions based upon what was written in that agreement. There were further discussions between the solicitor and the parties as to what the parties wished in respect of the arrangement for the purchase of the Brooklet property. The deed subsequently came into existence and was entered into. It cannot be said in those circumstances that the prior arrangement demonstrates what the parties meant when they entered into the 1993 deed.

That leaves the matter to one of construction of the two deeds. I have already indicated what I consider to be the proper meaning of the phrase "Mother's monies" in the 1993 deed. In my opinion there is no inconsistency between the deed and the 1980 deed; both can operate according to their terms and in that circumstance there is no basis for saying that the 1993 deed abrogated the earlier deed.

The second issue raised on the appeal related to the order for indemnity costs made by his Honour in favour of the respondent. That order was made having regard to an offer of compromise which was made in the matter on 24 October ; that offer of compromise was made in accordance with the appropriate
Supreme Court Rules.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that again, as a matter of construction, the offer of compromise was not more favourable to the appellant than the result of the judgment. The appellant faces two difficulties in raising this argument on appeal: 
Firstly, as counsel properly conceded, this point was not raised before the trial judge. There are circumstances in which the Court of Appeal will allow a point to be taken which was not taken below. This case does not fall into that category for two reasons: firstly, in the court below counsel accepts that he did not dispute and, indeed, may have conceded that the offer of compromise was in every respect more favourable to the defendant than the result of the earlier judgment. In the ordinary course parties are constrained by the way in which they conduct the matter in the court below and there is nothing in this case to take it out of the ordinary course. In any event, the matter does involve a question of the trial judge's discretion and for that reason that challenge to his Honour's orders ought also to be dismissed.

That leaves for consideration only the question of grounds 27 and 28 of the appeal relating to an order for costs made against the appellant by his Honour
Mr Justice Windeyer on 6 September 1995. In his written submissions, counsel for the appellant indicated that the outcome of that challenge would depend upon the result of the appeal. Whilst I assume we will have to hear counsel it would seem, having regard to what I propose will be the outcome of the appeal, that the costs order made by Mr Justice Windeyer will be maintained but that will be the subject of further submissions.

Subject only to that matter I propose that the appeal be dismissed with costs.

MEAGHER JA: I agree.

SIMOS AJA: I also agree but I would just like to refer to one argument put by counsel for the appellant in the context of his submissions as to the construction of the words "Mother's monies" in clause 4 of the 1993 agreement, on the assumption, which I agree with my sister Beazley, is unfounded, that it is appropriate to have regard to extrinsic material. He submitted that the agreement, if not construed in the manner for which he contended, meaning if not construed so that the words "Mother's monies" -- excluded the share of the proceeds of the sale of Bondi property to which the mother was entitled under the 1980 agreement, would be unduly onerous to the appellant. In that connection I wish to say only three things: 
Firstly, as I have already said, in my opinion the words are not ambiguous so as to justify recourse to extrinsic evidence and they should be given the meaning given by Justice Beazley in her reasons; 
Secondly, even if it is permissible to have regard to the extrinsic evidence in the matter as put by counsel for the appellant, in my opinion, for the reasons I stated in argument, the construction put by this Court on those words does not produce the result that the agreement operates in an unduly onerous way on the appellant. I am of this view for a number of reasons, including the fact that the appellant was still entitled to remain in occupation of the Brooklet property and also, at relevant times, had the benefit of clause 2 of that agreement whereby the mother agreed to provide in her Will that the property was to pass to the daughter upon the death of the mother free of all funeral debts and testamentary expenses which were to be charged upon the residue of the mother's estate. In other words, the substance of the agreement is to the effect that the mother is to provide and did provide accommodation at Brooklet for the daughter, whereas the daughter, on the other hand, was to provide accommodation for the mother in a retirement home, but only to the extent that the respondent's own moneys were insufficient for that purpose.

I would only add thirdly that even if the agreement was thought to be onerous, or even unduly onerous for the appellant that is not necessarily a reason for departing from the plain meaning of the relevant words. Persons frequently undertake onerous, and even unduly onerous, obligations, and that is never regarded as reason for departing from the proper construction of unambiguous words.

MEAGHER JA: The order of the Court, therefore, will be the order proposed by Justice Beazley, namely that the appeal be dismissed with costs.
 (Mr McVay indicated to their Honours that he had no submissions to make on the orders of 6th September.) * * * 
