

Regina versus McEwen; Regina versus Simpson; Regina versus Simpson; Regina versus Marcovich
Matter Nos 60535/96 [1998] NSWSC 1005 (12 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 April 1998 `

REGINA versus CLIFFORD STUART McEWEN, RICHARD JAMES SIMPSON, HELEN EDWINA SIMPSON and MARK FRANCIS MARCOVICH` ` 60535/96, 60633/96, 60654/96, 60632/96, 60664/96, 60648/96, 60695/96` `12 March 1998` `Hunt CJ at CL, Smart J, Simpson J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` `

NATURE OF JURISDICTION:Appeal from District Court` `(Davidson QC DCJ)` `FILE NO/S:60535,60633,60654,60632,60664,60648,60695 of 1996` `HEARING DATE/S:4 June 1997` `DELIVERED:12 March 1998` `PARTIES:REGINA versus Clifford Stuart McEWEN, Richard James SIMPSON, Helen
Edwina SIMPSON, Mark Francis MARCOVICH` `JUDGMENT OF: HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, SIMPSON J` `COUNSEL:` ` APPELLANT -(for McEwen) PM Paish` ` (for the Simpsons) GR James QC, JW Korn` ` (for Marcovich) IS Lloyd QC,WP Brewer` ` RESPONDENT - GE Smith, RA Hulme` `SOLICITORS:` ` APPELLANT -(for McEwen) Watsons` ` (for the Simpsons) Patricia White & Associates` ` (for Marcovich) Baird & Associates` ` RESPONDENT - SE O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions` `RESULT: Appeals against conviction dismissed` `CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - "Nexus" - dimethoxyphenylethamine - whether a prohibited drug prior to 1994 amendment to
Schedule of [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) - functions of judge and jury in determining whether it was.` `

No. of pages: 64` 
REGINA versus Clifford Stuart McEWEN 
REGINA versus Richard James SIMPSON 
REGINA versus Helen Edwina SIMPSON 
REGINA versus Mark Francis MARCOVICH 
HEADNOTE 
RS, M and HS were convicted of knowingly taking part in the manufacture of a prohibited drug, 4 Bromo -2, 5 Dimethoxyphenylethylamine, commonly known as "Nexus". RS and MM were also convicted of supplying Nexus.

Crown expert witnesses gave evidence that Nexus is a substance "structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine" and has hallucinogenic properties.

RS, M and HS claimed to have relied upon legal advice that Nexus was `a completely legal substance.' The solicitor confirmed that such advice was given. These assertions were challenged by the Crown and the trial judge left to the jury the question of whether that advice had in fact been given 
Held per Smart J, Hunt CJ at CL and Simpson J agreeing: - the Legislature did not, by adding Nexus to Schedule 1 of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) subsequent to the commission of the offences, recognise that Nexus had not previously been a prohibited drug. The scheme has to be construed as it stood at the time. Later additions do not throw light on its then meaning. The addition of nexus specifically avoids the need for and cost of lengthy expert evidence.
 - the judge was correct in rejecting arguments that the Crown expert witnesses were not sufficiently qualified, that the opinion evidence lacked probative value and that the evidence should be rejected under <case> of the
Evidence Act 1985 . The judge was correct in holding that there was no basis for excluding the evidence under <case> of the Evidence Act.
 - the words "structurally derived" in the clause "and other substances structurally derived from methoxyphenylethlamine" needed expert evidence in explanation. Without that evidence a court would not have understood the issues which arose.
 - the evidence adduced explained the field of discourse in which the phrase "structurally derived" was used. The word "derived" was explained as was the phrase "structurally derived." The evidence had the effect of pointing up the meaning of that word and that phrase in the Schedule to the Statute. The evidence given would not have confused the jury - instead it would have helped them understand and undertake their task.
 - the jury would not have been confused or distracted. They were well informed and adequately directed.
 - the judge correctly directed the jury that the word "hallucination" is a word in ordinary English use but that it should be considered in the framework of its use in a Statute the purpose of which was to specify the drugs whose manufacture, supply, possession and use were prohibited in the community. The word hallucination was not used in the framework of a Statute relating to the diagnosis or treatment of mentally ill persons.
 - the meaning of an ordinary English word is a question of fact. If "hallucinations" and "hallucinogenic properties" were non legal terms of art or technical terms evidence was admissible as to their meaning which was a question of fact.
 - in any event evidence was admissible to enable the jury to understand the competing contentions and what fell within the description of an hallucination. The complexity of the considerations and the problem required evidence.
 - it was a question of fact for the jury whether Nexus had hallucinogenic properties.
 - consequent on the Court's refusal to quash the counts or grant a stay, the appellants were keen that evidence should be led as to "structurally derived" and "hallucinogenic properties". This was the most favourable way the trials could be conducted for them. They called extensive technical and scientific evidence. The appellants cannot change tack on appeal and contend that the judge should have told the jury what "hallucinogenic properties" meant. This was also inconsistent with the important fact finding role entrusted to the jury.
 - the directions given by the judge were adequate.

Held per Simpson J, Hunt CJ at CL and Smart J agreeing - it was well open to the jury to reject the appellants' assertion that they believed the substance was not a prohibited drug thus the verdicts were not unsafe or unsatisfactory 
McEwen was convicted of manufacturing and supplying commercial quantities of methylamphetamine and of manufacturing Ecstasy. The trial judge directed the jury to enter a verdict of not guilty if `there is available on the facts which you find so established a reasonable explanation which is consistent with the innocence of any one of those charges.' The judge told the jury that they could regard the Appellant's unsworn statement as a "possible version" of the facts.

McEwen contended that a finding that the methylamphetamine found in the boot of his car had been manufactured by the same method as that which had been the subject of other charges was an indispensable step in the Crown's circumstantial case which had to be established beyond reasonable doubt in accordance with Shepherd versus the Queen The appellant admitted possession; the combined effect of this and [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s3.html) and [29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) meant he was guilty of supply unless he established on the balance of probabilities that the drugs were in his possession otherwise than for supply.

Held per Hunt CJ at CL, Smart J and Simpson J agreeing: - the phrase "which you find so established" was unnecessary but did not alter the sense conveyed, particularly when read in context, and was not incorrect the appellant having stated in his unsworn statement his belief that the drugs found in his car had been manufactured by the same method as the methylamphetamine which had been the subject of the other charges and submitted at trial that his case was that he was storing the drugs after they had been so manufactured.
 - there was no real likelihood of the jury concluding that they were being directed that the unsworn statement made by the appellant was incapable of satisfying the necessary standard of proof.
 - the absence of a Shepherd direction as to the methylamphetamine found in the boot of McEwen's car did not lead to a miscarriage of justice - for more abundant caution it may be preferable for the standard direction in relation to an unsworn statement where the accused bears an onus of proof to be varied to say that the jury may regard it as at least a possible version of the facts, the weight to be given to it being entirely a matter for them.

Held per Simpson J, Hunt CJ at CL and Smart J agreeing: - the contention that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory, being dependent upon the other grounds raised by McEwen, must also fail.

ORDERS 
All appeals against conviction dismissed.
The Crown (if it wishes to pursue its appeals against sentence) is directed to arrange with the Registrar for those appeals to be listed before a reconstituted Court of Criminal Appeal. The Crown should advise the Registrar and the appellants of its intentions within 14 days.

REGINA versus Clifford Stuart McEWEN, Richard James SIMPSON 
Helen Edwina SIMPSON, Mark Francis MARCOVICH 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: The appellants (Clifford Stewart McEwen, Richard James Simpson, Helen Edwina Simpson and Mark Francis Marcovich) were found guilty by a District Court jury of charges of the manufacture and supply of prohibited drugs. Judge Davidson QC imposed various sentences upon the appellants, in relation to four of which Crown appeals were lodged but which appeals were put to one side pending the disposal of the conviction appeals. 
The evidence relevant to the conviction appeals, and the detail of the charges, of the evidence and of the verdicts, is discussed by Simpson J in her judgment, and further evidence is discussed by Smart J in his judgment. I agree with Simpson J, for the reasons which she has given, that the verdicts of guilty were not unsafe and unsatisfactory.[1] I also agree with Smart J, for the reasons which he has given, that no error has been demonstrated in relation to the issues as to whether the drug "Nexus" was capable of being a prohibited drug[2] and as to the functions of the judge and the jury in determining whether it was in fact such a drug.[3] I agree with Simpson J, for the reasons which she has given, that no error has been demonstrated as to the state of knowledge required that "Nexus" was a prohibited drug.[4] 
That leaves outstanding only the grounds of appeal taken by the appellant
McEwen relating to the judge's direction as to onus of proof,[5] the need for a "Shepherd" direction,[6] and the status of the unsworn statement which this appellant made.[7] This judgment will deal with those outstanding grounds of appeal against conviction.

The complaint concerning the onus of proof direction relates to this paragraph in the summing-up: "... if, at the end of your deliberations you are left in the position that there is available on the facts which you find so established a reasonable explanation which is consistent with the innocence of any one of those charges, then it would equally be your duty to enter a verdict of not guilty in respect of that particular charge." 
This direction is said to be in contrast with what immediately followed: "... if the Crown has not excluded beyond reasonable doubt an explanation which you think is reasonably possible on the material to be true and which is consistent with the innocence of the accused, then of course it would not have proved its case beyond reasonable doubt." 
The second direction is said to be correct, but the first incorrect in that (so it is said) it placed an onus on the accused to establish the facts consistent with their innocence.

These two directions must, of course, be considered in their proper context.
They follow shortly after clear directions: that the onus of proving the case against the accused lay on the Crown, and that it was not for an accused person to establish his or her innocence; that there was a presumption of innocence in favour of each accused, who was entitled to a verdict of not guilty unless and until that presumption was overthrown by a body of evidence tendered by the Crown; and that the burden of proof was to establish the Crown case beyond reasonable doubt.

These propositions were then restated in these terms: "... we come to this position, unless and until you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the Crown has proved against each of the accused before you in relation to each of these charges which he or she faces, each one of the essential elements of a particular charge beyond reasonable doubt then it would be your duty to acquit the accused. ...

On the other hand, if at the end of your deliberations you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that in relation to any particular accused in respect of any particular charge the Crown has established beyond reasonable doubt each one of the essential elements or matters which it must prove in order to make out that charge it will equally be your duty to enter a verdict of guilty." 
The judge then went on to explain that there was no direct evidence of the manufacture of the drugs, and that the Crown case was a circumstantial one.
The two directions earlier quoted appear during the course of this discussion.
The first of them is preceded by this direction: "Now, as I have already told you, the Crown must prove each one of those essential elements beyond reasonable doubt otherwise it would be your duty to enter a verdict of not guilty. If, therefore, at the end of your deliberations you were left in respect of any one of the accused in respect of any one of these charges of the view that the inference or the conclusion which the Crown has asked you to draw is not established beyond reasonable doubt, by the facts which you find to be established in the evidence, then it would be your duty, as I have said, to acquit." 
This explains the reference in the first of those two directions - the one said to be wrong - to it being "equally" the duty of the jury to enter a verdict of not guilty.

There is, of course, an evidentiary onus upon an accused person to point to or to produce evidence (or material in an unsworn statement) from which such an innocent explanation may reasonably appear,[8] but that is not something which the jury ought usually to be told. The direction in relation to the
Crown's obligation to eliminate any reasonable explanation consistent with innocence may usefully be given only where there is such evidence or material. There must be no confusion as to the Crown's legal onus to eliminate the existence of that reasonable possibility, and a reference to the accused's evidentiary onus could well cause that confusion.

I can see no such confusion or any uncertainty in the directions which the judge gave in this case. There is not the slightest suggestion that there was any onus on the accused to establish the facts consistent with their innocence. The phrase "which you find so established" in the passage said to be incorrect was unnecessary, but it did not alter the sense conveyed, particularly when seen in its context. I maintain that the better direction would be: "If there is another conclusion which is reasonably open when you examine the whole of the evidence and which is consistent with the innocence of the accused, it is your duty to acquit him."[9] 
But the direction given here was not incorrect. I would reject this ground of appeal.

The next remaining complaint was that no direction was given to the jury that they had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the methylamphetamine found in the boot of the appellant's motor vehicle when he was driving it had been manufactured by the same method as the methylamphetamine which had been the subject of other charges. This was not an essential ingredient of the charge, but it is said that such a fact was an indispensable intermediate step in the Crown's circumstantial case, and thus one which must be established beyond reasonable doubt in accordance with Shepherd versus the Queen.10 
No such direction was sought at the trial, so that the appellant requires leave to rely upon the ground.[11] Leave will be granted where an appellant is able to establish that the absence of such a direction led to a miscarriage of justice.[12] The appellant points out that the drugs were not found in his vehicle until some weeks after the police had found the equipment used to manufacture such drugs, and that the Crown had relied upon the suggested link in opposition to an application that the deemed supply charge against him be tried separately. It was therefore said to have been treated as one of the principal circumstances relied upon in the Crown case against him upon the charge that he had manufactured them.

The Crown responds that the link was not in issue at the trial. The appellant had in his unsworn statement stated his belief that the drugs in his vehicle had in fact been so manufactured, but it is said on behalf of the appellant that such a belief was formed in hindsight. Such an interpretation is, however, at odds with the submissions of his counsel at the trial,[13] that the appellant's case was that he was storing the drugs after they had been so manufactured.

I am not satisfied that the absence of a "Shepherd" direction led to any miscarriage, and I would refuse leave to the appellant to rely upon this ground.

The final remaining complaint concerned the direction which the judge gave in relation to the status of the unsworn statement made by the appellant. The direction was in these terms: "Each of the accused, other than Mr Fistar,[14] made a statement. That was a course which the law permitted each of them to take. Insofar as this particular trial is concerned, each one of the accused had a choice of one of three courses which he or she could take in response to the Crown's case. They could either say nothing and rely on the law which I have explained to you, namely, that it is for the Crown to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt, or they could get into the witness box, give evidence on oath or on affirmation as the other witnesses in the case have done and had that evidence tested by questioning and cross-examination by Madam Crown or Mr Hulme as the case may have been, or give a statement such as each of the accused did other than Mr
Fistar in this case. 
Such a statement as you have seen was not made on oath or affirmation, nor was it subject to any questions in cross-examination. You should regard it as on its face a possible version of the facts giving it such weight as it appears to you to be entitled to in the light of the facts you consider are established by other evidence. I give you this as a direction of law applicable to each of the statements made in this trial." 
As the trial took place after the commencement of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), the reference to the fact that the accused could have given evidence was permissible.[15] 
The direction as to the status of the unsworn statement, that it is a "possible" version of the facts, is in accordance with high authority.[16] The appellant nevertheless argues that, in the particular circumstances of this case, it denied to him any prospect of success. The particular circumstances were that, in relation to the charge against the appellant of supplying not less than a large commercial quantity of the methylamphetamine found in the boot of the vehicle he was driving, the Crown relied upon deemed supply, in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/). That section provides that a person in possession of a particular quantity of a prohibited drug is deemed to have that drug in his possession for supply unless that person proves that he had it in his possession otherwise than for supply. Possession of a prohibited drug for the purposes of supply constitutes the supply of the drug.[17] In the present case, the appellant had admitted his possession, so that the defence provided by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) was effectively the only issue in relation to this charge.

The defence so provided by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) is an affirmative defence, and the onus lies on the accused to establish it on the balance of probabilities,[18] as the judge had correctly directed the jury some eleven pages earlier in his summing-up than the passage which I have just quoted and repeated again nine pages before that passage. As the appellant here had made an unsworn statement, and as the judge had told the jury that they could regard that statement as a "possible version" of the facts, so the appellant's argument ran, the jury were obliged to reject the defence.
Reliance is placed upon this Court's decision in Regina versus Nicholas
Brehoi,19 in which a new trial was ordered in what are said to have been identical circumstances, the Court saying that the jury may have been confused to the extent that they may have believed that they were being directed that the unsworn statement was incapable of satisfying the necessary standard of proof.[20] 
I do not accept that the circumstances of Brehoi's Case were identical to those of the present case. In Brehoi, the trial judge had somewhat unnecessarily discussed the difference between possibilities and probabilities, concluding: "In law, a probability is something which is more likely to happen than a possibility." 
No such distinction was drawn in the present case. The judge here was correctly concerned to stress that the onus of proof on the balance of probabilities is a lesser standard of proof than that placed upon the Crown to establish its case beyond reasonable doubt. There is nothing in the summing-up which directly links the onus on the appellant (on the balance of probabilities) and the status of his unsworn statement (a possible version).
Moreover, there is nothing to suggest that the statement could be regarded by the jury only as a "possible" version. To the contrary, the judge went on to direct the jury that they should give the unsworn statement such weight to which it appears to them to be entitled.

It may be preferable for the standard direction in relation to an unsworn statement (in the very limited circumstances in which the right to make one still exists) to be varied - where the accused bears an onus of proof - to say that the jury may regard it as at least a possible version of the facts, the weight to be given to it being entirely a matter for them. But that is only for more abundant precaution. It is almost certainly confusing to discuss the difference between possibilities and probabilities. I see no real likelihood of the jury in this case having concluded that they were being directed, as in
Brehoi's Case, that the unsworn statement made by the appellant was incapable of satisfying the necessary standard of proof.

I would reject this ground of appeal.

I propose that the appeals against conviction be dismissed, and that the Crown (if it wishes to pursue its appeals against sentence) should be directed to arrange with the Registrar for those appeals to be listed before a reconstituted Court of Criminal Appeal.

REGINA versus Clifford Stuart McEWEN 
REGINA versus Richard James SIMPSON 
REGINA versus Helen Edwina SIMPSON 
REGINA versus Mark Francis MARCOVICH 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: This judgment deals with the meaning of "structurally derived" and "hallucinogenic properties" in the definition of the drug known as Nexus and the directions which the judge gave as to the determination of the meaning of those words. The jury had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Nexus was structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine and had hallucinogenic properties.

The other issues in this appeal are dealt with in the judgments of Hunt CJ at
CL and Simpson J. I agree with those judgments.

Counts 3 & 4 
It was contended that the judge had erred in directing the jury that the phrase "structurally derived" in the definition of the drug known as "Nexus" was concerned with "structural derivation of drugs in a theoretical or structural sense and was not limited in any practical sense" as a chemist producing substances in a laboratory would be.

It was further contended that the judge erred in not holding that the expression "hallucinogenic properties" in the definition of Nexus was a technical term of art requiring a direction of law to the jury as to its proper meaning and that the judge erred in directing the jury that it was for them to decide the meaning of the words "hallucinogenic properties" and "hallucinations".

The appellants submitted that the judge erred in permitting the Crown witness,
Dr Allan to give evidence as to the meaning of "hallucinogenic properties" and "hallucinations" and in permitting witnesses called as experts for the Crown to base their opinions partly on what they saw and read on the Internet.

After taking into account the acquittals of McEwen on counts 3 and 6 in the
Indictment, the Crown had to establish during the period 1 June 1993 - 6 March against R J Simpson, Helen Simpson and Marcovich that the drug 4 Bromo - , 5 Dimethoxyphenylethylamine known as "Nexus" was a substance structurally derived from Methoxyphenylethylamine and having hallucinogenic properties. If so, it was a prohibited drug (Count 3). The Crown also had to establish those facts as at 5 March 1994 against R J Simpson and Marcovich (4 count).

This arose as a result of the provisions of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act 1985](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) .
[Section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s24.html) makes it an offence to knowingly take part in the production or manufacture of an amount of a prohibited drug which is not less than the commercial quantity.
By [s.3(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s3.html) "prohibited drug" means any substance, other than a prohibited plant, specified in Schedule 1. In the list of prohibited drugs in Schedule 1 this entry appears: "2, 5 Dimethoxy - 4 methylamphetamine and other substances structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine being those substances having hallucinogenic properties." 
Those words mean relatively little except to those who have a technical or scientific knowledge of drugs, their composition, production and manufacture.
The words would have meaning for a chemist, a pharmacologist or a medical practitioner who is familiar with this field of discourse.

Expert evidence was needed to explain what these words meant. It was critical to know what the words "structurally derived" meant. In the long list of prohibited drugs these words are used but once and that is in the entry quoted, being the one with which these counts are concerned. There was a further complication in that in relation to some of the other prohibited drugs a drug was specified and these words were added "and its derivatives being those derivatives having hallucinogenic properties." This clause was used after specifying the drugs Bufotenine, N N Dimethyltryptamine, Lysergic acid,
Lysergide, Psilocin and Psilocylin.

It is apparent from reading through the list in Schedule 1 that the legislature was at pains to prohibit derivatives of nominated drugs where those derivatives have hallucinogenic properties. Drugs having hallucinogenic properties are targeted.

There are 2 other drugs where derivatives are prohibited. These entries are: "Ecgonine, its esters and derivatives which are convertible to ecgonine and cocaine." 
And "6 Monoacetylmorphine and other acetylated derivatives of morphine." 
These derivatives are viewed as being prohibited drugs.

The meaning of the words "structurally derived" has to be determined not only in the immediate context in which they are used but in the light of the terms of Schedule 1 taken as a whole and the purposes of the Act.

The phrase "having hallucinogenic properties" also required consideration.
That phrase, as the judge told the jury, means that "Nexus" has the attribute, quality or characteristic of causing or inducing hallucinations, that is, that it is capable of causing hallucinations. Considerable time was spent at the hearing exploring the meaning of the word "hallucinations", there being a contest as to that.

Prior to the jury being empanelled Mr and Mrs Simpson demurred to counts 3 and alleging that they disclosed no offence known to the law. In support of the demurrer it was contended that "Nexus" was not a prohibited drug at the relevant time. Much reliance was placed on the amendment of the Schedule to take effect from 10 October 1994. This was done by regulation as permitted by s.44 of the Act. The amendment reads: "Schedule 1 to the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) is amended by inserting in alphabetical order the following matter: - Bromo - 2, 5 dimethoxyphenethylamine..." 
The Gazette notice of the amendment has added: 
Explanatory Note 
The object of this Regulation is to add the substance 4 - Bromo - 2.5 dimethoxyphenethylamine (known as Nexus) to the Schedule of prohibited plants or drugs set out in the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) ." 
It was submitted to the judge that this was a recognition by the Legislature that "Nexus" had not previously been a prohibited drug. That argument was rejected by the judge. It was renewed before this Court. It is incorrect. The
Scheme has to be construed as it stood at the time. Later additions do not in this case throw light on its then meaning. The addition of Nexus specifically avoids the need for and cost of lengthy expert evidence.

The judge, while acknowledging that a statute must impose criminal liability in clear terms, that any doubt as to its application or any ambiguity must be resolved in the accused's favour and that there can be no offences by construction, held that none of the counts offended against these principles.
The judge said that the counts raised 2 issues of fact, namely, whether "Nexus" was structurally derived from the named precursor, methoxyphenylethylamine, and whether Nexus has hallucinogenic properties.
While experts may differ as to the meaning of "structurally derived" and "hallucinogenic" this did not affect the validity of the counts in the
Indictment which followed the words used in Schedule 1 to the Statute.
Correctly, the judge overruled the demurrer.

It was further submitted both on the motion to quash the Indictment and on the application for a stay that the construction of the Statute was dependant on the evidence of experts in a number of fields and that the vagueness of the provisions and the uncertainty as to the result which they produced required the quashing of the Indictment or the granting of a stay. The judge thought that so far as questions of fact were concerned these could be decided on the evidence called. He declined to consider the expert evidence on the applications on the basis that it went to matters of fact which were for the jury to decide.

The Simpsons' relied on these propositions in support of the application for a permanent stay: "Nexus" was not clearly prohibited and the weight of scientific opinion favoured the conclusion that it was not prohibited. The definition of the items in the Schedule was scientifically erroneous.

The jury would have to decide whether "Nexus" was a prohibited drug as a question of law and would only be able to do so on the basis of evidence about competing scientific theories.

The question of "hallucinogenic properties" may only be determined by hearsay evidence.

The accused could not by any reasonable enquiry have concluded that there was any existing prohibition as to "Nexus". The absence of any control or restriction of the precursor (2,5 - Dimethoxyphenethylamine) strongly suggested that there was not.

If the accused were convicted it may be "notwithstanding a positive finding of fact that he specifically intended not to produce a specific substance." 
The judge rejected the application. The jury would not be asked to resolve any question of law. It would decide questions of fact including those which were disputed, even if technical and complex. The jury would, so far as relevant, weigh up any competing scientific theories and reach a decision, applying the principle of proof beyond reasonable doubt. Evidence based on training, study and reading the literature frequently involves an "element" of hearsay but is admissible. The judge stated that he proposed to direct the jury that they must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused and each of them knew or believed that the subject drug was a prohibited drug or was aware that there was a significant or real chance that it was. This would meet the objections set out in paras (d) & (e).
 "Structurally Derived" 
It is necessary briefly to review the evidence as to this phrase. Professor
GAR Johnston, Professor of Pharmacology at the University of Sydney and a scientist of world standing with over 25 years experience in the design, synthesis and development of drugs acting on the central nervous system, explained that methoxyphenylethylamine (the word used in the Schedule) is a collective term or group name given to derivatives of a chemical called phenylethylamine which can have methoxy substituents added onto it.
Phenylethylamines are a group of many substances. The methoxy group is a carbon atom, three hydrogen atoms and an oxygen atom (CH30) and that is a substituent on the phenylethylamine skeleton. There are many types of methoxyphenylethylamines. Three are common and can be purchased from a chemical catalogue.

Professor Johnston explained that in chemistry something can be derived from another compound by a simple substitution. In the present case by putting the methoxy group into the structure, the hydrogen of the carbon-hydrogen bond in phenylethylamine is replaced with the methoxy group and the result is methoxyphenylethylamine which is structurally derived from phenylethylamine.
If desired, a second methoxy group could be added. Two hydrogens on the molecule have been replaced with the methoxy group. This is the simplest type of structural derivation. Chemists are really only interested in structurally derived substances like that.

Professor Johnston gave this explanation (T 2196): "Structurally derived is a term covering the naming and understanding of the structures of the molecules concerned. But it does not mean you make one from the other. It does imply a hierarchical relationship between things when something ... has to be derived from something else, but in terms of modern chemistry that is often not the best way to make it. There are usually ...
much more straightforward routes to do that." 
He explained that structural derivation is "looking for relationships between compounds, whether they are in the same family and how they are related to each other." 
He said that the substance known as Nexus (4 Bromo - 2, 5
Dimethoxyphenylethylamine) was structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine. 2 Methoxyphenylethylamine is a common methoxy derivative of phenylethylamine. To get Nexus there is added to 2 methoxypheylethylamine a 4 - bromo group and a 5 - methoxy group. He explained: "... Nexus is derived from the methoxyphenylethylamine by two manipulations, the 5 methoxy group and 4 bromo." 
With two or three changes in compounds it is "perfectly acceptable" to describe the changed compounds as structurally derived from the initial compound. If, for example, there were 10 changes the chemist would start thinking that it was another type of compound.

In cross examination Professor Johnston stated that it was better to classify drugs on what is known about their structure rather than rely solely on what they do. He recognised that it was possible to classify drugs by the nature of the effects which they produced and that the validity of that classification was measured by the probability of realising those effects.

Professor Johnston said that he was not aware of any opinion based on good science that Nexus was not structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine nor of any eminent scientist who held that opinion.

The addition of the bromo group makes Nexus a compound which has a more potent action on the nervous system.

Professor Johnston accepted that there had been some debate whether Nexus was structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine but he thought it was and did not accept that there was substance in the opposing view. He described the situation in the present case as a very straightforward structural derivation.

Dr R D Allan was a senior lecturer in the Department of Pharmacology at Sydney
University and a Fellow of the Royal Australian Chemical Institute. He has published extensively in recognised scientific journals. His researches have dealt with the activity of drug molecules and he teaches a subject which relates to the activity of drug molecules in relation to the chemical structure and covers the matter of structural derivation. He was familiar with the structure of Nexus and believed that compound was structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine. This was because Nexus contains the methoxy group, the ethyl group and the amine group and both molecules (methoxyphenylethylamine and Nexus) had phenyl rings with two carbon side chains.

Dr Allan said that, as a pharmacologist, structural derivation was used in the sense of structural activity in biological tissue which goes to make up a living organism. He took the view that to an expert pharmacolgist the words "2, 5 Dimethoxy, - 4 methylamphetamine and other substances structurally derived from methoxphenylethylamine being those substances having hallucinogenic properties" referred to structural derivation in the biological sense and that they meant that the derived compound is likely to have the structural elements to interact with the same receptors as methoxyphenylethylamine. "Biological" assumes the existence of an organism within the receptors and is to be distinguished from a chemical synthesis meaning. Structural derivation in the biological sense includes the ability of a molecule to interact with the receptor site. On the aspect of the ability of molecules to interact with receptor sites Nexus is structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine.

Nexus, according to Dr Allan, was a member of a large group of compounds which have a common element, namely, methoxyphenylethylamine and in that sense Nexus is structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine. In the chemical synthesis sense one of the derivatives of methoxyphenylethylamine could be converted to Nexus. In the biological sense, Nexus is structurally derived both from 2 and 3 methoxyphenylethylamine. He explained that the 3 position corresponded to the 5 position in Nexus so that there was a clear relationship there between the compounds.

Dr Allan agreed that methoxyphenylethylamine was not absolutely descriptive of any one chemical. It refers to a general class rather than to a specific compound. There was evidence from Dr Allan that Nexus was not structurally derived from a type of methoxyphenylethylamine known as
N-methoxyphenylethylamine and that it was debatable whether it was structurally derived from Beta-methoxyphenylethylamine.

Professor Johnston said that if Nexus is structurally derived from any form of methoxyphenylethylamine that is sufficient. Professor Johnston said that it was structurally derived from 2 methoxyphenylethylamine and Dr Allan from 2 and 3 methoxyphenylethylamine.

Professor Johnston and Dr Allan were cross examined at length and in considerable detail. Many aspects of structural derivation were covered. No inroads of consequence were made upon their evidence.

Dr A T Shulgin who was called on behalf of Simpson, described himself as a researcher, a consultant and a writer. He still did quite an amount of chemistry work and lectures at the University of California at Berkley. He majored in chemistry in his Arts degree and completed a Ph.D at that
University in 1954. He worked in industry from 1954-1966, spent 2 years at medical school in 1967 and 1968 and undertook post doctoral studies in 1969 and 1970 at a Neurological Institute, University of California. From 1971 onwards he has worked as a consultant in the fields of chemistry and pharmacology. He has had major clients. He has published alone and jointly a large number of papers.

Dr Shulgin stated that Nexus was not derived from methoxyphenethylamine basically because it would be a very tortuous task to convert that latter substance to Nexus. It would be a many step process taking a considerable time and not a practical one. He spoke of many weeks if not months. Dr Shulgin stated that the words "structurally derived" had no particular meaning to him.
"Structurally derived" bore the same meaning to him as "derived". He said "Derived in the chemical, in the structural, in any sense in the laboratory means you convert A to B. B is derived from A." He had probably heard of "structurally" being placed before "derived" but although there was an added word the phrase would carry no more sense than derived alone.

Nexus was first mentioned in a publication in 1975 of which Dr Shulgin was a co-author. He discovered it. That paper was a presentation of the discovery of the synthesis of and the preliminary psychopharmacology of two compounds, one of which was Nexus. It was a group study of the mental effects of that drug and the other drug.

In cross examination Dr Shulgin said that he did not know with what you could make Nexus from methoxyphenethylamine. There might be a theoretical way of doing so but it would probably be long and possibly not effective. He had never done it, he had not pursued that chemistry and it was not worth trying.
He reiterated that to him "derived is derived and whether it is structural or chemical it is a all a matter of derivation" and "I don't think structural contributes with the term derived". Dr Shulgin insisted that structural derivation is exactly the same as chemical derivation or derivation by itself.

Dr Shulgin was taken to diagrams prepared by Professor Johnston. Dr Shulgin thought that the examples of methoxyphenylethylyamine and 2, 3 and 4 methoxyphenylethylamine were correct but that more elaborate examples could have been given. Dr Shulgin thought that neither 4 - methyl -2, 5 - dimethoxyamphetamine nor Nexus was structurally derived (or derived) from 2 methoxyphenylethylamine. Dr Shulgin took the view that Professor Johnston had engaged in blackboard chemistry, by writing down in diagrammatic form the components and their location on the methoxyphenylethylamine compound and then adding a bromo in the 4 position on the compound and methoxy in the 5 position. By such blackboard chemistry there was an apparent conversion from methoxyphenylethylamine to Nexus.
However, Dr Shulgin said that in no way was Nexus derivable from methoxyphenethylamine.

Mr A Turner, who was called in McEwen's case, was a lecturer at the Sydney
Institute of Technology. He held the degree of Bachelor of Applied Science from the University of Technology with honours in Organic Chemistry. His practical training and work included looking at the structure of compounds. He had spent all his professional life in structural and analytical chemistry. He was a "hands on" chemist.

Mr Turner accepted that methoxyphenylethylamine was a generic term used to describe a class of substances and that the question was whether something could be made from that class. He stated that Nexus was not structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine and that no practising chemist would attempt to synthesise Nexus from the range of methoxyphenylethylamines because of the "enormous difficulty" involved.

For example, it may take weeks or months to combine 2 methoxy with 5 methylethylamine. This was impractical. However, you may decide to brominate by putting bromate at the 4 position of 2 methoxyphenylethylamine. That compound was structurally derived from 2 methoxyphenylethylamine.

He described structural chemistry as either the manufacturing or synthesising of new molecules and then proving their structure, that is, how the atoms are put together in the molecule and then looking at the molecule's properties. He said that to a practising organic chemist "derived" means compound B is chemically synthesised from compound A.

Mr Turner emphasised that a practical rather than a theoretical (blackboard chemistry) approach should be taken. It was not realistic or practical to make
Nexus from 2 methoxyphenylethylamine. There were more suitable starting materials from which to carry out the synthesis. He said that something was structurally derived if it is practical to make one substance from another. Mr
Turner rejected the proposition that structurally derived did not mean that you made one molecule from another but implied a hierarchical relationship between them. Mr Turner stated that generally when one is looking at the structure of compounds (the arrangement of atoms in a molecule) it is done for a purpose such as making a component or studying its properties or passing them on to others not examining the relationship between structures.

Dr Shulgin's approach on structural derivation had an inherent difficulty. In effect, he treated the word "structurally" as surplusage. Mr Turner appeared to do likewise. They assimilated the words "derived", "chemically derived" and structurally derived. Emphasis was placed on being able to obtain, in a practical way without difficulty, one compound from another. On the approach of Dr Shulgin and Mr Turner "structurally" has no work to do. Effect should be given to every word used in a statute or statutory instrument unless there is some good reason not to do so, for example, the result produced may be absurd or the word may have been added for more abundant caution.

The Legislature has used "structurally derived" once in the schedule to the
Act and in other places has used "derivative" and not "structural derivatives." Professor Johnston's approach give effect to all the words used in the Schedule.

If the Legislature had used the phrase "and other substances derived from methoxyphenylethylamine" the contentions of Dr Shulgin and Mr Turner would have had greater force. The provision is an embracing and an extending one controlled by the requirements of structural derivation and the compounds having hallucinogenic properties.

The judge at SU 203 correctly explained to the jury that the issue of fact which arose for its determination was whether Nexus was structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine. This point was covered at length in the evidence. This issue required much explanatory and background material so that the jury could appreciate its task and the setting in which it had to decide the factual issue. At times the experts in their explanations ventured into the meaning of the words in the Schedule. This was particularly true of Dr
Shulgin and Mr Turner who relied on what could be done practically by a chemist. Having equated "derived", "chemically derived" and "structurally derived" and expressed their view on that, they did not deal with the matter on the basis propounded by Professor Johnston. They did not deny that if the matter were approached theoretically, Professor Johnston and Dr Allan were correct.

Dr Shulgin and Mr Turner seemed to hold the view that after a prolonged, tortuous and impractical process there might be a way from which Nexus could be derived from methoxyphenylethylamine. It was not worth trying. Dr Shulgin may well have gone a little further and accepted that it was possible to show a structural relationship on the blackboard.

The judge recognised that he was dealing with a matter of some difficulty and was at pains to deal with it in a way which could be understood by the jury.
To enable the jury to understand the legal position, the facts and the setting in which they had to resolve the factual issue, the judge gave each juror a copy of Schedule 1 to the Drugs, Misuse and Trafficking Act and focused their attention on the relevant part as earlier quoted. At SU 223-224 the judge said: "It is important to recognise that the phrase used in that part of the
Schedule which defines what are prohibited drugs for the purposes of the law of this state is not "derived", nor indeed "chemically derived", but "structurally derived". That is the important phrase.

There is a rule of law and I so direct you that when parliament uses an expression like this in an Act of Parliament we are not at liberty to treat one or more of the word used as superfluous or insignificant. We must proceed on the basis that at least prima facie all words in a statute such as these have some meaning and they are to be given some effect. I also direct you as a matter of law that the Crown does not have to prove that Nexus was in fact made from, in any practical sense, methoxyphenylethylamine. It does not have to prove that at all. Indeed, you may think in this case as demonstrated that the Nexus involved was not made from methoxyphenylethylamine, nor indeed is it a requirement that the Crown prove that Nexus was manufactured by any particular method.

I direct you further as a matter of law that what is being referred to here in this part of the Schedule of the Drugs Misuse and Trafficking Act so far as the expression "structurally derived" is concerned is a structural derivation of drugs including Nexus from methoxyphenylethylamine, not limited in any practical sense as was referred to by Mr Turner and you may think by Dr
Shulgin as a chemist producing substances in a laboratory but in a theoretical or structural sense." 
The appellants accepted that the judge was correct in directing the jury that it was for them to decide as a matter of fact whether Nexus was structurally derived from the named precursor. In his interlocutory judgment of 23 February the judge had ruled that the phrases "structurally derived" and "hallucinogenic properties" were non-legal terms of art whose meaning was susceptible to determination by expert evidence. The appellants accepted that these two phrases were terms of art but contended that expert evidence as to the meaning of these phrases should not have been led before the jury. The appellants also submitted that if the judge found it necessary to hear expert evidence he should have done so in the absence of the jury and then, after argument, told the jury what the phrases meant in his directions. The appellants alleged that the effect of the course taken by the judge was to confuse the jury.

The course of the proceedings should be noted. A lengthy voir dire was held before the judge in which the Crown experts gave evidence as to the meaning of "structurally derived" and "hallucinogenic properties". That voir dire was held because all the accused at the trial challenged the admissibility of that evidence on counts 3, 4 and 6 of the Indictment. None of the accused's experts were called although some documents by them were tendered and admitted. The challenge was made on 3 grounds:
The opinion evidence was inadmissible by reason of [Part .3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/index.html#p3.3) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), and, particularly, as the opinions were not based on relevant specialised knowledge - [s 79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s79.html) of [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/);
Any probative value of the evidence was outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the accused - [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/);
Any probative value of the evidence was substantially outweighed by the danger that it might be unfairly prejudicial to the accused or be misleading or confusing - [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) of [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

The judge correctly rejected the argument that the Crown witnesses were not sufficiently qualified. The accused contended that each of the Crown witnesses had "advocated" the meaning to be given to "structurally derived" and that this had the effect of rendering the relevant portion of the Schedule meaningless. The jury could be given no sensible direction and any decision on the basis of the Crown evidence would, of necessity, be based on other than legal grounds. The argument continued that, accordingly, the evidence lacked probative value and its admission would result in unfair prejudice to the accused. The judge thought that the phrase fell to be interpreted in accordance with the way it is used by organic chemists and pharmacologists and saw no real difficulty in the jury being able to distil from the evidence a meaning which accurately reflected the evidence given. The judge correctly rejected the submission that the evidence lacked probative value and the further submission that the evidence should be rejected under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). The judge dealt with the matter in greater detail in his reasons which were correct.

The judge also correctly held that there was no basis for excluding the evidence under <case> of the Act.

The judge's decision of 2 February 1996 overruling the demurrer to counts 3 and 4 of the Indictment and declining to grant a stay was the subject of an application for leave to appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal. That application was heard on 23 February 1996 and leave to appeal was refused because the applicants (R J & H E Simpson) had not shown sufficient reason to doubt the correctness of the decision of Judge Davidson. Arguments appear to have been put to that court that the provisions here under consideration were void for uncertainty. The Chief Justice, speaking on behalf of the Court, said: "Second, an Act of Parliament cannot be void for uncertainty. It is the duty of the courts to give effect to the will of the Parliament as expressed in the legislation. If, as sometimes occurs, the meaning of words used in an Act of
Parliament is obscure, that provides no justification for refusing to enforce the law. The ordinary techniques of interpretation are to be called in aid and these may or may not be assisted by admissible evidence.

Third, nothing before us warrants the conclusion that the applicants will not be able to have a fair trial.

We would add one thing. We were told by senior counsel for the applicants that the trial would take many months but he was unable to tell us the nature of the issues in the trial or the defences that will be relied upon. We know from the argument we have heard today that one of the issues in the case will be whether a certain substance falls within the terms of the Schedule to the relevant Act of Parliament. As we understand it the evidence relevant to that issue will be able to the dealt with in a matter of days, not weeks or months.
We do not know what other issues there are in the case or why the trial should be expected to take several months, nor do we know what steps have been taken by the parties to narrow the issues in the trial or to shorten the length that the hearing might take.

This history helps to demonstrate that the approach now being taken as to the course which should have been followed was not advocated on either of the extended interlocutory applications before the trial judge or on the application for leave to appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal. The accused wanted the counts quashed and a permanent stay granted.

The Court of Criminal Appeal was not told of the extended cross examinations which were to take place of the experts called by the Crown nor the lengthy evidence to be led on behalf of the accused.

It appears that, if the accused did not succeed in their attempt to quash the counts and obtain a permanent stay, they wished to cross examine the Crown's experts extensively and lead evidence from experts called by them. The accused would have seen Dr Shulgin as a critical witness and, hopefully, one likely to raise a reasonable doubt as to the Crown's case on Nexus being "structurally derived" from methoxyphenylethylamine. That strategy having failed a new approach is advanced on the hearing of the appeal.

The words "structurally derived" in the clause "and other substances structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine" need expert evidence in explanation. Without that evidence a court would not understand the issues which could arise.

In Collector of Customs v. Agfa-Gevaert Ltd <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 123] at 126, the High Court, whilst acknowledging that general expositions of the law were helpful when considering what were questions of law and fact and when evidence was admissible in dealing with the construction or meaning of a particular statutory or regulatory provision, warned against rigidity of approach and trying to lay down propositions of universal application. It was pointed out that such propositions lost much of their utility when the term or phrase is complex. That remark has particular force in the present case.

Nevertheless, there are some principles which are worth noting. In The
Australian Gas Light Co v. The Valuer General (1940) 40 SR 126 at 137 Jordan
CJ said: "(1) The question what is the meaning of an ordinary English word or phrase as used in the Statute is one of fact not law ... This question is to be resolved by the relevant tribunal itself, by considering the word in its context with the assistance of dictionaries and other books, and not by expert evidence ...
although evidence is receivable as to the meaning of technical terms ... and the meaning of a technical legal term is a question of law.

The question whether a particular set of facts comes within the description of such a word or phrase is one of fact." 
In both prior and subsequent cases it has been accepted that the meaning of a non legal technical term or phrase is a question of fact as to which evidence is admissible: See Collector of Customs v. Pozzolanic (1993) 43 FCR 280 at
Indeed, such evidence is frequently called in customs cases.

The effect of the evidence adduced was to explain the field of discourse in which the phrase "structurally derived" was used. The word "derived" was explained as was the phrase "structurally derived". The evidence had the effect of pointing up the meaning of that word and that phrase in the Schedule to the Statute. The evidence given would not have confused the jury - instead it would have helped them understand and undertake their task.

The directions given (and earlier set out) were correct. The judge summarised the evidence of each expert on the critical points and contrasted their different approaches. He related the law to the facts and ensured, both while the evidence was being given and during the Summing Up, that the jury had the necessary background information to decide the factual issue. The evidence in chief on the point was comprehensive but not lengthy. However the cross examinations were long and wide ranging. The points were fully exposed. The appellants sought to move away from the views of Professor Johnston and the unhappy consequences which they had for the appellants. The Summing Up posed the true issues and directed the jury in the correct way as to their resolution. Neither the judge nor the jury could have appreciated the issues without a substantial body of evidence. To the lawyer and the lay person the words themselves were not illuminating or self explanatory. A study of the lengthy evidence of the expert witnesses and the Summing Up leads to the conclusion that the jury would not have been confused or distracted and that they were well informed and adequately directed.

Hallucinogenic Properties 
On this topic there was a marked divergence of views between Professor
Johnston, Dr R D Allan and Associate Professor Starmer who were called by the
Crown and Dr Shulgin and Professor Finlay-Jones. The approaches of Professor
Johnston and Associate Professor Starmer did not coincide. I will briefly summarise their evidence.

Professor Johnston stated that Nexus profoundly affects human beings following oral ingestion. It alters sensory perception. The affect depends on the size of the dose. Hallucination means an altered sensory perception, for example, seeing strange visions or hearing noises (or voices), an altered sense of smell or an altered sense of taste. Hallucinatory drugs affect thought, perception and mood without causing marked psychomotor stimulation or depression (T 2206). Hallucinatory drugs alter the perceptions as to what is real. It is sufficient if one of the major sensors is changed. The consumer sees something which is not there or has an altered perception about something which is there. Professor Johnston's views were based on a comprehensive study of the scientific literature available, his own extensive scientific knowledge and material on the Internet. He had exercised special caution as to the latter because it could not be verified. He thought that, when considered with the other sources and materials, the volume of the material on the Internet from so many people was of some weight notwithstanding not being able to question them or test what they asserted. The details which many had supplied had been helpful in evaluating the material. He had also relied on his scientific skills of analysis and assessment. Professor Johnston pointed out that experiments on humans with Nexus are illegal.

Professor Johnston did not think it was useful to distinguish between an altered perception of something which is there and of something which is not there. He though that in both instances the point was that there was an altered perception of the world. He disagreed with the proposition that hallucinations applied only to perceptions of something which is not there.
Professor Johnston thought that it was necessary to look at every alleged or possible hallucination where there was an altered perception of something which is there on a case by case basis. One example given in one of the dictionaries relied on by the appellants is where a person thinks that everything is very much smaller than it is. The person's sense of scale is markedly astray, eg, everything might appear to be Lilliputian.

In cross examination, Professor Johnston repelled the suggestion that it was perhaps more within the field of psychiatrists than pharmacologists to define an hallucination.

Professor Johnston rejected Dr Shulgin's definition of hallucination describing it, amongst other words, as extreme. Professor Johnston disagreed that an hallucination involved "a phenomenon in which a completely convincing reality surrounds a person with his eyes open, a reality that he alone can experience and interact with". In his view, there can still be a hallucination even if it is not completely convincing to the person involved, that is, that person has at least some appreciation of the correct position, even if not a significant appreciation (T 2213).

Professor Johnston regarded what hallucinations were as obvious and Dr
Shulgin's adopted definition as bizarre. It was not part of suffering from an hallucination that the person be totally unaware of everything else which was going on, that is, the person is "totally encapsulated in the big hallucination." In Professor Johnston's view it was not necessary for the person undergoing the hallucination to have no insight into the fact that he or she was then undergoing an hallucination.

Professor Johnston asserted that he had done a lot of research on Nexus.
However, he had not conducted practical experimentation into it nor had he been presented with a human being or animal who had been given a dose of the substance. On Professor Johnston's approach Nexus was hallucinogenic in quite low doses.

Dr R D Allan described hallucinations "as being subjective sense perceptions for which there isn't any appropriate external source." He thought that Nexus had hallucinogenic properties for four reasons. First, there were, in the literature, reports of the hallucinogenic action of these compounds in humans.
Second, there were reports of studies of the pharmacological activity in animals and on animal tissues and especially looking at the interaction of
Nexus with receptor 5HT2. Third, because the compound Nexus is a member of a class of substances which the textbooks suggest have a strong likelihood of being hallucinogenic. This is because of their structure. ("structure activity grounds"). Fourth, feedback information obtained from the Internet and various other sources. Professor Johnston also relied on these reasons.

Dr Allan agreed that he had not undertaken any research in the laboratory on the substance Nexus. He had, however, researched the literature. He said that he had researched deeply what is an hallucination. Dr Allan agreed that he was not an expert on hallucinogenesis. He suggested that a psychiatrist would be expert on that topic. Dr Allan was referring to the effects of drugs having hallucinogenic properties upon the behaviour of people and their ability to undertake normal day to day living tasks. Dr Allan said that he agreed with the definition of hallucination in the Macquarie dictionary.

Dr Allan thought that hallucinations existed where the person is absolutely convinced that the object, animal or person he is seeing is in fact there when it cannot be, for example, a pink horse and also where the person is convinced that he is seeing the particular object, animal or person, for example, a pink horse but knows that the animal cannot be as he is seeing it because there is no such thing as a pink horse. Dr Shulgin, by contrast regarded the first case as an hallucination but not the second one.

Dr Allan disagreed with Dr Shulgin that an hallucination is an extremely rare phenomena. While treating newspaper reports with reserve he felt that there were too many reported instances of alleged hallucinations to describe them as an extremely rare phenomenon. He accepted that each of the reported instances had not been scientifically investigated. He did not accept that the evidence available entitled a scientist to conclude that they were extremely rare. Such material as was available pointed in the opposite direction.

While Dr Allan agreed that none of the four reasons which he relied upon would, on its own, prove that Nexus was hallucinogenic in humans the four reasons in combination did so. A contrary proposition could be advanced but it was incorrect. Dr Allan did not believe that it was necessary for him to either have taken the substance himself or to have undertaken clinical work in the laboratory in order to express an opinion as a scientist on the hallucinogenic properties of Nexus. Dr Allan said that his expertise was in the chemical aspect, for example, it was in the field of structural activity relationships and how the activity of drugs varies with their structures. Dr
Allan was taken through a number of papers. He explained what he understood the authors to be saying and the extent to which he agreed or disagreed with their views as he understood them.

Dr Allan stated that there was no absolutely definite definition of "hallucinogenic" but that there were categories which are considered as definitely hallucinogenic. There was no definite standard definition which was applied across all the fields which concern themselves with "hallucination" or "hallucinogenic".

Associate Professor G A Starmer was a highly qualified pharmacologist with extensive local and international experience. His prime area of expertise was on the effects of psychoactive drugs and alcohol on the ability to carry out psychomotor functions such as driving a motor vehicle. His work had intruded into the area of hallucinogenic substances to some extent.

He preferred the definition of "hallucination" in DSM - IV (Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders) of the American Association of
Psychiatrists. That definition was not perfect but it was the best one which he could find. That definition reads (T 2681-2): "A sensory perception that has the compelling sense of reality of a true perception but that occurs without external stimulation of the relevant sensory organ. Hallucinations should be distinguished from illusions in which an actual external stimulus is misperceived or misinterpreted. The person may or may not have insight into the fact that he or she is having a hallucination. One person with auditory hallucinations may recognise that he or she is having a hallucination. One person with auditory hallucinations may recognise that he or she is having a false sensory experience, whereas another may be convinced that the source of the sensory experience has an independent physical reality. The term hallucination is not ordinarily applied to the false perceptions that occur during dreaming, while falling asleep ...
`hypnagogic or when awakening' ... `hypnopompic'. Transient hallucinatory experiences may occur in people without a mental disorder." 
Associate Professor Starmer stated that there were many drugs which have hallucinatory effects and that some have such effects after normal doses and some occur only after high doses. The reactions of different individuals to the same dose are also likely to differ. He thought that Nexus was capable of having hallucinogenic properties basically because that substance can be shown to act on receptors in the brain. He relied on work which had been done on animals and some material published by Shulgin and Carter in 1975, Shulgin and
Shulgin in 1991 and by Lemaire, Jacob and Shulgin in 1985. Associate Professor
Starmer later stated that he had made a mistake in assessing a portion of this last mentioned article. There had been no research work of an authoritative nature in humans but there had been some clinical tests in humans. Dr Shulgin had used 10 subjects and increasing doses. The material available was scant.
There had been case reports of people who had taken Nexus and experienced an hallucination. Nexus has no recognised therapeutic use. It is used as an aphrodisiac and to produce an hallucination. Associate Professor Harmer also had regard, with reservations, to material on the Internet. That material tended to reinforce the other material. Whether a person taking Nexus would hallucinate depends upon the size of the dose taken and the person's tolerance to Nexus. If the person has a tolerance to Nexus the dose would have to be increased to produce an hallucination. He thought that the available evidence suggested that Nexus had hallucinogenic properties, that is, it was capable of causing hallucinations providing the dose was high. He agreed that "suggest" means points to the possibility that it might be the case without being "definitive" On being pressed, Associate Professor Harmer stated that this applied to the animal work, it was suggestive not definitive. However, as to humans there was some documented evidence that if doses were increased to say mg or 40 mg the people have hallucinated. The word "suggest" did not describe that work adequately.

Associate Professor Harmer said that that definition of hallucination in DSM
IV meant seeing something which was not there at all, there being no objective stimuli to cause you to see that which you believe you are seeing and that the definition of illusion in DSM IV meant perceiving something which is there to be seen but it is seen differently from its actuality. He stated that DSM - IV makes the point that the person may or may not believe that the experience is real.

Associate Professor Harmer disagreed that "hallucinations" are very rare.
There were plenty of studies which had reported accounts of hallucinations after particular drugs had been taken.

Dr Shulgin adopted the definition of hallucination which appeared in the book called Pikhal, written by himself and his wife and published in 1991. That definition reads: "Hallucination, an extremely rare phenomenon in which the completely convincing reality surrounds a person with eyes open, a reality that he alone can experience and interact with. The inducement of hallucinations is a property that is commonly attributed to psychedelic drugs but in reality is virtually non-existent in the use of these materials. In almost all psychedelic experiences undergone by normal healthy people there is an awareness of real surroundings. Visual distortions are common but they are not confused with objective realities by the subject. They are known to be visual distortions and appreciated as such. The delusional anaesthetic drugs such as
Scopolamine and Ketamine on the other hand can and do produce cruel hallucinations." 
By "an extremely rare phenomenon", Dr Shulgin said that he meant that the inducing by a drug of an hallucination is extremely rarely seen. He added "some drugs ... have never ... had reported hallucinations from their use, others have them with some regularities, but in general it is a rare phenomenon in the area of psychedelic drugs." Dr Shulgin hoped that the psychedelic drugs area would be spared the association with hallucinations.

Dr Shulgin explained what had been written in the Shulgin/Carter 1975 work. He said that what he wrote in the abstract of that work was meant to convey that
Nexus does not lead to hallucinogenisis in relation to the work which had been done for the study with dosage levels at a maximum of ten milligrams.

Dr Shulgin recounted the incident of a colleague, a physician anaesthesiologist who took a 64 mg dose of Nexus. The colleague said that he was propelled into something not of his choosing and that everything which was alive was completely fearsome. When he looked at a picture of a bush in that room, it was just a picture and it posed no threat. However, he was petrified when his gaze caught a bush growing outside the window of his dining room.
This was a lifeform the colleague could not understand and could not control.
He felt his own life form was not a bit more controllable. Dr Shulgin did not regard this as an hallucination because the bush and picture were there. Other experts including those called by the Crown would regard that experience as an hallucination. Dr Shulgin related other case histories where there had been very unusual experiences, but which he did not regard as hallucinations, as the person taking the drugs was lucid, and the object which caused fear existed. The person took an overdose and believed that he was going to die, there being a moment when he believed that he was facing death.

Dr Shulgin stated that Nexus did not have hallucinogenic properties. He did not favour the use of the term "hallucinogenic" outside the concept of hallucination as he defined it. In 30 years he had only seen a human being hallucinate 3 or 4 times.

At T2955-56 Dr Shulgin said: "Q: What is the difference between a person that you observed as hallucinating and a person who is experiencing psychedelic experience? 
A: A person who is in the moment of hallucination is not aware that he is hallucinating. It takes an outside observer to say `do you know who you were', `I know where I was'. His world is totally convincing, it is just not confirmable by the observer. So in essence you cannot say if you are alone if you ever hallucinated because everything that occurs is very real. It takes that consensus. It takes that observer to say you were not at the sea shore, you were in Davenport, but I know where I was, I was in sea shore. That I would hold as hallucination and I see this very rarely with a psychodelic drug." 
Dr Shulgin agreed that he had a partiality towards phenylethylamines and tryptamines arising from getting to know them intimately over a few decades.
He regarded the drugs which he dealt with as tools of personal discovery and tools for research into the human mind. He regarded them as potential tools in therapy. He thought that the personal use of these drugs was the prerogative of the individual. He was a regular user of the different psychoactive drugs except wine. Psychoactive, in his usage, meant having some action on the human mind.

According to Dr Shulgin an hallucination involves a distortion of some sensory modality which, on objective analysis, appears to be undocumentable. There is no objective confirmation of the distortion. The absence of documentation is very much part of the definition of hallucination. There is no objective reality. It is seen as real without any awareness of it not being real. There is no awareness that there is a distortion on the part of the person who is undergoing the experience. Dr Shulgin emphasised the lack of awareness and that he was not alone in his view.

A distinction is to be drawn between and hallucination and a true sensory distortion. If a person is aware that there is a distortion, he or she is not in the hands of an hallucination. If a person sees something that he feels is not real, that is a distortion, an illusion, but it does not fit into Dr
Shulgin's classification of an hallucination.

Dr Shulgin said that Nexus did not cause hallucinations at any dose of which he was aware. He said (T 2992): "When a person sees something they know they are seeing is real but no-one else can confirm it, then that I call hallucination. It is not a belief, it is a knowledge.
 ... the person is unaware that the object they are seeing is not there. He does not know it is not real. He responds to it as if it were real and I have seen this occur in two or three cases. It is very disturbing, a little bit frightening because you realise what is going into that person's senses is neatly his and totally believed and the trouble is no-one else can see it and it becomes very disturbing and potentially dangerous, very dangerous." 
And at 2994: "... it's intrinsic, at least in my definition, that the person believes it is there. In fact, knows it is there, it is part of his reality, it is just that it is no-one else's reality, no-one else shares that reality." 
That gives a very restricted meaning to hallucination and one which does not accord with the general understanding of that word.

Dr Shulgin thought that Nexus was very clearly capable of causing distortions in sensory perceptions. There was also a very good possibility of Nexus creating an illusion in a subjective sense such as seeing colours swirling round when they are not there. The person would know it was not really happening. Dr Shulgin agreed that Nexus might generate a type of tactile change such as the feeling of things under your skin, for example, ants. He said (at T 2996): "The distinction comes from the hallucination in which a person does not know that there are not ants under there and takes a knife to his skin to get rid of what's wrong. That is where you have gone into an unconfirmed reality and there are no ants there but he knows there are." 
It is only an illusion if the person feels that there are ants there, but has some knowledge that there could not be ants there.

Dr Shulgin said (at T 3000) that his opinion that Nexus did not have hallucinogenic properties was arrived at "both from myself being observed (as a user of Nexus) and my observing others." 
Professor Finlay-Jones has held the chair of Forensic Psychiatry at the
University of New South Wales since 1991. He was very experienced. He said :
 "In my opinion a hallucination is diagnosed by an observer when a subject reports perceiving a stimulus which the subject believes is real and is located outside the body and the observer believes that it is not real, that there is no stimulus. On the other hand, an illusion is a perception of a stimulus reported by a subject where the observer agrees that there is a stimulus but the subject has a distorted perception of that stimulus." 
He agreed that an hallucination is the subject seeing, feeling, healing et cetera, something which is not there at all.

He agreed with the definition of an hallucination given by Dr Shulgin in
Pikhal and with Dr Shulgin's views of the various incidents recounted in
Pikhal. He drew a firm distinction between an hallucination and an illusion.
An hallucination is almost always a sign of a serious psychiatric disorder call psychosis. An illusion is usually not and may be experienced by perfectly normal people. With an hallucination the person believes so strongly that he knows that the object or the stimulus is there. The person harbours no doubts - he is totally convinced.

He said "the characteristic of an hallucination as it is happening for the first time to somebody, which is the commonest experience, particularly with substance abuse, there is no doubt that the subject feels that it is real." He distinguished that situation from a patient with chronic hallucinations. Such a patient may have insight into the fact that he is having an hallucination.
This is called double insight. The statement in DSM IV, "a person may or may not have insight into the fact that he or she is having an hallucination" should be understood in the light of these explanations. Later in his evidence
Professor Finlay-Jones said that this statement from DSM IV was "a mischievous sentence because if one has a compelling sense of reality that one is hearing or seeing something, ... that is totally inconsistent with saying at the same time, oh it's only an hallucination." 
Professor Finlay-Jones said that there is no word comparable with hallucinogenic to describe a substance that causes illusions although there should be as its psychiatric significance is quite different. For example, there was no such word as illusionogenic. He explained that the popular term "psychedelic" covered a wide variety of mental processes far greater than the term "hallucinogen". "Psychotomimetic" is a subset of "psychedelic" and "hallucinogenic" is a subset of "psychotomimetic". There was " a broad panorama of experiences that are produced by mind altering drugs including feelings, perceptual distortions and changed ideas. One subset of all those experiences are psychotomimetic experiences, experiences that resemble being psychotic, and they are delusions, hallucinations and a strange way of talking known formally as "thought disorder" and then underneath that umbrella there is simply hallucinogenic" (T 3065).

Professor Finlay-Jones said that pleasurable experiences from taking drugs were rarely in the category of hallucinations. With an hallucination the subject was mostly terrified by the experience. Something like an hallucination is very rarely likely to appear at a low dose but is more likely to appear at a higher dose (T3066). A person experiencing an hallucination could be completely aware of his surroundings. That also occurs with a psychedelic experience.

Professor Finlay-Jones said that the definition of an hallucination accepted by all psychiatrists was that it is a perception of a stimulus that does not exist. He said that his definition of hallucination corresponded completely with that in DSM IV. The definition of hallucination in DSM IV was to be found in the first sentence, namely, "a sensory perception that has the compelling sense of reality of a true perception but that occurs without external stimulation of the relevant sensory organ." Professor Finlay-Jones said that he agreed completely with that sentence. The remainder of the paragraph in DSM
IV was commentary.

I have but briefly summarised the evidence which was given as to what constituted an hallucination and hallucinogenic properties. In his Summing Up the judge covered the matters in considerable detail as he reviewed the evidence of each of the expert witnesses. The judge pointed up for the jury the different approaches of the witnesses and where they agreed and disagreed.

At SU 224-225 the judge directed that they had to be satisfied that Nexus was a prohibited drug and that this depended on the Crown proving that Nexus was structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine and that Nexus had hallucinogenic properties. At SU 225 he said: "That you may take it simply means that it must be shown that the substance
Nexus has the attribute, quality or characteristic of causing or inducing hallucinations, hence of course the time spent and indeed properly spent in exploring with the expert witnesses this term `hallucinations' rather than the phrase `hallucinogenic properties'. Of course it does not mean that the Crown must prove that hallucinations will occur every time anyone takes Nexus in whatever dose. The question is whether it has that attribute or quality or characteristic. Is it capable of inducing hallucinations, not does it induce hallucinations every time it is taken by human beings in whatever dose." 
The judge at SU 225-226 told the jury that: " ... it is the capacity of inducing hallucinations that the phrase hallucinogenic properties is directed to and it is not intended to convey that every time anybody takes some of the substance they will undergo what might be termed an hallucination." 
The judge pointed out that Professor Johnston regarded an hallucination as including some situations where something real is perceived but is misconstrued or misunderstood. Dr Shulgin and Professor Finlay-Jones disagreed. The judge reminded the jury that another area of difference was that Dr Shulgin and Professor Finlay-Jones said that for there to be an hallucination the person undergoing the experience must have no insight into the fact that he or she was then undergoing an hallucination. The subject must believe that the stimulus or object is real, that is, belief to the point of knowing. Professor Johnston and Associate Professor Starmer thought that a person might undergo an hallucination whilst recognising that what he or she was seeing was simply not there. They would know or have insight into the fact that they were then undergoing the hallucination (SU 229). Dr Allan said that it was not essential to his definition of an hallucination that the person undergoing it actually believed the false sense or perception experience to be true. Professor Johnston disagreed with Dr Shulgin that a person undergoing or suffering an hallucination would be totally unaware of everything else that was going on around him or her. Professor Johnston said they were still aware of part of the real world.

The judge pointed to the disagreement as to whether an hallucination was an extremely rare phenomenon.

The judge took the jury through the definition of hallucination in DSM IV in conjunction with the evidence of Associate Professor Starmer, and also that of
Professor Johnston and Dr Allan. Professor Johnston thought that some illusions were also hallucinations, depending on the circumstances. Dr Shulgin and Professor Finlay-Jones took a different view.

The judge reminded the jury that Professor Johnston and Associate Professor
Starmer thought that the size of the dose of Nexus was important in causing an hallucination. Dr Shulgin disagreed.

The judge told the jury that while Professor Johnston regarded some instances of mis-perceptions (a distorted perception of a stimulus which exists) as hallucinations. Professor Finlay-Jones seemed to regard such misperceptions as illusions.

The judge gave these directions at SU 252-3: " ... the word hallucination is a word in ordinary English use. Its more precise meaning, however, will depend on the context in which it is used and here I direct you as a matter of law that we are not dealing with its use in the context of psychiatry in which psychiatrists are concerned with diagnosing and treating mental illnesses. Here we are concerned with the phrase `hallucinogenic properties' as it appears in the context of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/), the purpose of which is to indicate the drugs which were prohibited in our community.

In particular, we are concerned with that part of the schedule which the Crown relies upon as including Nexus as a prohibited drug. This part of the schedule requires that it be shown that if Nexus is to be so regarded, firstly, that it is structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine, to that extent it is therefore in a chemical context in which that question must be determined as I have already said; however, the legislation prohibits drugs also according to the effect which they may have to human beings within the community. Hence, assistance may be had as to the meaning of `hallucinogenic properties' and `hallucinations' from psychiatry and the definitions of that term adopted by psychiatrists and, of course, from witnesses who are psychiatrists, such as
Professor Finlay-Jones. But I repeat again, that we are not dealing here with an essentially psychiatric question, we are not dealing here with a statute which has as its purpose or as its field of operation mental illness or mentally ill persons." 
And these at SU 275: "You may think, ladies and gentlemen, that the term, `hallucinogenic properties' impinges on a number of fields of learning, including of course pharmacology and psychiatry. Ultimately it is for you to determine as a question of fact whether Nexus has hallucinogenic properties but you must do so within the framework of that part of the schedule to the Drugs Misuse and
Trafficking Act in which the phrase appears and also having regard to the purpose of that Act.

The broad purpose of it is stated in what is called the preamble to the Act, which reads as follows: `An Act to prohibit the manufacture, supply, possession and use of certain prohibited drugs and for related purposes.' 
It is not, as I have said, an Act relating to the diagnosis or treatment of mentally ill persons. Nevertheless you will recall that it was the Crown witness, Associate Professor Starmer, who spoke of DSM4 as an acceptable definition and it is a matter for you whether you think that the question of hallucinations raises considerations in which you may find evidence from the psychiatrist, Professor Finlay-Jones, of assistance. Your actual findings, however, must be made within the legal framework which I have outlined relating to the Drugs Misuse and Trafficking Act of which the schedule, exhibit U, forms a part, including the stated purpose of the legislation." 
In the afternoon of 19 August 1996, the first day of their consideration of their verdict, the jury requested that excerpts of the transcript be read that paraphrased the qualitative characteristics of 2CB (Nexus) contained in
Pikhal, ie, the accounts of the effects of Nexus. Dr Shulgin in his book
Pikhal had set out some case histories summarising the effects on people of having taken varying doses of Nexus. There was a debate whether any of the various case histories revealed the subject having an hallucination. These had been canvassed at some length in the evidence. The judge stated that the jury's use of the word "qualitative" indicated that the jury had understood that the defence submissions were as to the qualitative and not the quantitative characteristics of Nexus.

The judge read the case histories to the jury. They contained some detail and it was wise for the jury to refresh their recollection. The judge had referred to these in his Summing Up on 6 August 1996. They had been dealt with at length in the evidence some weeks previously.

Early on 20 August 1996, the second day of their deliberations, the jury requested that Dr Shulgin's definition of hallucination in his book Pikhal and the definition of hallucination in DSM IV be read. This was done. The accused relied heavily on the definition in Pikhal, Associate Professor Starmer thought well of the definition in DSM IV and Professor Findlay Jones thought well of the first sentence. The definition distinguished between an hallucination and an illusion. DSM IV was a work of obvious authority and standing. These two sources were of importance to the accused. It was prudent for the jury to have these technical passages read especially as they had last heard them on 6 August 1996.

The jury did not bring in their verdict until 27 August 1996. This is not surprising given the volume and nature of the material before the jury and that there were seven accused. The jury returned 19 separate verdicts, 12 of which were "not guilty". The jury differentiated carefully between the charges.

From the questions asked by the jury during their retirement it appears that the jury dealt with the issue as to whether Nexus had hallucinogenic properties at an early stage of their deliberations. That was wise as this was a substantial but discrete issue. If resolved against the Crown, the jury would not have had to further consider three counts of the Indictment.

The appellants contended that, as the judge had ruled in the absence of the jury that the phrase "hallucinogenic properties" was a non legal term, the judge should have arrived at a meaning of this phrase in the absence of the jury and directed the jury accordingly. The appellants also submitted that "hallucinations" was also a term of art, the meaning of which should have been determined by the trial judge after evidence and argument in the absence of the jury. These arguments are incorrect. Evidence is admissible as to the meaning of non legal terms of art or technical terms. I will not repeat what I have previously written.

The appellants complained that the judge allowed lengthy evidence to be adduced from the scientific experts called by the Crown and the accused before the jury. If the accused could not secure a quashing of the "Nexus counts" or a permanent stay they wanted evidence to be called. From the tenor of the cross examination by counsel for the accused they anticipated making major inroads into the Crown evidence. Generally, the well qualified Crown experts were not accommodating. The accused were very keen to call Dr Shulgin and
Professor Finlay-Jones. If that evidence had raised a reasonable doubt the accused would have been acquitted. When the judge at T3051-3 queried the admissibility of the evidence of Professor Finlay-Jones, counsel for the accused insisted that it was relevant and admissible.

The appellants submitted that the judge did not adequately direct the jury as to the meaning of "hallucinations" or "hallucinogenic properties" and that he had left it to the jury to decide the meaning of "hallucinations" and "hallucinogenic properties." If "hallucinations" and "hallucinogenic properties" were non legal terms of art it was a question of fact for the jury to decide what they meant, after having heard the expert evidence. That was the way in which the trial was fought to the advantage of the appellants. If the word "hallucinations" is an ordinary English word its meaning is a question of fact.

It was submitted that the judge should have formulated the meaning of "hallucinogenic properties" and told the jury what that phrase meant when the experts could not agree. Given the fact finding roles of the jury just mentioned that submission cannot be accepted. It would not have been an acceptable course to counsel for the accused at the trial unless the judge had adopted Dr Shulgin's views or those of Professor Finlay-Jones.

The judge was correct in telling the jury that the Crown had to establish that
Nexus was capable of causing hallucinations, that it was a word in ordinary
English use, but that regard had to be had to the context in which it was used. The judge was also correct in telling the jury that they were not dealing with its use in the context of psychiatry and diagnosing and treating mental illnesses. He pointed out, correctly, that the jury was concerned with the phrase "hallucinogenic properties" as it appeared in the context of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/), the purpose of which was to indicate the drugs which were prohibited in the community.
 "Hallucination" is a word which is often used loosely in common parlance to refer to what seems to be an unreal or ethereal or fanciful assertion or proposition or something that is imagined and does not exist as imagined. If pressed for an accurate or precise meaning, most people would have to resort to a dictionary and a lay person studying some of the dictionary meanings may well require further assistance to elucidate the meaning of the words "hallucination" and "hallucinogenic" in the present context. If it had not been for the expert evidence, the difference, between an object or stimulus not existing but "known" by the person to exist and an object or stimulus existing but being perceived in an altered way, would not have presented itself to the lay person (or a lawyer) as being of importance. A similar comment could be made in respect of the other differences to which reference has been made.

Counsel referred the experts on both sides to various dictionaries and books and the experts themselves had had regard to some of them. Expert guidance was needed. The differences of opinion between the experts as to what constituted an hallucination were addressed many times in the evidence in chief and in cross examination of the experts and mentioned in the Summing Up. The jury must have been seized of them and what the Crown and the accused contended constituted an hallucination, and especially after they had had the case histories and the definitions in Pikhal and DSM IV read.

As a result of the judge's directions the jury would have understood that they had to determine what constituted an hallucination having regard to the purpose of the Act, its ordinary meaning and the expert evidence. The complexity of the considerations and the problem required expert evidence. The jury would then have come to the critical question whether Nexus had hallucinogenic properties, that is, whether it was capable of causing hallucinations.

In my opinion the directions given by the judge were adequate. The issues had been canvassed and highlighted in the evidence and sufficiently dealt with in the Summing Up. The jury would not have been confused. The matter was dealt with on the most favourable basis for the appellants.

The appellants submitted that Dr Allan should not have been allowed to give evidence that Nexus had hallucinogenic properties because he had conducted no personal research into that matter. He had not carried out any tests on humans nor laboratory experiments or laboratory research. He had searched through and studied the available literature and the recorded case histories and experiments. He was a highly qualified and experienced chemist with a background in research, having been a research fellow of the Imperial College of Science and Technology, London and the John Curtin School of Medical
Research at the Australian National University. He brought his formidable talents to the evaluation of the available material and the consideration of the components of Nexus and its properties. He was careful not to venture into the field of psychiatry and specified the areas on which he could speak. The challenge to his qualifications to speak about Nexus and its properties is without substance.

A complaint was also made that the judge incorrectly allowed experts to refer to research on the Internet, such research being unable to be tested by cross examination as to its reliability. Professor Johnston and Dr Allan had regard to the material on the Internet but they recognised its limitations and that that material could not be tested. As to that material, the judge told the jury at SU 227: " ... you may think it was not regarded by any of the witnesses as in itself a reliable source for the formation of an opinion as to whether Nexus has hallucinogenic properties." 
That observation summarises the view of Professor Johnston and Dr Allan. There is no substance in this complaint.

General 
This was not a case where the jury was or should have been unable to resolve the differences in the testimony of the expert witness. On the "structurally derived" point the view of the defence experts was not based on the correct construction of Schedule 1. It did not give full effect to all the words used in the Schedule. The jury was directed correctly.

On the "hallucinogenic properties" point there was a conflict as to what constituted an hallucination and the meaning of that word. The jury were well able to assess the differing opinions offered and the basis of those opinions.
They had to consider the meaning of an ordinary English word but in the context in which it was used. It was not a case where the jury would have been unable to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt because of the different opinions expressed.

This is not a case in which the conflict in the expert testimony was such that a reasonable doubt caused by that conflict could not safely be eliminated; see
Chamberlain v. The Queen <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 521] at 558 - 559, 757 - 576, 598 - 599; 628 - 629.

None of the complaints of the appellants have been made good. They should be rejected.

REGINA versus Clifford Stuart McEWEN, Richard James SIMPSON, 
Helen Edwina SIMPSON, Mark Francis MARCOVICH 
JUDGMENT 
SIMPSON J: The appellants are Richard Simpson, Clifford McEwen, Mark Marcovich and Helen Simpson. 
On 27 August 1996, following a long trial, each appellant was convicted by a jury on one or more counts concerning the manufacture and supply of prohibited drugs. Richard Simpson, Mark Marcovich and Helen Simpson were each convicted on one charge of knowingly taking part in the manufacture of not less than the commercial quantity of a prohibited drug identified as -Bromo-2, 5- Dimethoxyphenylethylamine, the common name of which is Nexus. It will be convenient, generally, throughout these reasons to refer to the drug by its common name. Richard Simpson and Mark Marcovich were each convicted on one charge of supplying not less than the commercial quantity of the same prohibited drug. Clifford McEwen was convicted on one charge of knowingly taking part in the manufacture of not less than the commercial quantity of methylamphetamine, one charge of supplying not less than the large commercial quantity of methylamphetamine, and one charge of knowingly taking part in the manufacture of 3, 4 methylenedioxy-methylamphetamine, the common name of which is Ecstasy.

The charges concerning manufacture of the drugs were brought under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s24.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) ("the
Act"). The charge of supplying Nexus was brought under <case> (2). The charge of supplying methylamphetamine was brought under the same section together with s (4).

The Nexus charges - Simpson, Simpson and Marcovich 
Proof of each charge concerning Nexus depended upon establishing that the drug concerned was a prohibited drug within the meaning of the relevant sub section. By reason of the definition of the term "prohibited drug" in <case> of the Act, any drug specified in Schedule 1 to the Act is prohibited. Schedule 1 specifies a lengthy list of named substances, one of which appears as: "2, 5-Dimethoxy-4- methylamphetamine and other substances structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine, being those substances having hallucinogenic properties" 
The name "Nexus" does not appear in the schedule. It was essential to the
Crown case to prove, in relation to the Nexus charges, that the substance known as Nexus, chemically identified as 4-Bromo-2, -Dimethoxyphenylethlylamine is a substance structurally derived from methoxyphenylethylamine and has hallucinogenic properties.

At the conclusion of the trial, at which each of the appellants made an unsworn statement, the issues which had emerged for determination by the jury in relation to each of the Simpsons and Marcovich were whether Nexus had been shown to be a prohibited drug (that is in the two respects mentioned) and, if so, whether any of those appellants knew that it was a prohibited drug. Each of these appellants acknowledged participation in the manufacture of the drug, and Marcovich acknowledged supplying it.

The facts relied upon by the Crown may therefore be stated with brevity. In late 1993 McEwen, who was then using a false name, began to work on a casual basis for a Jeremy Frew. His task was to collect chemicals that had been ordered by Frew and deliver them at Frew's direction. One such order was for two kilograms of 2,5Dimethoxyphenethylamine. By the time it was available Frew was in custody at Villawood Detention Centre being held as an illegal immigrant. McEwen borrowed the purchase price for the substance, an amount of $23,000, and took delivery on 6 January 1994.

Earlier the two Simpsons and Marcovich set out to purchase an item called a pill press, or tablet press, a device used for converting powders into tablet form. They did so in February 1994. Marcovich transported the press to premises at 19 Margate Street, Botany, which had previously been rented by
McEwen using the false name Greg Evans. These premises were used for the storage of the components of the substance Nexus, and chemistry equipment for its manufacture. It was here that Nexus was manufactured. The pill press was stored on the back of a utility truck rented by Marcovich, which was at times parked at the Margate Street address, and at times at another address at 884
Canterbury Road, Lakemba, a car yard where a business called `McAllister's
Autos' was conducted by a John Carroll. On 5 March 1994 Richard Simpson,
Marcovich and two others were located by the police in a workshop at the rear of the car yard in circumstances, and with a variety of items, that clearly suggested that they were in the process of making the Nexus powder into tablets. The utility and the pill press were then present.

Leaving aside, for a moment, the questions concerning the chemical structure and properties of the drug, the cases advanced by each of these three appellants concerned their state of knowledge of the prohibited status of the substance. Richard Simpson, in his statement, said that he had consulted a solicitor with a good deal of experience in the criminal law and in drug law in particular, who had advised him that, as the drug did not appear in the
Schedule, it was "a completely legal substance." Helen Simpson's statement was to similar effect. She claimed that her involvement arose only after she and her husband had obtained what they believed to be competent legal advice, and that they had gone to a lot of trouble to ensure that what they were doing was legal. Marcovich claimed to have relied upon the same advice, relayed to him by Richard Simpson.

That such advice was given was confirmed by the solicitor, Michael Croke. He gave evidence that was largely, if not entirely, consistent with that of the appellants, although he considered that the advice had been informal rather than final, and he had not expected the appellants to proceed as they had.

Unsafe and Unsatisfactory 
There was thus a real issue concerning knowledge for the jury's determination.
The question was whether Crown had established beyond reasonable doubt in each case that the appellant had known that the substance in which he or she was involved was a prohibited drug. Each appellant argued in this court, in addition to the other grounds of appeal of which more will be said below, that the verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The assertions by the Simpsons, in their statements that they had received legal advice, and the evidence of Mr Croke to the same effect were challenged by the Crown. The trial judge left to the jury as an issue whether that advice had in fact been given, pointing to certain aspects of the evidence that, it had been argued by the Crown, suggested that it had not. These were the circumstances in which it was claimed the advice had been given. Both Richard
Simpson and Mr Croke said that they had met in a coffee shop that was part of the complex from where Mr Croke conducted his practice and that Richard
Simpson identified the substance about which he was enquiring by writing its chemical name on a table napkin, and that Mr Croke said that he would check the Schedule. Mr Croke said that he did not open a file, and that, although he conducted more research than merely perusing the list of drugs in the
Schedule, and had looked in the Poisons Act and the Customs Act, and had consulted some chemistry text books at the Fisher Library of Sydney
University, he had not considered the advice he had given sufficiently time- consuming to warrant rendering a fee, and he had not done so. It was suggested by the Crown that it was unlikely that a solicitor, specialising in drug law, would have given such incompetent advice, and that fact in itself called into question whether the advice was given at all.

This was not the only factual issue for the jury. There were other matters, going to the knowledge of the appellants or any of them, of the prohibited status of the substance. There was a large volume of evidence derived from intercepted telephone calls. It was conceded by Richard Simpson at least that in some of these coded language was used in order to conceal from any unintended listener the true subject of the conversations. He gave an explanation, the detail of which it is unnecessary to recount in full, but which concerned fears he allegedly held that another person who had been interested in participating in the manufacture, but who had been rebuffed, had close ties with some corrupt officers, and that the coded conversations were for protection against any intrusion by them. The jury was entitled, in my view, to regard this as a feeble and unsatisfactory explanation.

The same explanation was given for events which occurred towards the latter part of the enterprise. The appellants became aware or suspicious that they were under surveillance and engaged in what was described as "counter surveillance" tactics, using one vehicle as a decoy to mislead the police in the surveillance vehicle. This, it was argued by the Crown, betokened a degree of suspicion inconsistent with people who are confident of the legality of their activity.

There was evidence that, when the Simpsons' home was searched pursuant to search warrant, a bag belonging to Helen Simpson was found which contained a piece of paper bearing a note of the registration number of one of the police surveillance vehicles. She gave no explanation for having this in her possession.

Both Richard and Helen Simpson gave some incorrect, untrue or evasive answers when interviewed by police, again, it was suggested by the Crown, evidencing a lack of confidence in the legal status of what they were doing.

It is, of course, quite unnecessary and inappropriate to consider all of these matters here, except as material to which the jury were entitled to have regard on the factual question of the appellants' state of knowledge. In my view, in the light of all this material, it was well open to the jury to reject the appellants' assertion that they believed the substance was not a prohibited drug.

I do not find these verdicts unsafe or unsatisfactory.

McEwen 
McEwen was not convicted of any charges concerning the manufacture or supply of Nexus. The three charges on which he was convicted concerned methylamphetamine and Ecstacy.

The bases on which he argued that the verdicts of guilty were unsafe and unsatisfactory were dependent upon the grounds otherwise raised by him. Since
I agree with the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL, which I have read in draft, that these grounds fail, it follows that this ground, too, must fail.

Other Grounds 
In relation to the remaining grounds of appeal that were argued, I have read in draft the judgment of Smart J. I agree, for the reasons given by his
Honour, that those grounds have not been sustained.

In all cases, I agree with the orders proposed by Hunt CJ at CL.
 [1] McEwen, Ground 6; Simpsons Ground 2; Marcovich, Ground 8.
 [2] Simpsons, Ground 1.
 [3] Simpsons, Grounds 3(ii) and (iii); Marcovich, Grounds 3-7.
 [4] McEwen, Grounds 1 and 2; Simpsons, Ground 3(i); Marcovich, Grounds 1 and .
 <case>; [(1911) 13 CLR 619] at 661-662; Borca versus The Queen <case>; [(1975) 133 CLR 82] at 104; Chamberlain versus The Queen <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 521] at 599; and see Regina versus Youssef <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 573] at -580.
 [11] [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), r 4.
 [12] Regina versus Abusafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531] at 536.
 [13] (It was not counsel who appeared for him on the appeal).
 [14] Bayden Fistar was another accused, and was one of two accused found not guilty.
 [15] Regina versus Ivan Robert Marko Milat (Hunt CJ at CL, 22 April 1996, unreported) at 6-7.
 <case>; [(1911) 13 CLR 619] at 640-641.
 [17] Definition of "supply" in [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s3.html) [18] Regina versus Carey [(1990) 20 NSWLR 292] at 294.
 (5 July 1989, unreported).
 [20] (at 5).
 * * * 
