

Regina versus Many Matter No Cca 60277/97 [1997] NSWSC 358 (1 September 1997) 
Regina versus Fred Many /97 September 1997 
Smart J, Simpson J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus FRED MANY 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: In December 1990 the Court of Criminal Appeal reviewed a sentence received by the appellant in March 1988. The sentence was substantially reduced because of assistance given to the authorities. The appellant's release in March 1995 was attended by considerable publicity in the news media which was very inflammatory and very adverse to him. The publicity continued until later in 1995. Some at least of that publicity remains readily accessible in this age of computer access to previously published materials. 
At about the time of the appellant's release, certain allegations were made to the police which resulted in the appellant being charged with two instances of armed robbery said to have been committed in August 1986.

On 2 June 1997 application was made to Davidson DCJ for an order that the prosecution for those alleged offences be stayed for such period as might be determined by the court. In argument a permanent stay was sought or, alternatively, a temporary stay of the proceedings (in effect, an adjournment) for a period of two years. The evidence in support of the application consisted of cuttings from newspapers which demonstrated the extent and nature of the media publicity in 1995 and other evidence showing that, to some extent at least, what had been published in 1995 remained accessible. Davidson DCJ refused to grant a permanent or a temporary stay of proceedings.

The refusal to grant a permanent stay was not impugned on the hearing of this appeal.

The appellant does not require leave to appeal against his Honour's refusal to grant a temporary stay because a certificate has been given by his Honour pursuant to [s
F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) in that regard.

In my opinion, the appeal should be dismissed. The determination was an exercise of judicial discretion. There was no error of law. No specific error in the exercise of discretion was identified. No error in the exercise of discretion is to be inferred from the result. I would add that I agree with his Honour's decision in refusing to grant a temporary stay of proceedings and with his reasons for that decision.

The order I propose is that the appeal should be dismissed.

SMART J: I agree. 
SIMPSON J: I also agree. 
SMART J: The order will be as proposed by Sperling J. I would simply add that the media should be very careful about the reporting of these proceedings so that they do not jeopardise a trial later this year because it is now obvious that the trial will take place before the end of the year and it is very important that there should be no publicity which would result in that not being able to happen. * * * 
