

A Mrsnik versus Distaga P/L [1996] NSWSC 306 (29 July 1996) 
Adrian MRSNIK versus DISTAGA PTY LTD /93 
MONDAY 29 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter the defendant seeks an order pursuant to Part 72B Rule 4(2) of the Rules extending the time after which an arbitrator's award is taken to be a judgment to a date up to and including a period of fourteen days beyond the date of the making of this order. Alternatively, other relief is sought in the notice of motion. As indicated, during the course of argument, I did not consider it appropriate to consider giving the alternative relief as sought. The question is whether I should grant the relief in order number one in the notice of motion.

The facts of the matter may be stated briefly as follows, on 13 February 1989 the plaintiff sustained injury. He, subsequently, commenced proceedings in by way of statement of claim. In February 1996 an arbitration hearing took place before Mr Crumpton QC on 27 May 1996. The court forwarded a copy of the award to the defendant's solicitors. Apparently, in April 1996 and within the time, the defendant's solicitors determined the rehearing was warranted and draft documents were prepared to reflect that view. It appears that, unfortunately, thereafter the system broke down, to say the least. The partner in charge of the matter and the conduct of the proceedings on behalf of the defendant in the action apparently commenced extended sabbatical leave in May
In June 1996 apparently one of the employed solicitors or associates found the defendant's file on a trolley and left a note for the partner to consider upon his return. It appears that on 17 June 1996 the defendant's partner solicitor returned from sabbatical leave, and he shortly thereafter discovered omissions and wrote to the defendants seeking instructions. It appears as though he acted fairly promptly in dealing with the matter and I accept the merits he proposed to in the affidavit of 17 April 1996. In July the defendant's partner wrote to the plaintiff's solicitors seeking consent to the extension of time matter that had been earlier raised with the plaintiff's solicitor. In July 1996 the plaintiff's solicitors indicated consent probably would not be forthcoming. Against that background, a notice of motion was filed on 17 July 1996 seeking the order referred to in paragraph one of the notice of motion. I should add that I accept the matters set forth in the defendant's solicitor's affidavit of 17 July 1996.

It appears to me that I have a discretion to extend the time, indeed, the ruling provides for the exercise of such discretion. Reasons have been given, which I have already indicated, justifying the exercise of discretion, and in the circumstances of this matter, I propose to act in accordance with Part 72B
Rule 4(2) and make the order as sought in paragraph one of the notice of motion.

The order that I make is the order as sought in paragraph one of the notice of motion.

In the circumstances, I propose to order the defendant, who is the applicant on the motion, to pay the plaintiff's costs of this motion. Next, it seems to me that in the circumstances, the plaintiff in the action does have a legitimate ground for seeking a hearing as soon as possible. It is not within my power to grant an order for expedition, however, as I understand it, the matter is, in effect, ready to proceed, and in the circumstances of this case,
I direct that the matter be placed forthwith in the holding list and to be called up at the next call over of matters to be fixed for hearing from that list.
 * * * 
