

Khoury V Zambena Pty Ltd [1997] NSWSC 125 (10 April 1997) `KHOURY V ZAMBENA PTY LTD` `2680/96` `Thursday 10 April 1997` `THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION` `YOUNG J` `` `JUDGMENT` `` ``HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs seek an order that a resolution of the creditors of Zambena Pty Ltd ("Zambena"), passed on 6 June 1995 whereby
Zambena resolved to enter into a Deed of Company Arrangement pursuant to s
C of the Corporations Law, be set aside. Alternatively, the plaintiffs seek a declaration that they are not bound by the deed.

The background facts are unusual. Capitol Laundry Pty Ltd ("Capitol") was formerly under the effective control of one Harry Sarkis. Capitol carried on business as a commercial laundry. It borrowed money from Morlend Finance
Corporation (Vic) Pty Ltd ("Morlend") and the plaintiffs guaranteed the obligations of capital in respect of that loan for the benefit of Morlend. The debt was also secured by a charge given by Capitol over all its assets.
Morlend appointed a Mr Lombe as receiver and manager of Capitol's business. Mr
Lombe caused Capitol to sell its business to Zambena by an agreement of July
That agreement included a clause 7.1(3) that completion was "Subject to ... the Purchaser discharging the following real estate mortgages within six calendar months from the date hereof." Those mortgages were mortgages given to Morlend by the plaintiffs. Litigation ensued between (1) Morlend and
Harry Sarkis; and (2) Capitol and Zambena and Giles, J gave judgment in both matters on 13 April 1995. The judgment is 115 pages long and I will not endeavour to quote from it extensively, but on p 106, his Honour came to the conclusion that there was a direct agreement between Mr Harry Sarkis, the guarantors and Zambena, that Zambena would discharge the mortgages. He concluded that Capitol and the plaintiffs were entitled to orders that Zambena discharge the mortgages. Short minutes of order were brought in on 21 April and the Judge made formal orders in accordance with his judgment. These orders were Exhibit PX 02 before me and they include judgment for Capitol against Zambena for $1,704,416.40 and a series of orders that specified mortgages given by the plaintiffs be discharged by Zambena.

On 17 May 1995, John Edward Star was appointed administrator of Zambena. About the same time a statutory demand was served by Capitol upon Zambena seeking payment of the judgment debt of $1,704,416.40 as ordered by Giles, J. This amount was never paid.

On 29 May 1995, the administrator forwarded notices of meetings to various creditors of the company. The plaintiffs say they never received any notices of the meeting.

The notice of meeting gave notice of a proposed resolution that Zambena enter into a Deed of Company Arrangement pursuant to <case> of the Corporations Law whereby Zambena would continue to trade and pay 30% of its after tax net profit for distribution to participating creditors. The report to creditors which accompanied the notice of meeting showed that the company had accumulated losses, but was budgeted to earn a profit in 1996 of $63,612.00.
Contingent liabilities were noted as workers compensation insurance liabilities, a liability for rent and costs orders in the litigation, but there was no mention of any liability to any of the plaintiffs. The litigation was obliquely mentioned in the report, but it was acknowledged in the report that there was a judgment debt to Capitol of $1.4 million and that the total deficiency of assets over liabilities was $3.1 million. However, the debt to
Capitol was included in a schedule of "other unsecured creditors". There was a line in Schedule G Contingent Liabilities "Sarkis Family" "Unknown".

The meeting was to be held on 6 June 1995 at 10 am. On that same day, the administrator approached Cohen, J sitting as the Companies Judge for an order under <case> or directions under <case> of the Corporations Law. Cohen, J ordered, under the latter section, that the administrator would be justified "1. In treating guarantors of the liability of that company to Capitol Laundry Pty Limited ... as bound by a Deed of Company Arrangement which may be entered into by the company pursuant to <case> of the Corporations 
Law;
In permitting those guarantors to vote on the motion to require the company to enter into a Deed of Company 
Arrangement on the basis that the contingent debt of each of those guarantors may be valued at a nominal amount unless a payment under the guarantee has been made." 
In his reasons for judgment published on 13 June, Cohen, J said that "The administrator has suggested a nominal figure of $1 and that seems to be a just estimate in those circumstances." Unfortunately, the administrator did not give Cohen, J the facts on which a decision for advice under <case> of the
Corporations Law could properly be given. Cohen, J was led to believe that the plaintiffs were guarantors of a debt from Zambena owing to Capitol. Of course this was not the situation at all. The guarantors were guarantors of Capitol to Morlend and the securities were given by the guarantors to Morlend and the problem the plaintiffs had was that because Zambena had defaulted, their securities were still held by Morlend and would not be released. Furthermore, the plaintiffs had obtained judgment against Zambena that Zambena cause the mortgages to be released.

No explanation was given to the court as to how Cohen, J was given the wrong facts. In his report to creditors of 29 May the administrator had claimed that records had only recently been obtained from the court in proceedings Morlend v Sarkis and Capitol versus Zambena. Even if this were true, it is just incredible that the administrator did not have access to the directors' records including solicitors' files and briefs to counsel which would have given a full picture of what the real situation was. Again, if the records were available "recently" on 29 May, there was plenty of time to master them before going to the court on 6 June.

A person who obtains advice from the court after giving the court the wrong facts can gain no comfort from it at all: Re Grose <case>; [[1949] SASR 55],60 and see Marley versus Mutual Security Merchant Bank &
Trust Co Ltd <case>; [[1991] 3 All ER 198.] 
The administrator says that he caused his staff to give notices to each of the plaintiffs of the meeting. He did not do this personally and he has no longer any useful records, but he remembers that he and his senior staff took pains to make sure that the plaintiffs were notified of the meeting. However, the first plaintiff swore that he never received any notice of the meeting as did the fourth plaintiff. It seems to me more likely than not that there was some clerical error made and the administrator though intending to notify the plaintiffs did not do so. Mr Malanos was the person mainly concerned with this matter within Mr Star's office. He had a list "in label format" of creditors, the ninth and last page being the list of the plaintiffs and people like
Morlend. It is quite conceivable that in the process of sending out the notices the last page became detached and lost.

Mr Harry Sarkis says that he became aware of the meeting on 5 June because he visited a soap supplier who was a creditor of Zambena and Mr Naylor, the proprietor of the soap supply business, showed him a copy. Mr Sarkis says that he arrived the next day at the meeting and was told by a person whom he understood worked for the administrator, "You are not a creditor of the company. You should not be here." Mr Sarkis replied, "How do you work that out? The company owes me a lot of money and my house is on the line. This meeting wouldn't be on at all except that I took the company to court and won." He says that Mr Star then came over and said, "You can stay, but you can only vote as a creditor with a one dollar debt".

The meeting proceeded and both the representatives of Capitol as well as Mr
Sarkis voted against the resolution to enter into a Deed of Company
Arrangement and for an adjournment of the meeting.

The minutes of the meeting are before the court and there is no challenge to their accuracy. Mr Star took the chair and informed the meeting that, on a liquidation, unsecured creditors were unlikely to receive any return whatsoever, and the secured creditor would receive a shortfall, whereas under the proposed deed, provided the company generated profits in excess of minimum thresholds, 30% of its after tax profit would go to unsecured creditors.

The minutes then read: "The Chairman stated that he had applied to the Court for directions as to the voting of the meeting today as the administration was somewhat complex in the sense that there was a debt owed to Capitol Laundry 
Pty Limited ... , or more correctly stated, there is not at this stage a debt to Capitol Laundry Pty 
Limited but rather an obligation to discharge mortgages of people who have guaranteed the secured creditor of Capitol Laundry Pty Limited being Morlend Finance Corporation (VIC) Pty Ltd and the guarantors being Mr Harry Sarkis and his family. The obligation on the company to discharge those mortgages was not yet a monetary obligation however was likely to be converted to a monetary obligation in the future. Accordingly, the 
Administrator had applied to the Court for directions as to whether it was possible to bind all the parties under the Deed and how same are dealt with for the purpose of voting at this meeting. The decision had been handed down this morning and the Chairman had received an advice as to that decision which he proceeded to read to creditors." 
Two things might be said about this. First of all, although Cohen, J was given the wrong facts, the administrator had no difficulty about defining the right relationships to the meeting the next day, and secondly, the administrator did not correctly put to the meeting that there was a judgment of Giles, J in favour of Capitol for $1.407 million and there was a direct order of costs made against the company in favour of the plaintiffs and Capitol.

The voting at the meeting was that 44 creditors holding debts of $2,035,472.68 voted in favour of the deed and two creditors, namely Capitol and Mr Sarkis, with a value of $1,407,417.40 voted against.

Mr Star has made a calculation as to what would have happened had related creditors been denied a vote. His calculation is that in that event 38 creditors representing $1.143 million would have voted in favour, and two creditors for $1.407 million would have voted against, so that the resolution would have failed.

Two further matters must be mentioned before dealing with the matters put by the solicitor for the administrator. The first is that there was evidence from a Mrs Alhaddad that she was employed as a machine worker in the laundry business of both Capitol, and later Zambena. She says that in May 1995, the manager Tracy Sheehan called a meeting of employees and said, "There is going to be a meeting in the city this afternoon. All of you who are owed money by
Capitol can go to the meeting, but I don't want you to as there is too much work here. However I am going and I can represent you at the meeting." The employees then each signed forms and gave them back to Ms Sheehan. She then said, "There is to be another meeting next week with the same problem and I will need to get new forms signed." Mrs Alhaddad said that a large proportion of the employees at the meeting did not speak or understand English well or at all. Ms Sheehan was not called and Mrs Alhaddad was not cross examined. The inference I can draw from the evidence is that the number of votes in favour of the scheme was enhanced by the manager voting in favour of the scheme because of the rights of employees who may not have understood anything about the proposal. Mr Somerset for Zambena says no such inference should be drawn when only one employee was called, but I think I can and should draw that inference. Mrs Alhaddad denied that she was a creditor of Capitol. However, Mr
Brown, the accountant for Dr Gregg, the controlling director of Zambena, produced some records which showed that she was a creditor for $1,165.88.
However, he inexplicably failed to produce the complete records to the court even though he had been asked to do so. I was not at all impressed with Mr
Brown's oral evidence.

The second point to make is that as a result of the meeting, the commercial relations between the various parties changed dramatically. Prior to the decision of Giles, J, Dr Gregg had claimed that he had bought through Zambena the business of Capitol from its receiver without any obligation to the plaintiffs or Capitol. He and his accountant, Mr Brown, seem to have convinced the administrator that this was the commercial situation. The judgment of
Giles, J shows that the sale agreement provided otherwise, that Dr Gregg sought rectification from Giles, J who refused rectification. Giles, J found that although the directors and shareholders of Zambena were Mr Gamble, a chartered accountant, and Ms Gellett, an employee of Dr Gregg's orthodontic practice, he had no doubt that Dr Gregg was in de facto control of the company. Dr Gregg and Mr Gamble were not accepted by Giles, J as witnesses of truth, nor indeed on most matters was Mr Harry Sarkis.

Giles, J considered that the retention of Mr Harry Sarkis' services was seen as important by the purchasers (ie Zambena) and when Mr Harry Sarkis said he would work for Zambena if it "saved the houses" (meaning the houses of the persons who had guaranteed the capital loan), Zambena agreed to discharge the mortgages owed by Capitol though it may not have intended to keep that agreement. Giles, J found, despite his suspicion about Harry Sarkis' evidence, that there was a direct agreement that Zambena would discharge the mortgages.
Accordingly, after the decision of Giles, J, Dr Gregg and his interests were in the situation where they had been ordered to pay the capital debt to
Morlend and to discharge the mortgages to save the homes of the plaintiffs which had been put up as security for the loan from Morlend to Capitol.
Although Dr Gregg and the administrator seemed to be of the view that the judgment of Giles, J changed something, one only gets this view if one accepts
Dr Gregg's evidence, which Giles, J didn't. Giles, J found that there was a liability on Zambena because of the arrangements which had been made with Mr
Harry Sarkis to keep him in the business after its purchase and to save the houses. As a result of the acceptance of the deed of arrangement, these debts will never be paid save that Capitol will receive some part of the profits of the continued trading. The houses of the plaintiffs have already been sold by
Morlend to partly pay for all the moneys that it lost on its loan to Capitol.
Despite his agreement and despite the loss of the expensive court case before
Giles, J, Dr Gregg is now in control of the business with no liabilities, making profits, and the persons whom he or his company agreed to exonerate, have lost their houses.

The contrary argument to this is that the houses would have been lost in any event. Had there not been any deed, Zambena would have gone into liquidation and it had no assets of any real worth so that no moneys would have been paid to Capitol, Capitol still would have defaulted on the loan to Morlend and the guarantors' houses would have been lost.

The administrator says that in addition to the point I have just recorded, it is extremely difficult for the plaintiffs to succeed in setting aside a deed when they only file a summons 13 months after the meeting. During this 13 month period, if the deed was set aside all the problems referred to in Re
Crawford House Press Pty Ltd [(1995) 17 ACSR 295], would be visited on the administrator without any rights to priority for the debts he incurred. Mr Somerset put that an application to set aside a deed must be made promptly because if it is not, so many other people will be prejudiced. Mr
King of counsel for the plaintiffs, put that there was no blameworthy delay in this case. There was no indication that the plaintiffs knew of what had happened in obtaining the advice from Cohen, J or of the other misrepresentations or defects prior to the commencement of the proceedings.

Mr King put the application as being made under <case> of the Corporations
Law, or alternatively, <case>, or alternatively, <case>, or alternatively, s
D.

Section 600A applies if the court is satisfied that a proposed resolution such as a resolution to approve a deed, would not have been passed had the votes of a particular related creditor or creditors been disregarded and that the passing of the resolution is contrary to the interests of creditors as a whole or is reasonably likely to prejudice the interests of the creditors who voted against the proposed resolution having regard to (A) the benefits resulting to the related creditor, and (B) the nature of the relationship between the related creditor and the company, and (C) any other relevant matters. I have paraphrased the subsection omitting alternatives which do not arise in the instant case. Mr Star's evidence makes it plain that the resolution would not have been passed if the related creditors were disregarded so the question really is whether the resolution was contrary to the interests of a class of creditors as a whole. Mr King says that the class of creditors means the plaintiffs as guarantors of the debts of Capitol.

Mr Somerset points out that in Kantfield Pty Ltd versus Plastamatic (Aust) Pty
Ltd [(1994) 14 ACSR 687], 692, Hayne, J, in the Supreme Court of Victoria, said that "class of creditors" in 600A(1)(c)(i) referred back to class of creditors when used in 600A(1)(a)(ii), that is, a class of creditors summoned to a meeting to consider a scheme of arrangement and so did not mean a distinctive group of creditors. Although other parts of the Plastamatic case have been doubted in subsequent decisions, as far as I am aware, no one has ever doubted this part of the judgment. Accordingly, c(i) cannot assist in the instant case. The next question is whether the passing of the resolution is reasonably likely to prejudice the interest of the creditors who have voted against it to an unreasonable extent.

I cannot find that this is the case because if one analyses the position under the deed and the position under a liquidation, the position of the plaintiffs is not materially different; indeed, it may be that so far as the order for costs is concerned, they obtain more under the deed than they would in a liquidation. If one turns then to the benefits to the related creditors, Mr
Somerset says that as Dr Gregg and the related creditors did not participate under the deed nor were they entitled to any dividend, it cannot be said that they received any unreasonable benefits from the resolution. With respect, I do not believe that <case>(c)(ii)(A) is so confined. A person may receive a collateral advantage as a result of a resolution being passed to enter into a deed such as the release of any liability either under the criminal law or the civil law that might flow if there was a liquidation and there may be other collateral commercial benefits as well. Even, however, accepting that for present purposes, the court has insufficient material to show that there was unreasonable prejudice caused to the creditors or any of them because of such advantage.

After I had reserved my decision, Mr King made further submissions in writing.
He put that although he acknowledged the authority of the Plastamatic case, in the present case the administrator essentially treated the plaintiffs and Mr Harry Sarkis as a separate class of creditors. Thus they were put in a special schedule to the report and were not given notices of the meeting and were the subject of the ruling sought from Cohen, J. I have taken these submissions into account, but would agree with Mr Somerset's further submissions in reply that the term "class of creditors" should only arise under s 600A(1)(c) which in turn is subject to the introductory words as held by
Hayne, J in the Plastamatic case. 
Accordingly, it does not seem to me that <case> can be used to give the plaintiffs what they want.

Mr King relies on <case>, but that is only an empowering section to allow the court to put an end to a deed and does not deal with the specific problems that exist in the instant case. Section 445G permits the court, when there is doubt on a specific ground as to whether the deed was entered into to declare the deed void or not void. There is also a power to vary, but only with the consent of the administrator which has not been given in the instant case.
Section 445D permits the court to terminate a deed if satisfied that there was material information given to the meeting about the company which was false or misleading or that effect could not be given to the deed without injustice, or that it was oppressive to one or more creditors.

I will deal with the application under <case> first.

In Mulvaney versus Rob Wintulich Pty Ltd [(1995) 18 ACSR 384], 385,
Branson, J said that <case> operates in a narrow field and only where there is a specific ground identified for both limbs of the sub-section. There are grounds for attacking the deed, but no particular ground is specified in the application. The grounds relied on by Mr King include - that no proper notice of the meeting was given; that the voting rights of Mr Sarkis were improperly modified by a decision obtained from Cohen, J on a misrepresentation of facts; there was misleading information given to the meeting; and 
Dr Gregg's real interests were not disclosed.

All of those matters should more properly be dealt with under <case> and I will now do so.

Section 439A(3) of the Corporations Law requires the administrator to give written notice of a meeting to as many of the company's creditors as reasonably practicable. This, of itself, shows that the meeting will not be invalid because of the accidental omission to notify a person who might be a creditor. The facts as I have found them are that there was no deliberate intention of the administrator to exclude the plaintiffs, but that the plaintiffs did not in fact get notice of the meeting. In my view, this of itself does not invalidate the meeting.

The other matters raised by Mr King are matters of grave concern. It has always been a worry to those involved in schemes of arrangement that the controllers of the company may pack a creditors' meeting by, for instance, admitting the debts of friends and relatives who may not indeed be creditors at all, so that a meeting is held with the majority favouring the resolution.
Often creditors who see that they are not going to be given much on the liquidation anyhow, either do not attend the meeting, or alternatively, do not speak against it, as a result of which a business is returned to the hands of the controllers freed from all the debts and also free from any liability they may have if the company went into liquidation and was investigated by the regulatory authorities. Accordingly, any suggestion, such as the suggestion made by Mrs Alhaddad that the manager represented employees who did not really know what was going on and voted in their stead in favour of the deed must be looked at very seriously. The evidence in this case would make me think that in fact Mrs Alhaddad was a creditor, and so was entitled to vote, but the circumstances whereby her vote and probably also those of non-English speaking workers at the factory were in fact usurped by the manager is something which led to the situation that one could not guarantee that had the workers known what was going on, they would have agreed to the scheme at all. However, at the meeting their votes were in favour of the scheme.

There is then the unexplained failure to give Cohen, J the real facts. Mr
Somerset tried to put forward an explanation, but all he could do was to say that shortage of time must have meant that some inadequate statement was made in the evidence. Again, this is an extremely regrettable matter and one that should not have occurred.

Again, Mr King says that it was wrong for the administrator to approach the court without notice. Certainly had notice been given to the people who were affected the misstatement made to Cohen, J would have been corrected. However, as Judges have remarked time and time again, the time limits set down by the legislature on administrators under Part 5.3A of the Corporations Law are often unrealistically tight, so that it was not unexpected that the application would be made without respondents. However, this case proves once again that even if time is very tight, there must be at least some attempt to get in contact with the proper contradictor so that the court has before it the proper argument. It is very difficult when a Judge is confronted at very short notice with statements by one side and arguments by one side with no proper contradictor to give valid advice, even though that advice may affect the rights and pockets of hundreds or thousands of people. In the instant case, despite the learned Judge's impeccable summary of the law, the administrator derived no benefit at all from the advice he had gotten on false facts.

There are also misstatements made to the meeting. One was that Giles, J's judgment changed the situation. A person might have believed that if they had believed Dr Gregg, but Giles, J didn't and the chances of there being any successful appeal on the learned Judge's assessment of the witnesses was close to nil. The real position thus was that there had been an agreement by Zambena to pay out these mortgages which was a commercial decision made in order to retain the services of Mr Harry Sarkis which otherwise would not have been able to be retained. To suggest to the meeting that somehow or other Giles,
J's judgment had changed what was the already existing position, was a statement made by accepting people whom a Supreme Court Judge after a full hearing had rejected. Furthermore, there is some substance in Mr King's suggestion that Dr Gregg's interests and the fact that he owned both the businesses involved was not put to the creditors.

Furthermore, the plaintiffs were never treated as creditors in their own right despite the order for costs that was made, but were relegated to contingent creditors whose debt was valued at $1.

I start my examination by accepting the very grave defects that there were in the meeting. The question is, however, whether I should exercise my power under <case> to set aside the deed.

There have been quite a few reported instances in recent years where the court has been asked to exercise its powers under <case> of the Corporations Law. I have reread all the reported cases for the purpose of these reasons, but there does not appear to me to be any value in going through them one by one as they all depend on different facts and circumstances. However, the following general principles appear to me to emerge:-
The court has a complete discretion which is to be exercised having regard both to the interest of the creditors as a whole and to the public interest:
Emanuele versus Australian Securities Commission <case>; [(1995) 63 FCR 54], 69.
Delay in making an application is a relevant matter to take into account as to whether the discretion will be exercised: Molit (No 55) Pty Ltd versus Lam
Soon Australia Pty Ltd [(1996) 19 ACSR 160], 171 (although this decision was reversed on appeal [(1996) 22 ACSR 169], this part of the judgment was not affected). It is to be noted that in the Lam Soon case the resolution was passed on 3 March 1995, the deed was executed on 23
March 1995 and the proceedings were commenced on 7 April 1995 (22 ACSR at ), yet Branson, J considered that, at least under <case>, there had been delay.
The court will not be surprised to see every so often that the details given to creditors at meetings are not as well presented as they should be, and indeed, may be biased towards the directors' view. This will not necessarily be sufficient in itself to set aside the deed; see eg Hagenvale
Pty Ltd versus Depela Pty Ltd [(1995) 17 ACSR 139.]
The court will act where the deed is to effect a purpose which cannot be effected under the law such as altering the priority of the Commissioner of
Taxation without his consent: Federal Commissioner of Taxation versus All Suburbs
Car Repairs Pty Ltd <case>; [(1994) 14 ACSR 753.]
The court may act if the deed may have some unfair consequential effect on the rights of creditors or a section of them: Winterton Constructions Pty
Ltd versus MA Coleman Joinery Co Pty Ltd (1996) 20 ACSR 671.
The deed may be set aside if there has been some unconscionable conduct such as making side deals with certain creditors: Wood versus Laser Holdings Ltd [(1996) 14 ACLC 801.]
The mere fact that a creditor is prejudiced by the operation of the deed will not be sufficient because the mere existence of the deed procedure usually means that some creditors will gain something and some creditors will lose something out of the rearrangement: Lam Soon case on appeal [(1996) ACSR 169.] 
The only case I need examine in detail is Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v
Pddam Pty Ltd [(1996) 19 ACSR 498.] Heerey, J had to deal with a situation where there had been a substantial breach of the requirements for a proper creditors' meeting, but all creditors other than the plaintiff had voted in favour of the deed. The meeting was held on 22 June , the deed signed on 29 June 1994. It is not clear from the report when the proceedings commenced: there appear to have been winding up proceedings before the court and probably some application was made in those proceedings.
The case appears to have taken eight days to hear and then judgment was reserved for a further four months. The Judge considered that there had been substantial failures in and about the meeting, but he found that the company had no assets and there would be no benefit to the plaintiff if the deed were set aside, but a considerable loss to former employees and he also took into account the fact that no creditor other than the applicant opposed the deed.
Accordingly, the application was dismissed. Nothing was said about the time in which the application was made or the injustice that might occur if a decision was made to upset a deed 22 months after it was executed.

As I have said, some of the things that happened at the meeting should not have happened, and the seeking of the advice of Cohen, J without giving his
Honour proper facts again should not have happened. However, the two facts which make me consider I should not give any relief in my discretion are that so much time elapsed before the making of the application; and (b) I cannot really see how the plaintiffs could be any better off even if I did make the order setting aside the deed.

As to the first matter, the delay was about 13 months. In these cases, people's positions can be affected by activity under a deed in much less than one month, let alone 13 months. There must be a point in time when the company and its creditors can consider that as there has been no challenge filed, the deed is to be the final wash-up of their commercial relations. As I have said, in the Lam Soon case even a month was thought to be too long a time. A month appears to be about the maximum time for entertaining such an application. It should be noted that in one of the most recent cases in this court, M & G Oyster Supplies Pty Ltd versus Nonchalont Pty Ltd [(1995) 19
ACSR 27](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281995%29%2019%20ACSR%2027 "View LawCiteRecord" ), the meeting was on 30 November 1995, the proceedings were amended to seek an order to set aside the deed on 4 December and final judgment was given on December 1995. Even in Woods versus Laser Holdings, the deed was executed on March 1995 and the initiating process was filed on 19 April.

The second decisive point is that the plaintiffs would not be any better off if the deed was set aside. The company would almost certainly go into liquidation. Under a liquidation there would be no money to pay Capitol, and accordingly, no money to exonerate the mortgages given by the plaintiffs so they would still be in the same position. They might have the satisfaction of seeing that Dr Gregg was not able to carry on "their" business without paying the price, but that is an insufficient reason for setting aside the deed. The court must be sure that if it does so, it is doing so in the interests of creditors generally or in the public interest.

Accordingly, the proceedings must be dismissed.

As to costs, the plaintiffs have failed. However, Heerey, J said in the
Pddam case at p 513, "The application therefore will be dismissed. But in view of the deficiencies which I have established I think it was reasonable for the applicant to bring this application. Accordingly there will be no order as to costs." I believe these words are fairly close to the situation in the present case and accordingly I make no order as to costs.
 * * * 
