

Regina versus Arthur Stanley Smith Matter No 70082/96 [1998] NSWSC 371 (10
September 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 September 1998 
REGINA versus ARTHUR STANLEY SMITH /96 September 1998 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
SENTENCE 
HER HONOUR: On 13 July the prisoner pleaded not guilty to an indictment containing a single charge of murder. Yesterday afternoon the jury returned a verdict of guilty on that charge. Notwithstanding that he had vigorously defended the charge through a trial that occupied eight weeks, and notwithstanding more than one invitation, the prisoner, through senior counsel, declined to present any evidence or any submissions relevant to the sentence that should be imposed. I am therefore left without any assistance on matters of mitigation (save those which the Crown very fairly and properly drew to my attention), without any assistance from the prisoner as to the facts on which the sentence should be based, and without any assistance from the prisoner as to relevant precedent, authority, or other legal guidance. 
In determining the facts relevant to sentence, I remain conscious of the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal in Regina versus Isaacs [(1997) 41
NSWLR 374.] Any facts found against the prisoner must be established beyond reasonable doubt.

The Crown case consisted essentially of the evidence of an alleged accomplice, who gave his evidence under the pseudonym Green; and evidence of conversations between the prisoner and another prisoner, who gave his evidence under the pseudonym Brown, who shared a cell with the prisoner in 1994, and who secretly tape recorded their conversations; in these conversations the prisoner on more than one occasion made clear admissions of his guilt of the murder of Jones and of other occasions made statements that, taken together with the other evidence, tended to incriminate him. The two separate accounts, that is that given by Green and that given by the prisoner to Brown, were very largely consistent with one another, and consistent with facts not then known, but discovered later, such as the location of the murder site. The prisoner simply denied the account given by Green. He sought to answer Green's evidence by alleging an elaborate, but ultimately circular, conspiracy, in which Green was said to have been paid a large sum of money by a convicted drug dealer falsely to inculpate the prisoner. The prisoner admitted the conversations with Brown, but claimed that he made the various statements he did in the knowledge that
Brown was passing them on to police, and for the purpose of causing police to follow a false trail in which they would ultimately make fools of themselves.

There were some contradictions inherent in the case the prisoner sought to make. One of these concerned his evidence, on the one hand, that the version of the murder that he related to Brown was substantially drawn from information Green had given him, many years before, about the murder of Jones, but which he did not then believe; and on the other hand the argument put on his behalf to the jury, that the description of the murder and its location given by Green in the trial largely accorded with what the prisoner was telling Brown because Green was receiving information through police or others about what the prisoner was saying to Brown in the cells. Apart from this contradiction, it was of great significance that both accounts, that is, the account given by Green, and the account given by the prisoner to Brown, had very considerable consistency with objective facts as they later emerged. It is unnecessary here to detail those consistencies.

Another contradiction in the prisoner's case concerned his assertion that he deliberately told Brown various things about the murder in the knowledge that
Brown was feeding this information back to police. The tape recordings of the conversations contain a number of suggestions to Brown made by the prisoner as to what Brown should do or say in the event that police sought information from him about anything the prisoner might have said in the cell, and at least one explicit threat to Brown concerning his future if he did reveal anything of their conversations.

In the circumstances, consistently with the jury's verdict, and also independently of that verdict, I have no hesitation in accepting beyond reasonable doubt that the murder occurred essentially as recounted by Green.
Those facts may be stated briefly.

On the evening of 15 July 1983 at the direction of the prisoner, Green drove the prisoner and the victim, Harvey Francois Jones, in a van to Botany beach.
There they alighted from the van and walked to the beach and Green, again at the direction of the prisoner, separated for a short time from his companions.
During this interval the prisoner produced a gun and shot Jones in the chest.
Forensic evidence, and the evidence of Green, establish beyond reasonable doubt that the prisoner fired at least two shots. He then told Green to remove any jewellery that Jones was wearing, or removed that jewellery himself, and instructed Green to dig a hole and bury the body. This Green did using a shovel that was nearby.

I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the prisoner had made the necessary arrangements for the shovel to be available, and, accordingly, (from this and other evidence) that the murder was premeditated and carefully planned. There was abundant evidence that the prisoner was hostile to Jones and that Jones had become a nuisance to him. Much of that evidence emerges from the prisoner's own writings, some of which were in evidence.

I am further satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that immediately prior to his death Jones was carrying a substantial sum of money. Precisely how much money that was I am unable to say, but it was, at a minimum, several thousand dollars. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he either gave that money to the prisoner before his death or that the prisoner took it from Jones' body after shooting him.

These are the objective facts relevant to sentence. The killing was premeditated, cold blooded and deliberate. Jones' body was not discovered until 26 March 1995. The prisoner took steps to conceal his crime, firstly by telephoning Jones' mother on the evening of the murder, and complaining that
Jones had failed to keep an appointment with him earlier that evening, and, later, in conversations with police, by speaking of Jones as though he believed he was still alive.

I turn now to what might be called the subjective features. The prisoner was born on 27 November 1944. He is now fifty-three years of age. He has a lengthy criminal record, which commenced in 1959, when he was fifteen years of age. It contains numerous entries for dishonesty and discloses that he was committed to children's institutions on a number of occasions and later sentenced to imprisonment. The most significant entry, for present purposes, is a conviction for murder in October 1987, in respect of which he was sentenced to imprisonment for life. That sentence was imposed under <case> of The [Crimes
Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) before its repeal in 1989 and the amendment of [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s19a.html) in the same year. Accordingly the prisoner is eligible to make application, under s 13A of The [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/), for re- determination of that life sentence. No details of the facts or circumstances of that conviction for murder were placed before me.

The prisoner's criminal record, as I have stated it, alone disentitles the prisoner to any claim for leniency. However, his criminal history is immeasurably worse than appears in his record. He himself gave evidence, in detail, of a long history of armed robberies in which he participated. He said that he had been involved over several years in distributing heroin on a large scale. He gave evidence of a sustained pattern, over many years, of paying bribes to corrupt police in order to avoid the consequences of his criminality. He admitted to having given false evidence in two judicial proceedings, one of which was for the purpose of concealing a murder. Further,
I am satisfied that one of a number of reasons for the killing was the need to protect and preserve his corrupt relations with some police, into which Jones was intruding. All of this emerged from the prisoner's own evidence and I accept beyond reasonable doubt as essentially true.

However, the prisoner is not today to be sentenced for his past criminality.
Except insofar as his criminal associations with corrupt police provided one motive for the killing, these matters are relevant only in the sense that they negate any possibility that an otherwise appropriate sentence might be mitigated.

There was some evidence in the proceedings that the prisoner had, since his arrest and conviction on other charges some years ago, rendered assistance to the authorities in the apprehension and conviction of other criminals, and in disclosing what he knows of the criminal milieu. He claimed to have given evidence and/or information to the National Crime Authority, the Independent
Commission against Corruption, the State Crime Commission and the Royal
Commission into the NSW Police Service. He claimed that his information had been material in the apprehension, arrest and charge of one person who was a major drug dealer, and who ultimately pleaded guilty to such a charge. It would have been open to the prisoner to put before me evidence from the relevant authorities as to the extent the accuracy and the value of any information he had so provided. He declined to do so. In the circumstances, his evidence being unconfirmed by any reliable source, I am unable to take into account that he has rendered any accurate or useful assistance to the authorities.

Another matter on which the prisoner may have sought to find some leniency is his present medical condition. It was perfectly apparent during the entire trial that he is in a parlous state of health. I was told that he suffers from
Parkinson's disease, which he said was diagnosed in 1980. There were a number of occasions when the trial could not proceed because he was unfit to pay proper attention to the proceedings, or, indeed, to remain in the court. No medical evidence was put before me and I have no information as to the prognosis. I take into account the prisoner's medical condition insofar as I have been able to observe it but having regard to the limitation on the information available to me.

There is no question of remorse or contrition. The prisoner maintains his innocence and declined to participate in the sentencing proceedings. His plea of not guilty is not to be treated as an aggravating feature, but the absence of contrition is a balance against such mitigating features as I have noted.
 [S 19A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s19a.html) of The [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) provides that a person who commits the crime of murder is liable to penal servitude for life. A person so sentenced is to serve that sentence for the term of his natural life. A court is, nevertheless, entitled, where it sees fit, to impose a lesser sentence. As with maximum penalties in respect of other charges, imposition of the maximum sentence is reserved for the most serious cases. The
Crown has argued that the present represents a most serious case. No argument was put to the contrary.

I am fully conscious that, in making the radical amendments to sentencing for murder that it did in 1989, the legislature was signalling its intention that the sentence of life imprisonment should be reserved for offences of the very worst kind. It was not envisaged that life imprisonment would, from that date, be the norm for conviction for murder, but rather that it would be exceptional case that attracted that penalty. In that sense the maximum penalty available for murder is, like the maximum penalty available for other charges, to be used sparingly.

This killing was committed for at least three reasons; one, for monetary gain; two, to protect and preserve the prisoner's own extensive criminal empire; and three because, Jones had become a nuisance and a pest to the prisoner. It was carefully planned and executed with precision. Another person was involved, upon whose silence the prisoner could rely because of a regime of fear engendered, no doubt, at least in part, by the very killing that that person had witnessed.

It is possible to envisage worse murders than this. That, however, is not the test to be applied in determining whether this killing falls into the worst category of cases. The circumstances I have outlined, individually and together, in my view place the killing into the worst category of case, that for which the maximum penalty of penal servitude for life is reserved.

Objectively, the circumstances of this murder are such as to justify, if not call for, the imposition of the maximum penalty. This was, as I have said, a cold blooded and deliberate killing from which the prisoner made significant financial gain. That, however, is not the end of the question. I must have regard to such subjective matters relating to the prisoner as emerged from the evidence in the trial.

The question that has exercised my mind is whether, particularly having regard to the prisoner's health, there is any warrant for reducing the sentence that otherwise would be appropriate. Notwithstanding the absence of any medical evidence as to the prisoner's prognosis, I do not overlook the possibility that his life expectancy is limited. In one sense, this may render the present question academic. Even if I were not to impose a life sentence, it would be necessary, in recognition of the objective gravity of the crime and the prisoner's history, to impose a very lengthy minimum term. I have, however, given careful consideration to whether any sentence less than penal servitude for life would be adequate. I have concluded that this prisoner should entertain no prospect, however theoretical that prospect may be, of regaining his liberty. There is nothing in his history and nothing in the circumstances of the offence which would warrant any reduction from the maximum penalty available. I propose to impose that sentence.

Arthur Stanley Smith, you are sentenced to penal servitude for life.
 * * * 
