

Regina versus Harvey Matter No Cca 60287/97 [1998] NSWSC 95 (9 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 April 1998 
REGINA versus WARREN CRAIG HARVEY /97 April 1998 
Wood CJ at CL, Smart J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and Sentence 
FILE NO/S: 60287/97 
DELIVERED: Thursday, 9 April 1998 
HEARING DATE: Friday, 27 February 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Warren Craig HARVEY 
JUDGMENT OF: WOOD, SMART AND SPERLING JJ 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: S R Norrish QC 
Respondent: R D Cogswell SC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: T A Murphy 
Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - DIRECTIONS TO JURY - DELAY IN COMPLAINT - UNSAFE AND UNSATISFACTORY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO. OF PAGES: 20 
HEADNOTE 
H was convicted of sexual offences against the daughter of his de facto wife.
The complainant first mentioned H's alleged criminal conduct towards her to her mother over five years after H and the complainant's mother had ceased living together.

Held: - A direction was required that, in evaluating the evidence of the complainant and in determining whether to believe her, the jury could take into account her failure to make a complaint at the earliest reasonable opportunity as reducing her credibility. The directions given tended to reinforce her credibility and lacked the balance required.
 - The absence of the directions as to the effect of the delay on the complainant's credibility and the difficulty of the appellant defending himself adequately as a consequence meant that the appellant did not receive a fair trial and that there has been a miscarriage.
 - Due to numerous factors including inconsistencies in the complainant's evidence, inconsistencies in the complainant's mother's evidence, inconsistencies between their evidence and statements previously made to officers of the Department of Youth and Community Services, failures to mention matters of some consequence to the Police and the lengthy delay in complaint, the verdicts are unsafe and unsatisfactory.
 - There was reasonable doubt as to the appellant's guilt. There is a reasonable possibility that the appellant is innocent and has been wrongly convicted.

ORDERS 
Appeal allowed.
Convictions quashed.
Enter a verdict of acquittal on each count.

JUDGMENT 
WOOD, CJ at CL: I agree with the reasons and orders proposed by Smart J. 
SMART J: Warren Craig Harvey appeals against his conviction on six counts of indecent assault of a child under 16 years and under authority and four counts of sexual intercourse with a child under 10 years (licking her vagina). He received a concurrent minimum term of 3 years and an additional term of 2 years on each of the sexual intercourse charges and concurrent fixed terms of 2 years on each of the other charges. Mr Harvey also seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentences.

There was no issue at the trial about the complainant being under the age of years nor that she was under the appellant's authority. The issue was whether the appellant did the acts alleged. She was born on 25 March 1982.

The appellant and the complainant's mother formed an association in late 1986 and commenced to live together in early 1987 with her two children by a previous marriage, namely, the complainant and her older brother. At one stage they lived in a flat. During 1987 the family moved around and lived at a number of places and in about three states.

According to the complainant's mother the family moved to caravan 1 at Anchor
Inn Caravan Park, Chinderah about May/June 1987. She agreed that she was unsure of the date and that it could have been July or August 1987. They may have moved out for varying periods or temporarily. The appellant was absent fruit picking in Mildura in the summer of 1987/1988. It was estimated that he was away for about 4 to 6 weeks probably from December 1987. In the early months of 1988 he also spent some time at Fingal. The mother said that he returned to the family briefly after the fruit picking. In all, he was away for about three months. It was hard to be precise about the dates with the lapse of time.

The charges arose out of six incidents. The first, second and third incidents were said to have occurred in caravan 1 while the "family" lived there. The three incidents gave rise to counts 1 to 7. The caravan had an annex. The first incident was alleged to have occurred in the latter half of 1987 or perhaps the first half of 1988. The Indictment alleges that it occurred between 1 June 1987 and 31 December 1989. The complainant said that she, her mother, her brother and the appellant were living at the Anchor Inn Caravan
Park. The complainant said that she was aroused from her sleep on feeling the appellant's hand under her touching her vagina. This constituted the indecent assault, the subject of the first count. She said that he picked her up, walked out of the annex to the caravan and sat on a couch with her beside him, the TV being on. She stood up in front of him, he took down her underwear and pulled her nightie over her head. He lifted her upside down. He licked her vagina for five minutes or so. She said that he was naked. She could see his penis and felt scared. She said that she had to go to the toilet, he told her to wait and continued to lick her vagina. He stopped and took her to the toilet. The licking of the vagina constituted the second count of sexual intercourse with a child under the age of ten. She said that he took her to the toilet, sat her on the toilet seat, made her lean back and that a discharge from his penis came onto her chest. That is the subject of the third count of indecent assault.

She asserted that the second incident occurred four or five nights later. She woke up on the appellant's lap on a couch in the annex. He felt her vagina - this constituted the indecent assault, the subject of the fourth count. He got up, lifted her upside down, took her clothes off and licked her vagina. That is the fifth count of sexual intercourse with a child under the age of ten years.

The complainant alleged that there was a third incident some four or five days later. She was asleep in the double bed in the annex with her brother. She woke up to find the appellant's hand touching her on the vagina. That was the subject of the 6th count of indecent assault. She stated that he then undressed her, took off her pants and nightie, lifted her upside down and licked her vagina again. She felt his tongue. That constituted the seventh count of sexual intercourse.

The three incidents were alleged to have occurred within a fortnight or, allowing for memory and date problems, within a relatively short period of time. At one stage the complainant seemed to suggest that the incidents may have taken place in a later year.

Allowing for various gaps while they were away and the appellant's absences, one of which he said lasted 4-5 months in late 1988 early 1989 the family lived at caravan 1 for a period of a little over 2 years. The mother thought that they stayed there for about 2 to 3 months after the death of her husband (from whom she was separated) on 21 August 1989. They then moved to caravan 2 in Anchor Inn Caravan Park. The mother was pregnant to the appellant, their child being born on 14 January 1990. After a few months the four of them moved into a house. About April 1990 the relationship between the mother and the appellant came to an end.

The Indictment alleges that the incidents the subject of counts 8, 9 and 10 occurred between 21 August 1989 and 30 April 1990, the complainant contending those incidents occurred while she was living at caravan 2. In caravan 2 there was a bucket for the children to use as a toilet in the night. An area was screened according to the complainant and her mother but not according to the appellant and his brother.

The first incident at caravan 2 was the subject of the eighth count of indecent assault. The complainant said that one night at caravan 2 she was awoken by the appellant. She sat on the couch and the appellant felt her vagina with his fingers. She said that she wanted to go to the toilet. The appellant went with her to the bucket located inside the annex separated by a bamboo screen from the sleeping area. As she learnt over the bucket, her mother asked "What are you doing" and the appellant replied "Taking L to the toilet." 
The complainant stated that on another night in caravan 2, being the second incident there, she was taken by the appellant into the lounge room. He undressed her, turned her upside down and licked her vagina. This was the subject of the 9th count of sexual intercourse.

The third incident and the subject of the 10th count of indecent assault occurred as the family were driving home to caravan 2. She alleged that she wanted to go to the toilet. The appellant stopped the car on the side of the road and took her behind a large hedge type plant. She went to the toilet. She went to pull up her underpants and he told her not to do that. He placed his arms around her and felt her vagina. He wiggled his fingers around and after a couple of minutes he or she pulled up her underpants.

After the appellant and the mother separated, the complainant only saw the appellant once prior to the latter part of 1995 and that was in a family setting in the presence of other people.

The Crown case depended on the complainant. The mother gave limited supporting evidence. She said that the appellant sometimes took the complainant to the toilet. She recalled that whilst living in caravan 2 she had woken up one night and found the appellant together with the complainant. The mother asked what was going on and was told by the appellant that he was taking the complainant to the toilet. The mother recalled that one day in late 1989 outside the Coolangatta Club the appellant remarked in blunt language the he would like to have intercourse with the complainant.

The mother said that in 1987 she was contacted by the Department of Youth and
Community Services about some drawings of the complainant in her school depicting a figure with an erect penis having something coming out from the end of it. The mother said that she told the appellant about it and he said "Don't take her back to the Community Services people, they're going to accuse everyone." The mother explained that the complainant had a problem with her genital area.

It appears from the reports of 11 and 16 November 1987 of the District Officer of the Department of Youth and Community Services that the complainant was a sad girl who did not interact well with other children. Her teacher was concerned about her, thought that all was not well but could not put her finger on exactly what was wrong.

To the District Officer the complainant described the appellant as "a bit nice" and stated that he did not play with her. He did not touch her apart from on the arm but he did say rude words to her. Her mother and the appellant exchanged rude words. She had seen her mother and the appellant in bed together and could describe his penis in the erect and "slack" state. She saw the appellant's penis when he was in bed with her mother. The complainant painted a picture of some neglect of her by her mother. The complainant said that she would like to spend more time with her mother.

On 16 November 1987 the District Officer interviewed the complainant and her mother, principally the latter. The mother appeared to be very strongly attached to the appellant, following him from Brisbane to Melbourne. The mother stated that she had told her daughter that her father did not care about her or want to see her any more. This would have been a blow to the child. The officer counselled the mother about this. The mother stated that a lot of people had mentioned that her daughter was "odd" and different but that was because they did not know her as well as the family.

The mother raised the matter of the complainant about a year previously making a series of drawings of naked bodies with the penis attached. She had stopped doing this but then had produced another of these drawings about a month prior to the interview. The complainant was referred to a psychologist. Her detailed notes are in evidence. They relate to consultations on 20, 30 November and 8
December 1987. The mother told the psychologist that she was worried that something might have happened to her daughter when she was small. She had gone back over all the possibilities and wondered about the time her daughter had spent with a distant male relative called Ernie. The complainant did not attend her appointment in January 1988. In March/April the complainant came for a further consultation. Apparently, there was a question of stealing at school and withdrawn behaviour.

The appellant denied all the offences. He referred to the lengthy periods when he was away from the family. He estimated that the family lived in caravan 2 for but 3 or 4 months. He denied that he had ever taken the complainant to the toilet and the allegation that he told the complainant's mother not to take the child back to Youth and Community Services on the basis that "they'll start accusing everyone, your dad, me". He said that he had gone to Mildura after problems that the complainant had developed at school and that when he lived with the complainant's family he had "some problems" with both his de facto's children. The appellant, who took the family on a number of driving trips, recalled an occasion where he had taken the family on a driving trip and stopped the vehicle to allow the complainant to go to the toilet. However, he insisted that he had not taken her to the toilet behind a bush as alleged.

Appeal Ground 1 - The judge failed to properly or adequately direct or warn the jury in relation to the delayed "complaint" of the complainant.

The complainant first mentioned the appellant's alleged criminal conduct towards her on about 21 August 1995 and this was to her mother. She made a statement later that month in which she outlined her allegations and handed that statement (or a copy) to the Queensland Police. She stated that the reason why she did not tell her mother previously about the appellant's behaviour was because she thought that the appellant might hurt her (the complainant) or other persons. It would be easy to understand why the complainant said nothing to her mother while the appellant was living with them but over 5 years had elapsed between the appellant leaving the family and the complainant telling her mother. This was not so easy to understand.

Counsel for the accused addressed the jury about the delay and submitted that this impacted substantially upon the complainant's credit. He also submitted that there was no acceptable reason for the delay.

The judge gave this direction at SU 6-7: "Now, there are also some special warnings that I should give you as to the case and some special directions. One matter relates to the lack of or sorry, the delayed complaint and of course it is now submitted that that is inconsistent with what the complainant says happened. The Crimes Act, which I have referred to earlier, as defining what sexual intercourse is, also says this, that I am required to warn you that absence of complaint or delay in complaining does not necessarily indicate that the allegation that the offence was committed was false. I am also required to inform you that there may be good reason why a victim of sexual assault my hesitate in making or may refrain from making a complaint about the assault.

Well, you may think that that is all just consistent with common sense, that there can be good reason for there being no complaint. The question for you to consider in this case is what you make of it in the context of the facts here." 
This is the conventional direction given pursuant to <case> of the Crimes
Act. Later at SU 24-25 the judge summarised the Crown's contentions that the complainant was reliable and truthful and that the delayed complaint was understandable in a young child who had been subjected to a traumatising sequence of events which she did not know how to handle. The judge at SU 25 summarised the defence argument that the complainant was not so reliable, so accurate and so honest that the jury could be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the alleged events occurred. At SU 26 the judge said: "It is pointed out that the complainant says that there was delay because of her fear but she had nothing to fear from the accused for a period of five years; she had no contact with him." 
The judge then summarised further arguments on behalf of the appellant at some length.

The appellant complains that the judge at no stage told the jury that in evaluating the evidence of the complainant and in determining whether to believe her they could take into account her failure to make a complaint at the earliest opportunity as reducing her credibility. This was important when the first offence was alleged to have taken place over 7 1/2 years prior to the complaint to the mother and the last offence over 5 years prior to such complaint and the complainant's mother and the appellant had separated over 5 years prior to that time.

In Regina v. DJK CCA, unreported, 8 October 1997, Hunt CJ at CL said: "The judge did not direct the jury that, in evaluating the evidence of the complainant and in determining whether to believe her, they could take into account her failure to make a complaint at the earliest reasonable opportunity as reducing her credibility: Kilby v. The Queen <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 460] at 465-466, 469; Regina versus Zorad [[1979] 2 NSWLR 764] at 772.
Such a direction remains appropriate notwithstanding the provisions of <case> (R v. Davies [(1985) 3 NSWLR 276] at 277 - ) as the High Court has recently re-affirmed (Crofts v. The Queen <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427] at 435-436, 449-452). This court had said that such a direction should as a general rule continue to be given (R v. Davies at ), at least where the delay may be of significance in the particular case to the credit of the complainant (R v. Murray [(1987) 11 NSWLR 12] at 18).
The High Court - accepting that such a direction is appropriate - has now said more specifically that the duty to give such a direction arises only where the peculiar facts of the case or the conduct of the trial suggests the need for a warning to restore the balance of fairness; it has also said that the warning to be given must not suggest a sterotyped view that complainants in sexual assault cases are unreliable or that the delay in making a complaint is invariably a sign that the complainant's evidence is false (Crofts v. The
Queen at 451). If it did, of course, it would conflict with the <case> direction." 
In Crofts v. The Queen at 450 the joint judgment of Toohey, Gaudron, Gummow & Kirby JJ pointed out that where the delay is objectively substantial, being a matter of years in that case, the trial judge was required to give a direction which is meaningful and adequate to enable the jury to make a reasonable evaluation of the matter. At 451 the joint judgment stated that the purpose of the Victorian equivalent of <case> was to reform not remove the balance of jury instruction as to delay in complaint. It was not intended "to convert complainants in sexual misconduct cases into an especially trustworthy class of witnesses." 
The judges continued: "In restoring the balance, the intention of the legislature was not to "sterilise complainants from critical comment where the particular facts of the case, and the justice of the circumstances suggested that the judge should put such comments before the jury for their consideration (Longman v. The
Queen <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 79] at 86.) The overriding duty of the trial judge remains to ensure that the accused secures a fair trial." 
In the present case, a direction was required that, in evaluating the evidence of the complainant and in determining whether to believe her, the jury could take into account her failure to make a complaint at the earliest reasonable opportunity as reducing her credibility. The directions given by the judge in the present case tended to reinforce her credibility. They lacked the balance for which the authorities call.

Further, the judge did not point out that the delay in complaint made it difficult for the appellant to defend himself and obtain substantial evidence in rebuttal. This was important in the present case as the evidence of the complainant varied as to the dates on which the offences were committed.

No point was taken at the trial as to the deficiencies in the directions. The judge was not asked to give the further directions which would have restored the balance. In the present case the absence of the directions as to the effect of the delay on the complainant's credibility and the difficulty of the appellant defending himself adequately as a consequence meant that the appellant did not receive a fair trial and that there has been a miscarriage.
At least there must be an order for a new trial.

Appeal Ground 2 - The verdicts of guilty are unsafe and unsatisfactory.

This was a case of the evidence of the complainant as against the evidence of the appellant. The mother's evidence added little to that of the complainant.
Nor did the appellant's evidence that he had stopped the car on one occasion while they were out on a drive so she could go to the toilet in the bush off the side of the road.

Normally, where a case turns on the resolution of the conflict of the evidence of the complainant and the accused and there are no glaring weaknesses in her evidence and no other powerful features and the jury has seen and heard both of them give evidence, the verdict cannot be classed as unsafe and unsatisfactory. Frequently, with young complainants where the events happened many years previously there are significant discrepancies in the evidence.
These require careful appraisal. In the end, everything depends on the particular circumstances of the individual case.

The following salient points emerge from the evidence.

In her evidence in chief the complainant said that the first three incidents happened when she was 5, at caravan 1. In cross examination she stated that the incidents could have occurred a few months after the four of them moved into caravan 1. She said that the offences happened before the end of 1987. Later, she said that some of the offences could have occurred in
She said that it was not the truth when she told the District Officer in
November 1987 that the appellant did not touch her. She did not feel that a stranger had a right to know such matters. That answer must have been given with hindsight. It is not the answer which a 5 year old girl would give. She was unable to remember that the only negative comment which she made about the appellant to the psychologist on 20 November 1987 was that she saw him hit her mother and tripping over and hurting her.

In the statement which she prepared and handed to the police in late
August 1995 she had written that the first incident occurred while her mother was pregnant with Shannon. This would have been in 1989. In evidence, the complainant said that she was not sure if her mother was pregnant at the time of the first incident. In re-examination she said that it was possible that the incidents happened when her mother was pregnant. A few questions later she said that the incidents occurred while seeing the psychologist. That was in
November - December 1987 or possibly March 1988 but the latter is less likely.

In the statement which she prepared the complainant referred to four incidents in caravan 1. She gave evidence in chief of 3 incidents. She said that there could have been other times but she could not remember the details.
In a statement made to the police about 21 September 1995 she suggested that the incidents started on a regular basis when she was about 6 years old and took place over a period of 3 years.

In a subsequent statement made to the police some time before the trial she said in respect of the second incident at caravan 2 (count 9) that she could not remember what happened after the incident and that she could not even remember going back to bed. In her evidence she had said that after the incident the appellant dressed her and that she then went back to bed. She said that she could have been thinking of another incident.

The complainant agreed that she did not like the appellant.

The evidence of the complainant's mother as to the appellant's absence from her and the children was marked by her not being able to be reasonably sure as to the dates. It seemed probable that the appellant was away for most of the period between December 1987 and March 1998. That is what she told the
District Officer (T45/46 of 22 May 1997). See also the appellant's evidence.

The evidence of the complainant's mother had several unsatisfactory features. She tried to step around what she had told the District Officer of the Department of Youth and Community Services. In November 1987 she told the officer that the drawings by the complainant had been done "a year or so ago".
In her evidence she said that they were done while at Tandarra Flats at
Kingscliff when the complainant was 5 1/2 to 5 3/4 years old. She said that she had not seen any pictures drawn while at the caravan park. The mother said that that she had given the officer a round figure. It could have been 6 months ago. Then she said that the appellant probably told her to say that the complainant had done the drawings a year or so before. He had alarmed her by saying that Community Service would take the children off people if that service thought that there was anything happening to the children. She agreed that she did not tell the police about this.

The mother was unable to explain why she had told the District Officer that the complainant had stopped doing the drawings when the family had moved from Banora Point Caravan Park in late 1986. The appellant did not join the family at that caravan park but joined them about a month after they moved into the Tandarra flats. At Banora Point Caravan Park she had left the children in the care of a distant male relative who is now dead. The mother did not recall telling the District Officer that she had told the complainant that her father did not care about her. The mother said that she would never say that. She agreed that she may have told the psychologist that she (the mother) was concerned that something might have happened to the complainant when she was small.

The mother said that the child's first nightmares were in Melbourne in after she had left the flats. Then the mother said that the nightmares started in the flats. She did not recall telling the psychologist that the complainant "had on occasions had nightmares, the last being several months ago in Melbourne" but agreed that she had possibly done so.

The mother agreed that she did not mention in any of her statements to the police about looking out and seeing the complainant at the bucket and speaking to the appellant. This was alleged to have happened in the first incident at caravan 2. This was the only time that she remembered the appellant taking the complainant to the bucket.

The written reports of the District Officer and the psychologist and the notes which they made at the time in November 1987 do not sit readily with the mother's evidence. Her evidence taken as a whole and carefully read reveals a tendency to load her evidence against the appellant incorrectly.

The mother contended that she was with Allanah Jelliman when the appellant allegedly expressed, in coarse terms, his desire to have intercourse with the complainant. That lady was interviewed by the police but she was unable to assist.

The complainant's older brother who was present during the whole of the period was not called to give evidence 
The lengthy delay in complaining.

There were other matters on which counsel for the appellant relied but in my opinion they were matters of minor detail and readily explained by the lapse of time or related to issues on the periphery.

In a case where the primary contest is between the complainant's evidence and that of the appellant and there is a subsidiary contest between the mother's evidence and that of the appellant the contemporaneous written notes of the
District Officer and the psychologist are of considerable importance. There was a statement by the complainant that although the appellant used rude words, he did not touch her. In about December 1987 the appellant went away fruit picking in Mildura and he seemed to be away for most of the next three to four months. The complainant at one stage shifted the incidents forward to although she had originally said that they occurred in late 1987 and possibly 1988. It became apparent that there were problems about this period due to the appellant's absences. It is not easy to meet a case where the dates of the alleged offences shift significantly. While hearing and seeing the witnesses is an advantage, this is not a case where that is all important. The difficulties in accepting the Crown case arise out of the November 1987 documents of the District Officer and the psychologist and the failures to mention matters of some consequence. To these matters must be added the delay in complaint. It was over five years after the appellant left the mother and the complainant that the latter made her allegations.

I am persuaded that the verdicts are unsafe and unsatisfactory. I have a reasonable doubt and so should the jury. There is a reasonable possibility that the appellant is innocent and has been wrongly convicted.

I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed.
Convictions quashed.
Enter a verdict of acquittal on each count.

SPERLING J: I also agree with the reasons and orders proposed by Smart J. * * * 
