

Regina versus Scott Matter No Cca 60203/97 [1998] NSWSC 758 (29 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
REGINA versus MARK ANTHONY SCOTT 
CCA 60203/97 April 1998 
McInerney J, Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY, J: I will ask Greg James, J. to give the first judgment in this matter. 
GREG JAMES, J: Application has been made for leave to appeal in respect of the sentences imposed by his Honour Judge Twigg, QC. sitting in the District Court of New South Wales at Parramatta. 
On 22 April 1997, his Honour sentenced the applicant in respect of two charges, the first, pursuant to s.97 of the Crimes Act - robbery when armed with an offensive weapon; and the second pursuant, to s.145A of that Act - steal a motor vehicle. On the first count the sentence was for five years and four months comprising a minimum term of four years penal servitude and an additional term of 16 months. On the second count a fixed term of 18 months was imposed. The sentences commenced on their passing. His Honour found no special circumstances. The applicant had pleaded guilty before his Honour having adhered to pleas of guilty before the magistrate.

The maximum penalties for the offences are penal servitude for 20 years for the first offence and penal servitude for five years for the second.

As to the facts, his Honour held that:- "The circumstances of the offence are that at about 3.00 am on the morning of
Saturday 7 September 1996, there were two people at the Mobil Service Station at Wahroonga, a trainee and a console operator, when the offender came in and produced what they believed was a sawn-off double barrel shotgun. On the evidence, it is clear to me that that is what the offender wanted them to believe. He got from them a sum of $365 in cash. He entered those premises wearing clothing, including a baseball cap and carrying a black bag and protruding from that black bag were two lengths of pipe taped together and they were protruding to give the impression, by them being taped together, that it may well have been a sawn-off shotgun. The offender demanded money from those two and got it in bank notes. He left the service station and was running to his vehicle when two students gave chase. They tried to grab him from the driver's seat before he drove off. He drove from the scene but, as is emphasised by the advocate appearing for the offender, he gave himself up to police within a few days. He told them, at the time of this record of interview, which is after he had seen Mr. Nib, his present advocate, he told police that he drove his vehicle along Fox Valley Road, threw the bag containing the baseball cap, his shirt, containing the cash and the double iron bars on the side of the roadway. He said that he went back afterwards and found only the double iron bars. No money has been recovered. Compensation is offered for the $365 but that is offered some time in the future, without any precision about that offer.

It is clear to me that the two persons were very much in fear of what might happen to them - an understandable fear when faced with a person with this appearance." 
During the sentencing proceedings an issue arose as to whether the applicant had made certain statements to the victims and pointed the double iron bars at them. His Honour was concerned to resolve this issue and said:- "The statements indicated that they were clearly terrified. One alleged that the offender said to them, 'You call the police, I'll blow your head off'.
That is Steven Guyer. The other Salim Hakim, the console operator, says in his statement, that it was said, when he was quite scared, 'If you call the police
I will blow your head off'. My attention is drawn to the record of interview where, when presented with that allegation, the offender answered:- 'I didn't intend to do anything wrong It wasn't premeditated. It was just something that was on the spur of the moment. That evening I was at work. I'd spoken to my girlfriend. She was upset about financial support. She said she was leaving. I left work, drove up the coast. We had an argument about financial support, about debts, about certain things that had gone missing and
I was upset. I grabbed a bit of pipe I'd made up for her protection and drove down to Sydney.' 
That is the answer to question 25. Further, the answers to questions 32 and 33 are as follows, that he said he was scared, shaking and nervous and he walked to the service station. He had clearly taken the vehicle, as the circumstances show, not from the sale persons for the purpose of testing but for the purpose of perhaps using it for this offence. He did return it to the sale yard where he had got it quickly.

At question 110 and answer, when the allegations were particularly put about those allegations to which I earlier referred, he says, 'I was in that much of a state I didn't know what I was doing, okay'. He says that he panicked, 'I scared the shit out of them. I totally apologise'.
 ...

There can be no doubt that these victims were in great fear of what might happen to them, indeed fear of their lives, as they indicate and I have no doubt in my mind that the appearance of the items protruding from the black bag may well have given the impression that it was a sawn-off shotgun as they thought. I have certainly no doubt in my mind that that is what the offender intended." 
Subsequently, his Honour said:- "I take into account the co-operation given by Mr. Scott in the record of interview, albeit it raised a matter of conflict, which I have resolved, in relation to the situation regarding the two pieces of pipe." 
I am unable to conclude from this that his Honour was affirmatively satisfied or satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant had made the statements alleged and I feel that one can conclude affirmatively that his
Honour did not conclude that the applicant had actually pointed the two lengths of pipe. Nonetheless, there can be no quarrel with the conclusion that the victims were terrified for their lives and that that is what the offender intended. However, having said that, regard does have to be taken of the fact that the offender was not armed with an actual shotgun, for what it is worth.

His Honour had regard to the plea of guilty and the consequent saving of the cost to the community and trauma to the victims. He had regard to Mr. Scott's co-operation and his entry into the ERISP even though it appeared to his
Honour inevitable that bearing in mind the clear identification and other circumstances, the applicant would have been convicted. His Honour certainly had regard to the circumstances under which the applicant gave himself up to police.

His Honour clearly had regard to the applicant's family and subjective circumstances but was of the view that the circumstances of the offence were "quite horrendous", saying:- "It is a matter of importance in the community that offences of this kind, where money is obtained for whatever purpose using methods such as this are horrific. There must be a general deterrence to those who do this kind of offence that it will be met with severe penalty." 
It is submitted on the applicant's behalf that the features of the offence place it towards the lower end of the scale of criminality of offences of this category in that the offender was not in fact armed with a firearm and did not use gratuitous violence. Had he done so or been so armed, of course, it may well be that there would have been additional charges. He did, however, ensure that his victims thought he was so armed and the effect he must have realised was to put them in fear that violence would be used. Therefore I do not accept this submission and see no error in his Honour's approach.

Indeed, it appears from the sentencing statistics from the Judicial Commission of New South Wales with which we have been provided by counsel for the applicant, that the sentence falls generally within the mid-range rather than at one or other end of the scale. The decisions of Regina v. Davies (CCA, unreported 1 December 1995) and Regina v. Watterson (Ducker, DCJ.
unreported 23 November 1993) to which we were referred by the applicant's counsel are not comparable and of no real assistance.

It was further submitted that his Honour erred in failing to find special circumstances so as to vary the statutory proportion established by [s.5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). In my view, this criticism is not made out. True it was that there was evidence of co-operation with authorities, lack of a significant prior record and financial and emotional pressure on the applicant at the time of the commission of these offences and it was open to conclude that he had acted foolishly, impulsively and under great emotional anguish. Nonetheless, this court sits to correct error of law and does not sit to review the factual findings or discretionary decisions of sentencing judges unless they are out of accord with the law. His Honour, the trial judge, looked at those and other matters and was of the view that there were no special circumstances justifying a variation from the statutory proportion. I am unable to conclude that his Honour was in error in that regard and indeed his Honour appears to have had regard to all the relevant material before him. I am unable to detect any error in his Honour's overall approach or in the conclusions to which he came.

It is conceded by the submissions for the Crown that the sentence was at the higher end of the range. It is to be accepted that the sentence was a severe one. That was no doubt because of his Honour's appreciation of the objective circumstances of the offence and its effect on the victims as quite horrendous. That is a conclusion with which it is not open to this court to disagree. Whilst the applicant was not in fact armed with a shotgun, nonetheless, his use of the pipes in this way effected all the harm that a shotgun would have effected unless it had been used to shoot the victims or physically batter them.

In these circumstances, in my view, the application for leave to appeal should be upheld since there has been full argument, but the appeal dismissed.

McINERNEY, J: I agree with the orders proposed by Greg James, J. for the reasons he has advanced. The orders of the court, therefore, will be as proposed by Greg James, J. * * * 
