

Krupowicz and Anor versus Consumer, Trader and Tenancy Tribunal and Anor [2003]
NSWSC 1159 (27 November 2003) 
Last Updated: 8 December 2003 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Krupowicz & Anor versus Consumer, Trader & Tenancy Tribunal &
Anor <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law Division 
Administrative Law List  
FILE NUMBER(S): 30008 of 2003  
HEARING DATE{S): 27 November 2003  
JUDGMENT DATE: 27/11/2003  
PARTIES: 
Christian Krupowicz and David Krupowicz (Plaintiffs)  v 
Consumer, Trader & Tenancy Tribunal (First Defendant) 
Ryan Berryman (Second Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Master Malpass  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Consumer, Trader & Tenancy Tribunal  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): MV 02/70842  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: K Ross, Member  
COUNSEL: 
Mr B Slowgrove (Plaintiffs) 
N/A (First Defendant) 
N/A (Second Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
John J. Puleo & Company (Plaintiffs) 
I V Knight - Crown Solicitor- Submitting Appearance (First Defendant) 
N/A (Second Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
Appeal  gratuitous bailment  negligence must be proved  error in respect of a question of law.  
ACTS CITED:  [Suitors' Fund Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).  
DECISION: 
I set aside the order made by the Tribunal on 5 September 2002. The proceedings are remitted back to the Tribunal for the determination of the question of fault according to law. I order that the second defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs of these proceedings and if the second defendant is so entitled, he is to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW LIST  
Master Malpass  
Thursday 27 November 2003  of 2003 Christian Krupowicz & Anor versus Consumer, Trader & Tenancy Tribunal & Anor  
JUDGMENT  MASTER: The second defendant was the owner of a Holden Commodore motor vehicle. He left the vehicle at the first plaintiff's car yard so that work could be done on it by the second plaintiff. The work was to be performed gratuitously. Whilst the vehicle was at the car yard it was stolen.  As the question of liability could not be resolved between the parties, the second defendant brought an application before the Consumer, Trader and
Tenancy Tribunal (the Tribunal) claiming damages. It went to hearing and the parties were unrepresented. At the end of the hearing, the Tribunal made an order that the plaintiffs pay to the second defendant the sum of $7,500 (this being the Tribunal's assessment of the value of the vehicle).  The plaintiffs now bring an appeal to this Court. The appeal lies only where the Tribunal has made a decision in respect of a question of law.  The appeal was set down for and heard on 27 November 2003. Although the defendant had earlier appeared in the proceedings and had notice of the hearing date, he did not appear at the hearing.  Subsequent to the commencement of the proceedings, reasons for decision were delivered by the Tribunal. This has led to further amendment of the originating process. The plaintiffs now proceed on the Further Amended
Summons.  The Further Amended Summons propounds one ground of appeal only and it is in the following terms:-  "1. The Tribunal erred in law in that it found the Plaintiff liable to the
Defendant as a bailee without making Any (sic) finding that the loss of the
Defendants (sic) vehicle was as a result of the Plaintiff's fault."  The reasons for decision disclose that the Tribunal determined that the plaintiffs were liable as bailees. Unfortunately, in addressing the question of liability, the Tribunal misdirected itself as to what should be determined.
It appears to have proceeded on the basis that strict liability arose in the circumstances of this case.  Whilst there may be dispute on the question of onus (a number of Australian cases place the onus of proving negligence upon the bailor where the safekeeping is gratuitous), the law as it presently stands requires proof of negligence before damages can be recovered in a claim founded on bailment.  The failure of the Tribunal to properly address the question of liability leaves the court with no option but to set aside the decision and to remit the matter back to the Tribunal for determination of the question of fault according to law.  It is unfortunate that this has to be done, as the amount in issue in this case is only in the modest sum of $7,500.  I will make these orders:- 
I set aside the order made by the Tribunal on 5 September 2002. 
The proceedings are remitted back to the Tribunal for the determination of the question of fault according to law.  (Mr Slowgrove applied for costs)  I will make an order that the second defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs of these proceedings and if the second defendant is so entitled, he is to have a certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act, 1951.  
LAST UPDATED: 05/12/2003 * * * 
