

Helman versus Byron Shire Council and Anor Nos. Ca 40314/94; Lec 10314/93
Environment Law [1995] NSWSC 53 (27 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY ACJ(1), PRIESTLEY JA(2) AND HANDLEY JA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 7 and October 1994 #DATE 4:8:1995 #ADD 27:9:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:     T S Hale 
Solicitors for the Appellant:
Dunhill Madden Butler 
Counsel for the 1st Respondent:   B Walker SC (Byron Shire Council) 
Solicitors for the 1st
Respondent: Henningham and Ellis-Jones 
Counsel for the 2nd Respondent:   N A Hemmings QC (Solr) (Batson Sand) 
Solicitors for the 2nd Respondent: Allen Allen and Hemsley
ORDER
Appeal allowed with costs
JUDGE1
KIRBY ACJ I agree with Handley JA in the terms of the concurrence by
Priestley JA.
JUDGE2
PRIESTLEY JA I agree with what Handley JA says concerning the invalidity of the development application in question in this appeal and also with his reasons concerning this court's jurisdiction in appeals in Class proceedings. I therefore agree that the appeal should be allowed.
This conclusion makes it unnecessary to decide the ground of appeal concerning the validity of Condition 53. I express no opinion about this ground.
I agree with the orders proposed by Handley JA.
JUDGE3
HANDLEY JA This appeal relates to what is known as the Batson Sand and Gravel
Quarry which is situated about five kilometres south of Byron Bay. There has been a quarry on the subject land for over fifty years and interests associated with the Batson family have been operating it for about twenty five years. It was common ground that the second respondent, Batson Sand and Gravel
Pty Ltd (the Company) had existing use rights over an area of some twenty hectares of the much larger site it owns.
Presumably because of the restrictions on existing use rights introduced by amendments to ss 107 and 109 of the Environmental
Planning and Assessment
Act (the Act) in 1985 the company sought development consent from the Council for an extension of the quarry.
This was designated development as defined by s 158 of the Act and Sch 3 of the Regulation. Accordingly, any development application had to be accompanied by an environmental impact statement (EIS).
Section 77(3)(d). The trial judge (Pearlman J) found that the proposed development was likely to significantly affect the environment of endangered fauna so that <case>(d1) applied and the development application should also have been accompanied by a fauna impact statement (FIS) in accordance with s
D of the National Parks and
Wildlife Act (Wildlife Act).
On 16 November 1992 the company lodged with the Council a development application which was accompanied by an EIS but not an FIS. The Council, as required by <case> of the Act and cl 37 of the Regulation gave written notice of the application to adjoining owners and others and caused prescribed notices to be exhibited on the land and advertised in a local newspaper. The application and the documents which accompanied it were available for public inspection until 24 December 1992. The Council received submissions objecting to the proposal and 247 submissions in support. The Company belatedly submitted an FIS in May 1993 and the Council determined the application on 28 May by granting consent subject to conditions.
Objectors, including the present appellant, appealed to the Land and
Environment Court (the Land Court) in its Class 1 jurisdiction. Following a lengthy hearing Pearlman
J dismissed the appeal and granted consent subject to additional conditions. The appellant appealed to this Court. Under <case> of the Land and Environment Court Act (the Court Act) the appeal is confined to questions of law. The appellant relied on two arguments.
The first was that the development application was invalid because of failures to comply with what were said to be mandatory requirements of the Act, the Regulation, and the Wildlife Act. The second challenged the validity of Condition 53 which required the Company to obtain a licence under <case> of the Wildlife Act to take or kill endangered fauna before carrying out any clearing or quarrying in part of the area. The appellant contended that this involved impermissible delegation to the Director General of National Parks and
Wildlife and the consent was not final.
 
VALIDITY OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION
Section 92D(1)(c) of the Wildlife Act provides that an FIS shall include "to the fullest extent reasonably practicable" a full description of the relevant fauna and their habitat, an assessment of the regional and statewide distribution of the species and the habitat to be affected, the effect of the development on the fauna and details of the measures to be taken to ameliorate those effects. The person preparing the FIS must consult with the Director
General (s 92D(2) and (3)). A separate FIS is not required where the relevant matters are covered by the EIS (s 92D(4)).
Although the EIS dealt to some extent with the effect of the development on fauna Pearlman J found that it did not sufficiently address the matters in s 921)(1) and there had been no consultation with the Director General.
Accordingly a separate FIS was required.
The respondents did not challenge these findings. It follows that the development application lodged on 16
November 1992 did not then comply with <case>(d1). This resulted in a further breach because the documents required by <case> to be available for public inspection did not include a proper FIS.
An FIS was lodged in May 1993 but the Council did not give fresh notices to adjoining owners and others and the application was not readvertised. The application could not be accompanied by the FIS until the latter was lodged, but thereafter it was accompanied by the FIS. See Wielgus versus Removal Review
Authority [(1994) 1 NZLR 73] at 77, 79. The same result is reached if one construes <case> as requiring substantial rather than strict compliance. This was achieved when the FIS was lodged but the Council's obligation in <case> to have all the documents accompanying the development application available for public inspection was never performed.
In their appeal to the Land Court the objectors challenged the consent on the merits and on legal grounds based on the late lodgment of the FIS.
Pearlman J reviewed the relevant provisions of the Act and Regulation and said:- "The purpose of those sections is to provide a method by which the public may know of the proposed development and its possible impacts in order that they may then, if they wish, be involved ... in the assessment of the development application".

She then asked herself the following question:- "...Did the failure to exhibit the FIS preclude the involvement and participation of the public in the assessment of the development application in conformity with the purpose of the relevant sections?" 
She answered her own question as follows:- "What was exhibited was the EIS and the October survey.
Both documents detailed the quarrying operations which were proposed, the habitats which were intended to be cleared, the potential impact on fauna species, and the proposals for mitigating that impact. It is true that the information was not complete and a more comprehensive examination ... was made in the FIS but that did not mean that the potential fauna impact problems were unable to be perceived ... What sections , 86 and 87 require is that the public be alerted to the impacts of the proposed development, and so long as the development application and the documents which did in fact accompany it are adequate for that purpose and are on exhibition, the object of those provisions is met." 
She concluded:- "All the foregoing is not to say that breach or noncompliance of the provisions of section 77(3)(d1) ... is of no effect at all.
If the circumstances exist for the operation of subsection ... then in the absence of a fauna impact statement at the time of determination of the development application, the
Council could not, nor could the Court on appeal, determine the development application because the development application would not have been accompanied by the required document. That is not the case here because the FIS was ultimately submitted.
The issue here relates only to the absence of the FIS at the time of exhibition. My conclusion is that the failure to exhibit the FIS does not preclude the Court from granting consent to the development application."
Mr Hale, counsel for the appellant, submitted that the findings of the trial judge established that the company failed to comply with <case>(d1) before May 1993 and this denied the public the opportunity Parliament intended it should have of inspecting an adequate FIS. These breaches invalidated the consent and since the Land Court was in the same position as the Council it was bound to refuse the application and it should have allowed the appeal. Mr
Walker SC for the Council submitted that the breaches were not such as to require the Council or the Land Court to refuse the application and his submissions were adopted by Mr Hemmings QC for the Company.
The existence of the breaches was not an issue in this Court but the parties were in dispute as to the legal consequences of those breaches
Parliament having failed to state clearly what those consequences should be.
One recalls, yet again, the statement by Mahoney JA in Hatton versus Beaumont [(1977) 2 NSWLR 211] at 225:- "This is another of the cases in which the Court is asked to determine the effect of non-compliance with a statutory provision that something be done ... The function of the Court in such a case as this is to give effect to the intention of the Legislature. This it may do without difficulty where it appears ... that the legislature ... expressed an intention upon the effect to be given to the particular provision. But in most cases, ... , such an intention is not expressed and the Court's task is, by the application of the appropriate principles, to divine or impute that intention ... and this frequently leads, not merely to litigation, but also to uncertainty in the day to day operation of the legislation.
The administration of the law would be facilitated if, in the formulating of legislation, attention were given as a matter of routine to this question. If this were done ... the cases of the present kind would be, if not avoided, at least greatly reduced in number."
Express provisions of the kind suggested by Mahoney JA, would reduce the cost of and improve access to justice without increased expenditure from
Government. The suggestion therefore demands serious consideration. In the present case however the Court must seek an answer by applying the principles in Tasker versus Fulwood [(1978) 1 NSWLR 20] at 23-24:- "The problem arises whenever a judicial or executive act, or the act of a litigant, is subjected by statute to the prior performance of conditions. The numerous decisions in this field have been recently reviewed by this Court ... From these sources we take the following propositions:(1) The problem is to be solved in the process of construing the relevant statute. ... (2) The task of construction is to determine whether the legislature intended that a failure to comply with the stipulated requirement would invalidate the act done, or whether the validity of the act would be preserved ...
The only true guide to the statutory intention is to be found in the language of the relevant provision and the scope and object of the whole statute ... (4) The intention being sought is the effect on the validity of the act in question, having regard to the nature of the precondition, its place in the legislative scheme and the extent of the failure to observe its requirement ... (5) It can mislead if one substitutes for the question thus posed an investigation as to whether the statute is mandatory or directory..."
The effect of non-compliance with statutory conditions governing the lodgment of development applications and the grant of development consent has arisen with some frequency under other legislation but this Court's first task must be to examine the scheme of the Act.
A person may not carry out a development which requires consent unless that consent has been obtained and is in force. (Section 76(2)). Section 77 deals with development applications. Subsection (1) provides that such an application in relation to private land "may be made only by" the owner or a person with his written consent subject to the limited exception in subs (2A).
Parliament has prohibited other persons from making such applications and any consent thus obtained would probably be void.
Section 77(3) defines the form and content of such applications. Its requirements are mandatory in terms, being governed by "shall" in each case.
However the content of these requirements vary. They include matters of form ("(b) ... made in the prescribed form") and cost ((e) a fee determined by the consent authority or any prescribed fee). They also include matters of substance especially in (d) and (d1) which require certain applications to "be accompanied by" an EIS or FIS. Clause 34 of the Regulation requires an
EIS to contain full descriptions of the designated development and the existing environment and to identify and analyse the likely environmental interactions between them and the consequences of carrying out the proposed development. It must also include the measures to be taken to protect the environment, an assessment of their likely effectiveness and other matters. In Guthega
Development versus The
Minister [(1986) 7 NSWLR 353] at 361 (which dealt with cl (2) of the Regulation in the same terms) Samuels JA, who delivered the principal judgment, approved a statement by Hutley JA in Prineas versus Forestry
Commission [(1984) 53 LGRA 160] at 163 that:- "It would not be too much to say that it is almost impossible to conceive an EIS which literally complies with everything which the regulations require."
In Prineas at first instance [(1983) 49 LGRA 402] at 417 Cripps J (whose decision was affirmed) said:- "The fact that the environmental impact statement does not cover every topic and explore every avenue advocated by experts does not necessarily invalidate it or require a finding that it does not substantially comply with the statute and the regulations."
A FIS must comply with the requirements of <case> of the Wildlife Act "to the fullest extent reasonably practicable". This imposes a high but not absolute standard. This language may be contrasted with similar language in s (1) of the Act which requires a determining authority to examine and take into account "to the fullest extent possible" all matters affecting or likely to affect the environment by reason of a proposed activity. This obligation was considered in Guthega Development versus The Minister at 366 where Samuels JA said:- "... it can scarcely be read literally and without some modification of its terms... some element of reasonableness must be introduced and may be achieved by reading the section as if the word 'reasonably' was inserted before 'possible'.
This is the conclusion to which Cripps
J came and ... he read the expression 'to the fullest extent possible' as incorporating 'a concept of reasonableness and practicability.
The purpose of section 111 is to impose upon determining authorities an obligation to consider to the fullest extent reasonably practicable matters likely to affect the environment'".
It can be seen that Parliament adopted this very language when enacting s
D.
Mr Walker submitted that the construction of <case>(d1) contended for by the appellant would invalidate most, if not all, development applications governed by that requirement because it would not be possible in practice for a developer to comply with the standards required by <case>. This argument should be rejected. The requirements for an FIS are similar to those for an
EIS and were adopted by Parliament in 1991 when the proper approach to the requirements for an EIS was well established. The Courts have insisted on substantial compliance without being over technical or astute to find fault.
The authorities and the relevant principles were reviewed by Pearlman J in
Schaffer versus Hawkesbury CC [(1992) 77 LGRA 21] at 278-280 the same approach should be adopted to an FIS.
A consent authority receiving an FIS must forward it to the Director of National Parks and Wildlife (s 77(4A)). Where a planning instrument provides that a development consent shall not be granted without the concurrence of a Minister or public authority, <case> requires the consent authority to forward the application to the
Minister etc and notify the applicant. Sections 79, 80, 81 and 82 deal with the action to be taken by the
Minister etc. and the consent authority in relation to such an application.
Section 83 then provides that a consent granted without the concurrence of or the conditions required by the Minister etc. "shall be void". This gives legislative effect to the views of this Court in Parramatta City Council v
Palmyra Freeholds Pty Ltd [(1974) 2 NSWLR 83] in preference to contrary dicta by
Jacobs J in AG versus BP (Australia) Ltd (1964) 83 WN (Pt 1) 80 at 87.
Section 84(1) defines the duty of a consent authority which receives an application in relation to designated development. It "shall" forthwith give notice to adjoining owners and affected public authorities and cause notice of the application to be exhibited on the land and advertised.
Subsection (4) provides that the notices required by subs (1) "shall" be in or to the effect of any prescribed form and "shall" contain such matters as may be prescribed.
These are contained in cll 37-39 of the Regulation which are mandatory in form ("shall").
 .
Section 85 enables a consent authority to dispense with compliance with s where a development application is amended or replaced by a new application differing in either case in only "minor respects". The power is a narrow one which is only available where the consent authority has previously "complied in all respects with" s84. Section86 enables any person within the notification period to inspect the application and accompanying documents, and the consent authority is clearly under a duty to permit such inspection.
Section 87(1) enables any person within the notified period to make a written submission to the consent authority. Any submission so lodged "shall" be sent as soon as practicable after the notified period to the Secretary of the Department. Section 88 then provides:- "(1) A consent authority shall not determine a development application to carry out designated development otherwise than in accordance with this section.

Subject to section 86A a consent authority may determine the application: where no objection has been made under section 87(1) - at any time after the expiration of the period specified in a notice under section 84(1); or where objection has been taken under section 87(1) at any time after the expiration of the period of 21 days following the date upon which a copy of that objection is forwarded to the Secretary in accordance with section 87(3)."
The section operates in conjunction with <case> which requires a consent authority in determining a development application to take into consideration a large number of matters including (s 90(1)(p)) any submission under <case>.
Parliament evidently considered that this duty was so important that a consent authority should not proceed to a decision until the time for lodgment of objections had expired and twenty one days had elapsed after their transmission to the Secretary. These provisions demonstrate the importance
Parliament attached to the objection procedure.
Section 92 requires the consent authority to notify the applicant of its determination and <case> requires notification to objectors. Clause 45 of the
Regulation requires such notifications to be given on the same day. Under <case> a dissatisfied objector may appeal to the Court within twenty eight days after notification of the determination was given. If the consent authority gives public notice of the granting of the consent in the manner prescribed (cl 50A of the Regulation) the validity of the consent cannot be questioned except in legal proceedings commenced in the Court within three months.
What conclusion should the Court draw from this scheme as to the consequences which Parliament intended should result from such noncompliance with <case>(d1) and <case> as occurred in the present case?
The leading case in this area is undoubtedly Scurr versus Brisbane City
Council <case>; [(1973) 133 CLR 242.] The High Court was there concerned with <case> of the City of Brisbane Town [Planning Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/pa100/) which provided that the Council "before deciding" a relevant application "shall" cause public notice of the application to be given setting out "particulars of the application" and stating that objections could be lodged with the Council within a specified time.
Stephen J, who delivered the principal judgment, considered (251-2) that the purpose of the legislation was to ensure that the Council had the benefit of the views of objectors before making a decision on the application, that objectors were entitled to make their views known, and if dissatisfied to appeal. Achievement of these purposes depended on the giving of public notice of relevant applications.
At 255-6 he said:- "The legislation employs mandatory language, makes the giving of public notice a condition precedent to any consideration of the application by the Council and ... is wholly dependant upon the giving of public notice for the attainment of its objects ... I have found the particulars ... to be inadequate ... the Council here proceeded to a determination of the application without either strict or substantial compliance with relevant statutory requirements and the formation of its proposal to grant the application has thereby been vitiated."
His Honour proceeded to consider the effect of non-compliance (there being no express provision dealing with this matter) and concluded that the
Local Government Court should have rejected the application. In my opinion
Scurr's Case is directly relevant, although the defects in this case are different. [Section 77](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/pa100/s77.html) imposes on applicants, in mandatory terms, obligations in the nature of conditions precedent which are directed to achieving the purposes identified by Stephen J. [Section 88](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/pa100/s88.html) prohibits a consent authority from determining a development application until after the close of the period for objections. As in
Scurr's Case compliance with the statutory requirements is "a condition precedent to any consideration of the application by the
Council".
In the result, late lodgment of the FIS by-passed the statutory requirement that such a document be available for inspection and consideration by the public. Compliance would have enabled relevant and better informed objections to be lodged. While the decision maker had the benefit of an appropriate FIS, the objectors had no opportunity to consider it or make submissions based on it. In the result there has been something akin to a denial of natural justice.
[Section 83](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/pa100/s83.html) is an express provision for the avoidance of consents where a necessary concurrence has not been obtained. Mr Walker argued that the absence of a similar provision indicated that Parliament did not intend that non-compliance with the present requirements should avoid a consent. The High
Court has advised caution in adopting such an approach to the construction of legislation. See Houssein v Under Secretary <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 88] at 215. The situation covered by [s 83](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/pa100/s83.html) required clarification because of the existing case law but there was no such requirement in relation to the sections relevant in this case. Indeed the Act appears to have been framed in order to attract the principles in Scurr's
Case.
Decisions since have confirmed the construction adopted in Scurr's Case.
See Pioneer Concrete versus Brisbane CC (1980) 145 CLR 485 at 506, 514, 517 and especially at 518 where Wilson J said:- "Substantial compliance with the Act and ordinances is a condition precedent to jurisdiction to grant consent in relation to - the contents of the application ... ; the advertisement of the application ... ; and service of notice of the application on abutting owners ... The imperative underlying my conclusion ... is the importance of a faithful adherence to the provisions of the Act and ordinances so that the interests of all parties concerned ... are protected."
Decisions on the Act have established that substantial compliance with provisions of this nature including the obligation to prepare or submit an
EIS, is a condition of validity. See Prineas versus Forestry Commission [(1983) 49
LGRA 402] at 360; Penrith CC versus Waste Management Authority [(1990) 71
LGRA 376]; and Curac versus Shoalhaven CC [(1993) 81 LGERA 124.]
The judge held that substantial compliance had been achieved and invalidity was avoided because the FIS was available to the
Council before it made its decision, and all objections had been fully considered on their merits in the appeal.
An appeal in which the merits can be fully considered may cure an invalidity in the primary decision. See Twist versus Randwick MC <case>; [(1976) 136 CLR 106] However the powers of the Land Court on a merits appeal are in general no greater than those of the consent authority.
See Sydney
CC versus Claude Neon [(1989) 15 NSWLR 724] Compare Parramatta CC versus Palmyra Freeholds [(1974) 2
NSWLR 83] at 87-89. A limited exception in <case> of the Court Act which overruled the effect of Palmyra Freeholds is not presently relevant.
Accordingly where a consent authority is bound to refuse consent because of non-compliance with essential preconditions, the Land
Court on a merits appeal will be in no better position. This was the view taken in Scurr and Pioneer
Concrete. See Scurr at 257-8.
In Pioneer Concrete at 518 Wilson J said:- "One may never know whether a proper application, and adequate advertisements would have alerted other citizens who would have exercised their right to participate as objectors."
The same view has been taken in the Land Court. See Curac versus Shoalhaven CC at 129-130. The problem in these cases is that the Court has no means of knowing whether other objectors may have come forward and other objections been raised had there been proper compliance with the statutory requirements.
In my opinion, therefore, the appeal did not cure the invalidities in this case and did not achieve substantial compliance with <case>(d1) and <case>.
 
THE COURTS JURISDICTION IN CLASS 1 PROCEEDINGS
Mr Hemmings in support of the Company's notice of contention submitted that objections going to the validity of a consent cannot be raised in a merits appeal in Class 1 proceedings but only in Class 4 proceedings.
There is no express provision in the Court Act to this effect but he relied on the wide discretion to grant or withhold relief in Class 4 proceedings conferred by <case> and the comments by McHugh JA on that section in F Hannan Pty Ltd versus Electricity Commission (No 3) [(1985) 66 LGRA 306] especially at 326-328. Compare however Curac versus Shoalhaven CC [(1993) 81 LGERA ] at 129-130.
In my opinion the existence of the Land Court's jurisdiction in Class 4 proceedings provides no justification for confining the scope of its jurisdiction in Class 1 proceedings. A party by appealing against a decision does not ordinarily lose his rights to challenge the validity of that decision in the appeal. See Calvin versus Carr <case>; [(1980) AC 574] In both Scurr and Pioneer Concrete objections to the validity of decisions by the Council were successfully raised in merit appeals.
The Land Court has frequently entertained legal objections in merit appeals. See Schaffer versus Hawkesbury CC [(1992) 77 LGRA 21] and Leatch versus National Parks [(1993) 81
LGERA 270.] Section 104A of the Act purports to exclude challenges to the validity of consents except in proceedings commenced within three months of public notification. It does not restrict such challenges to Class 4 proceedings. In my opinion, therefore, Mr Hemmings' objection should be overruled.
It is unfortunate that the time devoted by the judge to considering the merits of the case will thus have been wasted but this was also the result in
Scurr and Pioneer Concrete. The Court could minimise such consequences in future by determining any legal objections at a preliminary hearing and proceeding with the hearing on the merits later, after the time for an application for leave to appeal under <case> of the Court Act has expired or such an application has been heard.
 
VALIDITY
OF CONDITION 53
The other challenge to the decision under appeal was based on the terms of Condition 53 which provided:- "Bat and potoroo surveys are to be undertaken prior to any clearing in the areas shown on Plan 2.4 of the approved Plan of Management, dated January 1994 and identified as 'Area recommended not to be disturbed' subject to the deviation of the haul road and associated works marked on the plan which is Exhibit A9 in these proceedings, in order to determine the extent of use of the habitat areas by any rare or endangered species as identified under the Endangered
Fauna (Interim Protection)
Act 1991. The surveys are to be forwarded to Council in order to enable it, through consultation with the NSW National Parks and Wildlife
Service, to determine the need for a licence under [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/npawa1974247/s120.html) of the [National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/npawa1974247/). If a licence is required, then no clearing or quarrying is to proceed in the abovementioned areas until a licence has been issued."
The appellant submitted that this condition lacked certainty and finality and left for determination by a third party an issue which the trial judge should have determined herself. If these objections were established the consent would be invalid.
See Mison versus Randwick Council [(1991) 23 NSWLR 734] at 118-119 (CA).
Section 99(1)(a) of the Wildlife Act provides that a person shall not "take or kill" any endangered fauna but subs (2) provides that a person shall not be convicted of such an offence if he proves that he acted under and in accordance with a general licence under <case> of that Act. Section 5(1) defined "take" for this purpose as including "disturb ... and without limiting the foregoing also includes significant modification of the habitat of the fauna which is likely to adversely affect its essential behavioural patterns."
Under <case>(e) a general licence may authorise a person "to take or kill any protected fauna in the course of carrying out specified development or specified activities". Specified for this purpose means specified in the licence (s 5(1)). Section 92B(1) required all such licences in respect of endangered fauna to be dealt with by the Director General.
Under subs (2) an application for such a licence must be accompanied by an FIS.
The judge found that the development sought by the company was "likely to significantly affect the environment of endangered fauna" for the purposes of s 77(3)(d1) of the Act so that the development application had to be accompanied by an FIS. Although this provision uses language which differs slightly from that part of the definition of "take" in the Wildlife Act which has been quoted above their practical effect may be the same.
If the proposed development will result in endangered fauna being "taken" the company would require not only development consent but also a general licence under <case>.
The evident purpose of Condition 53 is to ensure that the company does not proceed with the approved development without obtaining such a licence if it is required.
An unconditional development consent would not be a defence to a prosecution for taking or killing endangered fauna and a general licence would be no defence to proceedings to restrain or penalise the carrying out of development without the necessary consent. In other words, a development consent will not confer a positive authority on the company to carry out the authorised development. It will do no more than relax the relevant prohibition in the Act. A general licence will operate in a similar fashion in relation to the Wildlife Act. The position is analogous to that which applies where the construction and use of premises as an hotel will require both development consent and a liquor licence.
In Commercial Radio Coffs Harbour Ltd versus Fuller <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 47] the High Court held that a radio broadcasting licence issued under the Broadcasting and Television Act (Cwlth) did not constitute a
positive authority entitling the licensee to construct and use a radio transmitting station without obtaining development consent under the Act.
In my opinion, the challenged condition does not deprive the consent of the required finality and certainty.
The consent as a whole remains complete and final as a consent under the Act. The only purpose of the condition is to ensure that the developer complies with both laws but it is legally obliged to do this in any event. The finality of the consent for the purposes of the Act can be demonstrated by supposing that the Wildlife Act were to be wholly repealed. The company would then be free to proceed with the development without complying with Condition 53 which would have ceased to have any operation. The appeal in this respect, therefore, fails.
 
ORDERS
In my opinion, the following orders should be made:- 
Appeal allowed with costs. 
Judgment of the Land and Environment Court of 10 May 1994 and the development consent thereby granted set aside. 
In lieu thereof order that Development Application No 92/0455 made by the second respondent to the first respondent be refused.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/53.html  
