

Johannes Albertus Avenhouse and Gerda Avenhouse versus The Council of The Shire of Hornsby No. 14473 of 1984 [1995] NSWSC 42 (19 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMON LAW DIVISION
SPENDER AJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 22-25 August 1994, 29-31 August 1994, -9 September 1994, 12-13
September 1994, 15-16 September 1994, 31 October-4 November 1994, 16 December , 31 January 1995.
#DATE :6:1995 #ADD 19:9:1995
ORDER
Orders made.
JUDGE1
SPENDER AJ:  During the cross-examination of Mr Avenhouse, one of the plaintiffs, two questions of evidence arose on which, after argument, I gave my rulings. When doing so I told the parties that I would give my reasons later and in writing, so as not to take up Court time. The questions concerned the uses that could be made, (a) of a without prejudice letter written by the plaintiffs former solicitors to a third party, and (b) of the answer to an interrogatory made by the plaintiffs in unrelated litigation.
I now give my reasons.
 
THE "WITHOUT PREJUDICE" LETTER
A letter dated 18 May 1979 marked "Without Prejudice" written by David J.
Collins and Co., solicitors who then acted for the present plaintiffs, to
Prior and
Phippard, solicitors for a Mr. Carlyle, was referred to during cross-examination. Questions were put to Mr. Avenhouse on this letter.
The defendant intended to tender the letter in its case and, absent a ruling to the contrary, may have wished to put further questions in cross-examination to
Mr. Avenhouse on it. It appears that this letter had been discovered by the plaintiffs, perhaps inadvertently.
However, how it came into the hands of the defendant was not been fully examined. The plaintiffs objected to the tender of the letter and did so by written notice given to the defendant. They relied on the grounds of privilege and relevance. I am only concerned with the first of these grounds.
Strictly speaking, it was premature to rule on the admissibility of the letter until the defendant entered its case and tendered the letter. However,
I thought it convenient to rule on the letter in light of the defendant's stated intention to tender it, the submissions that had been put, and the possibility that further crossexamination may have been put to
Mr. Avenhouse in reliance on the letter. In the event, I ruled that the letter was not admissible in evidence on the ground of legal professional privilege, nor should further cross-examination be allowed on the letter itself. I left open for further debate the question whether the without prejudice privilege had been waived by the plaintiffs. See Attorney-General for the Northern Territory v Maurice <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 475]
The purpose of the without prejudice privilege is well known: to encourage the negotiated settlement of disputes, and to encourage in the process of negotiations communications of the frankest kind. See Field versus Commissioner for
Railways for N.S.W. <case>; [(1957) 99 CLR 285] at 291-292, Dixon CJ, Webb, Kitto and
Taylor JJ; Cutts versus Head (1984) Ch 290 at 306, Oliver LJ; Hong Kong Bank of
Australia versus Murphy NSWLR 512 at 522-523, Gleeson CJ, with whom the other members of the Court agreed. In the course of without prejudice negotiations, parties may make concessions which they would not otherwise make, including concessions on factual issues which they would otherwise contest, and contest on grounds that they believe to be genuine.
It was submitted by the defendant that the without prejudice privilege is limited to the proceedings to which the communication is referrable and does not extend to other proceedings. Barden v Barden <case>; [(1921) 21 SR 588] (to which my attention was properly drawn by counsel for the plaintiffs) was relied on by the defendant. Certainly, that decision supports the defendant's proposition; however, the decision itself is merely a statement of the conclusion reached by the learned
Judge. No detailed reasons were given. The defendant also relied on Cross on Evidence, 4th Australian Edition (paragraph ), which, somewhat hesitantly, states, the law in these terms:- "It seems to follow from the nature of the without prejudice privilege that the communication which is made by one party to another in an endeavour to settle the dispute between them is privileged ... only in respect of that dispute".
The learned authors rely upon Barden versus Barden for this conclusion.
 .
In Hong Kong Bank of Australia versus Murphy Gleeson CJ, in considering the question before the Court (which does not bear on the one
I have to decide) referred (at 522) to the decision of the House of Lords in Rush and Tompkins
Limited versus Greater London Council <case>; [(1989) AC 1280], which His Honour described as a decision concerning a novel point of law in relation to the discoverability of without prejudice communication. In Rush and Tompkins the plaintiffs' action against one of two defendants had been settled following an exchange of without prejudice correspondence. The second defendant remained in dispute with the plaintiffs, and applied for an order for specific discovery of the without prejudice correspondence between the plaintiffs and the first defendant. The plaintiffs conceded that the correspondence might be relevant to the issues between them and the second defendant but refused discovery on the ground that the correspondence was privileged. This position was unanimously upheld by the House of Lords.
In Hong Kong Bank of Australia, the Chief Justice in considering Rush and
Tompkins quoted (at 522-523) from the speech of Lord Griffiths (at 1305,) which I now set out: - "I have come to the conclusion that the wiser course is to protect "without prejudice" communications between parties to litigation from production to other parties in the same litigation. In multi-party litigation it is not an infrequent experience that one party takes up an unreasonably intransigent attitude that makes it extremely difficult to settle with him.
In such circumstances it would, I think, place a serious fetter on negotiations between other parties if they knew that everything that passed between them would ultimately have to be revealed to the one obdurate litigant. What would in fact happen would be that nothing would be put on paper but this is in itself a recipe for disaster in difficult negotiations which are far better spelt out with precision in writing.

If the party who obtains discovery of the "without prejudice" correspondence can make no use of it at trial it can be of only very limited value to him. It may give him insight into his opponent's general approach to the issues in the case but in most cases this is likely to be of marginal significance and will probably be revealed to him in direct negotiations in any event. In my view this advantage does not outweigh the damage that would be done to the conduct of the settlement negotiations if solicitors thought that was said and written between them would become common currency available to all other parties to the litigation. In my view the general public policy that applies to protect genuine negotiations from being admissible in evidence should also be extended to protect those negotiations from being discoverable to third parties."
In the Chief Justice's view (at 523): "The last sentence in the passage from the speech of Lord
Griffiths quoted above is to be read in the light of the first sentence in the same passage. The issue that was before the
House of Lords and the issue that was being addressed by Lord
Griffiths, was the matter of multi-party litigation. It was in that context that his Lordship referred to the matter of discoverability to third parties." 
While the issue before the House of Lords was precisely as the Chief
Justice had described it, I think that which was elsewhere said in Rush and
Tompkins helps to resolve the question I must decide. At page 1300-1301 Lord
Griffiths said: "There are many situations when parties engaged upon some great enterprise such as a large building construction project must anticipate the risk of being involved in disputes with others engaged in the same project. Suppose the main contractor in an attempt to settle a dispute with one subcontractor made certain admissions it is clear law that those admissions cannot be used against him if there is no settlement. The reason they are not to be used is because it would discourage settlement if he believed that the admissions might be held against him. But it would surely be equally discouraging if the main contractor knew that if he achieved a settlement those admissions could then be used against him by any other subcontractor with whom he might also be in dispute. The main contractor might well be prepared to make concessions to settle some modest claim which he would never make in the face of another far larger claim. It seems to me that if those admissions made to achieve settlement of a piece of minor litigation could be held against him in a subsequent major litigation it would actively discourage settlement of the minor litigation and run counter to the whole underlying purpose of the 'without prejudice' rule would therefore hold that as a general rule the 'without prejudice' rule renders inadmissible in any subsequent litigation connected with the same subject matter proof of any admissions made in a genuine attempt to reach a settlement."
In my opinion the views expressed by Lord Griffiths express the right balance between the public interest in protecting without prejudice communications, and the public interest that all relevant evidence should be available to a party.
It is common these days to find particular transactions or related transactions giving rise to a multiplicity of actions. The parties to one side of the record may be the same or they may be different; the parties to the other side of the record may be the same, or they may be different. The transactions which are the subject of different actions may not be identical; but not infrequently they arise out of the same or substantially the same or similar facts. For example, events that occur in the conduct of a commercial enterprise may give rise to actions against the directors of the company controlling that enterprise and senior executives, the auditors to that company, and outside financial advisers. It would be in the highest degree inconvenient and contrary to the policy of the law to encourage settlements if those who were parties to one set of proceedings believe that they were unable to engage in the frankest possible without prejudice communications for fear that those very communications would be made available and would be used against them in proceedings which might then be separately on foot, or might be in contemplation, or contingent, or merely a distant but unpleasant possibility.
The present case concerns, fundamentally, a dispute between the plaintiffs and the defendant Council in respect of the sub-division of a parcel of land purchased by the plaintiffs from Mr. Carlyle. It was to Mr.
Carlyle's solicitors that the letter of 18 May 1979 was written.
In one form or another, the underlying subject matter of the dispute, that is to say, the land itself, has been the subject of four separate pieces of litigation.
The letter in question was written shortly before the institution of proceedings against the plaintiffs by Mr. Carlyle, arising out of the contract between the plaintiffs and Mr. Carlyle for the purchase by them of 19 Fraser
Road. The subject matter of the without prejudice correspondence was the alleged termination by Mr. Carlyle of the land sale contract, and also, the subdivision of the property. That subdivision is the very issue which is at the heart of the present proceedings.
In my view it would be contrary to public policy for the defendant
Council to be able to use such correspondence in the present proceedings. It is, I think, sufficiently connected with the subject of the present proceedings as to fall within the general principal enunciated by Lord
Griffiths.
Therefore, unless the plaintiffs waived their privilege, which I hold they have not, the document was not admissible, nor should cross-examination have been allowed on the document itself.
 
THE INTERROGATORY
A separate question arose in respect of cross-examination by the defendant's Counsel on an interrogatory sworn by the two plaintiffs, together with a third person, in a fifth set of proceedings which have nothing to do with the subject matter of the present dispute.
This fifth set of proceedings to which each of the plaintiffs was a party was taken in the Federal Court. For reasons which are not material, it has since been abandoned. The file of the Federal Court proceedings was produced to this Court, with a direction from Mr. Justice
Lindgren, (which I have confirmed with him) to the effect that leave to inspect, and the use that might be made of this file, was to be determined by this Court. The matter which was the subject of the interrogatory, and of the cross-examination, was an interrogatory which dealt with Mr. Avenhouse's work history. It had nothing to do with the contract between the plaintiffs and Mr. Carlyle, nor the subdivision, nor the present proceedings between the plaintiffs and the defendant Council.
The interrogatory in question had not been read in open Court; the proceedings never got to a hearing on the merits. In such circumstances the question was whether or not there are reasons why the ordinary rules which protect that interrogatory from disclosure and use, should not be adhered to.
See generally: Ainsworth versus Hanrahan [(1991) 25 NSWLR 155], Smithers J, Springfield Nominees v
Bridgelands <case>; [(1992) 110 ALR 685] by Wilcox J, and in The Federal Court, Order , Rule 6, which limits the documents on court files which may be inspected without the leave of the court or a Judge, such documents including answers to interrogatories.
In Springfield Nominees versus Bridgelands the issue before Wilcox J was whether a witness statement made in one set of proceedings should be allowed to be used in another set of proceedings. Wilcox J held that such statements were subject to an implied undertaking that they would not be used otherwise than for the purpose of litigation to which they were given, unless consent or leave of the court was obtained, and that the court would not release or modify the implied undertaking save in special circumstances.
His Honour gave a detailed analysis of the basis on which witness statements, affidavits, discovered documents and answers to interrogatories were (in general) protected from disclosure save for the purposes of the proceedings for which they had been brought into existence. I would adopt what
His Honour had to say.
In essence, the question is whether special circumstances were made out which would entitle Counsel for the defendant to cross-examine Mr Avenhouse on the interrogatory. That I think is the appropriate test, and I do not think it has been made out.
In the first place, there was no commonality between the proceedings in the federal court in which the interrogatory was sworn, and the proceedings before me. In the second place, as I have pointed out the answer to the interrogatory dealt with Mr Avenhouse's work history. This was I think too peripheral to the issues between the parties. In the event, it was quite irrelevant to my reasons for judgment in the main proceedings. Accordingly, in the exercise of what is a discretionary judgment, use of the answer to the interrogatory in question was denied to the defendant.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/42.html  
