

Cotton Trading Corporation P/L versus Pengilley and Ors [1996] NSWSC 424 (12
September 1996) 
COTTON TRADING CORPORATION PTY. LIMITED versus PENGILLEY & ORS /96 
Tuesday 3rd September 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
HODGSON, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff is the second mortgagee of land known as Ingelara at Warren. The first and second defendants, Mr. and Mrs. Pengilley, are the owners of that land. The third defendant, Logima Pty. Limited, is a family company of Mr. and Mrs. Pengilley, and it appears that Logima has been conducting the farm business carried out on this land.

On 1st August 1996, Raymond Tolcher was appointed administrator of Logima under Pt.5.3A of the Corporations Law. The amount owing to the plaintiff, and secured by its mortgage, is now about $686,000.00. This amount is owed both by
Mr. and Mrs. Pengilley and by Logima. In the report as to the affairs of
Logima dated 20th August 1996, the plaintiff is listed as an unsecured creditor of Logima in an amount of about $664,000.00, and other unsecured creditors are listed in a total amount of around $250,000.00. In that report, the assets of Logima are said to be plant and equipment valued at around $180,000.00, and a wheat crop sown on Ingelara valued at around $300,000.00.
The report shows as a contingent asset of Ingelara certain water licences valued at around $232,000.00, subject to Council approval; and as a contingent debt, an amount of $81,000.00 being a water licence fee, payable on approval.

The plaintiff has arranged for an auction of Ingelara to take place tomorrow, that is, 4th September 1996. In these proceedings, the plaintiff seeks a final order for possession of Ingelara; interlocutory orders providing for the sale of Ingelara with the water licences and the wheat crop, and the holding of the proceeds of sale of these assets pending determination of entitlement; and any necessary leave to proceed against Logima under Pt.5.3A of the Corporations
Law.

The plaintiff relies particularly on a deed of settlement dated 27th June , which was made at the conclusion of a mediation in accordance with the
Farm Debt Mediation Act. The deed is expressed to be between the plaintiff and
Mr. and Mrs. Pengilley; but it is signed in addition by Mr. and Mrs. Pengilley on behalf of Logima, although it is not executed under the common seal of
Logima. The deed acknowledges that the plaintiff is entitled to vacant possession of the property Ingelara, to exercise its power of sale of the property, and to sell the property. The deed provides that the property would be put to auction by the Pengilleys no later than 30th August 1996. Clause 10 of the deed is in the following terms:- 
The Pengilleys can remain in possession of The Farm Property until 14 days after directed in writing by CTC to deliver up possession provided that such date be not earlier than 30.8.96.

A document associated with the deed, also signed by the plaintiff, by the
Pengilleys, and by the Pengilleys on behalf of Logima, provided that the plaintiff would not exercise its power of sale of Ingelara on certain conditions including, among others, the grant of a crop lien on the wheat to the plaintiff, and the assignment to the plaintiff of the interest as purchaser of the water licences with the equity of redemption retained by
Logima.

On 10th July 1996, the plaintiff obtained a certificate under s.11 of the Farm
Debt Mediation Act. On 16th July 1996, a notice under s.57 of the [Real
Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) was served personally on Mr. and Mrs. Pengilley. On 31st July 1996, the plaintiff sent by facsimile, to estate agents, a letter purporting to appoint them as agents to conduct an auction of Ingelara on 30th August 1996. The evidence suggests that the agents acted on this appointment, but does not indicate precisely when they accepted the appointment. On 1st August 1996, the administrator was appointed. On 19th August 1996, the plaintiff gave 14 days notice that it required possession of the property, purportedly under cl.10 of the deed of settlement.

There is in evidence a lease dated 10th September 1995 from Mr. and Mrs.
Pengilley to Logima for a period of three years. The plaintiff contends that this lease is void under the [Crown Lands (Continued Tenures) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/clta1989325/) because there was no consent obtained from the Minister.

In these circumstances, Mr. Slattery QC for the plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff was clearly entitled to possession of the property, both as against the Pengilleys and as against Logima, pursuant to the deed of settlement.
Quite apart from the question of whether the lease was void, the deed of settlement was conclusive to the effect that Logima could not set up the lease as entitling it to possession as against the plaintiff. There was at least a serious question to be tried as to entitlement to the wheat crop, and the balance of convenience favoured the wheat crop being sold with Ingelara and the proceeds of sale attributable to the wheat crop held pending determination of entitlement. Although Mr. Slattery ultimately conceded that, at this stage, there was no serious question to be tried as to entitlement to the water licences, he submitted that there was a clear balance of convenience in favour of selling that entitlement with the land, and retaining the proceeds of the sale of that asset pending determination of ultimate entitlements. He submitted that necessary leave to proceed should be granted under Pt.5.3A of the Corporations Law.

For the Pengilleys, Mr. Gorrick submitted that there should not be a final hearing of the case for possession against the Pengilleys at such short notice. Among other things, the Pengilleys wished to consider putting on a cross-claim for damages based on the relationship between the Pengilleys and the plaintiff, which could have a bearing on the order to be made in any claim for possession. On the assumption that that submission is rejected, Mr.
Gorrick submitted that the s.57 notice was invalid because there was no evidence that the solicitor signatory of that notice was authorised to sign it on behalf of the plaintiff. He submitted further that the notice purportedly given pursuant to cl.10 of the deed was not effective because, on its true construction, cl.10 did not permit the giving of the notice until 30th August.

Mr. Gye for Logima submitted that leave should not be granted pursuant to
Pt.5.3A of the Corporations Law. He submitted that the rationale of the Part was to maintain the status quo pending the administration, and he referred me to Osborne Computers v. Airroad Distribution [(1995) 17 ACSR 614] at 619, and Foxcraft v. The Ink Group [(1994) 15 ACSR 203] at 205. He submitted that this rationale applied to secured creditors attempting to exercise their security, and he referred me to Tymray v. Mercantile Mutual [(1994) 13 ACSR 111.] 
I do not need to set out his submissions concerning the water licences in the light of the concessions ultimately made by Mr. Slattery.

In relation to the wheat crop, Mr. Gye submitted that Logima was entitled to this crop in priority to the plaintiff, as lessee under a lease which had priority over the plaintiff's mortgage, and as occupier of the land who was conducting the business on the land and who had paid for the planting and maintenance of the wheat crop. He also pointed out that Logima had been the grantor of crop liens in the past, and was the grantor under a crop lien which had in fact been submitted by the plaintiff for execution. This asset should be available to the administrator for the benefit of the unsecured creditors of the company.

Mr. Gye also provided written submissions which I will leave with the papers.

In reply, Mr. Slattery submitted that, even though the plaintiff did not have a claim of right to the water licences, the Court could, nevertheless, authorise the sale as a matter beneficial to all parties. As regards the wheat, Mr. Slattery submitted that the deed of settlement extinguished all rights of possession in Logima, and it thereby extinguished Logima's rights to the wheat crop; and he referred me to par.39.13 of the Australian Edition of
Fisher & Lightwood, Law of Mortgages.

On the question of giving leave, Mr. Slattery submitted that the plaintiff had, within the meaning of s.441F(1)(b) of the Corporations Law, exercised a power in relation to the subject property, and had, within s.441B(1)(b) and , entered into an arrangement to sell the property and made arrangements for that property to be offered for sale by public auction. He submitted that the scheme of the Act was that the secured creditors, who had taken the steps to realise their security before the commencement of the administration, should not be held up from exercising their security; and that accordingly it was appropriate to give leave to commence and pursue these proceedings under s.440D.

It is convenient for me to look at this question of the granting of leave. It seems to be clear that s.440B of the Corporations Law does not apply, because this is not a case where the plaintiff is seeking to enforce a charge on property of the company. It seems to me probable that s.440C does not apply either, because, although it appears that Ingelara is used or occupied or in the possession of Logima, it seems that the plaintiff would not be regarded as owner or lessor of that property within s.440C. If that is right, the exceptions provided by s.441B and s.441F are not directly applicable to this case.

In any event, I would note that, in my opinion, it is not established that the plaintiff would fall within s.441B(1)(b) or (c), if only because it is not shown that the estate agents accepted the appointment as agents prior to the commencement of the administration. I am also doubtful whether the plaintiff would fall within the exceptions in s.441F. It is not clear to me that what the plaintiff did in relation to the property does amount to exercising a power in relation to the property for the purpose of enforcing its right to take possession of the property. I do not reach a final view of that, because it may be that the engagement in mediation and the service of the s.57 notice would qualify.

However that may be, the most important section for the purposes of these proceedings is s.440D. It is clear that the plaintiff does require the leave of the Court to commence and proceed with these proceedings against Logima.

My present view is that that leave should not be given. Mr. Slattery relies on the acknowledgment of a right to possession given by Logima under the deed of settlement. It seems to me that if Logima was, prior to that deed, entitled to possession under its lease, and entitled to the wheat crop under the lease or as occupier or as the entity which planted the wheat and maintained it, then any transfer of rights under the deed from Logima to the plaintiff would have the effect of giving the plaintiff a preference over other unsecured creditors, and so would be liable to be set aside should the company go into liquidation. It seems to me that one cannot, therefore, regard the deed of settlement as conclusive as to what should happen in these proceedings, brought as a matter of urgency at very short notice.

One other factor that I take into account on the question of whether leave should be granted, as a matter of discretion, is that there is evidence that the administrator is attempting to re-finance the liabilities of Logima; and there is an indication in the evidence that the Commonwealth Development Bank may be prepared to lend sufficient money to pay out the first mortgagee of
Ingelara, to pay out the plaintiff, and to provide $500,000.00 towards the cost of sowing a cotton crop. That willingness appears to be conditional upon the Pengilleys and Logima selling off part of the property.

I note that it is common ground if there is to be a cotton crop planted on the land this year, it should be planted in about October, so that this re- financing contemplated by the Commonwealth Development Bank is presumably a re-financing which is to take place within a very short period of time, if at all. The desirability of a cotton crop being planted in October is also a factor relied on by the plaintiff as giving some urgency to the sale of the property.

Having regard to these considerations, it does seem to me that the appropriate course is to refuse leave at this stage, but to contemplate a further application for leave within about three weeks as sought by the plaintiff; by which time the administrator should be able to present evidence which either indicates that adequate re-financing from the Commonwealth Development Bank is available, or else suggests that re-financing will not be possible. In that time, it should also be possible for the parties to prepare more adequately for some of the questions that are involved in this case, such as the validity and effect of the three year lease held by Logima.

Since for the reasons I have indicated, I do not propose, at this stage, to grant leave under s.440D, I propose not to proceed to a final determination of the plaintiff's case against Mr. and Mrs. Pengilley. I think it is appropriate to defer that also to the adjourned date.

There is a question of whether it would be appropriate to dismiss the plaintiff's application for leave and to require it to bring a fresh application. I do not think that is necessary, and I think it would be appropriate simply to refuse at present to make the order granting leave which is sought, but to allow the plaintiff to pursue it at a later date.

I think it is appropriate at this stage to reserve costs, because again the situation may well be clearer on the next occasion. The parties have agreed, in the light of the decision which I foreshadowed, that it would be appropriate to stand this matter over for a further mention on 12th September at 9.30am.

For those reasons, I refuse leave to proceed against Logima Pty. Limited under s.440D of the Corporations Law.

I stand the matter over to 12th September 1996 at 9.30am before me.

I reserve costs.
 * * * 
