

Sugar Australia Limited versus Conneq [2011] NSWSC 805 (13 July 2011) 
Last Updated: 2 August 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Sugar Australia Limited versus Conneq  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): /07/2011  
Decision Date: July 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Technology and Construction List  
Before: 
McDougall J  
Decision: 
Interlocutory injunction refused. Proceedings stayed for 42 days, thereafter to be transferred to the Supreme Court of Victoria.  
Catchwords: 
CONTRACT - interlocutory application - injunction sought to prevent termination of contract - whether parties should be left to resolve consequences of termination according to mechanisms within the contract - whether specific performance appropriate relief in building contracts. 
PROCEDURE - contract contains mandatory dispute resolution procedure - whether proceedings should be stayed to that procedure to be followed. 
PROCEDURE - jurisdiction - whether proceedings ought to be transferred to
Supreme Court of Victoria pursuant to [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joca1987427/s5.html) of the [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-vesting) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joca1987427/) - factors for consideration in determining whether proceedings ought to be transferred.  
Legislation Cited: [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-vesting) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joca1987427/)  [Occupational Health and Safety Regulations ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolreg/ohasr2007382/) (VIC)  
Cases Cited: 
Australian Broadcasting Corporation versus O'Neill <case>; [(2006) 227 CLR 57] 
Crouch Developments Pty Ltd versus D & M (Australia) Pty Ltd <case> 
Patrick Stevedores Operations No 2 Proprietary Limited versus Maritime Union of
Australia <case>; [(1998) 195 CLR 1] 
Wolverhampton Corporation versus Emmons [[1901] 1 KB 515]  
Texts Cited: 
Carter's Breach of Contract 3rd ed, (2011) 
Contract Law in Australia (5th ed, 2007) 
Doctrines and Remedies (4th ed, 2002)  [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-vesting) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/joca1987427/)  
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane's Equity  
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
Sugar Australia Pty Ltd ACN 081 245 169 (Plaintiff) 
Conneq Infrastructure Services (Australia) Pty Ltd ACN 081 540 847 (Defendant)  
Representation  - Counsel: 
Counsel: 
F C Corsaro SC / D L Cook / T Cogley (Plaintiff) 
B W Collins QC / C N Bova (Defendant)  - Solicitors: 
Solicitors: 
Herbert Geer (Plaintiff) 
Mallesons Stephen Jaques (Defendant)  
File number(s): /214730  
Publication Restriction: 
Judgment (ex tempore) - on notices of motion 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, as principal, and the defendant, as contractor, entered into a design and construct contract whereby the defendant undertook to design and construct an upgrade (for want of a better word) of a sugar refinery owned by the plaintiff. The refinery is situated in Yarraville in the State of Victoria.  
The parties are in dispute as to many things. Of specific relevance today, the parties are in dispute as to whether the defendant has a right to terminate the contract for what it says is the plaintiff's failure to rectify a substantial breach, of which alleged breach the defendant gave written "show cause" notice to the plaintiff.  
The plaintiff seeks interlocutory relief, to restrain the defendant from terminating (or purporting to terminate) the contract pending the final hearing and resolution of these proceedings. The application for interlocutory relief was made to protect what was said to be the plaintiff's accrued right to receive performance of the defendant's contractual obligation to deliver certain documents to the plaintiff in relation to the works.  
The defendant moves alternatively for an order that the proceedings be dismissed; an order that they be stayed; or an order that they be cross-vested to the Supreme Court of Victoria.  
The defendant's "show cause" notice was given on 31 May 2011. It alleged that the plaintiff had committed substantial breaches of the contract. One breach alleged was of clause 20, under which the plaintiff was required to have, and to keep in place, a principal's representative who would fulfil his roles and functions under the contract reasonably and in good faith. The particulars of that breach related to a direction given by the principal's representative (a Mr Karantzis) to the defendant on 17 May 2011, and another direction given by Mr Karantzis to the defendant on 20 May 2011. Reliance was also placed on what was said to be the wrongful rejection by Mr Karantzis of variation claims submitted by the defendant, and the way in which he dealt with those variations.  
Other grounds of alleged substantial breach related to the plaintiff's interference in the defendant's intended testing activities to be conducted from a switch room known as Switch Room 5, and the plaintiff's act in excluding the defendant from that switch room and thereby, it is said, breaching the plaintiff's obligation to give the defendant access to the site.  
This morning, the plaintiff gave the defendant letters whereby, without admitting that it was required to do so, it withdrew the two directions with immediate effect and stated that the defendant would be allowed immediate access to Switch Room 5. One of the letters also stated that the plaintiff would comply with its obligations under clause 20 (relating to the position of the principal's representative), and that it remained willing and able to perform the contract.  
The defendant's position, in relation to the claim for interlocutory relief, is that it has an accrued right to terminate (or, more accurately, will have an accrued right to terminate tomorrow, when the relevant contractual provisions have run their course, and on the assumption that the plaintiff has not by then remedied the breaches of which complaint was made).  
Nonetheless, the defendant offered, without admissions, undertakings to the Court that, if it validly terminated the contract, it would not contend that the effect of termination was to preclude the Court from making an order requiring the defendant to deliver the plaintiff any document that the defendant was required to deliver up to 10 June 2011 (when notice was given by the plaintiff requiring delivery) and that was in existence at the date of that notice. Further, the defendant undertook that it would not destroy or otherwise make unavailable any such document.  
At the heart of the plaintiff's submissions in support of the application for interlocutory relief lay the proposition that, if the contract were validly terminated by the defendant, the Court would not order specific performance of any accrued right to receive performance other than a right to demand payment of sums fixed by the contract which had accrued up to that date. Reliance was placed on Carter, Peden and Tolhurst, Contract Law in Australia (5th ed, 2007) at 743 [32-05].  
I do not propose to recite the parties' various submissions in any detail. They were outlined in writing and the written submissions will remain with the file. The oral submissions have been taken down, and can be transcribed if necessary. In essence, the defendant submitted that the position stated by the plaintiff in its written outline was correct and that accordingly, even if otherwise specific performance might be ordered of some but not all obligations under a building contract, the plaintiff could not as a matter of law get specific performance of any accrued right to receive documents. Alternatively, the defendant submitted, the plaintiff would be debarred from obtaining equitable relief in the hypothetical circumstances under consideration because of its unclean hands.  
Under the contract, as I have said, the defendant as contractor can give the plaintiff as principal written notice to show cause in the event of substantial breach. If the plaintiff does not show cause by the date and time limited in the notice, the plaintiff has an express right to suspend the whole or part of the works under the contract. Further, if the suspension continues and the plaintiff does not within a period of 28 days remedy the breach or (if the breach cannot be remedied) make other arrangements to the reasonable satisfaction of the defendant, the defendant can terminate the contract.  
I proceed on the basis, (which I assume, but do not find) that the plaintiff has not availed itself of the opportunity to show cause, or rectify the breach, or to make other arrangements to that the reasonable satisfaction of the defendant, and that it is unlikely to do so before the 28 day period expires tomorrow. Whether or not that assumed basis is correct, it is a convenient starting point for the analysis.  
If the 28 day period expires without rectification or other arrangements having been made, the defendant has a contractual right to terminate. If it terminates, the contract is brought to an end in so far as further performance is concerned, and the defendant's obligations further to perform are discharged. Thus, if the termination is valid, the contract comes to an end. If, however, the termination is not valid, the plaintiff is given a choice. It may, nonetheless, treat the termination as a repudiation, accept that repudiation and thereby discharge itself from further performance. It will be left to its right in damages against the defendant. Alternatively, the plaintiff may reject the termination and affirm the contract. If it does so, and succeeds in showing that the termination was invalid, the plaintiff will maintain, and can seek to enforce, whatever (if any) right to specific performance it may have.  
There is much to be said for the proposition that, at least as a general rule, valid termination of a contract discharges the parties from further performance, not only of obligations that are unperformed at the date of termination but also of obligations that fell due for performance, but were unperformed, prior to that date. That is the general position stated in Carter, Peden and Tolhurst at the reference I have given. It is also the general position stated in Carter, Carter's Breach of Contract (3 rd ed, 2011), with more detailed analysis, at 600 [12-09] and following. However, it is unnecessary to consider whether that general position applies in the present case or whether, perhaps, one of the possible exceptions could be utilised for the benefit of the plaintiff. That is because Mr Corsaro of Senior Counsel, who appeared with Mr Cook and Mr Cogley of counsel for the plaintiff, accepted that if the plaintiff were correct and termination did not divest accrued rights, then there was no utility in the grant of injunctive relief; and that if the plaintiff were wrong, and termination did divest the plaintiff of accrued rights, then it would not get the order for specific performance that it would seek in any event. If I may say so, that analysis seems to be correct.  
In those circumstances, I do not think that there is any utility in granting interlocutory relief.  
Even if that conclusion were wrong, I have to say that this is a case in which there are very strong considerations that would tell against the grant of interlocutory relief. The first is that the relief is sought in order to enable the plaintiff to achieve specific performance of rights under a building contract. Whilst it is certainly not the case that an order for specific performance cannot be made in respect of a building contract, it is certainly correct to say that, as a general rule, such orders are not made. As Martin CJ put it in Crouch Developments Pty Ltd versus D & M (Australia) Pty Ltd  <case> at <case>, "[g]enerally speaking, neither specific performance nor interlocutory injunctions having the effect of specific performance will be granted in respect of building contracts in other than exceptional circumstances". Thus, his Honour said at [23], the court would only be justified in granting relief by way of interlocutory injunction to hold the position, "if the plaintiff had made out a very strong case indeed; a case in respect of which the court could have a high degree of satisfaction that it would ultimately succeed at trial". In expressing that view, his Honour directed himself by reference to the judgment of Gummow and Hayne JJ in Australian Broadcasting Corporation versus O'Neill <case>; [(2006) 227 CLR 57] at 524-525.  
It may very well be, as Mr Corsaro submitted, that the focus has moved away from continual supervision by the court and more towards the adequacy of damages as a remedy for any breach. See the majority (Brennan CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ) in Patrick Stevedores Operations No 2 Pty Ltd versus Maritime Union of Australia <case>; [(1998) 195 CLR 1] at 46-47. But regardless, the fact remains that, at least as a matter of general application, the courts are unwilling to order specific performance of a building contract and will do so only in extraordinary circumstances.  
Further, what the plaintiff is seeking is not specific performance of the whole of the defendant's obligations under the contract, but of a discrete identified part only of those operations. Quite how this can be done, when the obligations of the parties are interdependent, and where there is an entire consideration although payable by instalments, is something that raises its own difficulties.  
Another consideration that would have told against the grant of interlocutory relief is that the hypothetical circumstance that was said initially to make it necessary, was that the defendant had validly terminated the contract. The termination would only have been valid if the plaintiff had committed a substantial breach, or breaches, of the contract. There would thus be a direct relationship between the plaintiff's own wrongdoing (in committing substantial breach or breaches) and the right sought to be protected (namely the right to receive performance notwithstanding the defendant's exercise of its contractual entitlement consequent upon those breaches). In those circumstances, there would be a very strong inclination to deny interlocutory relief on discretionary grounds.  
Finally, for present purposes, the court cannot but be aware that the contract in question no doubt reflects close and detailed negotiation by the parties. They bargained for the precise contractual regime that is set out in the contractual documents, and assessed the price they were prepared to pay by reference to the benefit of the obligations of which they would receive performance and to the mechanisms both for ensuring performance and for protecting them, in the case of substantial breach, from having to deliver further performance. If a party has validly exercised a contractual right that reflects the contractual outcome of this bargaining process - and I repeat that the governing hypothesis is valid exercise of the right to terminate - then the court should be slow to deprive the party of the consequent protection for which it had bargained, and to require it nonetheless to continue to perform some part of its obligations.  
There were other questions argued, as to the adequacy of damages as a remedy and as to the balance of convenience. It is not necessary to refer to those because, even if I had thought that as a matter of principle a right to interlocutory injunctive relief had been demonstrated, I would have been declined to grant that relief by reference to the discretionary considerations that I have just outlined.  
I turn to the defendant's application. That application was based on clause 42 of the contract, which provided for a staged dispute resolution procedure. If a dispute arose, then one or other of the parties was required to give written notice of it. Once such a notice was given, the parties were required to confer at least once within 14 days to resolve the dispute. If that conference (or those conferences) did not resolve the dispute then the parties were required to confer again, at least once, within a further period of 14 days. If the dispute was not resolved within a further period of 14 days (i.e. within 42 days of service of a notice of dispute) then either party could refer the dispute to litigation. There was the usual saving of what was called "summary relief": a right to institute proceedings to enforce payment under the contract or to seek injunctive or urgent declaratory relief.  
In submissions, Mr Collins of Queen's Counsel, who appeared with Mr Bova of counsel for the defendant, accepted that the purpose of the first leg of the relief sought by his client was to preserve the benefit of the dispute resolution process, and thus that the appropriate relief would be by way of stay rather than by way of summary dismissal. That must be so, in a context where the proceedings were commenced seeking urgent interlocutory injunctive relief. Mr Collins accepted also that if any stay were to be granted, it should be dissolved following any exercise by his client of its alleged contractual right of termination.  
It is clear, again, that the dispute resolution process forms an integral part of the bargain negotiated by the parties. The clause in question (clause 42) does not prevent the parties from having access to the court, even where no urgent relief or payment is sought. It makes them confer, perhaps twice or more, in an attempt to resolve the dispute before it goes to court. The courts these days take the view that the parties should be held to their bargain, and that if necessary the courts' processes should be directed towards ensuring that they do so. Indeed, some of the cases go so far as to suggest that it might be an abuse of process for someone to commence litigation in the face of a clause such as clause 42, where the exception for summary relief does not apply.  
In the present case, it does not appear that any conferences of the kind contemplated by clause 42 have occurred. That may perhaps be because the relationship between the parties appears to have become toxic. (Harking back for a moment to the question of specific performance, if on a final hearing the evidence showed that there was such a toxic relationship, that itself might be a matter that would tell against the grant of specific performance.) Nonetheless, the parties should not be at liberty to dispense themselves from compliance with their bargain simply because their individual representatives have been (if indeed they have been) offensive one to the other. Thus, I think, it is appropriate in principle to stay these proceedings for a period of 42 days to enable the parties, although out of time, to comply with their obligations under clause 42. Equally, if that is to happen, the stay should be dissolved if the defendant gives notice of termination during that 42 day period.  
I turn to the application to send the proceedings by the Supreme Court of Victoria, pursuant to [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/s5.html) of the [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/) . That application is made on the basis that it is in the interests of justice that the proceedings be determined by the Supreme Court of Victoria rather than by this court. The factors relied upon included the following; * the construction project that is the subject of the proceedings is located in Victoria; * the contract is governed by and is to be construed in accordance with the laws of Victoria, and the parties agreed to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of that state; * the plaintiff's solicitors are located in Melbourne and the defendant's solicitors have a substantial practice in Melbourne; * Mr Karantzis, who I think I can infer will be a very significant witness in the proceedings, resides in Melbourne; * many relevant employees of the defendant, who are likely to be required to give instructions or evidence, reside in Victoria. * most of the hard copy documents are in Victoria; * the conduct that is complained of took place in Victoria.  
The defendant acknowledges that people who are likely to be principal, or at least substantial, witnesses for the plaintiff reside in New South Wales, and that in so far as the project records are stored electronically, they can be accessed at any point where a computer can obtain access to the electronic data base.  
Reliance was placed on the fact there had been other proceedings commenced in Victoria. I do not regard those as significant.  
There is, however, a matter which seems to me to be of very substantial significance. One of the problems underlying the dispute between the plaintiff and the defendant that was agitated in the plaintiff's notices, and to which a substantial bulk of affidavit evidence is directed, is whose "permit to work" or PTW system should govern the way in which testing and other work is carried out. The plaintiff commenced that its PTW system should govern; and the defendant contends that its should. Although that issue has been removed from present dispute by reason of the plaintiff's withdrawal of the notices and agreement to give the defendant access to Switch Room 5, I have no doubt whatsoever that it will be a very significant issue in determining the question of who is right and who is wrong in relation to the documents that have passed between the parties. A resolution of that issue will require a consideration of the Victorian legislation relating to occupational health and safety: specifically, I think, the [Occupational Health and Safety Regulations 2007](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolreg/ohasr2007382/) (Vic).  
No doubt, to the extent that the law of Victoria is involved at a level of generality, the courts of this State can understand it and deal with it. There is, after all, but one common law of Australia. I accept, further, that even though questions of construction of Victorian legislation may arise, this court is as well equipped as any other to deal with questions of statutory construction. Nonetheless, I think, what is involved is a question of construction of a detailed scheme for the protection of health and safety of, among others, those working on building sites in the State of Victoria, the primary responsibility for the construction and application of the legislative underpinning of that scheme should rest with the courts of Victoria.  
That seems to me to be a specific, or concrete, application of the preference expressed by the parties in their choice of law and non-exclusive submission to jurisdiction clauses.  
Again, the parties have constructed a bargain, a feature of which is that the courts of Victoria are to be the primary courts for resolution of disputes (if clause 42 does not nip the disputes in the bud), and have done so against a background that the project is carried on in that State, and, in its OH&S aspects, is regulated by the laws of that State.  
Those considerations seem to me to dictate that it is indeed in the interests of justice that the proceedings should be determined by the Supreme Court of Victoria.  
Of course, proceedings were validly commenced in this State, because the defendant has its registered office in this State, and was properly served in this State so as to be amenable to the jurisdiction of this Court. But the authorities on the application of <case> of the Cross-Vesting Act make it clear that no weight, let alone dispositive weight, is to be attributed to the plaintiff's selection of one jurisdiction rather than the other.  
When one takes the considerations to which I have referred, and adds the factors as to the location of the plant (bearing in mind that there may be some need for a view) and the availability of witnesses, I think that this is a case where it is appropriate for the proceedings to be transferred to and determined by the Supreme Court of Victoria.  
The consequence of those reasons is that the plaintiff's notice of motion filed in Court on 6 July 2011 should be dismissed, and I so order. In relation to the defendant's notice of motion filed in court on 5 July 2011, I order that the proceedings be stayed for a period of 42 days from today's date unless in the meantime the defendant gives notice of termination of the contract, in which event the stay is automatically dissolved. I order, further, that at the expiration of the stay, the proceedings be transferred to the Supreme Court of Victoria. I will hear counsel on costs.  * * * 
