

Inghams Enterprises Pty Limited versus Kira Holdings Pty Limited and Anor Nos.
Ca40091/95; Lec10255 and 10256/94 [1996] NSWSC 69 (15 April 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
PRIESTLEY(1), CLARKE(2) AND COLE(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 27 November 1995 #DATE 29:3:1996 #ADD 15:4:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant     P D McClellan QC with
T
S Hale 
Solicitors for the Appellant    Freehill Hollingdale and Page 
Counsel for the 1st Respondent   S Austin QC with
G Newport 
Solicitors for the 1st Respondent Abbott Tout 
Counsel for the 2nd Respondent   P Clay 
Solicitors for the nd Respondent Malcolm M Waters
ORDER
Appeal upheld
JUDGE1
PRIESTLEY JA I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons of both
Clarke JA and Cole JA.
Like Clarke JA, I agree with Cole JA that Bignold J erred in law in failing to consider the relevant matters required by pars (d), (h) and (v) of subs 90(1) of the Land and Environment Court Act because his attention was diverted by his attempted resolution of a conflict between the proposed use of the appellant's land and the use of adjacent land.
I therefore agree with the orders proposed by Cole JA.
I also agree with the various observations of Clarke JA upon this appeal.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA The facts in this appeal are set out in the judgment of Cole JA with whose ultimate conclusions I agree.
I do so because, like his Honour, I consider that the trial judge erred in law in failing to consider the factors arising under s (1)(d), (h) and (o), which he identified as the sub-sections raising the relevant considerations, but rather was diverted from the task of considering those factors by an endeavour to resolve a conflict which he saw between the proposed user of the subject lands and the use of neighbouring lands.
Because this appeal is concerned only with errors of law I will not express any opinion upon factual considerations which will arise for consideration in the re-hearing. It is, I feel, necessary to emphasise that it is for the Land and Environment Court to determine whether, having regard to the relevant considerations which arise under <case>, the appeal bought by Kira
Holdings Pty Limited to that court should be allowed.
It was common ground before the trial judge and again before this Court, that the critical matter for consideration arose under <case>(h) and that was the relationship of the proposed development to development on adjoining land.
As the trial judge pointed out the parties accepted that the existing development on adjoining land was fundamentally incompatible with the proposed development and that this was demonstrated, according to his Honour, " ... by the probable adverse environmental impacts (in terms of noise, odour and dust emissions together with associated human health hazards) emanating from the existing development and significantly impacting upon the future residential population of the proposed development."
His Honour was bound to consider whether, taking that incompatibility into account, he should allow the appeal (so much is clear from the terms of the section and the discussion of the section by Moffitt P in Parramatta City
Council and Anor v Hale and Ors [(1982) 47 LGRA 319], at 339. It may be accepted that his Honour was entitled to have regard to any steps proposed by the developer to minimise the fundamental incompatibility. Nonetheless, at the end of the day, the court was required to determine whether, having regard to the incompatible relationship, the application should be granted. His Honour was, as it seems to me, diverted from that basic question by an endeavour to determine the best means of resolving the conflict or incompatibility between the two land uses. This can most readily be seen by his Honour's identification of the three possible approaches to the problem. Cole JA has identified them and it unnecessary to spell out each of those approaches again. His Honour did, however, identify the intermediate approach in these terms: "... namely that the exercise of planning discretion will require of the Applicant for development consent, to the extent that it is reasonably open to him, to make a reasonable attempt to mitigate the conflicting relationship between the proposed development and the existing development eg by way of some adjustment or compromise of his interests."
I see nothing wrong in a planning authority imposing conditions on the grant of a consent designed to alleviate any problems of incompatibility.
After all there is no novelty in finding that a proposed development detrimentally affects a neighbouring land use. The most obvious example is where the development consists of a building which will destroy the views enjoyed by a neighbouring land holder. When that occurs the task of the development authority is straightforward - either it grants the development, with or without conditions, or it refuses it.
The same approach was required in this case.
In a sense his Honour's intermediate approach suggested that an applicant for development consent faced with an incompatible adjoining land user could, or should, make attempts to minimise the effects of the incompatibility. That is not saying any more than that a development authority may, in considering whether to grant approval to the development application, take into account the steps which the applicant has made to lessen the impact of the development on neighbouring owners in determining whether to grant consent or in the imposition of conditions. It is not, however, any part of the function of that authority (or the court when acting in substitution for the authority) to seek to resolve conflicts or to be concerned, as his
Honour was, with the prospect that the holder of the land adjoining the proposed development could or should be expected to make adjustments to its land use to accommodate the new development.
As I have earlier indicated I think his Honour, in endeavouring to find an acceptable compromise which involved a consideration of the way in which the adjoining landholder may be required to modify its land use, was diverted from the straightforward, but no doubt difficult, task of determining whether, despite the incompatibility, consent should be granted. If his Honour had directed his attention to that task there would have been no occasion for this court, restricted to the review of legal error, to interfere. I reiterate that it is not for this court to direct the trial court as to the manner in which its discretion should be exercised and, in this respect, I disagree, with respect, with that part of the judgment of Cole JA in which he indicates that if the incompatibility cannot be resolved by the imposition of conditions the development should be refused.
I agree with the orders proposed by Cole JA.
JUDGE3
COLE JA This is a Class I appeal from a decision of Bignold
J granting development consent to a subdivision of land at Hoxton Park. Pursuant to s.57(l) [Land and Environment Court Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/) an appeal is permitted to this
Court only on a question of law. The first respondent, Kira Holdings Pty Ltd ("Kira"), the successful developer below, has contended that the issues raised on this appeal are in truth questions of fact and the appeal should thus be dismissed.
By amended grounds of appeal, Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd ("Inghams"), an objector and the appellant, has contended that there are five errors of law disclosed in the judgment. They may be summarised briefly as follows: 
The trial judge misdirected himself regarding the proper approach to the application of s' 90 and s.91 [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) in the circumstances of this case. 
In consequence, the decision reached was manifestly unreasonable and thus appellably wrong.
The trial judge misstated the proper question to be addressed in considering whether development consent should be granted having regard to the competing interests of the developer and Inghams. 
Having wrongly stated the test and assuming it was answered favourably to the developer, the trial judge failed to give reasons for that decision. 
Assuming the proper test had been stated, there is no evidence to support a finding favourable to the developer on that test.
 
FACTUAL CIRCUMSTANCES
The development appeal before the trial judge was in respect of the subdivision of a parcel of some 12 hectares of land being former rural zoned land included in the Sydney Urban Release Programme by being rezoned
Residential 2(el) in 1992. The application concerned Stages 2 and 3 of the subdivision of that land, Stage I comprising 88 residential allotments having been approved by Council in December 1993. The subject land is zoned for residential purposes under the Liverpool Local Environmental Plan No. 108 (the
LEP) and Development Control Plan
No. 18 (the DCP). The subject land is surrounded on three sides by land owned by the appellant upon which is conducted a large scale rural industrial development comprising breeder hen sheds adjoining the subject land on two sides and waste water ponds on the third.
The waste water ponds are an adjunct of a large scale poultry processing plant established on adjoining land. The trial judge saw the issue requiring resolution as being a resolution of "the conflicting relationship between (i) the proposed conforming development of the appeal site and (ii)
Inghams existing development on the adjoining site, having a total area of some 60 ha ("the Ingham site"), all of which but for the poultry processing plant, are existing non-conforming uses with the entitlements conferred by
Div. 2 of [Part IV](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/index.html#p4) of the EP and A Act". ((1) Appeal Book, p. 1589).
The development was opposed by Liverpool City Council, the second respondent, upon the basis that consent to subdivision was premature. Council contended that whilst in time the lengthy usage transition process might result in the eventual replacement of existing rural industrial developments such as that of Inghams with the residential development, it was too early in the transition process for development consent to subdivision now to be given.
The appellant, on the other hand, contended that the proposed subdivision of land for residential purposes was completely incompatible with the use it made of its adjoining land for the large scale breeding of poultry and processing of poultry at the processing plant with its necessary adjunct of waste water ponds. It argued that the environmental effects of its operations, in particular regarding emissions of noise, odour and dust, and associated health hazards to humans, particularly from asthma, would result in a substandard residential amenity on the proposed subdivided land. It also contended that diseases which might flow from animals and other sources in an adjoining residential development may affect the health of its poultry flocks.
It was against that background Bignold J posed for himself the question of how the conflicting relationship between Inghams and the developer could be resolved.
 
PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS
Bignold J referred to the relevant planning considerations. In particular his Honour noted that cl.31A of the LEP contained a "special enabling provision ... to allow development for "poultry processing factory" on a designated portion of the Inghams site". Clause 31A provides: "Nothing in this plan prevents a person, with the consent of council, from carrying out development on land referred to in Schedule 4 for a purpose specified in relation to that land in that Schedule, subject to such conditions, if any, as are so specified." ((2) Appeal Book, p.437.)
Part of the Inghams land was so designated with the purpose shown as "poultry processing factory". Thus, whilst LEP 108 zoned both the land the subject of the appeal, and much of the Ingham land as residential (el), it also recognised in the same instrument that Inghams were permitted to further develop the poultry processing factory on portion of their land which necessarily involves use of the waste water ponds. The result of cl.31 A was to negate the necessity for Inghams to rely upon existing use provisions referred to in ss. 106 and 107 EPA Act in relation to development of that portion of its land upon which the poultry processing factory was constructed.
This becomes of importance in considering the "primacy" which
Bignold J afforded to the designation of the land the subject of the appeal as residential 2(el) under the LEP.
 
THE FACTUAL DETERMINATIONS
The learned trial judge recorded the following findings: "1. It is common ground that the existing development is fundamentally incompatible with the proposed development in terms of the nature and quality of each development and by virtue of the physical contiguity of the two development sites. The proposed development is for development that conforms to the LEP whereas the existing development does not so conform and its continued existence depends upon the existing-use entitlements conferred by Div 2 of Pt IV of the
EP and A Act.
That fundamental incompatibility is demonstrated by the probable adverse environmental impacts ( in terms of noise, odour, and dust emissions together with associated human health hazards) emanating from the existing development and significantly impacting upon the future residential population of the proposed development.
The Applicant's proposals for protective or defensive measures against the existing development (eg the position of the high acoustical perimeter fencing and the provision of a temporary buffer zone some 50m in depth from the three affected common boundaries and foregoing some 30 lots) will not, by themselves, relieve the adverse environmental impacts except for the noise impact, which I am satisfied will be substantially and satisfactorily mitigated. However odour and dust emissions arc not touched by the Applicant's self protection measures and the successful control of these emissions would require some mitigation action to be taken by the Second Respondent itself, if there were to be a satisfactory co-existence of the two developments.
The extent to which mitigation measures may be undertaken voluntarily or involuntarily by the Second Respondent was not explored in any precise or thorough manner except at the hearing of the appeal. The Second Respondent (Inghams) did not give evidence (except for the various expert witnesses called on its behalf) and neither it nor its Counsel indicated a willingness or a capacity to take any environmental mitigation measures which would bring about an acceptable impact on the adjoining proposed residential estate. Although there is available technology for the dust and odour emissions to be controlled, its particular application to the breeder hen farms must be seriously doubted on the basis of the evidence of Mr Gilchrist which was essentially uncontested and which I accept.
Accordingly the Applicant's case ultimately depends upon the Second Respondent if necessary, being compelled to take environmental mitigation action to eliminate (or reduce to acceptable levels) the obvious adverse environmental impacts in terms of odour and dust emissions on the proposed adjoining residential estate. It is possible that such mitigation action could involve the physical removal of all, or parts of, the adjoining developments (not involving the poultry processing plant). The required mitigation action was unspecified, save for generalised formulations of the duty to be an environmentally responsible neighbour and not to cause a private or public nuisance to owners and users of adjoining land. However some particular reliance was placed upon provisions of the Clean
Air Act 1961, and in particular s19 which provides as follows: "19. (1) The occupier of any premises shall not unless he is in special circumstances exempted from the provisions of this section by the Minister, conduct any trade, industry or process, or operate any fuel burning equipment or industrial plant in or on such premises in such a manner as to cause, permit or allow the emission at any point specified in or determined in accordance with the regulations of air impurities in excess of the standard of concentration and rate, or the standard of concentration or the rate, prescribed in respect of such trade, industry, process, fuel burning equipment or industrial plant.

Where any such standard has not been so prescribed the occupier of any premises shall conduct trade, industry or process, or operate any fuel burning equipment or industrial plant, in or on such premises by such practicable means as maybe necessary to prevent or minimise air pollution." "
((3) Appeal Book, p. 1600-1602.) 
THE TRIAL JUDGE'S LEGAL APPROACH TO PLANNING DISCRETION
The leaned trial judge recognised that, in exercising the planning discretion conferred by s.91 "in accordance with the duty imposed by s.90" regard should, in present circumstances, be had to sub-paragraphs (h), (o) and of s.90(1). Those subsections require that consideration be given to: "(d) the social effect and the economic effect of that development in the locality; ...
 the relationship of that development to the development on adjoining land or on other land in the locality; ...
 the existing and likely future amenity of the neighbourhood".
"That development" refers to the development the subject of the appeal.
Having found that the development the subject of the appeal and the
Inghams use of its land resulted in a fundamental incompatibility, the trial judge nonetheless sought to reconcile the developments. He considered three possible resolutions to the conflict. The first was, apparently, to ignore the conflict, grant development consent with: 
Any resulting land use conflict must needs be encountered and be left to other areas of the law for possible resolution (e.g. the common law of nuisance and/or the Clean Air Act and the Noise Control Act)". ((4) Appeal Book, p. 1603.)
The second or "intermediate approach" was to require: "The applicant for development consent, to the extent that it is reasonably open to him, to make a reasonable attempt to mitigate the conflicting relationship between a proposed development and the existing development e.g by way of some adjustment or compromise of his interests." ((5) Appeal Book, p. 1605.)
This intermediate approach also required the adjoining owner, Inghams, to make "some similar adjustment of its interests."
The third contemplated solution was to hold that: "No development consent should be granted unless the conflict in relationships between the proposed development and the existing development is satisfactorily resolved, in and by the process of exercising the planning discretion". ((6) Appeal
Book, p. 1603.
The trial judge thought the appropriate exercise of discretion was to adopt what he called the "intermediate approach". In my view, in so doing his
Honour fell into error.
Having found that the two developments were "fundamentally incompatible", and having found that Inghams were not prepared to "compromise its interest", the trial judge said: 
I do not think it incumbent upon the Applicant seeking the favourable grant of planning discretion, to establish the precise environmental regime that needs to be imposed on the
Second Respondent (Inghams) to secure the desired environmental result, and the method of enforceability of that regime.
I think it sufficient if the Applicant establishes that there is a reasonable prospect that the Second Respondent's conduct of its existing development may be regulated by the application of available relevant laws (statutory and common law) designed to create an acceptable environmental impact". ((7) Appeal Book, p. 1606.
Further, Bignold J found: "Although
I readily acknowledge that the coming into existence of development resulting from the grant of development consent will probably create major problems for the Second Respondent in its desire to continue its existing operations, in the manner it has been operating for many years. I do not think the grant of consent will unfairly erode or undermine the
Second Respondent's existing use entitlements under the
EP and A Act." ((8) Appeal Book, p. 1606.)
In his consideration of the competing interests of Inghams and the developer, Bignold J gave a primacy to the interests of the developer because of his view that , as the LEP had, generally, zoned both the subject land and much of the Ingham's land as Residential 2(el), the continuation of the
Inghams operations constituted an "exception to that general norm". ((9)
Appeal Book, p. 1607.) Ms Honour regarded the developer in seeking to develop land for residential purposes as able to "legitimately claim a superior public interest in the implementation of the express aims and objects of the LEP and the EP and A Act by carrying out its proposed conforming development". ((10)
Appeal book, p. 1607.) Thus in considering the competing interests, a future development for residential purposes, as contemplated by the LEP, should be recognised by according it "superior public interest, over the continuation by
Inghams of a non-conforming use". ((11) Appeal Book, p. 1608.)
In affording this primacy, Bignold J was influenced by a sentence in the judgment of Kirby P in North Sydney Municipal Council v Boyts Radio and
Electrical Ltd and Ors. ((12) [(1989) 16 NSWLR 50] at 51.) Bignold J quoted part of the sentence reading: "Existing use rights are a transitional derogation designed,
FOR
A TIME ONLY, to cushion the impact of new general planning laws upon private owners with the established use of their land which has continued without abandonment."
The emphasis was added by Bignold J.
Regrettably, Bignold J took the passage quoted out of context and misapplied it. The learned President was addressing a conflict between private and social rights. He was comparing the conflict between private and social rights in considering whether circumstances which might constitute existing use rights should be narrowly considered, thus favouring social rights, or broadly considered so as to sustain existing use rights, thus favouring private rights. The President, who clearly favoured public rights, posed that conflict before considering the law, which he did at pages 57-60. Kirby P then concluded: "But whatever sympathy I might have for the desire of the
Council and of the residential neighbours and the environmental interest in removing a building which is something of an eyesore, I am obliged to approach the matter not by some personal opinion of my own but by reference to the Act. And the Act must be applied in the manner which the High Court of Australia and this Court have laid down for the definition and protection of an existing use right." ((13) [(1989) 16 NSWLR ] at 60.)
There was thus nothing in the judgment of the President in Boyts Radio which, as a matter of law, sustains the view that the status to be accorded to existing use of land, permitted as it specifically is by s. 106 and 107 EP and
A Act, and here relevantly by cl. 31 A of LEP 108, a lesser status or weight when considering the matters referred to in s.90 for the purpose of making a s.91 determination.
This misunderstanding and misapplication of the passage in the judgment of Kirby P led Bignold
J to at least two errors of law. First, he gave a primacy ("superior public interest") to the proposed development because he thought it reflected a general planning norm. This neglects the circumstance that the poultry processing factory development was specifically permitted by cl.31A of LEP 108, and it neglects to give proper weight to s. 106 and 107 EP and A Act. Second, Bignold J directed his attention, not to the question whether having regard to the proposed subdivision development against the circumstance of existing legal and permitted uses on the surrounding Ingham land, and weighing the factors requiring consideration pursuant to s.90, development consent should be given, but rather to the question of how the "fundamentally incompatible" conflict between the existing use and the proposed use could be resolved.
It may be permissible to consider a conflict between an existing and proposed development to determine whether the imposition of conditions on the proposed development could sufficiently resolve that conflict such as to justify the granting of development consent. In part Bignold J did this by recognising that the developer could ameliorate portion of the adverse affects upon the subject land by building an acoustic wall. He accepted, however, that the other found adverse effects of odour, dust emissions, and health hazards could not be overcome, perhaps at all, but certainly not without action by
Inghams which they were not prepared to take. The result of adopting the "intermediate approach" was to grant development approval notwithstanding that the result would be a recognition that it would result in a residential development with severely deleterious attributes, the contemplation being that, at some time in the future, some person or persons may be able to obtain a reduction or elimination of these deleterious attributes by, presumably, suing Inghams civilly or prosecuting under a statute. Bignold J, apparently, was of the view that such litigation would have "reasonable prospect" of success, although we were informed that the matter was not argued before him.
Any such view would, at best, be speculative, in particular regarding whether, if such action were taken in the future by some person, it would result in amelioration or elimination of the deleterious aspects affecting the proposed subdivision from the Ingham operations.
In my opinion the correct legal approach to a consideration of a s.90 and s.91 discretion was the third identified by Bignold J, namely, that development consent should not be granted unless, having weighed the factors requiring consideration pursuant to s.90, it could be said , on balance, that consent should be granted. If, at the time of considering whether consent should be granted, the incompatibility between the proposed development and that on an existing adjacent property cannot be resolved by the imposition of conditions upon the developer/applicant, the development should be refused. In my opinion it must be recognised that the decision maker considering the grant of a consent has no power to impose conditions upon a neighbouring land holder or his exercise of a legally permitted use on that land.
In my opinion, for the reasons given, the errors I have summarised as numbers
I and 3 have been established. Having found that the proposed development was fundamentally incompatible with the existing adjacent development, which incomparability could not be removed or adequately diminished by the imposition of conditions on the developer, the decision to grant consent was manifestly unreasonable. The second error is thus established. In the light of the findings made by the trial judge, the fifth error is also established. It becomes unnecessary to consider the fourth alleged error of law.
 .
The appeal should be upheld and the matter remitted to the Land and
Environment Court to be dealt with in accordance with these reasons. The first respondent should pay the costs of the appellant and the second respondent.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/69.html  
