

Capital Television Group Ltd and Anor versus Darling Down Tv Ltd (Receivers and
Managers Appointed) and Ors No. 50004/94 [1995] NSWSC 57 (6 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
BAINTON J
HRNG
SYDNEY 28 July 1995 #DATE 1:8:1995 #ADD 6:10:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs       Mr T. Bathurst QC and
Mr B. Preston 
Solicitors for the Plaintiffs     Mallesons Stephen Jaques 
Counsel for the 8th Defendant     Mr Whittle 
Solicitors for the th Defendant    Freehill Hollingdale and
Page 
Counsel for Australian      
Mr B. Walker SC and
Broadcasting Authority          Mr G. Johnson 
Solicitors for Australian       Australian
Government
Broadcasting Authority          Solicitor
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
BAINTON J By the third further amended summons in this matter, the plaintiffs claim against Northern Rivers Television Pty Ltd (Fourth Defendant),
Telecasters North Queensland
Ltd (Fifth Defendant), Kerry Matthew Stokes and
Australian Capital Equity Pty Ltd (collectively the Sixth Defendants), John
James
Cowin (Seventh Defendant), The Ten Group Ltd (Eighth Defendant) and
Canwest Global Communications Corp (Ninth Defendant), inter alia, the following relief "5. A declaration that the Fourth - Ninth Defendants inclusive, or some of them, combined to bring about the acquisition by the
Fourth Defendant of the issued capital of Meridian Holdings
Limited (Meridian) and the television broadcasting licence with call sign NRTV broadcasting to a licence area in Northern New
South Wales and South East Queensland ('NRTV Licence') in contravention of the BSA, so as to injure the Plaintiffs and cause them loss.
 In the alternative to paragraph 5, a declaration that each of the Eighth and Ninth Defendants intentionally, and in contravention of the Broadcasting
Services Act, interfered with the Plaintiffs' attempt to acquire the issued capital of
Meridian and the NRTV Licence.
 Damages.
Exemplary damages."
To assist the plaintiffs in the making of that case it caused to be served on Australian
Broadcasting Authority ("the ABA") a subpoena requiring production of "Your files relating to, and any other notes, file notes, memoranda, letters, working papers, diaries, files or other documents that came into existence during the period from 11
October 1994 to 31 May 1995 (together 'Documents') relating to: actual or possible compliance or non-compliance by The
Ten
Group Limited ('the Ten Group'), Telecasters North Queensland ('TNQ'), CanWest Global Communications Corp ('Canwest'),
Jack
Cowin ('Cowin') or any corporation in respect of which Cowin is a related entity or Northern Rivers Television Pty Limited ('KCTV') or any related body corporate of any of the foregoing corporations, with the provisions of [s53(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s53.html) of the [Broadcasting
Services Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/) ('BSA'); actual or possible compliance or non-compliance by CanWest with the provisions of ss57(1) or (2) of the BSA; the 45.5m $1 subordinated notes issued by Oltec Limited to
CGS Debenture Holdings Netherlands BV on 30 December 1992; the proposed acquisition by the Ten Group or a related body corporate of Northern Rivers Television Limited or its commercial television broadcasting licence for Northern New South Wales; the acquisition by KCTV or a related corporation of the commercial television broadcasting licence for Northern New
South Wales; any enquiry or the results of any enquiry by the Australian
Broadcasting Authority into the actual or possible compliance or non-compliance by any of the parties referred to in paragraphs or (b) above with [ss53(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s53.html), 57(1) or 57(2) of the BSA."
The ABA has caused the documents referred to in that subpoena to be assembled into bundles and it seeks that the plaintiffs be denied access to most of those bundles.
The bundles are identified and their contents described in an affidavit of
Patricia Manser, the Acting General Manager, Programs and Policy, of the ABA.
The bundle marked PM1 is said to be comprised entirely of documents the whole of which are subject to legal professional privilege. There is no doubt that access must be denied to any of those documents. The plaintiffs have not contended otherwise. Nor do the plaintiffs contend that they should have access to any of the documents in the remaining bundles to which a claim of legal professional privilege applies.
The bundle marked PM2 falls into two sub-categories. Sub-category PM2(a) contains documents in respect of which a claim of legal professional privilege is made in respect of a portion of those documents. The bundle identified as
PM2(b) contains the same documents from which those portions attract a claim of legal professional privilege having been deleted. No objection has been raised to inspection of the documents in this bundle PM2(b).
Objection is taken to access to any of the documents in the bundle identified as PM3 on what has become commonly called the public interest immunity claim basis. This bundle contains documents constituting evidence compiled by the Broadcasting Services Authority in its ongoing investigation "into Canwest Global Communications Corporation and its subsidiaries in relation to the compliance by Canwest and/or its subsidiaries with Part 5 of the Broacasting Services Act (1992) ("the Act") but in particular the compliance by Canwest with s57 of the Act in relation to the control of the commercial television broadcasting licensees referred to below: 
Television and Telecasters (Sydney) Ltd (Ten)
Television and Telecasters (Melbourne) Ltd (ATV)
Television and Telecasters (Brisbane) Ltd (TVQ)" 
This evidence is contained in transcripts and other records of examination of various persons undertaken pursuant to [s174](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s174.html) of the [Broadcasting Services Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/).
The bundle identified as PM4(a) contains documents in respect of which a claim for public interest immunity in respect of the whole of each document therein is made on the basis that they constitute internal ABA documents revealing the investigative processes and deliberations of officers of the
Authority. That identification is further elaborated in the affidavit but I do not think it necessary to reproduced that elaboration. Some of the documents in that bundle also contain material the subject of legal professional privilege. Bundle PM4(b) contains the same documents as bundle PM4(a) except that those parts attracting legal professional privilege have been deleted.
The bundle marked PM5(a) contains documents in respect of which a claim of public interest immunity is made on a portion of the documents on the same basis as is the similar claim in respect of the documents in bundle PM4(a).
The bundle
PM5(b) contains the same documents as bundle PM5(a) with the parts described above in respect of bundle PM5(a) deleted. There is not any objection to the production of the documents in bundle PM5(b).
The bundle identified as PM6 contains documents in respect of which a claim for public interest immunity is made over the whole bundle on the basis that they represent documents provided to the ABA in the context of its current investigation on a "commercial in confidence" basis.
The bundle identified as PM7(a) contains documents in respect of which a claim for public interest immunity is made over a portion of the documents on the same basis as the claim is made in respect of the documents in the bundle
PM6. The bundle identified as PM7(b) contains the same documents as the bundle
PM7(a) but with the deletion of those parts of the documents for which privilege is claimed. There cannot be and is not any objection to the production of bundle PM7(b).
I take the principles on which production of a document otherwise relevant to a party's litigation should be denied to be those stated in the judgment of Gibbs ACJ in Sankey versus Whitlam <case>; [1978 142 CLR 1] at p38 where his
Honour said "I must now attempt to state the principles according to which we must decide whether the documents which the Commonwealth seeks to withhold should nevertheless be produced and admitted in evidence, and whether the documents which the Commonwealth is willing to produce should nevertheless be withheld. For convenience I have spoken of the claims that the documents should be withheld from production as claims to privilege, but in Reg. versus Lewes Justices; Ex parte Home
Secretary (Rogers versus Home
Secretary) [(1973) AC 388] at pp400, 406-7, the expression 'Crown privilege' was criticised as wrong and possibly misleading. The decision in Conway v Rimmer <case>; [(1968) AC 910], did more than merely decide that an objection validly taken to the production of a document on the ground that it would be injurious to the public interest is not conclusive; it threw a new light on the principles governing the exclusion of evidence whose admission would be contrary to the public interest. The principles which
I am about to discuss apply in relation to oral as well as to documentary evidence, but since in the present case it has been agreed that it would be premature to deal with the objections taken to oral evidence, I may confine my remarks to the application of the principles to documentary evidence.
 
The general rule is that the Court will not order the production of a document, although relevant and otherwise admissible, if it would be injurious to the public interest to disclose it.
However the public interest has two aspects which may conflict.
These were described by Lord Reid in Conway versus Rimmer, as follows: 'There is the public interest that harm shall not be done to the nation or the public service by disclosure of certain documents, and there is the public interest that the administration of justice shall not be frustrated by the withholding of documents which must be produced if justice is to be done.' 
It is in all cases the duty of the court, and not the privilege of the executive government, to decide whether a document will be produced or may be withheld. The court must decide which aspect of the public interest predominates, or in other words whether the public interest which requires that the document should not be produced outweighs the public interest that a court of justice in performing its functions should not be denied access to relevant evidence. In some cases, therefore, the court must weigh the one competing aspect of the public interest against the other, and decide where the balance lies.
In other cases, however, as Lord Reid said in Conway versus Rimmer, 'the nature of the injury which would or might be done to the nation or the public service is of so grave a character that no other interest, public or private, can be allowed to prevail over it'. In such cases once the court has decided that 'to order production of the document in evidence would put the interest of the state in jeopardy', it must decline to order production."
This statement by Gibbs ACJ has been the subject of some elaboration where the claim is made on the "commercial in confidence basis" by Brennan J in Jacobson versus Rogers <case>; [(1995) 127 ALR 159] at 166 where he said "Public interest immunity has a particular application in the case of information gleaned upon the basis of confidentiality.
As Viscount Dilhorne said in Norwich Pharmacal Co. versus Customs and
Excise Commissioners (1974) AC at 189 'I do not accept the proposition that all information given to a government department is to be treated as confidential and protected from disclosure, but I agree that information of a personal character obtained n the exercise of statutory powers, information of such a character that the giver of it would not expect it to be used for any purpose other than for which it is given, or disclosed to any person not concerned with that purpose, is to be regarded as protected from disclosure, even though there is no statutory prohibition of its disclosure.' 
And in Conway versus Rimmer Lord Reid said 'If the state insists on a man disclosing his private affairs for a particular purpose it requires a very strong case to justify that disclosure being used for other purposes.' 
The principle does not appear to depend upon the encouragement of candour but rather upon the consideration that the public interest is best served by preserving the basis upon which the information was given. It may be necessary for the proper functioning of the public service to withhold documents where failure to do so would impair confidence in its assurances.
Confidential information of a business character required to be given by a statute which prohibits the disclosure of the information and protects it from production to a court would appear to present a particularly strong case for immunity.
Nevertheless, even where the private right to confidentiality is of some magnitude and its preservation is in itself in the public interest, it must be weighed against the public interest in disclosure for the purposes of the investigation and prosecution of the offences in question. Ultimately, that issue may require judicial determination but, as we have said, if the warrant is executed in a reasonable manner, as it must be, there is no reason why that issue may not be resolved by a court."
The role of the ABA is described in [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s5.html) of the Act in the following terms: "(1) In order to achieve the objects of this Act in the way that is consistent with the regulatory policy referred to in [s4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s4.html), the
Parliament: charges the ABA with responsibility for monitoring the broadcasting industry; and confers on the ABA a wide range of functions and powers that are to be used in the manner that, in the opinion of the ABA, will: produce regulatory arrangements that are stable and predictable; and deal effectively with breaches of the rules that are published by this Act."
Among those "rules" are [s 53(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s53.html) and s57(1) which provides "53(1) A person must not be in a position to exercise control of commercial television broadcasting licences whose combined licence area populations exceed 75% of the population of
Australia." "57(1) A foreign person must not be in a position to exercise control of a commercial television broadcasting licence."
Schedule 1 to the Act sets out complex provisions for determining those questions.
[Part 13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/index.html#p13) of the Act deals with "Information Gathering by the ABA".
Division 2 empowers the ABA to conduct investigations for the purposes of the performance or exercise of any of its functions and powers. If the ABA does so it has power to require persons to attend for examination on oath or affirmation and to provide documents or other information to the ABA. These sections confer coercive powers on the ABA. But it is not required to confine itself to such powers. It seeks, and gets, much information by asking for it.
Frequently that information is quite properly regarded as confidential, and the ABA accepts it and agrees to deal with it on that basis. That is a useful alternative to resorting to coercion.
As I have already stated, the ABA is currently carrying out an investigation pursuant to s158 of the Act in relation to CanWest Global
Communications Corporation and its subsidiaries.
The documents identified as PM3, contains transcripts and other records of examination of various persons, being examinations carried out pursuant to [s175](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bsa1992214/s175.html) of the Act and therefore in private. The ABA asserts that the reliability of evidence so gathered is or may be largely dependent upon its being provided independently without foreknowledge of evidence obtained from other persons.
The assertion is that if the
Authority intends to examine a number of further persons on issues the same or similar to those covered in the examinations to date, that disclosure of the evidence obtained to date would substantially increase the possibility of information yet to be obtained being distorted consciously or otherwise or even suppressed. No party sought to challenge that assertion by Patricia Manser: and it is obviously enough soundly based. After all it is customary in litigation to require witnesses other than parties to be out of the hearing of the court while other witnesses are giving evidence: the underlying reasons are the same.
The documents in bundle
PM4(a) are internal Authority documents revealing the processes and deliberations of officers of the Authority being in many cases preliminary assessments or matters recorded for the purpose of raising for consideration some issue to be pursued later during the investigation.
Disclosure of that material, as Patricia Manser points out, may be acted upon by other persons and bodies as though it were a conclusion and could have a distortive effect on the market. Patricia Manser also points out that if material of this description were released prematurely, officers of the
Authority would become reluctant to create documents of that kind in the future, thus impeding the efficient operation of the Authority. Again I have no difficulty in accepting that assertion: I would have reached that conclusion myself even had she not said so.
The documents in bundle PM5 are entitled on the same basis as those in bundle
PM4(a) to immunity from production in respect of that part of them in respect of which public interest immunity from production is claimed. There is no claim of privilege in respect of the remaining parts of those documents.
They are in bundle PM5(b). Production of bundle PM5(b) has not been opposed.
The documents identified as bundle PM6 are documents provided to the
Authority by a variety of persons on a "commercial in confidence basis". Those documents have been further identified in a letter from the Australian
Government Solicitor to the Solicitors for the plaintiffs and marked as
Exhibit R1 in the present application. They are all said to be documents provided by the Eighth Defendant, the Ten Group, or the Ninth Defendant,
CanWest Global Communications Corporation in response to notices to produce issued by the Authority. To that extent discovery will already have been given of those documents.
In those circumstances Counsel for the Plaintiffs did not press the production by the ABA of another copy.
The documents of which the Authority seeks to deny access to the
Plaintiffs are, in my judgment, all of them subject to the public interest immunity to which Gibbs ACJ referred in Sankey (supra). nose in the bundle PM6 are documents of the nature referred to by Brennan J in Jacobson v Rogers . I decline to order their production to the Plaintiffs for the reasons stated in the passage which I have cited.
In addition I would state that it appears to me to be obvious that if an investigating authority is compelled to produce documents gathered and statements received or evidence given in the course of an enquiry before that enquiry is concluded, the proper orderly and satisfactory prosecution of that enquiry is more likely than not to be inhibited. I accordingly order that access is not afforded to the Plaintiffs to any of the material in bundles PM1-7 inclusive referred to in the affidavit of Patricia Manser of 4 July 1995, other than those documents which, in the course of my describing them, I indicated there was no objection to access being afforded to the Plaintiffs.
Australian Broadcasting Authority has been wholly successful in the application for the denial of access to the documents which it sought not be made available to the Plaintiffs. I accordingly order that the plaintiffs should pay the costs of Australian Broadcasting Authority of the application to deny access to the documents which Patricia Manser in her affidavit of 4
July 1995 sought not to have produced to the Plaintiffs. I further order that the Australian Broadcasting Authority may have these costs assessed forthwith and that they be payable immediately upon assessment.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/57.html  
