

Bowen and Ors versus Campbell and Anor Matter No 12110/97 [1997] NSWSC 597 (2
December 1997) 
Bowen & Ors t/as Duffield & Duffield Solicitors versus Campbell & Anor /97 December 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Bowen & Ors t/as Duffield & Duffield Solicitors v Campbell & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiffs are the partners in a firm of solicitors carrying on practice under the name of Duffield & Duffield. 
The plaintiffs have performed legal services for the defendants. These services were performed at least mostly by an employed solicitor (Mr Quinn).
Mr Quinn is a cousin of the second defendant. He held a power of attorney from the defendants (who reside overseas).

Mr Quinn's employment with the plaintiffs came to an end. He commenced practising on his own (under the name of Quinn & Quinn). After the termination of his employment, he commenced to act for the defendants.

A Statement of Account was rendered on 12 September 1995. It assessed the costs in the sum of $6,511.03. The Court has been informed that this Account is of no relevance to the present dispute. On 20 December 1996, Mr Quinn prepared and rendered a further Account on behalf of the plaintiffs. It was in the sum of $274.89. The Court was informed that it purported to be an Account for services provided during the period 21 November 1995 to 10 October 1996 and that it was not paid by the defendants.

After the cessation of Mr Quinn's employment, an examination was made of the defendants' file. A view was taken that the December Account did not have regard to all of the attendances and disbursements which related to the plaintiffs acting for the defendants.

The plaintiffs then purported to withdraw the December Account and rendered a revised Account dated 17 January 1997. It was rendered in the sum of $1,971.40. The Court was informed that it purported to be an Account for services provided during the period 20 November 1995 to 15 January 1997.

An application was made to this Court for assessment of the Bill of Costs constituted by the revised Account. The Court referred the application for assessment to a Costs Assessor (Mr Hattersley).

Thereafter communication took place between the Costs Assessor and the parties. He received a Notice of Objection to the Bill and a response to that
Notice.

The Costs Assessor forwarded to the plaintiffs a letter dated 30 April 1997.
It was in the following terms:- "Thank you for your letter of 22 April 1997 a copy of which I am sending the respondents. I note that your firm sent an account for $274.90 to the respondents in December 1996 - the account is marked `E' as an attachment to your objections. Please advise me whether that account has been paid and if so upon what date it was paid.

In any event your firm having rendered that account to the respondents will you please inform me on what authority your firm relies in submitting to the respondents a revised account claiming a greater sum of money as costs and disbursements than that claimed in the first account.

In this respect I note that your firm concedes that there has been no disclosure of your firm's basis for charging costs as required by the [Legal
Profession Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/). In these circumstances the Act requires me to determine whatever costs and fees may be recoverable by your firm from the respondents at rates of charging which are fair and reasonable and meet the criteria laid down by the Act - see
Sections 208A and 208B.

I note Mr Quinn appears to have carried out most if not effectively all of the legal services described in the attachments to your objections. As I understand the position he sent out the account for $274.89.

Having regard to the foregoing please let me know why I should not accept the amount charged by Mr Quinn as being the fair and reasonable amount your firm is entitled to recover for the legal services provided. I note you are or were holding $1,539.20 in trust for the respondents. Are you still holding that total sum? If not please inform me to whom it or any part of it has been paid and pursuant to whose authority that occurred.

I will expect to receive your reply dealing with the foregoing matters within days. I am providing the respondents with a copy of this letter." 
The plaintiffs replied by letter dated 22 May 1997. It contained, inter alia, the following:- "We respond to the matters raised herein as follows:-
The account which was rendered on 20 December 1996 and forms annexure `E' to our Response To Objection To A Bill has not been paid.
In our submission, this firm was entitled to withdraw the account rendered December 1996 and submit a revised Statement of Account for the following reasons:- 
The Statement of Account dated 20 December 1996 was endorsed `E & O E' i.e. Errors and Omissions Excluded. It is clear that the account omitted to charge for the substantial work that had been undertaken on the Respondent's behalf between 14 November 1995 - 20 November 1995 and 7 December 1996 - 15
January 1997 and we were in the circumstances entitled to amend the Account to include those items which were omitted.

Quinn's omission to time record and consequently to charge for all the work performed by him on the clients' behalf, combined with his act in then rendering to the Clients an account which on its face gave the impression of being an account for all work performed on the clients' behalf, but in reality related only to a small part of the work performed was, at the very least a failure to comply with his obligations as an employed solicitor, and in the circumstances where Quinn was not only related to one of the Clients but also acting as their Attorney, one must question whether this was deliberate, thus entitling this firm to withdraw the account and re-submit a revised Statement of Account.

In the alternative, should you be of the view that this firm was not entitled to withdraw the account rendered 20 December 1996, we submit that we were, nevertheless, entitled to render a separate account for the work performed but not charged for in that account and would request that the assessment of our
Bill of Costs proceed on that basis." 
The Costs Assessor made a Determination under the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/), 1987 (the
Act). He issued a Certificate As To Determination Of Costs on 1 July 1997.
It contained, inter alia, the following:- "1. THE APPLICATION IS DETERMINED BY SUBSTITUTING FOR THE DISPUTED COSTS AS
FAIR AND REASONABLE THE AMOUNT OF COSTS TO BE PAID TO THE PRACTITIONER THE SUM
OF: $274.89 (TWO HUNDRED & SEVENTY FOUR DOLLARS & EIGHTY NINE CENTS)" 
The Certificate was forwarded under cover of a letter dated 1 July 1997. In that letter, the Costs Assessor advised the plaintiffs, inter alia, as follows:- "I refer to your letter of 22 May 1997 in reply to my letter to you of 30
April 1997. I take the view that a solicitor having rendered an account or bill of costs to his client for the provision of legal services is not entitled to render a bill for a higher sum relating to the same legal services by reason of a change in circumstances occurring at some later date unless the first bill is submitted upon specific terms allowing for the provision of a later higher bill. So far as I am aware your statement of account for $274.89 was not submitted conditionally to the respondent entitling you to present them with an account for a higher amount.

I have confirmed the fairness and reasonableness of your statement of account of December 1996 in the sum of $274.89 and I attach my Certificate of
Determination of costs to that effect. I also attach my Certificate of
Determination as to the costs assessor's costs amounting to $490.00 which are payable by you on an immediate basis to the Proper Officer of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales. You will appreciate these costs are payable pursuant to Section 182(3) of the Act by reason of your admitted failure to comply with the disclosure provisions of the Act. I have provided identical forms of the certificates to the respondents and to the Proper Officer of the Supreme Court of New South Wales." 
These proceedings were brought by Summons filed on 16 July 1997. The process purports to propound an appeal pursuant to section 208L of the Act. This provision provides a limited avenue of appeal. It is restricted to "a matter of law arising in the proceedings to determine the application".

The error of law is said to be that mentioned in the order sought in paragraph of the Summons. It relates to what was said by the Costs Assessor in his letter dated 1 July 1997.

A number of affidavits have been filed. The content of this material suggests that the parties may have been under some misapprehension as to the nature of the process contemplated by section 208L. The appeal is not a fresh hearing.
Section 208L does not provide an avenue for the ventilation of the many grievances had between the parties.

Largely, the appeal involves the Court in looking at the decision of the Costs
Assessor in the light of the material that was available to him and the communications passing between the Costs Assessor and the parties. The plaintiffs bear the burden of demonstrating that there has been an error of law on the part of the Costs Assessor.

It is apparent that there is considerable ill-feeling between the plaintiffs and Mr Quinn. Complaints have been made to the Legal Services Commission and to the Law Society. The Court was informed that the appeal was merely a part of a wider dispute between the parties.

Ultimately, the appeal was heard on the basis that the Court had before it certain of the annexures to an affidavit sworn by Mr Castle (viz. the material comprised within the pages marked 29-83).

It is accepted by the parties that the appeal concerns what may be described as a very modest sum. It is in the order of $1,700. For the purposes of pursuing this matter, the plaintiffs have paid a significant sum by way of filing fee for the Summons. They are required to pay the costs of the Costs
Assessor. Considerable documentation has been generated. Both sides have legal representation. The plaintiffs have been represented by Counsel. The costs and disbursements involved in the exercise have left the amount in dispute well in their wake.

It was obvious that the decision of the Court in this appeal was unlikely to resolve the conflict involving the parties. I did my best to urge the parties to reach a compromise of their differences. However, these efforts proved to be unsuccessful and further litigation (concerning modest disputes and hopefully in other jurisdictions) seems inevitable.

The Court appreciates that section 208L may provide the only avenue of challenge in this case. However, the need to pursue the facilities of the
Supreme Court in a case such as this is a gross absurdity. I should add that this modest dispute required the allocation of a special fixture and a day of the Court's valuable time was set aside to hear it. If it is seen necessary to provide an avenue of appeal from costs assessments and if parties must litigate such modest disputes, there is an urgent need for legislative action to provide an appropriate forum for their determination.

I should not have to stress that, for some years, this Court has been overburdened with work. In an endeavour to alleviate that burden, legislative changes have been introduced to enable work to be now handled by the District
Court. The legislation has recently seen a considerable volume of work remitted from this Court to the District Court.

Leaving aside the jurisdiction that the District Court now has in respect of certain motor vehicle matters (an unlimited jurisdiction), it has jurisdiction to entertain claims which do not exceed $750,000. The exercise of that jurisdiction may require the Court to resolve complex questions.

Hopefully, the modest amount involved in this case may be at least one of the smallest to come to this Court by way of appeal from a Costs Assessor.
However, it is not unique. The majority of appeals concern small sums and questions lacking in any complexity. Many of the cases involve sums of less than $10,000 and the Court is asked to put aside at least half a day to hear them. To some, it may seem farcical that the Court retains jurisdiction to deal with these modest disputes whilst matters involving an exercise of unlimited jurisdiction (or at least claims up to $750,000) are now being litigated in another Court.

I now return to the contention that there has been an error of law by the
Costs Assessor in this case. Counsel for the plaintiffs has prepared a written outline of submissions. The Outline contains the following:- "5. It is submitted that the Costs Assessor's reasons disclose the following two fundamental errors of law: 
While purporting to determine the bill of costs dated 17 January 1997 which was the subject of the application (see Annexure `N' to the affidavit of
Gary Ian Castle sworn 2 September 1997), it is apparent that the Costs
Assessor actually assessed a previous statement of account dated 20 December (see Annexure `D' to the affidavit of Gary Ian Castle sworn 2 September ). The Act makes plain that the function of the costs assessor is to assess and determine the bill of costs which is the subject of the application (see the combined effect of sub-sections 199(1), 201(1), 206(1) and 208A(1) and (2)). Indeed, sub-section 208A(5) expressly prohibits a costs assessor from determining any part of a bill of costs that is not the subject of an application.

The reason why the Costs Assessor proceeded to assess a statement of account which was not the subject of the application for assessment is provided in his 1 July letter. He explained there that he had `confirmed the fairness and reasonableness of your statement of account of December 1996 in the sum of $274.89' because he had taken `the view that a solicitor having rendered an account or bill of costs to his client for the provision of legal services is not entitled to render a bill for a higher sum relating to the same legal services by reason of a change in circumstances occurring at some later date unless the first bill is submitted upon specific terms allowing for the provision of a later higher bill. So far as I am aware your statement of account for $274.89 was not submitted conditionally to the respondent entitling you to present them with an account for a higher amount'.
As to the first matter, the plaintiff submits that the Costs Assessor erred in law in misconceiving his statutory function and duty in proceeding to determine a bill of costs other than the bill of costs which was the subject of the application for assessment.
As to the second matter, there is no basis in law for the Costs Assessor's view that a solicitor cannot withdraw a statement of account and render a revised account. There is no such legal constraint on a solicitor withdrawing a statement of costs (certainly prior to its payment as was the case here) and rendering a revised statement of costs in relation to the same legal services.
A statement of account is merely a demand for payment and, therefore, is subject to revision in appropriate circumstances. No question of estoppel has been raised by the defendants. The Costs Assessor's reasoning discloses an error of law because he has proceeded on an erroneous legal basis." 
Written submissions have also been handed up by the defendants. The Court has been referred to the usual decided cases.

The Certificate itself does not reveal an error of law. It is consistent with the Costs Assessor having performed his statutory function in accordance with the provisions of the Act.

The plaintiffs found their appeal on the material volunteered in the letter dated 1 July 1997. This material has been regarded as expressing the reasoning process behind the Determination. It is said to disclose the relevant error of law. For completeness, I should mention that it was common ground that the question of whether or not there is a need to give reasons did not arise for consideration in this case.

The letter contains an expression of confirmation of the fairness and reasonableness of the Statement of Account of December 1996. This was not the
Bill of Costs which was the subject of the application. This expression, of itself, may be seen as merely the product of certain looseness of language.
The real problem emerges from what is said in the first paragraph of the letter. It seems to me that this material makes it clear that the Costs
Assessor has misdirected himself by taking the view that, in the circumstances of this case, the plaintiffs were precluded from rendering the revised
Account. The only authority relied on to support that view was Florence
Investments Pty Limited versus H S Slater & Co. [(1975) 2 NSWLR 398.] In my view, that authority does not assist the defendants in this case. I should add that this was not a matter put in issue by the defendants in their Notice of
Objection. Generally speaking, a determination should be made in the light of the issues chosen by the parties. Further, I should observe that no regard seems to have been had to the material which demonstrated that the revised
Bill purported to charge for matters relating to periods which fell outside the scope of the December Account.

In the circumstances, the Court has little alternative but to find that there has been a relevant error of law. I am not able to affirm the Costs Assessor's decision. I remit the application to the Costs Assessor for re-determination.
The defendants are to pay the costs of the Summons.
 * * * 
