

Regina versus Warman Matter No 71711/98 [1998] NSWSC 766 (22 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 January 1999 
REGINA versus MARK WAYNE WARMAN /98 April 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: Bail is sought in the present matter principally, so I have been told in evidence, to enable the applicant to get out to assist his wife who has suffered injuries in a car accident which include broken limbs and brain damage. In particular, bail is sought in the context that his wife and his home had been the subject of a home invasion whilst he was detained in custody and consequently the situation with the Housing Commission is such that steps may need to be taken to preserve the couple's right to some sort of Housing Commission accommodation, either their present accommodation or some substitute. His father-in-law is attempting to cope with the situation of having his wife recently released from hospital with a heart condition and a daughter in the condition I have referred to. There is also a child. All of these are matters which go greatly to sympathy for the applicant and for his family. 
The father-in-law has come today prepared to offer, by way of surety, the sum of $500 and I have been informed that a further $500 had been deposited in the
Local Court for bail which was at one stage granted to the applicant. However it does appear that the offences with which the applicant presently stands charged, if they were committed, some at least of them were committed whilst he was on bail, others whilst he was on parole. They are offences which, except for the s.97 offence, are offences in respect of which there is a presumption for bail, there is no presumption for the s.97 offence and the applicant has been, whilst his parole was revoked, directed to be released by the Parole Board on 2 March 1998. He is serving the balance of parole which is to expire on 29 June 1998. Nonetheless there are a great many offences alleged against him. In some of those offences the Crown case is very strong indeed.
These are offences of violence and dishonesty. They are offences which accord with the very extensive criminal record which has been admitted into evidence.
They are offences which do not give me the slightest confidence that with the greatest will in the world the present applicant will be able to avoid committing further offences whilst on bail. For that reason, and principally for that reason, I am not prepared to grant bail notwithstanding that the applicant previously had bail and in the light of the refusal of bail in the
District Court where trials can be expected to take place in the latter part of this year commencing on 3 August.

In the circumstances, bail is refused.
 * * * 
