

Tenterfield Shire Council versus Egan and Anor Matter No 30140/96 [1998] NSWSC (8 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 October 1998 
TENTERFIELD SHIRE COUNCIL versus MICHAEL EGAN, TREASURER & MINISTER FOR ENERGY & ANOR /96 September 1998 
Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
Name: Tenterfield Shire Council versus Michael Egan, Treasurer & Minister for Energy & Anor 
Proceeding No: 30140/96 
Coram: Sperling J 
Date of Hearing: 3 September 1998 
Date of Judgment: 8 September 1998 
Catchwords: 
Administrative Law - judicial review on the ground of defective exercise of powers - whether determination of compensation for compulsory transfer of an electricity distribution undertaking invalid. 
Local Government - powers and functions - compulsory transfer of an electricity distribution undertaking - whether compensation incorrectly assessed. 
Electricity - compulsory transfer of electricity distribution undertaking - whether compensation incorrectly assessed. 
Statutes - interpretation - compulsory acquisition of property - whether Julius principle applicable. [Electricity Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ea1945139/), ss 6B(1),
FB; Sch 3, cl 3 
Electricity Legislation Amendment Act 1995 
Julius versus Bishop of Oxford [(1880) 5 App Cas 214] 
Counsel for the plaintiff: J J J Garnsey QC & J E Griffiths 
Solicitors: Blake Dawson Waldron 
Counsel for the 1st Defendant: J M Ireland QC & N J Williams & P A Fury 
Solicitors: I V Knight, Crown Solicitor 
No of pages: 10 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
The plaintiff is a local government body (hereafter "the Council"). For a long time, it distributed electricity within its local government area, in addition to its more usual municipal functions.

By the Electricity (Tenterfield Council) Order 1996, made under the [Electricity Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ea1945139/) and effective 29 February 1996, the Council's electricity distribution undertaking was transferred to the second defendant, NorthPower Energy. (I will refer to that Order as "the 1996 Order").

The main question in this litigation is whether the 1996 Order, on its true construction, gave rise to an entitlement to compensation for the value of assets which were transferred under the Order.

As at 29 February 1996, the [Electricity Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ea1945139/) (hereafter "the Act"), <case>, provided that the Council was authorised to exercise the functions of an electricity distributor subject to the Minister's approval (which had been given). By the Electricity Legislation Amendment Act 1995, s
B of the Act had been amended by adding the following sub-sections to <case>.
 "(5) The Minister may direct, by order in writing, that any specified staff, assets, rights or liabilities of Tenterfield Council (being staff, assets, rights or liabilities with respect to that Council's functions under this Act) be transferred to such person or body as is specified in the order.

Such an order may be made on such terms and conditions as are specified in the order.

Schedule 3 applies to the transfer of staff, assets, rights or liabilities under this section." 
Schedule 3 predated the amendment. It related to any transfer of electricity distribution undertakings pursuant to <case> of the Act. Section 6FB did not apply to the Council but, by the introduction of <case>, as appears above, the Schedule was made applicable to any transfer of the Council's electricity distribution undertaking pursuant to <case>.

Schedule 3 was itself amended by the 1995 amending Act. Clause 3 of the
Schedule related to the vesting of such an undertaking in the transferee. So far as is material, the following sub-clause was now added to cl 3 of the
Schedule by the 1995 amendments: "(6) No compensation is payable to any person or body in connection with a transfer to which this Schedule applies except to the extent (if any) to which the order giving rise to the transfer so provides." 
One of the options available to the Minister pursuant to <case> of the Act and cl 3(6) of the Schedule was to transfer the Council's electricity distribution undertaking, including assets relating thereto, to another electricity distributor, without compensation. That could be achieved simply by an order for the transfer of the Council's electricity distribution undertaking without mention of compensation. The effect of cl 3(6) of the Schedule to the Act would then be that no compensation was payable.

By cl 5 of the 1996 Order the Council's electricity distribution undertaking (being all staff, assets, and rights and liabilities of the plaintiff, in so far as they related to the Council's functions as an electricity distributor) was transferred to NorthPower Energy. Clauses 6 and 7 of the 1996 Order provided as follows: "Payment of compensation 
In accordance with Clause 3(6) of Schedule 3 of the [Electricity Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ea1945139/), compensation in connection with the transfer of any of the staff, assets, rights or liabilities referred to in Clause 5 of this Order, is to be payable to Tenterfield Council by the Minister for Energy or NorthPower Energy, to the extent, if any, determined by the Minister for Energy.

The transfer referred to in Clause 5 of this Order is not in any way conditional upon any determination by the Minister under Clause 6 of this
Order and accordingly takes full effect upon the commencement of this Order." 
It would have been competent for the Minister to decide at the time of making the 1996 Order whether compensation would be paid in connection with the transfer of the Council's electricity distribution undertaking and, if so, to specify the amount of such compensation in the Order. The Minister did not take that course. On the hearing of these proceedings, neither side contended for a construction of cl 3(6) of the Schedule which required the Minister to dispose of the whole question of compensation in the Order, including any quantification. With some misgivings, I am prepared to proceed on the basis that an Order which did not thus resolve the whole question of compensation was a valid order under cl 3(6) of the Schedule.

The meaning and effect of the 1996 Order is in dispute. The Council contends that the Order should be construed as meaning that compensation in connection with the transfer was payable, that the amount of compensation remained to be determined, and that (by implication) such determination would be in accordance with the general law relating to just compensation for the compulsory acquisition of property.

The Minister, on the other hand, contends that the meaning and effect of cl 6 of the Order was merely to preserve and postpone the question of compensation, including whether compensation was payable and, if so, in what amount.

The fundamental difference between the two constructions is that, under the
Council's approach (which the Minister disputes), cl 6 of the 1996 Order determined that compensation was payable, leaving open only the question of quantification.

On 5 May 1996, the Minister determined, in writing, that a maximum amount of $365,107 was payable, subject to certain conditions which included a condition that the Council accepted payment in full and final settlement of its claim for compensation.

Following further representations, the Minister, on 13 November 1996, in writing, redetermined the amount of compensation to be paid as $528,813. The determination was subject to the same conditions so far as is relevant.

The instrument of 13 November 1996 acknowledged that the amount of compensation so determined was for disaggregation costs only. It is common ground that that did not include compensation for the value of the assets transferred. It is also common ground that the assets had a value. (They included, for example, many kilometres of overhead wires and other valuable infrastructure and equipment.) 
By its summons initiating these proceedings, the Council seeks various declarations and orders. A declaration is sought that the determinations of 5
June 1996 and 13 November 1996 (assessing the amount of compensation) are void or should be set aside. Declarations are also sought which would establish an entitlement to compensation for the assets transferred and the basis on which compensation should be assessed.

Orders are sought setting aside the determinations, requiring reconsideration and re-determination of the compensation payable, for payment of compensation properly assessed, and for taking accounts.

For the following reasons, cl 6 of the 1996 Order is not amenable to the construction for which the Council contends.

The plain meaning of cl 6 of the 1996 Order is that compensation will be payable only if the Minister determines that it is. The phrase "to the extent, if any" means to the extent of any compensation determined by the Minister to be payable.

If a more literal reading is favoured by reading "if any" as qualifying the phrase "the extent", the clause contemplates that there might be no "extent". Compensation without an extent is no compensation.

To read "if any" as referring back to "any of the staff, assets, rights or liabilities" mentioned earlier in the clause would be otiose.

Clause 6 of the Order is stated to be in accordance with cl 3(6) of
Schedule 3. The terminology of cl 6 of the Order is relevantly the same as the terminology of cl 3(6) of the Schedule, where "if any" means if any compensation is allowed. It would be strange if the terminology of cl 6 of the
Order were intended to have a meaning different from the same terminology in cl 3(6) of the Schedule, when cl 6 of the Order is stated to be made in accordance with cl 3(6) of the Schedule.

The phrase "in accordance with cl 3(6) of Schedule 3", and the use of the same terminology in the Order as in the exception specified in cl 3(6) of the
Schedule, demonstrates an intention to do no more than to activate the exception specified in cl 3(6) of Schedule 3, by preserving the Minister's discretion to decide whether compensation is to be paid and, if so, its extent.

Because the Minister could opt in the Order for no compensation at all in connection with a transfer of the undertaking, it cannot be implied that he was obliged to award compensation in connection with any particular aspect of the undertaking transferred (such as assets), or that a decision to award compensation in connection with some aspect of the transfer of the undertaking (such as aggregation costs) obliged him to award compensation for the whole of the transfer, or that he was obliged to award compensation on any particular basis in relation to an aspect of the transfer or generally. There is no scope for application of the principle of statutory construction in Julius versus Bishop of Oxford [(1880) 5 App Cas 214], having regard the terms of this instrument.

Clause 6 of the 1996 Order embodied no determination that compensation was payable. It preserved and postponed the determination as to what compensation, if any, was payable. That determination was validly made on 13 November1996, in the sum specified by the instrument of that date.

The compensation determined by the Minister on 13 November 1996 has not been paid. During the hearing, counsel for the Minister said that the Minister would not require compliance with the condition that the Council acknowledge acceptance of the amount assessed as being in full and final settlement of its claim. Any possible impediment arising from non-compliance with the condition is thereby removed. The Council is entitled to judgment for the compensation as assessed.

The result is not discordant with the legislation. The effect is that the
Minister has exercised the option provided by cl 3(6) of the Schedule by transferring the Council's electricity distribution undertaking to another body with some compensation in connection with the transfer but without compensation for the value of the assets transferred. That was an option under the legislation.

I received considerable assistance from counsel and solicitors in these proceedings. The documentary evidence and legislative materials were presented with efficiency. The written outlines of argument and the oral argument were clear and thorough. I have limited this judgment to my reasons for decision, without reviewing the range of arguments advanced by each side. In taking this course, I do not intend to depreciate the contribution to which I have referred. I have given priority to a prompt judgment. The alternative would have been a time consuming exercise and would, accordingly, have delayed the result substantially. I would add that it is not practicable, in servicing the
Court's caseload, to take time to review, in a comprehensive way, the arguments advanced by counsel in every case.

I make no orders at this stage. Counsel should bring in short minutes of order implementing this judgment. I will hear argument as to costs on that occasion, if there is no agreement in that regard.
 * * * 
