

Regina versus J W Farrell [1997] NSWSC 643 (12 December 1997) 
REGINA v. John Wilfred FARRELL /96 
FRIDAY 22 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
MAHONEY P, SMART J, DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: John Wilfred Farrell seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentences imposed by the District Court on 13 June 1996, consequent upon Mr Farrell adhering to pleas of guilty to seven counts under section 29B of the Crimes Act (Commonwealth) of imposing upon the Commonwealth by an untrue representation with a view to obtaining money. Each offence carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for two years. I leave out of account any question of a fine.

Remarkably, the offences extend over a fifteen year period from 1978 to 1993.
Each count covers a separate time period of, for example, 1978 to 1982, 1982 to 1990, 1990 to 1991, 1991, 1991 to 1992, 1992 to 1993, and 1993. It is unnecessary to specify the periods in greater detail.

Mr Farrell obtained from the Department of Social Security some $55,112.59, to which he was not entitled. He did so by using three names, namely, John
Wilfred Farrell, John O'Farrell, and John William O'Farrell, and a false date of birth. He completed numerous false application forms over the fifteen years.

The facts appear in the statement of facts and in the Judge's remarks on sentence. The Judge also referred to the subjective features. Amongst other things, the Judge had regard to the evidence adduced on behalf of Mr Farrell and the pre-sentence report.

The Judge regarded this as a very bad case, and so do I. The Judge could not recall any case where there had been such a history of continuous and persistent criminality in the form of imposition upon the Commonwealth.

The policy underlying the Court's approach in matters of this kind is this:
The benefits available are, generally speaking, for those in need. Those benefits frequently have to be paid at relatively short notice, and there is not time for detailed investigation. Consequently, it is important that there be true and frank disclosure by all applicants. If detailed investigation is required to ascertain the truth of claims, then money which should be paid to the needy is diverted into investigation and administrative costs.

The Judge had these matters at the forefront of his mind. The Judge regarded the overall criminality as warranting a sentence which, under New South Wales law, would equate to a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months. The Judge was correct to consider and assess the total criminality of Mr Farrell and the total penalty for that criminality.

Given the nature and period of the dishonesty, the sentence contemplated by the Judge was lenient. He sought assistance from the legal representative of the Commonwealth as to the orders which he should make to give effect to his intentions. The Judge sentenced Mr Farrell on each count to concurrent terms of imprisonment for eighteen months, to commence from 13 June 1996. He ordered that Mr Farrell be released on parole on 12 December 1997, by way of a recognisance release order, on terms that he be of good behaviour for a period of two years from that date, and submit himself to the supervision of the
Probation & Parole Service for a minimum period of six months, or a maximum period of two years, at the discretion of the Service. The Judge made a reparation order in the sum of $51,921.79, being the balance then outstanding.

It was conceded by the Commonwealth that the form of the Judge's orders contained a mistake. Section 16G of the Crimes Act (Commonwealth) relevantly provides: "...if a federal sentence is to be served in the prison of a state...where state...offences are not subject to remission or reduction the Court imposing sentence must take that fact into account in determining the length of the sentence and must adjust the sentence accordingly." 
New South Wales is such a State.

In DPP (Commonwealth) versus El Karhani [(1990) 21 NSWLR 370] at 383G, this Court stated the reduction was to be made to the head sentence.

The assessment of the Judge of the overall criminality and the need for a custodial sentence of eighteen months was correct.

This is not a case where the sentences had to be concurrent. The appropriate course is to impose a fixed term of imprisonment of twelve months on count two, that count involving nearly half the money ($27,471.10 and half the period), commencing on 13 June 1996, and sentences of six months on the remaining counts, being counts 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, such sentences to be concurrent but cumulative to the sentence imposed on count 2. The six months sentences are each to commence on 13 June 1997. There should then be a recognisance release order directing the release of Mr Farrell as from 13
December 1997. That order should be of a duration of six months and require Mr
Farrell to be of good behaviour and to submit himself to the supervision of the Probation & Parole Service for a period not exceeding six months. This period of 6 months has been fixed without objection from the Commonwealth. On another occasion it may be necessary to consider whether the period of such an order when taken with the period of imprisonment must not exceed in total the maximum penalty of 2 years.

The appropriate course is to vary the orders made by the Judge. In view of the intricate and obscure nature of the provisions of the Crimes Act , the Commonwealth should bring in short minutes of order later in the day.

MAHONEY P: I agree.

DUNFORD J: I also agree.

MAHONEY JA: The orders of the Court will, therefore, be, at the moment, to the effect of those pronounced by Smart J.

At 2.00 pm the Commonwealth brought in Short Minutes, the form of which had been agreed to by the parties. The court then made the following orders:
Leave to appeal is granted;
The appeal is allowed, and the sentences are quashed;
In lieu thereof:- 
In respect of count 2, the applicant is sentenced to imprisonment for 12 months, to commence on 13 June 1996 and expire on 12 June 1997; and 
On each of the remaining counts, being counts 1 and 3 to 7 inclusive, the applicant is sentenced to imprisonment for 6 months to commence on 13 June and expire on 12 December 1997, to be served concurrently with each other, and cumulatively on the sentence imposed on count 2.
Order that the applicant be released on 12 December 1997 by way of recognisance release order without security to be of good behaviour for a period of 6 months from 12 December 1997, and to submit to the supervision of the Probation and Parole Service for that period of 6 months.

The President explained the effect of the Court's orders to the applicant.
 * * * 
