

Coates versus Harbour Radio Pty Ltd & Anor [2010] NSWSC 796 (20 July 2010) 
Last Updated: 22 July 2010 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Coates versus Harbour Radio Pty Ltd & Anor <case>  
JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /20443  
HEARING DATE(S):  March 2010  
JUDGMENT DATE:  July 2010  
PARTIES: 
John Dowling Coates (Plaintiff) 
Harbour Radio Pty Ltd (1st Defendant) 
Alan Jones (2nd Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Fullerton J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
B McClintock SC (Plaintiff) 
ATS Dawson (Defendants)  
SOLICITORS: 
Kennedys (Plaintiff) 
Banki Haddock Fiora (Defendants)  
CATCHWORDS: 
COSTS  whether relief sought is appropriately brought by an interlocutory process  indemnity principle  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Associations Incorporation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/aia1981307/) (Vic)  [Civil Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/)  [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/)  
CASES CITED: 
Adams versus London Improved Motor Coach Builders Ltd <case>; <case> 
Blair versus Curran <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 464] 
Coates versus Harbour Radio Pty Ltd & Anor <case> 
Coshott versus Woollahra Municipal Council <case> 
Dyktynski versus BHP Titanium Minerals PTY Ltd <case>; <case> 
Halliday versus High Performance Pty Ltd (in liq) <case> 
Spies versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia <case>; [(2006) 66 NSWLR 474]  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
The defendants' notice of motion is dismissed. 
The defendants are to pay the plaintiff's costs.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
FULLERTON J JULY 2010 /20443 COATES versus HARBOUR RADIO PTY LTD & 
ANOR 
JUDGMENT HER HONOUR: By notice of motion dated 22 February 2010 the defendants seek relief in connection with an order made and entered on 12 September 2008 obliging them to pay the plaintiff's costs consequent upon him succeeding in a defamation action that was heard and determined by Adams J on 4 April 2008 (Coates versus Harbour Radio Pty Ltd & Anor <case> The relief sought by motion includes a declaration that the indemnity principle applies to the costs order, an order permanently restraining the plaintiff from enforcing the costs order and an order that the proceedings on the costs assessment commenced in January 2010 be permanently stayed.  In written submissions filed in advance of the hearing Mr McClintock SC argued that the application is misconceived and should be dismissed on a number of alternate bases.
 The first that the application is effectively an attack on a final order, in this case a final order entered by consent, and is therefore res judicata.
While he accepted that a challenge to a final order may be brought by way of an appeal, or by exercise of the power granted by r 36.15 of the Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules (UCPR) where it can be shown that the order was made "irregularly, illegally or against good faith" (none of which is alleged here), it was submitted that the relief sought here is a collateral challenge to a final order and should be refused. An allied submission is that to seek to challenge the order by notice of motion is inappropriate and the motion should be dismissed on that basis. Spies versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia [(1991) 24 NSWLR 691] is cited in support of that submission.
 It was next submitted that there is no other source of power in the [Civil
Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) to allow me to entertain the application at this time. In particular, the power under [s 67](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s67.html) of the [Civil Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) to order a stay of proceedings is not available given that the section requires that the proceedings to which the stay is referable are before the Court and, in this case, there are no proceedings over which the Court exercises jurisdiction. The proceedings in defamation concluded before Adams J in
September 2008 when the costs order was made and entered and although the proceedings to enforce costs under the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/) have commenced by the filing of an application for a costs assessment, they are not proceedings in this Court.
 Further, it was submitted that if the defendants seek to resist enforcement of the costs order, the challenge should be mounted in the costs assessment process in accordance with the procedure now specifically provided for in
Division 11 of [Part .2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/index.html#p3.2) of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/). It is contended that if in that process the assessor falls into error, an appeal now lies to the District Court and not this Court as was the situation under s
M of the Act (see for example Wentworth versus Rogers <case>; [(2006) 66 NSWLR 474).] For this reason alone, so it was submitted, the motion should be dismissed as to seek relief in this Court at this stage is to circumvent the clear intention of the Parliament that the jurisdiction hitherto exercised by this Court should now be exercised by the District
Court.
 Finally, it is submitted that even were the proceedings competently brought by notice of motion, the relief sought should be refused, since there has been no breach of the indemnity principle disentitling the plaintiff from recovering his costs as the successful litigant in the primary proceedings.
 In his oral submissions Mr McClintock submitted that in addition to the challenges to the competence of the proceedings outlined in the written submissions, the terms of the resolution passed by the Executive of the AOC
Inc pursuant to which the plaintiff was indemnified in respect of the costs of primary litigation are decisive in disposing of the notice of motion.  The precise terms of the resolution passed by the Executive of the AOC are as follows: 
The Executive confirmed that the President is entitled to defend his reputation as a result of the positions he holds at the AOC and: 
IT WAS RESOLVED: to ratify the payment of legal fees to date and going forward in this matter by the AOC; to confirm the policy whereby Members of the Executive are indemnified against legal fees and expenses where, with the approval of the
Executive, they institute legal proceedings arising out of loss and damage suffered as a direct consequence of their membership of the Executive.

The indemnification is on the basis that the Committee reimburse such legal fees and expenses as a first priority out of any award or settlement.
 It was submitted that on a proper construction of the agreement embodied in the resolution, the terms upon which the AOC agreed to indemnify the plaintiff for his legal costs obliged him to repay the total costs from any monies he received by order of the Court, or was entitled to recover by order of the
Court, including an order for costs in his favour in the event that he was successful in the defamation action. On this construction of the agreement there has been no breach of the indemnity principle since the plaintiff is entitled to enforce the costs order to meet his obligations under the funding agreement with the AOC, and the fact that the plaintiff's costs of the litigation have already been fully met by the AOC paying the plaintiff's lawyers as the litigation progressed is irrelevant.
 Mr Dawson of counsel submitted that this construction of the resolution was not reasonably open because the term "any award or settlement" should be read restrictively limiting "any award or settlement" to any award of damages, or any settlement where damages are agreed, but exclusive of costs. He further submitted that if I am persuaded of the construction advanced by Mr McClintock then the plaintiff is only entitled to enforce the costs order to the extent of the amount of money he remains obligated to repay the AOC.

Background to the current proceedings   The plaintiff's damages claim was in respect of a number of imputations which were conveyed when the second defendant broadcast his views concerning certain events that occurred during, and immediately following, the rowing final of the Women's Eights in the 2004 Olympic Games. At the time of the broadcast the plaintiff was the President of the Australian Olympic Committee ("the AOC") and a member of the Executive of the Australian Olympic Committee
Inc ("AOC Inc"), an incorporated association under the [Associations
Incorporation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/aia1981307/) (Vic).  At the hearing before Adams J in 2008 the plaintiff was asked by the defendants' senior counsel whether he was personally litigating the claim for damages. He said that the AOC was "standing behind him". Cross-examining counsel did not seek to clarify precisely what the plaintiff meant by that answer. That is whether the AOC supported his action as a matter of principle or whether they were supporting him financially by funding the litigation. For my [part
I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/aia1981307/index.html#p1) see little latent ambiguity in the response. In any event, the relationship between the plaintiff and the AOC Inc was not the subject of any further evidence in the primary proceedings and was not raised when the question of costs was adjourned before Adams J to allow the parties to prepare submissions.  On 12 September 2008 the defendants consented to an order that they pay the plaintiff's costs on a party - party basis up to 30 November 2006, and thereafter on an indemnity basis. The order was entered that day.  On 29 May 2009, before a bill of costs was prepared by the plaintiff to enable costs to be assessed, the plaintiff filed a notice of motion seeking an order that the defendants pay interest on costs pursuant to [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s101.html) of the [Civil Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/).
 The proceedings on the motion were heard before me over a number of sitting days in August 2009.
 Prior to the hearing the defendants sought and obtained confirmation from the plaintiff's solicitors that he did not personally pay the legal costs associated with the primary proceedings either during the currency of those proceedings or at any time thereafter. Instead the tax invoices, rendered by his solicitors between June 2005 to the date of judgment and thereafter to 30
March 2009, were raised in the name of the AOC Inc and paid by that entity. As
I noted in the judgment at [8] the defendants must have believed that to be the case, even if they did not know it as a fact, given that in June 2008 the plaintiff directed that the judgment sum in the amount of $360,000, and judgment interest in the amount of $28,563.29, be paid directly to the AOC
Inc. In the proceedings Mr Mercer, the Director of Corporate Services for the
AOC Inc, deposed to the fact that these payments were made in partial discharge of the plaintiff's obligation under a private arrangement he had with the AOC Inc to repay the costs of the litigation in the event that an award was made in his favour, and to do so as a first priority before taking the benefit of any award.  On 1 October 2009 the plaintiff's notice of motion was dismissed with costs. In coming to the view that the jurisdiction under [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s101.html) had not been engaged, I said at [24]-[25] that: ... I am of that view not because the governing operation of [s (5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s101.html) requiring that costs be paid by the plaintiff as a prerequisite has not been satisfied (although I have doubts as to whether that is an appropriate characterisation) but because I am not persuaded that the order sought is to compensate the plaintiff.

Even were I wrong in that view I would refuse, in any event, to exercise the discretion in the plaintiff's favour. I do not regard the plaintiff's conduct in seeking the funding, or his apparent participation in securing it, as relevantly disentitling. In particular, I make no finding at all as to whether the plaintiff conducted himself in accordance with the AOC's Code of
Conduct at the meeting of the Executive where the resolution was passed. In addition, I accept that the funding arrangement was pursuant to an existing policy and that it was the subject of a formally constituted resolution of the
Executive who apparently saw the plaintiff's private interests in pursuing the defendants for damages as coincident with its interests in protecting the integrity of its President. I am, however, left unsettled by the way the application has been mounted and the state of the evidence led in support of it. It was, of course, entirely a matter for the plaintiff and his advisors as to whether he gave evidence as to his intentions in bringing the application.
In the circumstances where he has elected not to do so, he has failed to persuade me that the discretion should be exercised in his favour.
 The plaintiff moved to have his costs assessed on 14 January 2010 by filing an application in accordance with the procedure provided for [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/s354.html) of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/). Mr Mark
Hodges was appointed as the costs assessor. In correspondence dated 20 January Mr Hodges called for the costs agreement between the plaintiff and any legal practitioner who represented him in the proceedings, including any costs agreement with counsel, to enable him to determine whether the indemnity principle had been breached. It is not clear whether this was something he sought exercising the power afforded him under [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/s354.html) of the Act or whether the defendants, as the costs respondents, being made aware of his call for the documentation, raised the issue of the funding arrangements with him.
 In any event, on 2 February 2010, the defendants advised Mr Hodges that before the assessment process commenced they proposed seeking declaratory relief in this Court to the effect that the indemnity principle had been breached and, since resolution of the issue would likely involve consideration of what were described as complex legal and factual issues, the appropriate forum to resolve those issues was in this Court. It was common ground that after this approach Mr Hodges decided that the assessment process should be deferred. While there is nothing to indicate that the plaintiff sought to persuade Mr Hodges that he should proceed with the assessment (or for that matter nothing to indicate whether the documentation the assessor asked for was supplied) what is clear is that the plaintiff vehemently opposed the approach the defendants proposed as reflected in correspondence tendered in the proceedings.  
The evidence on the motion  The defendants read an affidavit of Graham Hryce, the solicitor with day- to-day carriage of the costs proceedings. Various documents were annexed to the affidavit replicating, in large measure, the documents that were before me in the proceedings brought by the plaintiff last year. A transcript of the evidence given by Mr Mercer in those proceedings was also tendered. Although, notice was given requiring Mr Hyrce to attend for cross-examination, after discussion the parties were in agreement that they would proceed on the basis that there was no challenge to my published finding at [8] of the judgment to the effect that while the defendants may not have known as a matter of fact that there was some funding arrangement between the plaintiff and the AOC before the relevant documentation was produced under notice, at the very least they must have believed that to be the case given that in June 2008 the plaintiff directed that the judgment debt and judgment interest was to be paid directly to the AOC Inc.
 The plaintiff read the affidavit of Patrick George, the managing director of Kennedy's (Australasia) Pty Ltd and the plaintiff's solicitor in the proceedings. In the affidavit Mr George deposed, without objection, to a conversation he had with the plaintiff on 27 September 2006 in the course of preparing a client agreement for the plaintiff to execute before he assumed conduct of the proceedings then pending before Adams J. He said the plaintiff said: 
I would like to retain you to act for me in defamation proceedings against
Alan Jones and 2GB. You will need to get the files from Simon Rofe who has been acting for me as he has decided to pull up stumps ... I have an indemnity from the Australian Olympic Committee for my costs.
 Mr George went on to say that at the time he was conscious of the possibility of a conflict between the plaintiff and the AOC over the indemnity and the need for the retainer to be made with Mr Coates personally for a number of reasons: 
On 26 September 2006 I was appointed to act as a referee to the
Supreme Court of New South Wales for enquiry and report in relation to costs incurred by a plaintiff in defamation proceedings arising out of an indemnity by the company of which he was a director: Whitlam versus National Roads and
Motorists' Association Limited (Supreme Court of New South Wales No. 50185 of ); 
That case concerned a dispute between the director and the company over an indemnity for his legal costs; 
Mr Coates was the plaintiff in the proceedings and would be liable for his costs as the firm's client, notwithstanding the AOC indemnity which was an arrangement made between him and the AOC.
 On 3 October 2006 a written retainer between Kennedy's and the plaintiff was prepared which was executed by the plaintiff on 11 October 2006. The terms are unexceptional. They identify Mr George as the responsible partner in the provision of legal services in relation to the proceedings, and detail the fact that reports will be rendered monthly and fees and expenses which will also be rendered monthly (unless otherwise agreed) in accordance with an attached scale of fees. The following is also set out in the letter: 
Agreement 
By accepting the terms set out in this letter you will enter into a Client
Agreement with us. This means that you will be bound by the terms and conditions set out in this document and the Standard Business Terms. You may accept by either: 
Signing and returning a copy of this document; 
Giving us instructions after receiving this document (including continuing to give instructions in the matter; or 
Speaking to us and confirming that you accept.

The document bears Mr Coates' signature and is dated.
 Mr George went on to say in his affidavit that in the course of acting for the plaintiff from that time no conflict had arisen in relation to the indemnity, as the AOC had in fact indemnified the plaintiff in respect of all his legal expenses, and had paid each of the accounts rendered by his firm in respect of those expenses. He also said he caused a search to be undertaken of the files delivered to him by Mr Rofe when he took over the carriage of the matter, but was not able to find any written client agreement between the plaintiff and Mr Rofe within those files. He said (also without objection) that after speaking with Mr Coates, who was at that time overseas, he was told that no document was prepared pursuant to which Mr Rofe was retained to act on his behalf. Mr George was not required for cross-examination.
 Mr Rofe appeared as solicitor on the record for the plaintiff when the original statement of claim was filed on 13 December 2004. Invoices were issued by him between early 2005 and 5 October 2006 in the total amount of $183,919.26. These were progressively met by the AOC.  Although I have come to the view that there has been no breach of the indemnity principle, primarily on the basis of Mr McClintock's analysis of the terms of the agreement embodied in the resolution, I propose to deal briefly with the procedural challenges to the competence of the plaintiff's claim for completeness.

Is the relief that is sought appropriately brought by an interlocutory process?  In so far as concerns the plaintiff's invocation of the principal said to emerge from Spies versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Mr Dawson submitted that although the Court of Appeal regarded it as both convenient and appropriate that where a consent order is to be set aside on the basis of fraud or deceit that a fresh action should be instituted rather than a motion in the original proceedings, the Court should not be taken to have laid down an immutable rule wherever a consent order is the subject of challenge or review. Moreover, so it was submitted, given the overriding principle provided for in [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) and [59](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s59.html) of the [Civil Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), the relief sought and the means of seeking it meet the statutory objectives of facilitating the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues. He emphasised that at the time of the primary proceedings before Adams J the defendants were not aware of the fact that the AOC Inc had paid the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings pursuant to the funding arrangements reflected in the resolution of the Executive. He argued that they could not have been aware of the fact, or the detail of those funding arrangements, from a single line answer given in cross-examination that the AOC "were standing behind him". When that information did come to light in the proceedings brought by the plaintiff for interest on costs in May last year, Mr Dawson submitted that it was wholly inappropriate to litigate the question whether the indemnity principle had been breached in those proceedings, it being irrelevant to the issue that I was then considering, despite the fact that it was a live issue in argument over the course of the hearing. Mr Dawson submitted that the issue was "parked" at that time to be revisited at some later date and that the plaintiff could have been under no doubt as to the arguments that would be mounted by the defendants in seeking to invoke the indemnity principle and no doubt as to the evidence that would be relied upon in making good that claim.  While that might be so, it has to be said that the defendants took no steps to raise the question of the indemnity principle either prior to the consent order for costs being made and entered in September 2008, (despite being on notice of the issue when the plaintiff directed that the judgment debt and interest be paid directly to the AOC Inc in June 2008), or thereafter for 12 months until August 2009, preferring, it seems, to wait and see whether the plaintiff would seek to recover his costs by filing a bill of costs as part of the assessment process.
 Subject to the principle of res judicata to which I will presently refer, it would have been open to the defendants under [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s98.html) of the [Civil Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) to bring an application to have the plaintiff's right to recover his costs determined in this Court in accordance with the approach that Austin J considered appropriate in Australian Beverage Distributors versus The Redrock Co  <case>. In that case his Honour, after finding in the defendants' favour in the primary proceedings, ordered that the plaintiff pay the defendants' costs as agreed or assessed. He did however allow the plaintiff liberty to restore the matter before him to settle the question, raised late in the proceedings, as to whether the indemnity principle had any application. Thereafter, the plaintiff filed a notice of motion seeking orders reviewing or revising the costs order Although his Honour acknowledged there may be a question as to the appropriateness of the procedure employed by the plaintiff, he did not explore the issue having resolved to determine the question on what he described as "the substance of the evidence". He went on to say: 
In a case where the application raises a question relating to evidence given at the trial reflected in the court's findings in its principal judgment, and the assessment of costs by a costs assessor has not been commenced, my view is that the trial judge has the power to deal with the application, and ought to do so (Civil Procedure Act, 2005 , <case>(b);
Wentworth versus Rogers <case>; [(2006) 66 NSWLR 474], at 512-4 per Basten JA; cf 485-7 per Santow JA). In my view none of the "floodgates" problems adverted to by Basten JA in Wentworth v
Rogers (at 514) has any application here.
 In the present case, although in a practical sense the costs assessment process has not commenced (or if it has, it has not progressed any distance such as might otherwise justify this Court refusing to consider the application), this is because the defendants have moved unilaterally to have the costs assessor defer the assessment against the plaintiff's opposition.
While there might have been at one time sound reasons for taking this approach (in the sense that it was thought evidence might need to be led orally in the process of determining whether the indemnity principle has any application), in the result that has not proved to be the case. That said, in the particular circumstances of this case and despite the largely unexplained delay in the plaintiff seeking a costs assessment, I do not consider the breadth of the power under [s (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s98.html) of the [Civil Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) should be read down. I am satisfied that the parties should be afforded the opportunity now to have the question of the application of the indemnity principle determined.

Are the orders res judicata?  The plaintiffs submitted that the declaratory relief sought is a collateral attack on the final orders which conclusively establish the plaintiff's right to cover the costs the defendants were ordered to pay at the conclusion of the primary proceedings. I was referred to the analysis of the principal articulated by Handley JA in Coshott versus Woollahra Municipal Council <case> where at <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 464] at 531 as follows: 
A judicial determination directly involving an issue of fact or of law disposes once for all of the issue, so that it cannot afterwards be raised between the same parties or their privies.
 In the case his Honour was considering Mr Coshott had unsuccessfully sought a declaration from Whealy J that he was entitled to the restitution of money paid to the Woollahra Council for its legal costs because of a breach of the indemnity principle after it had successfully brought an action in the Federal
Court for garnishee orders, which resulted in final orders requiring him to pay money into Court and the subsequent payment to the Council of those monies. Quite apart from his Honour concluding that there was no breach of the indemnity principle because of an arrangement between the Council and a mutual indemnity scheme known as Premsure, on the issue of res judicata his Honour held that: 
The entitlement of the Council to those costs under the orders and certificates of the Federal Court is res judicata, and it is not competent for this, or any other Court, to entertain a challenge to those orders in collateral proceedings. The principle prevents any inquiry into the legal or factual correctness of those final orders. The appeal from the decision of
Whealy J refusing to make the declaration sought should therefore be dismissed.
 I am of the view that, properly construed, the terms of the costs order made by Adams J by consent in September 2008 and entered at that time are not of the same legal effect as the final orders in Coshott and are not caught by the res judicata principle. The costs order has the effect of ordering the defendants to pay such costs as are allowed on assessment on an indemnity basis from the designated date, and prior to that on a party-party basis, such that in the circumstances of this case the challenge mounted by the defendants to the effect of the order is susceptible to being considered in these proceedings.  
The indemnity principle The uncontroversial rationale behind the operation of the indemnity principle is to ensure that the successful party to litigation is indemnified against the costs they have incurred in vindicating or upholding their legal rights. Equally as plainly, if the successful party to the litigation is not liable to meet his or her lawyers' costs, the compensatory aim of the indemnity rule has no function, since in those circumstances a costs order would serve to unjustifiably enrich the successful party.
 Where there is an agreement between client and solicitor, pursuant to which the litigant is absolved from paying lawyer-client costs, the indemnity principle is breached. No such agreement is alleged here. What is submitted by
Mr Dawson is that even if there were a retainer between the plaintiff and Mr
Rofe and then Kennedy's (which is disputed), the funding agreement between the
AOC and the plaintiff, embodied in the resolution set out in paragraph [8] above, effectively absolves him of having to meet the costs of the litigation because he is only obliged to pay to the AOC the monies awarded to him in the form of damages (and interest on damages) and he had paid over that money.
 Before resolving the question of retainer and construing the terms of the resolution, to the extent that it bears emphasis, the indemnity principle has been frequently and consistently applied even where the discharge of the litigant's liability in respect of costs is remote or where, as was the case here according to the plaintiff, the AOC's payment of the plaintiff's legal costs progressively throughout the litigation reduced the prima facie liability of the plaintiff to pay that amount to his solicitors. The leading case is Adams versus London Improved Motor Coach Builders Ltd [[1921] 1 KB ]
where Bankes LJ reasoned as follows: 
When once it is established that the solicitors were acting for the plaintiff with his knowledge and assent ... he became liable to the solicitors for costs, and that liability would not be excluded merely because the Union also undertook to pay the costs. It is necessary to go a step further and prove that there was a bargain, either between the Union and the solicitors, or between the plaintiff and the solicitors, that under no circumstances was the plaintiff to be liable for costs.
 This approach has been applied throughout the collected authorities to which I was referred by both parties as to which Coshott versus Woollahra
Municipal Council at [11] is but one example.

Did the plaintiff retain solicitors to act for him in the primary proceedings? In the absence of a written retainer with Mr Rofe the plaintiff relied upon the principles mentioned in Grundmann versus Georgeson <case> and the observation of Mason CJ at <case>, quoting the judgment of Dawson J to the following effect: 
The mere fact that a person appears on the record as the solicitor for a party does not necessarily justify the conclusion that there is a contract of retainer between the solicitor and that party. But, at least where the party is aware of this and takes no steps to rectify it, then a presumption must arise that there is a contract of retainer between them. And, both in so far as the Court is concerned and as between the parties to an action, the presumption that the solicitor on the record represents the party for whom he is recorded as being solicitor must surely be a strong one.
 Mr Dawson sought to emphasise that the invoices did not refer to the plaintiff by name but by the descriptor "Australian Olympic Committee Inc Re:
Sally Robbins affair" and were addressed to the AOC's office address, and further, that advice as to rights of assessment under the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/) was included. This, it was submitted, supported the inference that the AOC was the client and liable to Mr Rofe for his fees and not the plaintiff, thereby rebutting the presumption that arises from Mr Rofe being the solicitor on the record. He also submitted that in the absence of any evidence from the plaintiff I would be satisfied that the presumption has been displaced.  I am not persuaded that the strong presumption to which the authorities refer has been displaced in this case. The fact that the AOC engaged Mr Rofe, as a solicitor with whom they had an established relationship to act for the plaintiff, does not displace that presumption. Neither does the fact that Mr
Rofe looked to them for payment have that effect. As the authorities make plain, in the absence of evidence that the plaintiff was not be liable to Mr
Rofe for his legal costs, his liability should not be excluded. I note that in
Adams versus London Improved Motor Coach Builders Ltd the retainer between the plaintiff and his solicitors was implied.  In so far as the relationship between the plaintiff and Kennedy's is concerned Mr McClintock submitted that I would be easily satisfied that the written retainer executed on 11 October 2006 evidences a clear agreement between the plaintiff and the solicitors that he was personally liable to pay the legal costs of the litigation. This is said to be put beyond doubt by the fact that there is no collateral agreement between the AOC and Kennedy's such as might have permitted the lawyers to recover their costs from that body if they remained unpaid.
 Mr Dawson submitted that the terms of the retainer do not have the operation contended for by the plaintiff. I was invited to come to view the retainer was prepared and executed as some form of insurance against the potential for a dispute to erupt between the plaintiff and the AOC, so as to allow Mr George to continue to act for the plaintiff, and not to ensure the plaintiff's personal liability for costs. He again sought to draw comfort from the form in which the invoices were drawn, in that they were each marked to the attention of Mr Mercer Director of Corporate Services within the AOC without any mention of the plaintiff by name, and that each of the invoices included advice to the AOC and/or Mr Mercer of their rights in relation to a costs assessment under the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/). Mr
McClintock submitted that this might be readily and sensibly explained on the basis of administrative convenience in circumstances where it is clear beyond doubt that both Kennedy's (and Mr Rofe before them) knew that the AOC was indemnifying the plaintiff for the costs of the litigation, each being solicitors with whom the AOC had an established relationship. In any event, so he submitted, the first principles of contract law make it plain that it is simply not open to inquire into the motives behind Mr George contracting with the plaintiff when the plain terms of the agreement impose on the plaintiff a liability to pay his legal costs.
 I am not persuaded that any of the matters to which Mr Dawson referred undermine the clear terms of the written retainer and their legal effect.

What are the plaintiff's obligations under the funding agreement with the AOC? While the language of the resolution might lack legal felicity, I am satisfied that it should be interpreted in the way contended for by Mr
McClintock, namely that the AOC is entitled to be fully reimbursed from the monies the plaintiff is awarded by the Court the full amount of the costs it has paid on his behalf. He submitted that this interpretation makes sound commercial sense and no other rationale for the funding arrangements has been submitted by the defendants. He submitted, and I accept, that no violence is done to the language of "any award or settlement" to speak of the plaintiff being awarded his damages and his costs or that he was awarded his costs as the successful party (see by analogy Altorfer & Stow (A Firm) versus Lindsay & Anor  <case> at <case>- <case>.
 Dyktynski versus BHP Titanium Minerals PTY Ltd  <case>; [60 NSWLR 203] is authority for the proposition that where a litigant is liable to his solicitor for the costs of proceedings and where the litigant is indemnified for those costs (as I have found is the case here) he or she is entitled to recover his assessed costs for the benefit of the party who has provided the indemnity.
 Mr Dawson submitted that even were I persuaded of the construction advanced by Mr McClintock the plaintiff's entitlement to recover costs should be capped to the extent of what he remains obliged to repay to the AOC, after having paid over the monies awarded to him in damages in advance of having costs assessed, since he has no continuing liability to either Mr Rofe or Kennedy's, they having been fully paid by the AOC. Authority for that proposition is said to be mandated by application of the principle in Adams versus London Improved
Motor Coach Builders Ltd adopted by French J (as he then was) in Angor Pty
Ltd versus Ilich Motor Company Pty Ltd <case>; [(1992) 37 FCR 65.] That analysis, in my view, overlooks the fact that in this case what the plaintiff has done by directing the amount of $360,000 (plus interest) be paid to the AOC, is simply to have honoured that part of the agreement that obliges him to pay the AOC as a first priority from the monies that he has been paid and to which he is otherwise entitled, an obligation that continues until such time as the amount they have advanced is fully paid.
I am of the view that once the balance of the funds advanced by the AOC are fully repaid from the monies he recovers on assessment, the plaintiff is entitled to retain from the costs recovered the remainder, since they represent the amount awarded as damages to compensate him for the damage to his reputation. Were it otherwise, the defendants would, by reason of an incidental arrangement between the plaintiff and a third party, be able avoid the effect of the damages component of the orders made against it in the primary litigation.

Orders The orders I make are as follows:
The defendants' notice of motion is dismissed.
The defendants are to pay the plaintiff's costs.  
LAST UPDATED:  July 2010 * * * 
