

Tawil versus Public Trustee of New South Wales Matter No 4696/97 [1998] NSWSC (1 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 25 November 1998 
TAWIL versus PUBLIC TRUSTEE OF NEW SOUTH WALES /97 July 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
FILE NO: 4696 of 1997 
DELIVERED: 1 July 1998 (Reserved) 
HEARING DATE: 24 June 1998 
PARTIES: Tawil versus Public Trustee of New South Wales 
JUDGMENT OF: Hodgson CJ in EQ 
COUNSEL: 
Plaintiff: Mr R Tregenza 
Defendant: - 
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff: Malouf Solicitors, Parramatta 
Defendant: - 
CATCHWORDS: 
Practice - Declaratory Relief - Need for Contradictor 
Gifts - Donatio Mortis Causa 
Evidence that the deceased gave to the plaintiff a bag containing car keys and bank statements on the day before his death stating "I want you to have everything if I die" - Plaintiff sought declaration that he was entitled to the cars and the money in the accounts to which the statements related - The deceased did not leave a will - There was no evidence of searches for next-of- kin - Without an effective gift or next-of-kin, the property would go to the
Crown - The Attorney-General declined to take part in the proceedings - Held that the Court would not dispense with the need for a contradictor without satisfactory evidence of searches for next-of-kin; that the doctrine of donatio mortis causa did not extend to apply to bank statements, which are neither indicia nor evidence of title; and that requisite utility not present for declaration regarding the cars.

Public Trustee versus Brussel [(1993) 30 NSWLR 111] 
Sen versus Headley [(1991) Ch. 425] at 440 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The late Michael Biriukoff died at St. Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst on 21st April 1996, apparently aged 64. The evidence suggests he left the following property. 
Property Lodged With Hospital 
CPAP machine 
Three bags of clothing and personal effects 
Cash: $US1,071.00 Swiss francs $A3,309.00 
Property Found In His Room 
Three icons 
Typewriter 
Fax machine 
Microscope 
Two Motor Vehicles 
BS-400 
NGB-704 
Bank Accounts 
Bank of Melbourne Account No.70815337 - $539.58 
ANZ Bankcard Account No.5610572262325953 - $933.16 
Citibank New York Account No.40009911500 - $US6988.00 
Bank of the West San Francisco - three accounts 
Account No.042-067942 - $US6102.52 
Account No.042-018895857 - $US128,682.49 
Account No.042-018892854 - $US57,778.97.

No will has been found, and there has been no grant of administration. These proceedings, brought by the plaintiff, a friend of the deceased, against the
Public Trustee of New South Wales, seek declarations that the plaintiff is the absolute owner of the funds in the bank accounts and of the motor vehicles.
The Public Trustee has adopted the position that, as a bare repository of title, it is not appropriate for it to be made a defendant, and it has not appeared in the proceedings.

ISSUES 
The relief sought is declaratory relief, and as a general rule such relief requires both a contradictor and utility.

Subject to those matters, the issue in the case is whether the plaintiff has shown that the deceased made a gift to him of the money in the bank accounts and of the motor vehicles.

CONTRADICTOR AND UTILITY 
As noted earlier, although the Public Trustee was joined as a defendant, it has not appeared. In my view, the Public Trustee's position as a bare repository of title pending a grant of administration, pursuant to s.61 of the
Wills Probate & Administration Act, does not make it an appropriate contradictor of the plaintiff's claim. As I understand it, this is accepted by the plaintiff.

The evidence suggests there is no will, so unless the deceased had next-of- kin, property of the deceased in New South Wales not effectively given to the plaintiff would go to the Crown as bona vacantia. The New South Wales
Attorney-General has been notified of the proceedings, and in accordance with his usual practice, the Attorney-General has declined to take part in the proceedings.

In those circumstances, if it were proved that the deceased had no next-of- kin, or at least that no reasonable steps could be taken to ascertain whether there were next-of-kin, the Court might be prepared to dispense with the necessity for a contradictor.

The death certificate shows that the deceased did not marry and left no children; but the informant for the death certificate was the plaintiff. The plaintiff's evidence is that he was a close friend of the deceased, indeed like a son to the deceased, from early 1990 to the date of death. According to the plaintiff, the deceased told him that he had no relations or close friends in Australia; that he migrated to Australia during World War II (the deceased's death certificate shows he was born in Tsingtao, China); that he never married, and had no brothers and sisters; and that both parents died in
Australia, his mother in 1973 and his father in 1987.

This evidence from the plaintiff is not enough to satisfy me that there are no next-of-kin, or even that no reasonable steps are available to ascertain whether there are next-of-kin. Although the plaintiff gives evidence not merely of the statements to which I have referred, but of a close relationship with the deceased suggesting no contact with relatives for the period 1990 to , this covers only the period of the deceased's life from the time when the deceased was about 58 years of age up to the time he died. At least unless it could be shown that no further evidence is available, I would need more evidence to satisfy me that the deceased did not marry or have children, and that he had no brothers or sisters. So far as the evidence goes at present, it would seem that reasonable enquiries about the existence of next-of-kin would involve such things as obtaining the death certificates of the parents, obtaining access to records of administration granted in their estates, enquiring of the deceased's employer, the Ethnic Affairs Commission, whether it had any record concerning the deceased's family, and obtaining searches for any marriage of the deceased or the birth of any children of the deceased.

Accordingly, in my opinion, before the Court could dispense with a contradictor, there would need to be evidence of the taking of these steps, or evidence explaining why these steps had not been taken.

Turning to the question of utility, there could perhaps be utility in the making of a declaration concerning the bank accounts, if the requirement of a contradictor or dispensation with a contradictor was satisfied. As regards the cars, the evidence does not establish any particular utility in a declaration concerning the cars: it appears that the defendant has possession of them, and there is no challenge to that possession.

DONATIO MORTIS CAUSA 
The plaintiff's evidence is that on 20th April 1996, on the way to the hospital where he died, the deceased gave him a bag containing certain items.
The plaintiff gave evidence of the following conversation: 
I drove the deceased to St. Vincent's Hospital. He had said to me that we should go to St. Vincent's Hospital. On the way the deceased was holding a bag in front of him. It was a black shoulder bag with brown tubing. We then had a conversation to the following effect:- 
Deceased: Yousef, you know I loved you always as my son, and you know that I have no relatives, so if anything happens to me I want you to have all that it is in this bag. You will find details of my bank accounts, the car keys and all my other papers. Everything I own is yours if anything happens to me.

Me: Don't strain yourself by talking like this. You are going to be alright.

Deceased: I want you to have everything if I die and the papers are all in the bag. . He then gave me his bag.

Deceased: ... I packed it specially so that I could give it to you. If anything happens to me, please arrange the necessary things with the church for my funeral and make sure that a tombstone is built over my grave.

The bag contained statements concerning the bank accounts. According to the conversation the bag also contained the car keys, though I do not find this plainly asserted otherwise in the affidavit.

The principles concerning donatio mortis causa are set out in Public Trustee v. Bussel [(1993) 30 NSWLR 111] at 431.

The main question in this case concerns the second requirement. As regards the bank statements, the evidence suggests that they are not indicia of title, and are not required to be produced to the bank to obtain payment of funds from the accounts.

Mr. Tregenza for the plaintiff submitted that, although existing authority suggested that the delivery had to be of the subject matter of the gift or of part of the means of getting at the subject matter of the gift or some indicia of title to it, there had been significant developments and lessening of the requirements for donatio mortis causa in recent years. Mr. Tregenza referred me to Birch v. Treasury Solicitor [(1951) 1 Ch. 298.] He also pointed out that s.18A of the Wills Probate & Administration Act reflected the trend in the law to dispense with formalities and look to the intention of the deceased as the crucial matter. In this case, the deceased did everything he possibly could to make a gift of the funds in the bank accounts: the handing over of the bank statements plainly demonstrated his intention, and was plainly symbolic of it.

It is generally recognised that the doctrine of donatio mortis causa is anomalous: it makes a gift effective even though the requirements for a will are not satisfied, and even though the delivery requirements for a gift inter vivos are not satisfied. I do not think the doctrine should be extended to apply where what is handed over are merely bank statements which are in no sense indicia of title or even evidence of title. I accept the statement in
Sen v. Headley [(1991) Ch. 425] at 440 to the effect that the anomalous nature of the doctrine does not justify the creation of anomalous exceptions to it; but in my opinion, to extend the doctrine from its application to such things as bank passbooks and share certificates to mere bank statements would in fact be an anomalous extension of the doctrine.

As regards the car keys, assuming they were in the bag given to the plaintiff, and accepting the plaintiff's account as correct, that would appear to be within the principles and thus to be an effective donatio mortis causa of the cars. However, in the absence of a contradictor and in the absence of demonstration of utility, the plaintiff is not entitled to a declaration to that effect.

CONCLUSION 
For those reasons, unless the plaintiff satisfies me that there is some reason to keep these proceedings alive, I would propose to dismiss the proceedings.
 * * * 
