

Specifier Publications Pty Ltd versus Clayton Long and Ors Matter No 2991/96 [1997] NSWSC 364 (2 September 1997) 
Specifier Publications Pty Ltd & 2 Ors versus Clayton Long & 2 Ors /96 September 1997 
Bryson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /96 - SPECIFIER PUBLICATIONS PTY LTD & 2 ORS v.

CLAYTON LONG & 2 ORS 
JUDGMENT (PENALTY) 
HIS HONOUR: In reasons published on 13 December 1996, with which these must be read, I found that the Statement of Charge of Contempt of Court against Mr Clayton Long had been established for Items (a) and (d) to the effect that in breach of an undertaking given to the Court he did not prepare or cause to be prepared an inventory listing all the items proposed to be removed from the premises; and did not ensure that he remained at all times in charge of the exercise of the rights conferred by the orders of 26 June 1996 and passed possession and control of the goods, documents and chattels to the second and third defendants.

The second and third defendants are Mr Kurren Bhatia and Delaware Corporations
Pty Ltd which is a company controlled by him.

The part played by the supervising solicitor is essential to Anton Piller orders, and since very early in their development it has been clear that if a court is to make such an order there must be an arrangement for it to be carried out under professional supervision. Mr Clayton Long was in a position which no other of those who carried out the order could possibly occupy, in that he could understand fully the purpose of the seizure and the use likely to be made of the things seized, the need for further resort to the inventory and the need for control over access to and use of the things seized. He gave an undertaking dealing comprehensively with the part he was to take, including preparation of an inventory and remaining in charge of the exercise of rights conferred by the order. The undertaking given by the plaintiffs was much more limited, an undertaking not to use any of the things obtained except for the purpose of this litigation, and Mr Bhatia gave no undertaking.

The breaches of Mr Long's undertakings in two respects led to disadvantages of kinds which it may be feared that executing Anton Piller orders will cause, namely difficulty in identifying what things have been removed and difficulty in controlling access to and use of them and in getting them back. Without Mr
Long and his undertakings there would not have been any Anton Piller order.
Without his breaches there would not have been any difficulty in getting the things seized back and there would not have been a second litigation.

The property seized was laden into two vehicles and driven off by persons brought to the premises by Mr Bhatia, without Mr Long having made any arrangements at all to find out where the goods were going, or how they would be stored, or any arrangements for access to them, for their return or for their protection from weather, theft or inattention. He saw the things seized into the control of Mr Bhatia, but when they left the premises he did not concern himself any further with them. He knew nothing useful about where they were, he was unable to assist when a further direction of the court required them to be returned and he fobbed off the people to whom they were to be returned without any practical assistance. He entirely disregarded his undertaking to remain in charge. This contempt calls for punishment of some severity.

There are significant mitigating circumstances. Mr Long was admitted as a solicitor in September 1989 and has established a good reputation as a solicitor carrying on practice in an honourable way, not the subject of complaints or litigation except in relation to this controversy. His character is spoken of highly in affidavits by solicitors much senior to him. One is Mr
Ross Neville who was first his employer and later his partner for significant periods and was well able to express a view on his character. Another solicitor Mr Michael Gill, who is of high professional standing, has also attested to Mr Long's good character, on the basis of professional, personal and social associations, and has recorded his opinion that Mr Long is a careful serious solicitor who understood his responsibilities and took them seriously, and that it is surprising and at odds with what is known of him that he should have committed the contempts found. His good character is also attested on the basis of long acquaintance by an affidavit of Ms Janet Oakley, barrister. Other witnesses who are not legal professional persons speak highly of him on basis of long experience of his character. Character witnesses speak highly of his honesty, and I do not regard his honesty as being impugned as the facts relate to irresponsible conduct and not to dishonest conduct.

Mr Long has made considerable contributions to community affairs and given much time to supporting school debating which has been of great assistance to young people. He has made an affidavit explaining his view of his responsibilities, his concept of his professional position and reputation and the impact of the proceedings on him. He has taken the position in that affidavit, generally similar to that taken during the hearing, that he did not understand that the orders required him to take physical possession of the goods that were seized, and that if he had understood that he would have asked the court for some further orders varying this requirement or would have arranged for his own staff to transport the goods seized to locations under this control. This position does not meet the case: he was to remain in control of the exercise of rights, either by taking physical possession or in some other way, and as a professional person and a rational man he must have known that this is what his undertakings meant.

Mr Long has incurred financial burdens in that his professional insurance protects him against the costs order only in excess of $9000 which he must pay himself, and that claim will have an adverse affect on his future premiums. He has spent much professional time, which he estimates at 72 hours, in attending to these proceedings, causing him to lose income and having a significant adverse affect on his practice. He found the experience of conducting the defence of Mr Abadee's claim extremely distressing.

Mr Long's counsel pointed out that an opportunity was given to Mr Abadee to examine the goods against the inventory; Mr Abadee did so, sought two alterations and signed the document. This is correct, but it does not shift responsibility for breach of the undertaking; Mr Abadee had not given an undertaking, the protection of Mr Abadee was not the whole purpose for which the undertaking was required, and responsibility for breach of the undertaking cannot in any manner or to any extent be shifted onto Mr Abadee.

Counsel also referred to circumstances in the evidence which he said showed that there was pressure to depart the premises. Obviously, the event was not a calm one; the police attended twice and someone had a sufficient sense of opportunity to summon police to serve on Mr Smith an Apprehended Violence
Order which already existed. People executing Anton Piller orders must know that they will not be welcome, and adult hardihood is required. Mr Long remained at the premises and action under the order continued for four hours after Mr Abadee arrived. I see no reason why this time could not have been extended if necessary, and there was a real opportunity to do anything which ought to have been done. Pressure to depart could have no relation to Mr
Long's failure to remain in charge of the exercise of the rights conferred.

Counsel contended that Mr Long had no reason to think that Mr Bhatia would not act in accordance with advice, or that he would not continue in a professional relationship with Mr Long for later stages in the working out of the orders, and that Mr Bhatia's later declining to hand back the goods when the litigation was settled was an extraordinary turn of events and not to be expected. Quite otherwise, to my mind a professional person ought to have seen that such a turn of events was possible, that this was one of the reasons why a professional person was required to remain in charge, that the maintenance of effective control was quite important for the scheme contemplated by the court and that the involvement of Mr Bhatia, given the interest he had, called for vigilance.

It was said to be a mitigating circumstance that Mr Bhatia was acting plainly quite wrongly when he refused to return the goods and when he acted in a way which meant that Mr Long's relationship with Mr Bhatia was insufficient to secure the return of goods. I do not accept this as a mitigation. It does no more than illustrate the need for vigilance and for careful compliance with the undertaking. It was also put to be a mitigation that the goods ultimately were returned when Mr Bhatia was brought to the realisation of his position in the course of the contempt proceedings, and that, in a manner, the adverse affects of the contempt have been overcome. I regard these as mitigating circumstances.

It was then put that the culpability is almost entirely on Mr Bhatia, that he obtained the goods on an untenable basis and could not have had any justification for refusing to return the goods, yet maintained his resistance until well into the hearing, and that Mr Long should not bear the responsibility for this.

Mr Bhatia's involvement should have prompted vigilance. Mr Bhatia did not give any undertaking. The involvement of Mr Bhatia in carrying out the order was a possible source of future difficulties because he had a claim in right of his companies to be or become the owner of the things seized or some of them under an agreement for purchase from Messrs Smith and Lambert and their companies, because he had not given an undertaking to the court as they had, and because there had been no disclosure to the court of circumstances which made him an unsatisfactory choice as an agent of the plaintiffs to carry out the order.
Those circumstances were that he was the principal of purchasers from the plaintiffs, that he was paying their costs, and that the sale to his companies was in contemplation when the order was obtained, was carried to contract before the order was executed, and was not revealed to the court.

Counsel also contended that there is an absence of any need for deterrence in
Mr Long's case. In my opinion this is not correct. Meticulous performance by officers of the Court of undertakings like this is essential if there are to be Anton Piller orders at all. The court can only make an Anton Piller order if the rights of persons affected are handled with great care and respect, and if the opportunity to put matters right is in the court's hands. The court's dependence on solicitors as its officers is very high, and the potential for
Anton Piller orders to evoke resistance or even violence is real and obvious.
The situation created needs controlling, and disregard of the rights of those involved or high-handedness can have very unfortunate effects. It is fortunate that the evidence in this case does not, as I have heard in another case, speak of flourishes of fists or of a pistol. There is in my judgment a real need for deterrence against disregard of undertakings in circumstances like these.

Mr Long said in his affidavit "If ultimately the court's findings are upheld on appeal, then given my obligations as a practitioner I fully resile from any inappropriate conduct and apologise unreservedly to the court." I do not regard this as an expression of contrition, or as an apology. The plaintiffs' counsel observed that the apology offered was circumscribed and subject to reservations and did not extend to trouble and difficulty caused to the plaintiffs. He also observed that Mr Abadee had incurred a financial burden in that he had to pay $8,500 towards the settlement which he reached with Mr
Bhatia and related interests; but I do not have any regard to that, as I cannot appraise whether, in the whole circumstances of the relations between
Mr Abadee and his companies on the one hand and Mr Bhatia and his companies on the other, this was excessive or appropriate. Perhaps, without the settlement,
Mr Abadee would have got the things seized back under the Anton Piller order but would later have been required to return them to Mr Bhatia, whose purchase agreement was the earlier. Counsel also observed that Mr Abadee also has given much time to the second litigation and has lost income.

An object of contempt proceedings is to bring about compliance with orders and undertakings, insofar as that is possible, or to achieve some outcome which has the same effect; and that object was, as nearly as may be, achieved with the settlement of the second litigation between Mr Abadee and Mr Bhatia, the restoration of the goods and the order for costs.

Mr Long's counsel contended that the imposition of the order for payment of costs was sufficient to dispose of the question of contempt and that a fine or penalty was not warranted.

A submission was made, and developed by reference to authority relating to parity in criminal sentencing, to the effect that I should not impose a penalty, or that the penalty should be shaped to have regard to the need for parity with the case of Mr Bhatia, against whom the contempt proceedings were withdrawn when the claim for return of the goods was settled, so that no penalty was imposed on him. I was referred to the R. versus Tisalandas [[1982] 2
NSWLR 430] and Ditford versus Calcraft Court of Appeal 22 December 1989.
The significant authority is the decision of the High Court in Postiglione v.
The Queen, 24 July 1997. In my opinion there are no grounds for considering parity. The situations of Mr Bhatia and Mr Long are altogether different, as
Mr Bhatia gave no undertaking whereas Mr Long is a professional person who gave an undertaking. Mr Bhatia had a claim of right, however poorly founded, and no judicial decision was ever given on the contempt proceedings against him; he was neither found to be in contempt nor acquitted of contempt, the proceedings were settled under an arrangement under which he, at least on the face of the terms of settlement, incurred some disadvantages, and consideration of a question of parity cannot really begin.

The failure to prepare an inventory was a qualitative failure, a gesture was made towards preparing an inventory and some slight respect was paid to protecting other people's interests and to Mr Abadee's interest in it observing the court's requirement. There was a failure, very unfortunate in its effect, to perform a task of a kind which solicitors are ordinarily relied on to perform meticulously; if there had been no other breach and in the light of the mitigating circumstances which I have referred to it would have called for the court to deliver a severe reprimand for a very inadequate professional performance. Mr Long's failure to ensure that he remained in charge of the exercise of the rights conferred, and particularly to make any arrangements at all to have control over the things seized is a failure of much higher seriousness, flagrant disregard of the high responsibility placed on him for the achievement of the purposes of the court's order and for the protection of the property of others. Mr Long's breach was gravely irresponsible.

On Wednesday 27 August 1997 when I was about to publish my judgment in these proceedings the parties brought it to my attention that they then agreed, in
Terms of Settlement dated that day, on the total sums to be paid by Mr Long to
Specifier Publications the first plaintiff for costs and also expenses or other compensation in respect of the breach of the undertaking. The total amount to be paid is $33,000, for which earlier evidence shows that Mr Long is insured subject to an excess of $9,000 which he must bear himself. The Terms of Settlement provided for the plaintiffs to withdraw counsel's submission made on 11 August 1997 that a penalty for contempt should be imposed. The plaintiffs' counsel did withdraw that submission and instead submitted that in the light of the fact that the parties have reached agreement and that the plaintiffs do not ask for the imposition of any penalty, none should be imposed. I have taken time to give further consideration to what I should do, but I have concluded that I should act as I had earlier decided to act, as it is not in the hands of the plaintiffs as the parties moving for determination of the charges of contempt of court to establish by their submissions whether a penalty is appropriate or not. My concern for the protection of the plaintiffs from the consequences of breach of undertaking is fully met by the
Terms of Settlement and the plaintiff's entitlement to $33,000 in respect of expenses, compensation and costs. The question whether there is to be a penalty is determined on consideration of interests far wider than those of the plaintiffs.

I have regard to Mr Long's very good personal antecedents, and to the disadvantages which he has suffered. Taking both contempts together, I am of opinion that the imposition of a penalty is required, that a reprimand would be altogether inappropriate, that a fine of considerable severity is called for but that the amount of the fine should be moderated having regard to the mitigating circumstances, which must have considerable impact. The appropriate fine is $15,000.

ORDERS: ) Declare that the first defendant Clayton Long is in contempt of the Court in respect of Items (a) and (d) in the Statement of Charge under the Notice of
Motion of 13 August 1996.
 ) Order that the first defendant Clayton Long pay a fine of $15,000.
 ) With respect to costs and expenses, note the agreement between the parties in Terms of Settlement dated 27 August 1997 and filed herein.
 ) With respect to the remaining claims of the plaintiff in the proceedings, by consent make orders in the Short Minutes.
 * * * 
