

Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Peek Matter No 11350/96 [1998] NSWSC 6 (5
February 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 March 1998 
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA versus PEEK /96 February 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Name of Case: COMMONWEALTH BANK OF 
AUSTRALIA versus PEEK 
Proceedings: 11350/96 
Dates of Hearing: 2, 3 February 1998 
Date of Judgment: 5 February 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr C R C Newlinds 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Corrs Chambers Westgarth 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr C W J Leggat 
Solicitor for Defendant: Andrew P Quigley & Co 
Claim by the plaintiff for monetary judgment and possession.

Claim opposed by a cross-claim seeking relief under the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) and pursuant to the Amadio principles.

Cross-claim dismissed on the facts.

I N D E X 
Page 
The Proceedings 1 
Mrs Peek's Cross-Claim 3 
The Entry Into The Mortgage 6 
The Letters Of Acknowledgment 16 
The Position Thus Far 22 
The Position Of The Company As Known To 
The Bank As At 13 December 1989 26 
The Specific Allegations Made In the Cross-Claim 37 
The Letters Of Acknowledgment 39 
Alternative Remedies 40 
Conclusions 40 
Orders 41 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
The Proceedings 
By a Default Statement of Claim issued on 19 March 1996 the plaintiff,
Commonwealth Bank of Australia, ("the Bank"), for which Mr C.R.C. Newlinds of
Counsel appeared, sought an order for possession of land, a monetary judgment and ancillary relief against the defendant, Mrs Loris Grace Peek, for whom Mr
C.W.J. Leggat of Counsel appeared. The Bank's claim arose out of a mortgage, registered number Z472421, which incorporated the provisions of the memorandum filed in the Land Titles Office registered number T340042, given by Mrs Peek to the Bank over the whole of the land of which she is the registered proprietor, being the property comprised in Certificate of Title Folio
Identifier 6/SP3203 and known as 2C/5-7 Girilang Avenue, Vaucluse. The property is a home unit in which Mrs Peek and her husband, Mr Hugh Peek, have resided since approximately 1968 and, so far as the evidence disclosed, it is the only substantial asset of Mrs Peek.

The mortgage, which on its face is an "all moneys" mortgage, was given by Mrs
Peek to the Bank:- "In consideration of certain advances and accommodation granted or to be granted at the request of the Mortgagor to Waratah Foods Pty Limited .." 
Mrs Peek's husband and their son, Mr Michael Peek, were the directors of that company, to which I shall refer as "the company", and it was not in issue that
Mrs Peek was neither a director of nor shareholder in it. It was executed by
Mrs Peek at the King and Clarence Street Branch of the Bank on 13 December in the presence of Mrs Christine Graham, whose maiden name was Togher.
Although, as I have said, it purported to be an "all moneys" mortgage it was not in issue that initially it was limited to a maximum liability of $100,000 together with interest, costs, charges and expenses as provided for in it.
That appears from a letter from the Bank to Mrs Peek of 12 December 1989. On January 1990 and 2 July 1990 Mrs Peek signed Letters of Acknowledgment addressed to the Bank whereby she acknowledged that it had granted or may be granting from time to time to the company:- ".. accommodation and otherwise permitting the Debtor to incur liabilities to the Bank not exceeding an aggregate amount at any one time and from time to time of ... against the security of my mortgage(s)/guarantee(s) to the Bank referred to in the schedule below." 
In the letter of 23 January 1990 the amount was stated as $160,000, and in the letter of 2 July 1990 as $210,000.

The Default Statement of Claim alleged default under the mortgage, which is not in issue, and the entitlement pursuant to that default to the orders to which I have referred, which entitlement, save for one matter, is not in issue. At the commencement of the proceedings, Tp.1, Mr Leggat stated:- "Mrs Peek admits if her Cross-Claim is not successful, the Bank is entitled to possession of the property and judgment in an amount of $309,660.94 in accordance with the statement of account handed to me earlier to-day." 
It was also conceded, Tp.3, that the sum of $309,660.94 comprised the principal amount of $210,000, being the amount referred to in the letter of 2
July 1990, and interest thereon from 30 November 1994.

He confirmed that this left in issue the matters raised in Mrs Peek's Cross-
Claim, which are pleaded as claims for relief pursuant to the provisions of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) , ("the
Act"), and the principles enunciated in Commercial Bank of Australia Limited v Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447] and Yerkey versus Jones [(1939) 79 CLR 486.] 
Mrs Peek's Cross-Claim 
In paragraph 4 of her Cross-Claim Mrs Peek asserted that the execution of the mortgage took place in circumstances where:- "a. There was material inequality in bargaining power between the parties to the Mortgage; b. Prior to and at the time the Mortgage was executed the provisions of the Mortgage were not subject to negotiation; c. It was not reasonably practicable for the Cross-Claimant to negotiate for the alteration of, or to reject any of, the provisions of the Mortgage; d. The provisions of the Mortgage and their legal and practical effect were not explained to the Cross-Claimant in terms she could comprehend.
 e. The Cross-Claimant did not understand the nature and effect of the mortgage.
 f. The Cross-Claimant was not advised to seek independent legal or financial advice as to the merits of the mortgage.
 g. The Cross-Claimant did not obtain legal or financial advice as to the merits of the mortgage.
 h. The Cross-Claimant was a person of modest means whose income would not allow her to assume the obligations under the Mortgage should Waratah Foods not be able to service the overdraft from the Cross-Defendant which was secured by the Mortgage ("the overdraft").
 i. The Mortgage document was complex and in a form which was not readily comprehensible by the Cross-Claimant.
 j. The Cross-Clamant was not given an opportunity to read the Mortgage.
 k. Financial records and/or bank statements in the possession of the Cross-Defendant at the time the Mortgage was executed showed that the ability of Waratah Foods to service the overdraft was marginal, at best, and Waratah Foods would in all likelihood not be able to service the overdraft.
 l. The Cross-Claimant left school at the age of sixteen and has had very little commercial, business or financial experience, her main work duties consisting of secretarial duties.
 m. The Cross-Claimant was not advised of the desirability of seeking independent legal advice as would enable her to make an accurate evaluation of her obligations compared to those of Waratah Foods, and in fact did not do so.
 n. The Cross-Claimant was not advised of the desirability of obtaining independent financial advice as to the viability of the transaction or the ability of Waratah Foods to service the overdraft and, in fact, did not do so.
 o. The Cross-Claimant was not advised of the consequences to her of the failure of Waratah Foods to service the overdraft in words she could understand or at all.
 p. The Cross-Claimant was not a shareholder or director of Waratah Foods and obtained no benefit from the Mortgage.
 q. The Cross-Claimant was not informed of the reality of the risk to which she was exposing herself, nor did she appreciate the reality of that risk." 
The Cross-Claim alleged that the mortgage is a contract within the meaning of [ss.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) and [9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the Act and that "in the premises" it was unjust "in the circumstances relating to it at the time it was made".

It was further pleaded that in the alternative the mortgage constituted "an unconscionable bargain within the principles in" Amadio, and, in the claims for relief an order was sought that it was void ab initio "on application of the principle in Yerkey versus Jones". The Yerkey versus Jones point was not pursued.

Mrs Peek sought declarations that the mortgage was unjust within the meaning of [ss.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) and [9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the Act and that it is void ab initio, and orders that it be terminated and that the Bank execute a discharge of it. A declaration was sought that the mortgage "is void in equity" and, in the alternative, an order was sought pursuant to [s.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) that it be varied so as to limit the liability of Mrs Peek "to such an amount as this Honourable Court deems appropriate in the circumstances".

The Entry Into The Mortgage 
In her affidavit of 10 December 1996 Mrs Peek stated that she was born on 5
October 1930, concluded her schooling at sixteen years of age in New Zealand and, after migrating to Australia, engaged in secretarial work prior to her marriage to Mr Peek in 1960. In late 1968 she and her mother purchased units in the same block in Girilang Avenue and she gave a mortgage to her mother to secure the repayment of portion of the purchase price. She continued to do some secretarial work and, in 1971, her husband commenced working for the company. She had no involvement in the business, nor was she consulted about or told of its financial affairs. She relied for such information upon her husband and she believed that he was a competent business man running his affairs properly.

Several weeks before Christmas 1989 she had several conversations with her husband at their home in relation to a new business deal with certain other parties in which he was interested in becoming engaged. He told her that the
Bank's manager from Botany required more "collateral if this deal is going to go ahead" and that she would "need to sign some papers at the Bank". She asked why this was so and was told of the new business, which was "going to be very profitable". She asked about the deeds to the unit and he assured her that they would be returned "very quickly" to which she replied:- "OK I will go in and sign them at lunch time." 
In paragraphs 19 and 20 of her affidavit she deposed:- "19. I recall that a few days later I went in to the Commonwealth Bank at the corner of King and Clarence Street, Sydney and attended the enquiries counter at that branch. I signed some documents at the front counter of the bank. I do not recall who I spoke to on that occasion. I do however recall at that time that my son and my daughter (sic) were expecting their first child as it was just before Christmas. I was quite busy at that time and I did not consult a solicitor. In fact, I have never really had my own solicitor. I did not think of consulting a solicitor at the time as I trusted Hugh to have not asked me to put my house at risk. Annexed hereto and marked with the letter `A' is a true copy of the mortgage signed by me on or about 13 December 1989. I did not receive a copy of the mortgage at the time, however I recognise the signature on page 3 of that document as being mine. . Following the commencement of these proceedings I was shown a copy of a letter dated 12 December 1989 from the bank addressed to myself. I do not recall receiving this letter. Annexed hereto and marked with the letter `B' is a true copy of that letter." 
It will be recalled that was the letter that stated that the present maximum liability to the Bank under the mortgage was $100,000.

Mr Leggat tendered an affidavit of Mrs Christine Graham, who was formerly an officer of the Bank, and which was prepared on its behalf and sworn on 13
February 1997. It was admitted without objection and Mrs Graham was not required for cross-examination. In it she stated that on 13 December 1989 she witnessed the execution by Mrs Peek of the mortgage and:- "4. Whilst I have no independent recollection of Mrs Peek attending the King and Clarence Streets Branch of the Bank or of witnessing the execution of the Mortgage by Mrs Peek, my usual practice in accordance with the prescribed diary note was to refer the Mortgagor to the Mortgage document and hand to the Mortgagor the Bank's S33 letter (a copy of the relevant S33 letter provided to Mrs Peek dated 12 December 1989 is annexed and marked `B'). My usual practice was to say to the Mortgagor words to the following effect: `This is the Bank's Mortgage over your property at (I would then state the relevant property). This letter notes what you are liable for under the Mortgage. You should not sign the documents until you have read the letter and satisfied yourself as to your liability. You should have a solicitor look over them. If you wish to take them away for that purpose, you can. If you do not understand what you are signing, you should not sign them.' . I would then identify the facilities which the Mortgage was covering. I would then say words to the effect of: `The Mortgage covers the facility being provided to (I would then state the Borrower's name)'.
 . There is no reason why I would have departed from my usual procedure in this instance." 
In her oral evidence Mrs Peek stated that the mortgage had been sent to the
King and Clarence Street Branch to meet her convenience, as she was working nearby at the time.

In her oral evidence in chief, Tp.4, Mrs Peek was asked about the events of 13
December 1989:- "Q. Would you please tell his Honour what it was that you thought you were going to do at the Bank on that occasion? 
A. I was signing a, well, a mortgage to help my husband in his business to sort of ..

Q. Do you know how much money your husband was going to receive from the Bank? 
A. I understood it was $100,000.

Q. Did you have an understanding as to how much you might be liable for, to the Bank, under the mortgage that you were being asked to sign? 
A. Well, I understood it to be $100,000.

Q. What is the basis of that understanding, that is, your understanding that you might be liable for $100,000? 
A. Well I thought I signed the document for that amount and that was the extent of the amount." 
There could not be the slightest doubt from this evidence that Mrs Peek understood that on 13 December 1989 she was signing a mortgage over her property to secure a loan of $100,000 to help her husband in his business and that she understood that the amount for which she was then potentially liable was $100,000. No point was taken that the money was to be lent to the company, rather than her husband. Nor on the evidence could it have been. The matters to which I have referred were reinforced in cross-examination. She agreed,
Tp.7, that in December 1989 she knew what a mortgage was and, Tp.8, that if she did not comply with the promise to repay the mortgagee had the option of selling the property to repay the debt and, after that right was exercised, she would only receive any amount left over. She continued:- "Q. In December 1989 you understood that when you were asked to sign a mortgage over your unit in favour of the Commonwealth Bank, that what you were being asked to do was to put up your unit as security? 
A. Yes.

Q. For moneys owed to the Commonwealth Bank by Waratah Foods Pty Ltd? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you knew if Waratah, for whatever reason, was unable to pay the moneys it owed to the Bank, that you would be called upon to either pay an amount of money? 
A. (Witness nodded).

Q. Or if you weren't able to pay the amount of money that was called on, to sell the unit to pay that amount? 
A. Yes.

Q. You understood that? 
A. Yes. 
Q. But you thought, as at December 1989 that your liability, pursuant to the mortgage, was limited to $100,000? 
A. Yes, I did." 
She agreed that she did not think there was any arrangement whereby the company would not be allowed to borrow more than $100,000, and that she believed it was only her liability that was limited to that amount and, further, that it was "wholly irrelevant" to her how much the company might have borrowed as at December 1989. She continued, Tp.9:- "NEWLINDS: Q. At any time after the signing of the mortgage in December 1989, you really hadn't had any interest in what Waratah owed the Bank, had you? 
A. No.

Q. Your interest has been how much your potential liability is ..

A. Yes.

Q. .. on the mortgage? 
A. On the mortgage." 
She said she was not happy about executing the mortgage and, Tp.10, that she was hesitant: ".. but it was a new venture and he" (Mr Peel) "thought it was going to be successful." 
She said her husband allayed her fears "a little" about the risk that she could lose the unit "as a result of having signed the mortgage" and:- "Q. As at 13 December 1989 you knew that there was a real risk that if things didn't go as your husband wanted them to go that you could lose the unit? 
A. But he assured me that that - that it would be all right and I sort of went along with it. 
Q. But you, notwithstanding his assurances to you, you were very worried about the mortgage, weren't you? 
A. Yes I was worried, yes.

Q. And you often asked your husband ..

A. Yes, I often did, especially when I was hospitalised a couple of times and I was updating my will.

Q. And the reason you were worried and the reason you asked your husband on many occasions `when will I get the deeds back' is because you fully understood that there was a real risk that if things didn't go the way your husband wanted them to go that you could lose the unit; correct? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you didn't need anyone to explain that fact to you, did you? 
A. No, but I realise now I should have got advice.

Q. Well, as at December 1989 if someone had told you, `look, there is a risk that if Waratah cannot repay its debts to the Commonwealth Bank, you could lose the units', you wouldn't be being told anything that you didn't already know? 
A. No, but no one told me that." 
At Tp.13 Mrs Peek was cross-examined about what Mrs Graham asserted she told her and she agreed Mrs Graham could have told her that to which she deposed, but she had no recollection of it. She added she could not deny it.

The evidence to which I have referred in which, in my view, Mrs Peek frankly conceded a number of matters, satisfies me that as at 13 December 1989 she knew that she was signing a mortgage to secure the indebtedness of the company for $100,000; that she was advised by Mrs Graham in the terms to which Mrs
Graham deposed but elected not to take any legal advice, because she was "quite busy at that time"; and that she realised that if things did not turn out as her husband anticipated there was a real risk that she may lose the unit, which fact did not have to be explained to her. It was this realisation which caused her to be worried or concerned about entering into the mortgage.
This showed an appreciation of their being "a real risk". Finally Mrs Peek made it clear that she wished to assist her husband in his business and that she had confidence in him. There is further evidence, to which I shall refer shortly, which satisfies me of these matters.

Before considering that it is convenient to note certain of Mr Leggat's submissions. He submitted, firstly, that whilst Mrs Peek understood she was signing a mortgage and the legal effect of a mortgage, the Bank failed to advise her or to make it clear to her that there was a very real risk that because of the company's financial position the prospect that she may lose the unit was a real one. Mr Leggat's principal submission was that the Bank was possessed of information, which disclosed that the company's financial affairs were not good, and was bound to disclose this to Mrs Peek before she entered into the mortgage. It will be necessary to consider the state of the company's financial affairs when the mortgage was entered into and whether, in the circumstances, there was any obligation on it to disclose these matters to Mrs
Peek. It will also be necessary to consider whether, if any such advice had been given, Mrs Peek would not have entered into the mortgage. However, as I have said, I am satisfied by the evidence of Mrs Peek that at all relevant times she was aware that she was signing a mortgage; of the nature of a mortgage; of the purpose for which this mortgage was being granted; and of what steps could be taken if things did not turn out as her husband anticipated. The evidence to which I have referred also makes it clear that it was a matter of no concern or relevance to her how much the company borrowed, provided her liability was limited.

In her affidavit of 15 May 1997 Mrs Peek disputed, at least to some extent, the material in the affidavit of Mrs Graham. She gave a far more abbreviated version of the conversation, but I am satisfied from the uncontradicted evidence of Mrs Graham and the concessions made by Mrs Peek in cross- examination as to her inability to deny the conversation, that Mrs Graham said the words to which she deposed. I am satisfied that Mrs Graham offered Mrs
Peek the opportunity to seek independent advice, which Mrs Peek rejected for the reason to which I have referred.

In paragraph 21 of her affidavit of 10 December 1996 Mrs Peek stated that in late January 1990 her husband approached her and there was a conversation in which he told her the Bank manager wanted her to sign another document "in relation to our new business deal". She asked if she had to and her husband said "yes" and:- "I did not discuss the matter at all with Hugh and I only signed the document in an effort to assist Hugh in ensuring that his company's business deal proceeded without any problems. I did not read the document but was aware it was a document that the plaintiff requested be signed in relation to Hugh's new business deal. ... He requested that I sign the document and I complied with Hugh's request and accordingly the document was signed at our home ..." 
The document, of course, was the acknowledgment letter of 23 January 1990.

In paragraph 23 she deposed that in early July 1990 her husband brought home another document and requested that she sign it. She did not discuss the matter "in any detail" because she was aware it related to the new business and, in paragraph 24, she said:- "24. About six months after I had signed the legal documents at the Bank I had a conversation with Hugh to the following effect: 
He said: `In relation to the document you signed at the Bank and regarding the deeds to this house, I have now got a document which will cover you. This document will protect your whole situation'.

On this occasion I recall that Hugh showed me a letter from a Mr John Diacopoulos, solicitor, to Waratah Foods Pty Limited dated 29 June 1990. A true copy of this letter is annexed hereto and marked with the letter `E'. I recall that I read the letter at the time but did not understand the contents of the letter as Hugh had never really explained to me the precise details of the new business venture that he was entering into with the Japanese fishing company.
 . At no stage during 1989 or 1990 did any person explain to me the true nature of my legal or financial position as a result of signing the abovementioned documents. It was never suggested to me by any of the plaintiffs' officers that I obtain legal or accountancy advice prior to signing the abovementioned documents." 
The letter, which is Annexure "E" and bears date 29 June 1990, or matters relating to it, is or are, as best I understood some oblique evidence, the subject of proceedings in the Equity Division of this Court in which judgment was reserved in December 1996.

I do not accept Mrs Peek's assertion in the last sentence of paragraph 25 in so far as it relates to the obtaining of legal advice. It is inconsistent with the evidence to which I have already referred and which I accept.

The Letters Of Acknowledgment 
In her evidence in chief Mrs Peek was asked to assume an increase in the lendings to the company to $160,000 and she said that had she been aware of that she would have had "second thoughts again", her reason being that she was under the assumption the liability was $100,000. She was then asked to make an assumption about an increase in the liability to $210,000 and she said, Tp.6:- "A. Well, I think I would have started to make enquiries as to what was going on, but I was still - to me it was $100,000. I just didn't think it would escalate like it did. I didn't think, because I think I would have been concerned because the value of the unit would only have been worth $200,000." 
At Tp.13 Mrs Peek said that if she had chosen to seek legal advice there was nothing to stop her doing so, but she did not because she had been asked to sign the mortgage by her husband and she wanted to help him. She repeated that she knew she had signed a mortgage.

In relation to the letter of 23 January 1990 she said, Tp.15:- "Q. And it was quite plain to you that the first document related to your liability to be increased to an amount of $160,000? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you understood that when you signed the first acknowledgment? 
A. Yes, but it wasn't to exceed that amount.

Q. And you also understood that in addition to the $160,000 that your liability could be extended to, that the Bank was entitled to claim charges, interests, and costs over and above the $160,000? 
A. I am afraid I was still under the assumption that it was $100,000, I'm sorry, I just ..." 
I have no doubt from her first two answers just quoted that she understood as at 23 January 1990 that the liability was to be increased to $160,000. She was then asked about the letter of 2 July 1990 and in answer to a specific question that it was clear to her that her potential liability was being increased to at least $210,000, she said she did not think it was going to be and she was still under the assumption it was $100,000. She was shown the letters and, Tp.16:- "Q. And you told Mr Newlinds a few minutes ago that you knew that the amount was being increased from $100,000 to $160,000; do you remember saying that? 
A. Yes, yes, yes. I suppose at the time I must have - I'm sorry, I just I am a bit confused." 
She was taken to the letter of 2 July 1990 and she said she had no difficulty, on reading it, in understanding what it meant, and that there was no reason to suppose that she would not have understood what it meant, if she had read it, in July 1990. She agreed that the letter, which is Annexure "E", had nothing to do with her decision to sign either letter of acknowledgment: Tp.17, and:- "Q. You signed both Letters of Acknowledgment still concerned you could lose your unit? 
A. Yes.

Q. Still unhappy about the situation? 
A. Yes, I was concerned.

Q. And you did so because your husband asked you to? 
A. Yes.

Q. Notwithstanding your understanding of the risk involved? 
A. I was trying to help my husband": Tp.18. 
The last answer made it clear that she understood the risk involved and accepted it to help her husband.

In re-examination, Tp.21, she was asked about the letter of 23 January 1990 and she said she understood the letter to mean that the liability would not exceed $160,000. Once again this showed an understanding of the effect of the documents she was being asked to sign and a willingness to increase her financial obligations with the knowledge of all the matters to which I have referred.

In re-examination, Tp.23, she was asked about her refusal to consent to the liability being increased to $373,500. Her reason was "the unit is not worth that": Tp.24, and:- "Q. So if you had been asked that question you would have directed your mind to the value of the unit? 
A. Yes.

Q. To whether it would secure the debt, the new debt? 
A. Yes.

Q. Correct? 
A. Yes.

Q. And having worked out that the unit wasn't worth that, you would have said: Well I'm not interested in mortgaging the unit beyond what it is worth to help my husband? 
A. That's correct.

Q. That would have been your reasoning process? 
A. Yes." 
This evidence indicated a line of reasoning, which was rational, in the sense that she was not prepared to grant a mortgage in excess of the value of the unit as she understood it, and consistent with her agreeing to the two earlier increases in the amount secured. It was also consistent with her exercising a degree of business acumen in her consideration of the matter, which, in turn, was consistent with other evidence she gave and my impression of her. She said, Tp.24, that it was her understanding in December 1990 that the unit was worth about $220,000. Thus, when an increase well in excess of that amount was sought she applied the reasoning process to which I have referred and refused to agree. This indicated her ability to consider each situation on its merits and to make appropriate decisions to help her husband to the extent that she could, the limitation being her perceived value of the unit. Mr Leggat frankly conceded that this evidence provided great difficulty for Mrs Peek's case and he did not suggest, in any way that I found satisfactory, how it was overcome consistently with the case she was propounding. In my opinion it was, taken in conjunction with the evidence to which I have referred, substantially destructive of that case.

It was perfectly clear from this evidence that Mrs Peek was prepared to mortgage the unit to the extent of its value to help her husband, but not beyond. That became clearer at Tp.25, when she said that she doubted if she would have "gone more than $200,000" because she would not have been able to afford that and:- "I just would have been worried about the outcome. I didn't want to be bankrupt, having not many other assets. I don't quite know how to express it. I mean, as much as I wanted to help my husband, there would have been a limit." 
This answer made it clear that she understood that if the mortgage secured more than the value of the unit her other assets would be at risk.

She repeated she would not have agreed to more than $200,000 and, at Tp.26:- "Q. What do you say your understanding of the nature and effect of the mortgage was that you signed to the Bank, as to the amount to which you could be liable for the Bank after you had signed both of those Letters of Acknowledgment? 
A. I am still sort of thinking, believing it was around the $100,000. I'm afraid, I mean I know I signed those two papers, but I didn't realise I was going to get into - that it would amount to this. I mean, Huey (sic) assured me it was all being covered by this particular cheque and I mean, I am not trying to get out of my obligation to the Bank. I am just wanting to get this other case settled so that we can discharge the debt. I am not trying to get out of it." 
The transcript was corrected to read "Hughy", namely her husband, and the reference to the other case was to the one in the Equity Division to which I have referred. I am satisfied that when her evidence is viewed as a whole Mrs
Peek was "not trying to get out of" her obligations to the Bank, which she understood fully that she had undertaken.

Mrs Peek said in re-examination, Tp.26, that she understood her obligation to the Bank was $100,000 and, Tp.27:- "Q. Just so we are in no doubt about that answer, are you saying - correct me if I haven't understood you - that you acknowledge an obligation to pay $100,000 plus interest? 
A. Yes.

Q. What do you say about obligation to pay $210,000 plus interest? 
A. I don't know what the unit would sell for. 
Q. Leaving that to one side, what do you say as to whether or not you think ...

HIS HONOUR: You can't leave that to one side. The witness thought that was a matter of importance." 
Mrs Peek was not prepared to deny an obligation to repay $210,000 and she was not further asked as to why she thought that the sale price of the unit was a matter of relevance, although it seems to me that the reason is obvious, namely it is totally consistent with her evidence that she was prepared to secure the property to the amount of its value, but not beyond it.

The Position Thus Far 
The evidence to which I have thus far referred satisfies me of the following matters:- 
Mrs Peek understood on 13 December 1989 that she was signing a mortgage over her home unit to secure a loan to the company of $100,000 in respect of a new business venture.

Mrs Peel understood the obligations under a mortgage. Mr Leggat conceded this and hence the contrary was not submitted, nor, on the evidence, could it have been.

Mrs Peek understood that if the company for any reason was not able to repay the amount secured by the mortgage for watever reason, there was a real risk that the home unit would be sold and that she would only receive from the proceeds of sale any surplus after the Bank's debt was discharged.

Mrs Peek was invited to take legal advice on 13 December 1989 by Mrs
Graham but for reasons of her own she elected not to do so.

Mrs Peek was aware that she signed two Letters of Acknowledgment increasing her maximum liability to $160,000 and $210,000.

Mrs Peek was prepared to take these actions to help her husband in his business endeavours.

There was no suggestion that she was in any way forced by the Bank to sign the mortgage or the Letters of Acknowledgment.

Mrs Peek was not prepared to increase the maximum amount beyond what she believed the value of the home unit was, because she was not prepared to risk her other assets.

Mrs Peek was prepared to honour her obligations to the Bank.

On these findings, which, in my opinion, the evidence compels, it is not possible, in my opinion, to hold that the entry into the mortgage constituted the entry into an "unjust contract" within the meaning of the Act as it has been applied by the authorities. It may be that it was an unwise transaction, at least with the benefit of hindsight, and that this will lead to Mrs Peek's losing her home. But these are not matters, in themself, which made the contract "unjust" within the meaning of the Act.

Mr Leggat submitted that Mrs Peek was the type of person who should be, and was intended to be, protected by the provisions of the Act from entering into third party mortgages. I entirely disagree. Her understanding of what she was undertaking was in no way impaired. She knew what she was doing, why she was doing it and the associated risks. The Act has not been construed "to protect" people with that level of understanding. However, Mr Leggat submitted that the failure of the Courts to so construe the Act amounted to a failure to give effect to its beneficial provisions and had "emasculated" the Act. The short answer to this submission, which Mr Leggat conceded was a "cri de coeur", is that the Act is intended to allow the granting of relief, in certain specified circumstances and subject to the exercise of relevant discretions, from a contract found to be unjust in the circumstances relating to it at the time it was made. It does not relieve against transactions in the wider sense, nor against a contract, which is not unjust within the meaning of the Act, merely because in its operation it may have a severely detrimental effect on a party to it.

Mr Leggat submitted that in having regard to the public interest the Court must consider people in the position of Mrs Peek, who, so he submitted, should not be allowed to enter into third party mortgages. In my opinion this submission should be rejected. I do not see why Mrs Peek with the knowledge, understanding and intentions she had should not be allowed to exercise her right to contract. It is only if the contract into which she enters is unjust as provided for by the Act that she is entitled to relief.

In West versus AGC (Advances) Limited & Ors [(1986) 5 NSWLR 610] McHugh JA, with whom Hope JA agreed, reviewed the Act in detail. His Honour pointed to the words of ss.7 and 9 and, after indicating the wide range of the Act, he said, at p.621:- "If a defendant has not been engaged in conduct depriving the claimant of a real or informed choice to enter into a contract and the terms of the contract are reasonable as between the parties, I do not see how that contract can be considered unjust simply because it was not in the interest of the claimant to make the contract or because she had no independent advice." 
After quoting a passage from Professor Peden his Honour said, p.622:- "This passage brings out the important point that, under this Act, a contract will not be unjust as against a party unless the contract or one of its provisions is the product of unfair conduct on his part either in the terms which he has imposed or in the means which he has employed to make the contract." 
In concluding that the appeal should be dismissed his Honour said, at p.631:- "The [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) is beneficial legislation. It must be interpreted liberally. But it operates within and not outside the domain of the law of contract, except for one form of ancillary relief available for the benefit of a person not a party to the contract. By executing the deed of loan and memorandum of mortgage, Mrs West agreed to repay the loan which she obtained from AGC. She did so as Hodgson J found with a full appreciation of the consequences and against the advice of her son, a trained accountant. The deed and mortgage were ordinary commercial documents containing no unfair or unjust terms. AGC was guilty of no unfair conduct towards her. Mrs West's predicament is a sad one. But it is the consequence of the financial failure of Quiche. The primary responsibility for her predicament lies with those who induced her to provide her house as security for the obtaining of a loan of money four sevenths of which was to go to Quiche. But her refusal to accept prudent advice also played a considerable part in that predicament." 
In Esanda Finance Corporation Limited versus Tong & Ors [(1997) 41 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281997%29%2041%20NSWLR%20482 "View LawCiteRecord" ), at p.491, Handley JA, with whom the other members of the Court of Appeal agreed, said:- "Moreover as this Court held in West .. a contract is not unjust merely because it was not in someone's interest to enter into it, or because the person is unable to pay the debt when called upon to do so, or because its enforcement will lead to the loss of a home." 
The Position Of The Company As Known To The Bank As At 13 December 1989 
Mr Leggat made several submissions which, I think, on analysis are inter- related. They stemmed from what he asserted to be the financial position of the company, as known by the Bank, on 13 December 1989. The first submission was that the Bank, as at 13 December 1989, knew that the company was not in a good financial position, which the Bank failed to disclose to Mrs Peek. The second was that in any event the Bank should have advised Mrs Peek to obtain financial advice as to the position of the company and, presumably, its future prospects before giving the mortgage, so that she could assess the likelihood of the risk of her home being sold by having regard to the financial position of the company, or so that she could be advised of this. This was a basic submission. It was that while Mrs Peek understood that a consequence of entering into the mortgage was that if the company failed to repay its debt for whatever reason, she would be liable under the mortgage, none-the-less she should have been advised to have a financial analysis of the company carried out to see how "real" was the possibility of the company not being able to meet its obligations. This submission was linked to the fact that the Bank should have been aware that the possibility was "real" because of the information it had. Mr Leggat expressly conceded that there was no legal obligation arising either at law or under the Act requiring the Bank to take these steps, but he submitted that if the Bank failed to do so it did so at its own peril in the sense that adverse consequences may flow to it. He relied upon the observations of Kirby P in Beneficial Finance Corporation Limited v
Karavas & Ors [(1991) 23 NSWLR 256] at 268:- "The appellant is in a position to make informed business assessments about the risks involved in the extension of finance to particular borrowers. It can cover its position handsomely by taking mortgages such as were secured in this case. It then runs comparatively little risk of ultimate loss. But where the borrowers, or their guarantors and mortgagors, are ill-educated, inexperienced in business, related to those principally involved by blood or affection and involved in the purchase of a business with some apparent risks, the lesson of this case may indeed be that the financier will be well advised to ensure that the guarantors and mortgagors receive effective, independent financial advice on the risks they are running. If that means a divorce between the legal advice which the financier is receiving and that afforded to the borrowers and their supporters that, in my opinion would be no bad thing. If it meant that guarantors and mortgagors sometimes received effective, independent financial advice before imprudently putting their life's savings and the roof over their head at risk, that too would be no bad thing. Indeed, these results appear to secure the kind of objectives which the Act, by affording provision for relief against unjust contracts, clearly contemplated. If that means that some ventures do not go ahead, that cost is added to financing transactions and that delays inevitably ensue, so much may be no more than the inevitable outcome of the operation of the Act." 
As I understand it his Honour's remarks were obiter dictum. If such an approach is the law it will raise for consideration in each case facts such as the financier's knowledge of the understanding of the contracting party, the ambit of the financial advice required to be given, the factors the financial adviser has or should have taken into account and the validity of the advice.
It would also require a consideration, on the facts of each case, as to whether the contracting party was prepared to accept the advice.

The first matter the Bank knew was that on 15 August 1988 National Australia
Bank Limited had registered a charge on the property of the company over all the undertaking and its property and assets both present and future. The company had also granted it a debenture in respect of any moneys owing to that
Bank. There was little evidence to suggest what money was owing, which was covered by those securities. Nor was there any evidence that the giving of such a security is unusual or bespeaks the possibility that a company may not be able to meet its financial obligations.

On 24 November 1989 the manager of the Botany Branch of the Bank wrote a lengthy Internal Memorandum in which he traced the history of the company, which he stated had been operating for over twenty years primarily in the wholesaling of frozen fish to the Middle East. He described the business in some detail and the proposed relocation of the company's operations at the new
New South Wales Fish Marketing Authority complex. He observed that it was asserted that the lease the company was proposing to take could have a selling price of upwards of $1m. He noted, and great reliance was placed upon this by
Mr Leggat, that the export operations had suffered "a dramatic downturn" because of difficulties with the Middle East market, but that it was anticipated that "arrangements will normalise itself (sic) in the short to medium term". It was noted that a limit of $50,000 to cover working capital requirements had been sought and that no financial statements for the year ended 30 June 1989 were available, although there was some information that there was cash in hand as at 30 June 1989 of $60,631.94. The bank statements show that as at 24 November 1989 there was a debit balance of $33,673.93 at the Bank, and the note recorded that as at 30 June 1989 the Bank overdraft with the National Australia Bank Limited was $86,000. The collateral advantages were seen as providing cash flow through the Bank and the general comments and recommendation were stated as being:- "The company has some twenty years experience in the trade and from the discreet (sic) enquiries made, we have established they have a first class reputation. The most concrete evidence of this is by virtue of the fact that they have acquired space in the new Fish Marketing complex without bidding and hold the only export licence from same.

We also understand Peek has a close working relationship with the Manettas' who have a pre-eminent standing in the industry.

We do not question the personal equation of Peek. Accordingly establishment of facility as proposed is recommended." 
A document entitled "Balance Sheet Schedule" showed that as at 30 June 1988 total shareholders' funds were approximately $16,800, total current assets were approximately $360,000, total assets were approximately $378,000 and total current liabilities were approximately $360,000. The figures showed a turnover of approximately $272,800, and nett profit before tax and extraordinary items were shown as (0.03) per cent.

On 12 December 1989 the Bank wrote to the secretary of the company confirming its approval of an overdraft limit of $100,000 for working capital subject, inter alia, to a mortgage by Mrs Peek over her property. There was no suggestion that the money was not borrowed for the purpose of working capital, nor that the mortgage from Mrs Peek was taken to shore up the security taken to cover already existing indebtedness.

There was no evidence that the company was not meeting its financial obligations as and when they fell due, nor that it would not be able to do so in the future. There was no strange aspect of the transaction on the face of the documents prepared prior to the entry into the mortgage. There was no evidence of any different consideration being given to the matter by the Bank having regard to any association it had with Mr Peek and, certainly, there was no evidence to suggest that the Bank was aware of what subsequently proved to be financial difficulties encountered by the company. Essentially these difficulties seem to have emerged in about August 1990 in consequence of various transactions into which Mr Peek entered with other parties in relation to the further conduct of the business. This involved the incorporation of a company, Shuuka Pty Limited, and the transfer of various assets by the company to it without proper consideration, a matter which led subsequently to a degree of disquiet amongst senior officers of the Bank and to certain criticisms of the manager of its Botany Branch. However, when one reviews the whole of the material, which was tendered, it is apparent that the difficulties experienced by the company arose well after the mortgage was entered into and the two letters of acknowledgment had been signed. It is not to be overlooked that a memorandum was written on 6 June 1991 with the benefit of hindsight in which the manager of the Botany Branch was soundly criticised for, inter alia, poor judgment in allowing excesses "when meaningful financial analysis had not been undertaken to establish servicing capacity".

The memorandum also noted that the company ceased trading in November 1990 and that Shuuka Pty Limited had taken over its role. However, as I have said, the particular problems manifested themselves well after the mortgage was entered into and the Letters of Acknowledgment were signed.

In my opinion there are two evidentiary difficulties, which face this submission. Firstly, no evidence was called from any person with financial expertise to say what conclusion that person would have drawn as to the prospect or likelihood of the accommodation offered to the company being called up in circumstances where the mortgage may become enforceable. This, in my opinion, is a gaping hole in the evidence because there is nothing in it which indicates that the financial position, certainly prior to mid 1990, at the earliest, would have given any particular room for disquiet. I am not able to infer from the material before me that the financial position of the company was such that Mrs Peek would have been advised that in all probability she would have to meet the obligations under the mortgage, and she did not prove it.

Secondly, whilst Mrs Peek makes the assertions in paragraph 25 of her affidavit of 10 December 1996, which I have quoted, she gave no evidence that had she been aware of any particular financial position of the company, she would not have entered into the mortgage. At Tpp.4 and 5 she was asked to assume, in her oral evidence in chief, that all the assets of the company were subject to "a claim" by the National Australia Bank Limited and she was asked what effect, if any, that would have had when she came to sign the mortgage on December 1989. She replied that she thought she would have "thought twice about entering into the agreement".

She was asked, Tp.5, to assume that before signing the letter of 23 January she was told that the Bank "notwithstanding the letter" was prepared to lend the company more than $160,000. She was asked what effect that would have had and she said:- "I suppose I would have had second thoughts again." 
She was nextly asked about the position when she signed the letter of 2 July on the assumption that the Bank was prepared to lend the company more than $210,000 and she replied:- "I think I would have been very worried but my husband said it was a matter of formality and I signed it." 
She continued, once again in her evidence in chief:- "Q. Let me add another hypothetical to that. Imagine you are poised to sign this letter of 2 July 1990 and the Bank says to you words to this effect: Do you remember, Mrs Peek, when you signed the letter of 23 January 1990 and we said we wouldn't lend any more than $160,000, well, Mrs Peek, we have lent more than $160,000. We have lent a lot more than $160,000. If that piece of information had been passed on to you before 2 July, what, if anything, would you have done? 
A. Well, I think I would have started to make enquiries as to what was going on, but I was still - to me it was $100,000. I just didn't think it would escalate like it did. I didn't think, because I think I would have been concerned because the value of the unit would only have been worth $200,000." 
This evidence went nowhere towards establishing that if she had received certain financial advice she would not have entered into the mortgage. Rather it was to the contrary of that and the evidence I have just quoted is strongly corroborative of the view, which emerged from her evidence at Tp.24 and which
I have quoted, that she was prepared to allow money to be borrowed to the extent of, but not beyond, the value of the unit as she understood it to be.

In cross-examination, as I have pointed out, she said that she did not have any interest in what the company owed the Bank and it is quite obvious from her evidence, much of which I have quoted, that she was prepared to rely upon her husband, whom she wished to help, and his business acumen.

In re-examination, Tp.18, Mrs Peek somewhat qualified her earlier evidence by saying that "of course" she would have been worried about how much "he" owed, her reason being that she presumed "his" business affairs were better than they were. She obviously equated the fortunes of the company with Mr Peek and in responding to the question as to why she would have been worried she made no reference to her potential indebtedness. She said, Tp.19:- ".. I should have been more aware or wake up, but I just relied on my husband. That's all I can say. I relied on my husband's assurance that everything would be all right." 
A further question arises as to the extent to which the Bank was obliged or required to make a disclosure. This was considered at length in The
Commercial Bank of Australia Limited versus Amadio & Anor <case>; [(1982-1983) 151 CLR 447.] The facts of that case are well known and were somewhat stark. They require no repetition. Gibbs CJ, at p.455, said:- "In other words, a bank which takes a guarantee `is only bound to disclose to the intending surety' anything which has taken place between the bank and the principal debtor `which was not naturally to be expected', or as it was put by Pollock MR, in Lloyds Limited versus Harrison `the necessity for disclosure only goes to the extent of requiring it where there are some unusual features in the particular case relating to the particular account which is to be guaranteed': Goodwin versus National Bank of Australasia. The reason why a creditor is bound to reveal to an intending surety anything in the transaction between himself and the debtor which the surety would expect not to exist is that a failure to make disclosure in those circumstances would amount to an implied representation that the thing does not exist: see Lee versus Jones; London General Omnibus Co Limited versus Holloway; Union Bank of Australia Limited versus Puddy. A surety who guarantees a customer's account with a bank will not expect that the account has not been overdrawn or that the bank is satisfied with the customer's credit, for the probable reason why the bank requires the guarantee is that the customer has been overdrawing his account, and wishes to do so again, and that the bank is not satisfied with his credit: cf London General Omnibus Co Limited versus Holloway. The general rule therefore is that a bank is not obliged to disclose to the surety matters affecting the credit of the customer: Wythes versus Lavouchere. Indeed, a bank might well commit a breach of the duty of confidence which it owes to the customer if it did disclose matters of that kind." (My emphasis.) 
His Honour pointed out the very special factual circumstances in Amadio which, in his view, imposed an obligation on the bank to make disclosure.

At p.463 Mason J, after affirming the extent of the duty of a bank to make disclosure, said:- "But the fact that a bank's duty to make disclosure to its intending surety, arising from the mere relationship between principal creditor and surety, is so limited has no bearing on the availability of equitable relief on the ground of unconscionable conduct. A bank, though not guilty of any breach of its limited duty to make disclosure to the intending surety, may none-the-less be considered to have engaged in unconscionable conduct in procuring the surety's entry into the contract of guarantee." 
On the facts of that case his Honour was of the view that there was unconscionable conduct. Wilson J agreed with that and with the reasons of
Deane J, who noted that the evidence established that "the relationship between the bank and Amadio Builders was an unusual one": p.473. His Honour was of the view that there was unconscionable conduct and, at p.476, he set out a number of matters which showed the irregular financial transactions being conducted. He concluded there was a special disability in Mr and Mrs
Amadio, which was sufficiently evident to the bank to make it "prima facie unfair or `unconscientious' of the bank to procure their execution of the document of guarantee and mortgage in the circumstances in which that execution was procured": p.477.

The facts of the present case do not satisfy me that the Bank was guilty of any unconscionable conduct, such as to entitle Mrs Peek either to relief in accordance with the principles stated in that case or to relief under the Act on the basis of the failure by the Bank to make a disclosure to her. However, at the heart of that submission there are the evidentiary difficulties as to what disclosure would have been made and what, if any, effect that would have had on the way in which Mrs Peek would have acted. In my view her evidence makes it more probable than not that even if the company had been suffering some financial problems, which were disclosed to Mrs Peek, none-the-less she would have supported her husband in the business to the extent of the value of the property. This is the more probable when it is borne in mind that she was aware that the company was entering into a new venture.

The Specific Allegations Made In the Cross-Claim 
Sub-paragraphs 4(a), (b) and (c) have not been shown to make the mortgage unjust. As no specific submissions were put in respect of them I do not propose to deal with them further, save to say that Mrs Peek was afforded the opportunity of taking independent legal advice of which she did not avail herself. As to sub-paragraphs 4(d) and (e) I am satisfied that Mrs Peek understood fully the concept of the mortgage and all the terms relevant to the liability now sought to be imposed. As to sub-paragraphs 4(f) and (m) I reject these contentions in so far as they relate to independent legal advice. I am satisfied Mrs Peek was given the opportunity to take that advice. There is no evidence that she was told she should obtain "financial" advice, but I have dealt with that matter already. The observations I have made cover, relevantly for present purposes, the complaint made in sub-paragraph 4(g). As to sub- paragraph 4(h) this really misses the point. The mortgage was taken, and it was taken in my opinion to the knowledge of Mrs Peek, to cover the situation which may arise in the event of the company failing to meet its financial obligations. She was content with that situation provided the amount did not exceed the value of the property.

Sub-paragraphs 4(i), (j) and (l) have not been established. In my view Mrs
Peek was given an opportunity to read the mortgage if she wished.
Notwithstanding that she left school at the age of sixteen years she understood what a mortgage was and what the effect of the mortgage was and she was given the opportunity of seeking independent legal advice.

Sub-paragraph 4(k) raises a matter with which I have dealt in detail. Sub- paragraph 4(n) is, in essence, a repeat of previous allegations made as is sub-paragraph 4(o).

It was not in issue that Mrs Peek was not a shareholder or director of the company, but the evidence was that that was the business conducted by her husband and, at Tp.9, she said:- "Q. Your husband, I take it, during the period of your marriage, had been the person primarily involved with making money for the family? 
A. Yes." 
Therefore, there was obviously some benefit to Mrs Peek in supporting the business activities of her husband.

Sub-paragraph 4(q) has not been established. In my view Mrs Peek was fully aware of the risk which was being run and of the possibility that if all did not go well the property could be sold.

In my opinion none of the matters alleged to give rise to an "unjust" or "unconscionable" contract have been established. Rather I am satisfied that
Mrs Peek entered into the mortgage and its subsequent variations by the
Letters of Acknowledgment with a very good understanding of all that was involved.

The Letters Of Acknowledgment 
Mr Leggat made several submissions about the Letters of Acknowledgment, which must be viewed in the light of the failure of the pleading to raise any complaint about them. He submitted that such complaint was encompassed in that made about the mortgage.

His first submission was that Mrs Peek did not understand that they were increasing the amount of the potential indebtedness. I reject this submission.
The evidence is that she was fully aware of this.

Secondly, he submitted that they represented to Mrs Peek that no more than the amount stated would be lent to the company. I have doubt whether, on a proper construction of them, this is so. But even if it were so it does not matter.
Mrs Peek gave no evidence that she read the letters in this way or relied on any such representation. She was not concerned, I am satisfied, how much was lent to the company, which she regarded as irrelevant to her, provided her liability was limited, as it has been.

The Letters of Acknowledgment did not make the mortgage unjust, nor were they unjust, within the meaning of the Act, when they were signed.

Alternative Remedies 
Finally Mr Leggat submitted that even if I were not prepared to set aside the mortgage I should make an order limiting the amount payable to the principal sum of $100,000 and interest thereon from 13 December 1989. The bases of this submission must be that the attack on the mortgage as being unjust is withdrawn and an attack is made on the Letters of Acknowledgment. I think it is sufficient to say that in my view these attacks fail for the reasons given and, hence, there is no basis for further considering relief more limited than that sought. The submission did not involve a withdrawal of the admission as to the amount payable if the cross-claim otherwise failed.

Conclusions 
In my opinion the cross-claim fails. Whilst I will make most of the orders sought now a question arises as to whether I should stay execution of the Writ of Possession and, if I should, for how long. Mrs Peek is now aged 67 years and the evidence is that her husband has suffered several strokes and is unwell. The property has been their home for some thirty years. I infer at the moment, but the evidence may be to the contrary, that the monetary judgment can only be paid from the sale of the home unit. One evidentiary matter, which may contradict this, is the position of the case in the Equity Division in which judgment has been reserved. There is a suggestion in the evidence that if Mr Peek or the company is successful in that litigation the judgment debt may be paid from the proceeds of that litigation. Mrs Peek should have the opportunity of putting all the evidence in support of a stay before me.

Orders
I order judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant in the sum of $309,660.94.
I order judgment for the plaintiff for possession of the whole of the land comprised in Certificate of Title Folio Identifier 6/SP3203 and known as
C/5-7 Girilang Avenue, Vaucluse.
I grant leave to the plaintiff to issue a Writ of Possession for the possession of the property referred to in order 2.
I stay execution of the Writ of Possession until further order.
I order that the Cross-Claim be dismissed.
I order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the claim and the
Cross-Claim.
I order that the exhibits be returned at the expiration of twenty eight days unless within that time an appeal against this decision has been brought.
 * * * 
