

Svilicich versus Department of Technical and Further Education Matter No /90 [1998] NSWSC 132 (1 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
SOFIE SVILICICH versus DEPARTMENT OF TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION /90 May 1998 
Howie AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a claim for damages for personal injuries arising from an accident that occurred as long ago as 9 May 1985. On that day the plaintiff, who was employed by the defendant at the time, was burned by acid which splashed on her face, neck and chest area. The circumstances surrounding the incident in which the plaintiff was injured are in dispute between the parties and the defendant denies any liability for the injuries suffered by her. The extent and nature of her injuries are also in dispute. 
On 4 June 1984 the plaintiff, who was then aged 19 years of age, commenced work with the defendant as a casual laboratory attendant. Before taking this position she had worked in promotional work and as a waitress after she left high school at the age of 18 years. Initially she commenced work in the physics laboratory and part of her duties was to assist laboratory staff in the preparation of experiments to be performed by teachers. In November 1984 she moved to work in the chemistry laboratory, still as a casual employee. She had no qualifications of any sort but had undertaken classes in chemistry while at high school. She had not sat for an examination in chemistry in the
Higher School Certificate.

Her duties in the chemistry laboratory involved her in the preparation of experiments by setting out equipment such as bunsen burners, measuring cylinders, and mortars and pestles onto trolleys. It was also necessary for her to clean equipment after it had been used and to store it away. She was also required to make up basic solutions of chemicals for use later by teachers or students during classes. This generally entailed her mixing water with solutions, which had already been prepared, to make up the required quantity in accordance with written directions. In preparing equipment for experiments she received either a verbal or written request and followed an instruction sheet telling her what was required for the particular experiment which was to be performed. She was under the general supervision of Mr David
Higgins, a witness who gave evidence before me on behalf of the defendant. On March 1985 she became employed by the defendant on a permanent, but probationary, basis as a trainee technical officer. It was part of the conditions of her employment that she undertook a course in chemistry.

As I have already indicated, the plaintiff's account of the accident which occurred on 9 May 1985 is in dispute. That dispute relates both to the precise incident that led to her being splashed with acid, and to the general circumstances of her conduct at work on that day and the day before. A version of the circumstances leading up to the accident different from that asserted by the plaintiff has been given in evidence before me by Mr Higgins. Where there is a conflict between the version of the plaintiff and that given by Mr
Higgins, I accept the latter. Generally I find Mr Higgins to be a witness who was genuinely trying to recall the events in question and who was attempting to be honest and accurate. He seemed to me to be a witness who had some limitations as to his mental acuity but I did not get the impression that he was endeavouring to mislead the court.

On the other hand, I believe that the plaintiff has not always been truthful in what she has told various professional persons who have interviewed her over the years for the purposes of this claim. On a number of occasions, where her present account of matters has conflicted with statements attributed to her in medical or psychiatric reports, she has insisted that the reports are inaccurate and that her statements have been incorrectly recorded. I cannot believe that so many of the persons making reports for this court have consciously or unconsciously misrepresented what she has told them. Further, some of what she has told these persons is inconsistent with other statements she has made and other material which was prepared for purposes other than this case. Some of these inconsistencies are significant. I found her attempts to explain them unacceptable. I am satisfied that she has on occasions wilfully misled persons who were examining her for the purposes of these proceedings. I will refer to those matters in more detail later in this judgment but clearly these matters affect her general credit.

Nor has she been totally honest in what she has said in evidence before me.
During the course of her evidence there were many occasions when it was quite clear to me that she was simply not prepared to tell the truth. I will mention perhaps the most obvious instance which occurred in her cross-examination.
Although the matter upon which she was being questioned was of little relevance, her answers and general attitude were significant in my assessment of her. The evidence related to what she had written on a form applying for work at the City Tattersalls Club some years after the accident. Although it seems clear that she did not tell the truth on that form, this was a matter which I would have thought had little to do with her credit as a witness before me. But she refused to accept any suggestion that what she had written in that form might have been at least misleading and was patently untruthful in her explanations of what appeared on that form.

I am prepared to accept the plaintiff's account of how she came to be splashed with acid even though generally I would not find her a witness of truth. This is because her account, which she gave shortly after the accident, is plausible and is substantially corroborated by expert evidence as to the effects of the chemical reaction of the substances involved. I do not think it likely that the plaintiff, with her lack of knowledge of chemistry and her inexperience in the field, could have fabricated her account. There have been inconsistencies in the various versions of the accident she has given from time to time, but in this regard I do not think they are significant. Further what she says about the actual incident is readily understandable in light of the evidence of Mr Higgins which I do accept. Because I do not believe the plaintiff's version of the circumstances leading up to the accident, some of her actions remain unexplained or unclear. But notwithstanding this, I believe that the findings I make are by far the most likely version of what occurred.

I am satisfied that the plaintiff was injured when, on the afternoon of 9 May in the defendant's laboratory, she attempted to make a substance called "bright dip solution". This substance was a mixture of sulphuric acid, nitric acid, hydrochloric acid and water. It was used to clean corrosion and discolouration from copper objects by dipping the objects in that solution and hence its name. It is not in dispute that a quantity of that solution was made up by the plaintiff the day before the accident but the accounts given by Mr
Higgins and the plaintiff of the circumstances in which that solution was made on 8 May are completely different. As I have indicated, I would reject the plaintiff's account and accept the version of Mr Higgins.

He said in evidence that on 8 May he closely supervised the plaintiff in the preparation of the bright dip solution in accordance with a manual similar to the one which is evidence before me. According to him, the solution was prepared in a large glass beaker into which a quantity of water had been placed. He says that at his direction the plaintiff added the different acids to the water, a little at a time, while stirring the solution with a glass rod. After each addition of acid a period of time was allowed to elapse so that any heat generated by mixing the acid with the water was dissipated before more of the acid was added. He said that the whole process of making up the bright dip solution took a couple of hours because of the necessity of waiting for the solution to cool each time acid was added to the water. It was his evidence that he and the plaintiff made up a litre of the solution on that day for use by them that day and the next.

The need for the caution in making up the solution was explained to the court by Professor Crank. Sulphuric acid, which was an ingredient of the solution being prepared, reacts violently with water and produces a great amount of heat. Sufficient heat can be generated to cause the mixture to boil. However, adding sulphuric acid to water may not necessarily result in the immediate production of heat because the two liquids may not mix when one is added to the other. They can form layers. In such a case little heat will be produced until some action, such as stirring, occurs to combine the two layers of the liquids.

Although I do not accept the plaintiff's account of the making of the bright dip solution on 8 May, I should briefly indicate what it was. She said that on that day she received an order from a male teacher to make up the bright dip solution. She prepared the solution following a manual which had been provided to her by Mr Higgins which was similar to the one in evidence. However, she maintains that he was not present when she made up the solution and he gave her no instruction as to how to go about it. She said that she made up the solution by adding the appropriate amounts of the three acids to a beaker of water. She poured half the quantity of sulphuric acid into the beaker waited for a while then added the rest of the acid. She again waited about 5 minutes before adding the other acids. She then poured the whole solution into a measuring cylinder and, after placing a lid on the cylinder, rotated it in order to mix the liquids. She said that this was the first time she had ever been required to combine acids and the first time she had ever used this procedure. The plaintiff maintained that throughout this procedure she was not guided, assisted or supervised by any person.

One particular difficulty in accepting this account is that the manual which the plaintiff says she followed gives no information as to how the acids should be mixed with the water. It is not clear why, on the plaintiff's account, she would have waited after adding sulphuric acid to the water if, as she says, she had no experience in mixing acids and had not been told of the necessity to wait after mixing these two liquids.

I return to Mr Higgins account. He said that after making up the bright dip solution, he and the plaintiff proceeded to dip pieces of copper gauze into it. He said this activity took the remainder of that day, that is 8 May, and it continued the morning of the next day. According to him, the plaintiff was dipping pieces of gauze into the solution under his supervision until lunch time on 9 May. He said that the arrangement was that they were to continue cleaning gauzes after lunch using the solution made up the day before.
However, after he returned from lunch, he never saw the plaintiff again on that day. His evidence was that he returned at about 12.30 pm but the plaintiff did not come back to the laboratory. He made inquiries to try to find out where she was, but without success. He became involved in work away from the laboratory and at about 2.45 pm, after still not finding the plaintiff, he left the building. He did not see the plaintiff again that day and was told of her accident some time later.

The plaintiff's version of what happened on 9 May is again substantially different from that given by Mr Higgins. Again I accept his version as to the events preceding the accident. She said that in the morning she was not involved in dipping gauzes or engaged in any other activity to do with the bright dip solution. She did not see Mr Higgins at all on that day. She said that after she returned from lunch some time between 1 and 2 pm she decided to make more bright dip solution because, for some reason which I do not understand, she believed she had not made the full quantity required the day before. She said that this time she took a measuring cylinder, rather than a beaker, and into it she put a quantity of water. She then added the various acids one at a time. After waiting a short period, she rotated the cylinder as she had done the day before. But this time the lid blew off and she was sprayed with the acid solution. She says she was drenched in the acid but at the time was wearing a laboratory coat which covered her body apart from her face, neck and hands. She immediately felt a burning sensation to those exposed parts of her body.

As I have indicated, I accept this account of how she came to suffer burns to her face neck and chest. However, I also find that she did return late from lunch on this day, probably after Mr Higgins had left the building. Accepting, as I do, Mr Higgins' account of the days activities, I do not know why it was she felt it necessary to make up some more solution. Possibly she did not feel there was enough left or that it was losing its capacity to clean the gauze.
However that may be, she did decide to make up some more solution even though
Mr Higgins was not present at the time. Because she was late and flustered, she decided to use what she believed was a short-cut method to mix the acids and water rather than follow the lengthy process that had been used the day before. Mr Higgins in his evidence accepted that the plaintiff had been showed the method of mixing liquids she employed this day but he said it had been used only to increase the volume of a liquid by mixing it with water.

I believe that, despite having been shown the correct and safe method to make the bright dip solution, the plaintiff used an inappropriate method because she believed it would be faster. There is support for this finding in the account given by the plaintiff to Dr Nasser when she saw him in November 1989.
He reports that the plaintiff told him that she had followed the supervisor's procedure, but that because she was short of time she took a short cut. He reports that she said she was breathless and agitated at the time she made the solution on 9 May. Although the plaintiff denied that she said this to Dr
Nasser or that it was true, this denial was in my view merely another instance of the plaintiff refusing to accept statements attributed to her because she believes they are not now in her best interests.

On these findings of fact the question arises as to whether the defendant is liable for injuries suffered by the plaintiff from her adoption of a procedure to make up the solution which was clearly an inappropriate and dangerous one.
I believe that it is. Clearly the duty of care upon an employer in relation to employees is a multi-faceted one and includes a duty to provide a safe place of work, to establish and maintain a safe system or work, and to provide adequate supervision. The duty extends not only to establishing a safe system of work but also to enforcing it. The High Court has said that "accident prevention is unquestionably one of the modern responsibilities of an employer": McLean versus Tedman <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 306] at 313. The duty of the employer to take reasonable steps to protect an employee from injury in the course of carrying out the work has to take into account the possibility of the exposure of the employee to risk of injury in the work place in light of the nature of the work place and the experience and training of the employee.

Here the defendant's employees were exposed as part of their duties to the risk of injury from the use of potentially dangerous substances, such as sulphuric acid. The risk of serious injury from the mishandling of such substances was obvious and substantial. Therefore, the duty of the defendant to guard against risk of injury in respect of the access to, and use of, those substances was correspondingly greater than might be the case in relation to less potentially dangerous substances. Where the employee will be required to use dangerous substances in the course of his or her employment, there should obviously be proper training in the use of those substances and the potentiality for danger caused by mishandling them. There should be adequate instructions and warnings given not only as to the specific circumstances in which the employee may come into contact with dangerous substance in the course of his or her employment but also as to the nature of these substances generally and why they should be considered dangerous.

Where the employee is untrained or inexperienced clearly the responsibility of the employer to protect the employee from risk of injury will be much higher than might be the case in relation to an experienced employee who might be expected to exercise some care for his or her own safety when carrying out their duties. Measures and procedures sufficient to safeguard a person experienced or trained in the use of dangerous chemicals might be completely inadequate in the case of the inexperienced or untrained. The vigilance of the employer necessary to guard against accidents and injury from inappropriate or dangerous procedures will be higher with respect to young and inexperienced employees than in the case of other employees.

In the present case the plaintiff was employed without any training or experience in the use of chemicals other than what she had gleaned through her general education at high school. The evidence is that she was expected to do a course in chemistry as part of her employment as a trainee but the accident occurred very shortly after she commenced work. She had been employed by the defendant for just on a year at the time of the accident but had been involved in the chemistry laboratory about half of that time. She was still very young being only twenty years of age.

At the time of the accident she had not received any general instruction or explanation as to the nature of the substances that she could have access to in the laboratory. No doubt it was thought that such matters would be covered during her chemistry course which was a requirement of her traineeship. Yet, notwithstanding the absence of any such instruction or training, she appears to have had unrestricted and unsupervised access to dangerous substances such as sulphuric acid. I accept that she had been shown the correct way to make up the bright dip solution but I do not think that she had any real understanding as to why it should be prepared in the way that it was. There was no suggestion by Mr Higgins that he had explained to her the dangers of mixing sulphuric acid and water in any other than the way he had demonstrated. No doubt he did not expect her to prepare another batch unsupervised. However, the mixing of water and sulphuric acid was a potentially hazardous thing to do and the risk of injury by using an incorrect method was high.

I believe that there should have been steps in place to ensure that the plaintiff could not gain unrestricted and unsupervised access to chemicals such as sulphuric acid. In the absence of Mr Higgins or some other qualified person, she should have not been allowed access to the place where such substances were stored. Despite the fact that she was young, untrained and inexperienced, no restriction was placed upon her obtaining or using dangerous substances. In my view the defendant was negligent in failing to ensure that there were procedures or practices to guard against a person, such as the plaintiff, using dangerous chemicals. She should not have been permitted to have access to dangerous chemicals until she had been fully and properly training as to their properties and their use.

Although the defendant breached the duty of care it owed the plaintiff, I believe there was contributory negligence. It was a very incautious thing for the plaintiff, in her state of anxiety at being late back from lunch, to attempt to make up a solution involving acids without checking that it was appropriate to use what she believed to be the short-cut method in light of the procedure which had been followed the day before. She had never previously been permitted to use acids unsupervised and she should not have started to make up the solution by herself without checking with some responsible person.
But the plaintiff was young, very inexperienced and. untrained and she clearly misunderstood the appropriateness of using a method of making up solutions which she had been shown before. I think there was an element of panic involved. I do not believe she fully appreciated the nature of the chemical reaction that would take place and the reason for caution in making up the solution. In those circumstances I find contributory negligence to a minor degree which I fix at 10%.

As a result of the accident the plaintiff contends that she suffered both physical and psychological injuries which persisted for many years. However, she is now fully recovered. There is some residual scarring from acid burns but it is very minor and does not have any significant impact upon her life or well-being. She is happily married. At the time of the hearing she had two children and was about to give birth to a third. She is hopeful of eventually returning to full-time work when her duties and responsibilities as a mother will permit her to do so. But she maintains that as a result of the injuries she sustained she lost her career in the public service as a laboratory technician, and that she was unable to obtain and hold steady employment in the public sector by reason of a severe and long-lasting psychiatric illness.

Generally I believe that the plaintiff has exaggerated and misrepresented the effects of the accident upon her. She appears to me to be highly manipulative.
She has been selective in the material that she has revealed to those who have examined her and has at times been positively misleading. For example, she told Dr Rowe, a psychiatrist she saw on behalf of the defendant, that she had "happy childhood memories" and said nothing about the many years of sexual abuse she alleges she suffered at the hands of her father. She also blatantly misrepresented to Dr Rowe the status of her relationship with her first husband when she was examined by him in 1994. Because she did not reveal certain material to Dr Shoulder, a psychiatrist called in her case, he was no longer able to stand by the opinion that he had formed as to the psychological effects of the accident upon her. He indicated that he could not make any diagnosis of the plaintiff at all because of the incomplete and misleading history he had received from her. It was the opinion of two psychiatrists called in her case that she had fabricated at least one of the effects of the accident upon her as revealed in irreconcilably conflicting statements made by her to persons working at St Edmund's, a clinic that she attended in 1992.

She clearly suffered some physical injury. Immediately after the accident the plaintiff was assisted by her fellow employees and was taken to Sydney
Hospital. She was treated for burns caused by the acid solution splashing on her bare skin. The burning was substantially to her neck and upper chest but there was also slight burning to her face. She was given silvernitrate cream and pain killers and discharged after about 3 hours. She suffered pain and discomfort for about three weeks after the accident. The burns healed appropriately over a period of about two months. She found that the scarring caused her embarrassment. Although she says that she only stopped worrying about her appearance in 1993, I do not accept this and believe she is exaggerating her emotional reaction to the scarring. By December 1986, Dr
Isaacs, a plastic surgeon that the plaintiff attended, was of the opinion that the scarring amounted to minor cosmetic deformity and was well-hidden by make- up. In September 1988 Dr O'Mara was of the view that the scars did not constitute a significant permanent disability and he stated that he was "somewhat at a loss to reconcile the propound emotional disturbance with the slight injury and disfigurement sustained".

However, I accept that initially the burns and scarring would have been quite traumatic to the plaintiff, given her age and her undoubted interest in her personal appearance. There has been some suggestion that before the accident the plaintiff had been a model, but this is an exaggeration. For a short period, she had been involved in some promotional work in one of the large departmental stores shortly after she left school. She is entitled to compensation for pain and suffering associated with her physical injuries and for a short period of emotional distress caused by the appearance of the scarring.

The substantial part of the plaintiff's claim is for what she says has been the psychological trauma suffered by her as a result of the accident. I have already indicated that one of the psychiatrists relied upon by the plaintiff was no longer prepared to make a diagnosis after he became aware of further material relating to the plaintiff's history during the course of the hearing before me. The failure of the plaintiff to reveal matters which were clearly relevant to psychiatric assessments of her and attempts by her to paint a false picture of aspects of her life leave me in the position that I am generally not prepared to act upon any of the assessments made in the psychiatric reports tendered on behalf of the plaintiff. I think that the real position is probably disclosed in the reports of Dr Rowe. He expressed the final view that, although the plaintiff may have suffered some short-term psychiatric reaction to the accident, she had a pre-morbid personality problem and she was generally exaggerating the effects of the accident upon her.

The plaintiff has been under the care of a psychiatrist, Dr Westmore, since
Although he was of the view that her psychiatric problems were due in part to her accident at work, I am not satisfied that the accident was having any significant effect upon her at that stage. The plaintiff has had a most unfortunate background including a history of physical and sexual abuse by her father and a dependence on alcohol at least from her early teens. Her relationship with her father was in my view the matter which had most impact upon her and was responsible for the emotional and psychiatric difficulties she may have experienced in her early twenties. She had also the misfortune of entering into marriage with a man who physically assaulted her and this added substantially to her problems in coping with life. At the time she commenced to see Dr Westmore she was in a refuge with her two children having separated from her then husband. Although she returned to alcohol dependency after the accident, I think this was a result of her underlying personality problems caused by her father's abuse of her.

Although she has stated that after the accident she could not cope with her work at TAFE and had lost confidence in herself, it is clear that she was experiencing similar difficulties before the accident occurred. She was receiving vocational counselling up until shortly before the accident because of personal difficulties she was experiencing at work. She believed she was being unfairly treated by a male supervisor. After the accident she believed the staff in general were unsympathetic, hostile, blamed her for the accident and were falsely reporting that she was incompetent. This seems to have been the reason for her resigning her position in July 1985 even though she was removed from the chemistry laboratory apparently in an attempt to assist her in settling back to work. Dr Westmore reported that the attitude of hostility directed to her from a supervisor was a principal issue for her. There is no evidence to support these allegations and I would not accept that this was the true situation.

The plaintiff has had difficulty maintaining employment since the accident.
She has asserted that this is as a result of her loss of self esteem, and a lack of competence and confidence as a result of the accident. I am far from persuaded that this is so. I think that her work problems are more likely to be a result of matters unconnected with the accident at all. I think she has considerable difficulties with personal relationships, particularly in the work environment. Dr Westmore saw her early life experiences as a possible cause for her perceived problems with her superior at TAFE. Just as she felt she was being treated unfairly by TAFE staff, both before and after the accident, so she believes she was treated unfairly by staff at City
Tattersalls, her only other long-term employment. She says she was dismissed from that position in 1993 without good cause and for "political reasons".

I am not satisfied that the accident had any lasting effect upon the plaintiff other then a short term psychiatric reaction which may have amounted to what is now diagnosed as Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. I do not know how long this lasted but I do not believe it was so severe that it interfered with her maintaining employment either with TAFE or with any other employer. In August Dr Grady, psychiatrist, thought that she was fit to return to work. His diagnosis was Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (recovering) and he formed the view that no treatment was necessary. I believe this is the closest assessment of the true psychiatric effects of the accident upon the plaintiff. It should be obvious from what I have said that I do not accept the principal submission made on behalf of the plaintiff that the effect of the accident was more severe because of the plaintiff's pre-existing psychiatric state or that the accident exacerbated her pre-injury condition.

It follows from my findings that the plaintiff should be awarded general damages for pain and suffering as a result of the physical and emotional effects of the burns to her face, neck and chest. I calculate this as an amount of $30,000 She should also receive damages for a brief period of psychiatric illness in the nature of a Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. I think that this was for a period of no more than 3 years following the accident, although for a very substantial part of that time it would not have significantly interfered with the plaintiff's life or capacity to work. I calculate this as an amount of $25,000. General damages are, therefore, $55,000. I award interest on 70% of that sum at 2%, which amounts to $9,240.
She should receive compensation for past wage loss only as to August 1985 when she was found fit to work by Dr Grady. This amounts to a sum of $2,025. There should be no future wage loss. Although there has been a claim made for medical expenses for counselling by Dr Avila, which commenced from 1988, I am not satisfied that such counselling was required as a result of the accident.
The total amount is to be reduced by 10% by reason of contributory negligence.

I order that judgment be entered in favour of the plaintiff for the sum of $59,638.50.

The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
