

Casali versus Sabaidorro Pty Limited and Anor Matter No Ca 40483/98 [1998]
NSWSC 634 (11 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
ENZO L CASALI versus SABAIDORRO PTY LIMITED & ANOR 
CA 40483/98 November 1998 
Mason P 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
DIRECTIONS 
HIS HONOUR: I would direct that you file any Notice of Motion upon which you wish to rely and any affidavit within seven days. I will direct that if Mr Casali proposes to rely upon any further material in support of an application for leave to appeal it should be filed within seven days. Those directions operate from now and I give leave to the parties to approach the Registrar to set a date in the new term for the hearing of any motion that you will file, and the application for leave to appeal, which I understand Mr Casali to be prosecuting on the papers that have already been filed. 
GALLANT: We have asked Mr Casali for addresses for service. We served documents at that address and we have served at fax numbers documents that he has given us. He now complains that he hasn't been served. Can I ask Mr Casali once more to state for the record what his address for service is and what a fax number is that he can be served at. 
HIS HONOUR: Mr Casali what is your address for service please? 
CASALI: My address is 24 Orchard Road, Beecroft, which is on the file your Honour. I don't have a fax machine. 
HIS HONOUR: That's been noted. Thank you. Mr Casali you realise that this date will be set and if you're going to appear for yourself you'll have to prepare for it. If you're going to get legal assistance you'll need to have it ready by that date. Do you understand that? 
CASALI: Yeah. Yes your Honour. 
HIS HONOUR: And you must also understand that all that the Court of Appeal is concerned with is the question of the appeal that you have brought from Justice Bryson's judgment. The fact that there are other proceedings between you and the company concerning the deed is not a matter of concern in this Court. 
CASALI: Yes your Honour, that's understood. Thank you. * * * 
