

Regina versus Faneite Matter No Cca 60185/97 [1998] NSWSC 130 (1 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
REGINA versus RAMON GUILLERMO FANEITE /97 May 1998 
Studdert J, Sperling J, Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: Raymond Guillermo Faneite pleaded guilty in the District Court to two drug offences. The first of these was that he had imported cocaine in a quantity being not less than the traffickable quantity. The second offence was that he was knowingly concerned in the importation of a quantity of cocaine being not less than the traffickable quantity. 
These offences under ss 233B(1)(b) and 233B(1)(d) respectively, attracted a maximum penalty under the Customs Act of twenty-five years gaol and/or a fine of $100,000.

The learned sentencing judge sentenced the applicant on each count to a head sentence of six and a half years and his Honour set a non-parole period of four years in each case.

The applicant seeks leave to appeal against the sentences imposed.

The facts relating to the offences can be shortly stated. On 14 October 1996 the applicant arrived in Sydney on a flight from Venezuela accompanied by his wife. Both the applicant and his wife were subjected to a baggage examination, and subsequently to a body search. During the body search a quantity of white powder was located in the soles of the shoes worn both by the applicant and by his wife. That white powder proved to be cocaine.

The pure cocaine found in the applicant's shoes weighed close to 834 grams and the cocaine found in his wife's shoes contained pure cocaine weighing some 719 grams. The total importation thus discovered was therefore in excess of 1500 grams.

Following the discovery of the cocaine, the applicant was interviewed by customs officers and admitted awareness of his wrongdoing. He was subsequently interviewed by Federal Police officers and admitted that he knew that the substance in the shoes was cocaine. He sought to absolve his wife from any blame in the importation, asserting it was his own idea and his wife did not know anything about it.

The applicant admitted, however, that he and his wife were to receive in all $10,000, together with their air fares and $2,000 to cover travelling expenses.

Following his apprehension, the applicant co-operated with the investigating authorities, agreeing to take part in a controlled delivery of the cocaine. To that end he booked into a hotel and made telephone calls that attracted two men to the hotel. The applicant handed over to one of those two people the controlled delivery and received foreign currency in the sum of $20,000. As a consequence of the applicant's co-operation, those two people, whom he had arranged to meet, were arrested and charged and the applicant gave an undertaking that he would give evidence at their trials.

The applicant was born on 10 January 1935, so that at the time of his arrest he was sixty-one years of age and is presently sixty-three years old. He is a resident of Venezuela and the father of thirteen children from a number of marriages. He has three children by his present wife and the eldest of those at the time of sentence was thirteen, the other two being aged four and one and a half years respectively.

As is often the case with couriers, the applicant had no previous criminal history and evidence in affidavit form from the applicant's daughter was to the effect that the applicant had been hard-working and very supportive of all the children. Evidence placed before the sentencing judge indicated that the applicant's children by his earlier marriages were supportive of him and his
Honour viewed the prospects of rehabilitation in this case as being good.

In his remarks on sentence the learned sentencing judge expressly considered the various matters requiring consideration under <case> of the Crimes Act, and I detect no error of approach in those sentencing remarks.

The applicant has appeared in person on this application. In his written submissions he has referred to the need that his family has for his presence in Venezuela. He has an elderly mother who is very ill, as well as a wife and children who are his responsibility. The applicant has also sought to introduce further material, to which I shall presently refer.

Mrs Faneite stood trial in the District Court and the jury found her guilty of supplying cocaine. The applicant's wife was sentenced to twelve months imprisonment only, commencing on 14 October 1996. In giving that seemingly lenient sentence, the sentencing judge found her circumstances to be most extraordinary and one of the circumstances taken into account was the need of the children for their mother's care.

In Regina versus Ferrer-Esis (1991) 55 A Crim R, Hunt CJ at CL, with whose judgment the other members of the court agreed, considered that in determining an appropriate sentence not much weight should be given to the circumstance that the offender was incarcerated in a foreign country, living in a foreign culture. That is because a person who comes to Australia for the very purpose of introducing prohibited drugs into the Australian community can have no justifiable cause for complaint when, following his detection, he has been imprisoned in this country.

So far as the needs of the family are concerned, their dependence upon the applicant was a feature of the case of which the sentencing judge was well aware, and to which he specifically directed attention in his remarks on sentence. As Gleeson CJ observed in Regina versus Edwards [(1996) 90 A Crim R ], there is nothing unusual about a situation in which hardship is imposed upon some other person by reason of an offender being sentenced to imprisonment. In that case Gleeson CJ reviewed the authorities concerning the way in which hardship to third parties occasioned by an offender's imprisonment is to be regarded in the sentencing process. Reference was made to the well-known remarks of Wells J in Regina versus Wirth [(1976) 14 SASR .] 
Consistently with Regina versus Edwards, and the cases referred to in that decision, the position is that it is only where the circumstances are highly exceptional that the effect of imprisonment on an offender's family is to be taken into account.

In the present case the applicant has three children, those of his third marriage, who are dependent upon him. Their loss of the applicant's support is tragic in the circumstances of the applicant's family, but cannot properly be viewed as amounting to exceptional circumstances.

The next matter the applicant has referred to is his ill health. The applicant has a heart problem and hypertension. He is presently recovering from an operation very recently performed. An offender's state of health is a relevant consideration when determining an appropriate sentence, but it cannot be allowed to become a dominant feature and, generally speaking, it will be a mitigating feature - and I quote from Regina versus Smith [44 SASR 587:] "Only when it appears that imprisonment will be a greater burden on the offender by reason of his state of health or when there is a serious risk of imprisonment having a gravely adverse effect on the offender's health." 
See Regina versus Smith, and in particular the judgment of King CJ at 589; see also Regina versus Bailey <case>; [34
A Crim R 154] and [35 A Crim R 458.] There is no evidence to indicate that the applicant's health cannot be appropriately cared for by the prison authorities.

In his submissions the applicant has stated that his motive for committing this crime was that his young children were being held hostage. No such motive was advanced in the proceedings before the sentencing judge, and this is not a matter which the applicant raised when he was interviewed or when he made statements. Indeed, he told the police in the interview following his arrest he agreed to bring in the shoes, and I quote from question 295, "Because I was broke myself - I have no money." 
The applicant asked the sentencing judge to consider an affidavit sworn by him on 4 April 1997. That deals with the applicant's concerns about his children and it dealt with the manner in which they were being cared for, but it was not suggested that there had been some abuse of the children or threat to them consistent with the motive presently being advanced.

This brings me directly to consider the material which the applicant has asked the Court to consider, and which material has been marked for identification.

The additional documents which the applicant now seeks to have considered are these:
An undated statement made by him in Spanish but with an English translation. That statement is apparently of very recent origin, some time earlier this month.
A document described as a "social report" concerning the three young children, again in Spanish but with an English translation.
A document described as an "authorisation", again in Spanish but with an
English translation.
A letter from the eldest of the three children earlier described, again with an English translation.
A letter from a solicitor attached to the Minors Welfare Department dated October 1997.
A letter from Marion Faneite dated 29 October 1997. I observe that evidence from this child of the applicant was placed before the sentencing judge in affidavit form and this letter does not appear to add anything of significance.

It is necessary that the applicant understand that the appeal to this Court is not in the nature of a re-hearing and the circumstances in which further evidence will be received on an appeal in this Court are limited. There is a principle, very relevant for present purposes, which was expressed by the former Chief Judge at Common Law in Regina versus Boag [(1994) 73 A Crim R ] at 38.
 "There must be some finality in the resolution of matters in the criminal courts. After a conviction, this Court will permit fresh (or 'new') evidence to be adduced on appeal where the absence of that evidence at the trial amounted to a miscarriage of justice: Gallagher <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 392] at 399, 402; <case>; [20
A Crim R 244] at 249, 251; Mickleberg <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 259] at 273, 301-302; <case>; [43
A Crim R 182] at 189-190, 210-211. But there is no miscarriage of justice if that evidence was available to be called at the original trial and if the appellant had been content to go on trial without it." 
It seems to me that that principle is of application in the present case.

In the most recent statement forming part of the material marked for identification, the applicant has asserted that three men came into the hotel room where he was staying with his wife immediately before setting out for
Australia. According to the statement the applicant was there with his wife and the three younger children, and one of the men took out a gun and pointed it at his daughter's head. In that statement he has said in effect that he decided to come to Australia as a result of that threat.

It is to be observed that this version is new and inconsistent with the earlier versions given by the applicant when he was interviewed by the police, when he subsequently made a statement, and in the affidavit which he placed before the sentencing judge. Had he sought to introduce that material before the sentencing judge, it seems to me that the evidence was available for him to give. It is to be borne in mind that the applicant was represented before the sentencing judge but gave no evidence, relying only on the affidavit.

The motive for the offence expressed at the sentencing procedure was really a motivation of economic need. Nowhere was it suggested that the children were threatened or held hostage.

The material that was placed before the judge, and the additional material placed before this Court indicates that by the time the applicant was being dealt with in the District Court in April 1997, the children were not with those who it would appear were principals in this criminal enterprise. Shortly after the applicant left for Australia, the children went to their grandmother and from there, the evidence indicates, the children went to a daughter of one of the applicant's earlier marriages named Deborah. Indeed, there was evidence to that effect placed before the sentencing judge in the affidavit of the applicant's daughter. So it was that by the time the applicant came to be sentenced, the children were long gone from the custody of the woman Victoria with whom they were when the applicant began his flight to Australia.

In my opinion, even if the evidence now sought to be introduced is properly to be regarded as new evidence in an otherwise admissible way, the receipt of that evidence would not impact upon what ought to be an appropriate sentence in this case.

I do not find the explanation now sought to be introduced to be consistent with the sworn evidence placed before the judge at first instance.

The learned judge considered that this case would have attracted a head sentence of ten years with a non-parole period of six and a half years, but for the particular subjective features. Not only was there the feature of the early pleas of guilty, but there was the co-operation, and the co-operation was valuable co-operation leading to the apprehension and charging of two other offenders against whom the applicant undertook to give evidence at their trials.

Taking those matters into account, his Honour arrived at a head sentence of six and a half years and a non-parole period of four years. He reduced the head sentence by eighteen months for the undertaking to give evidence, and he reduced the non-parole period by eighteen months for that undertaking. His
Honour remarked that he considered the sentences which he ultimately fixed were towards the bottom of the sentencing range available to him in the circumstances of the case.

Suffice it to say, considering all the authorities and in particular Regina v
Ferrer-Esis (supra); Regina versus Doan (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, September 1996); and Regina versus Lawson (unreported, Court of Criminal
Appeal, 4 December 1997), they satisfy me that the sentences which were imposed were well within the range for the purposes of the sentencing judge's discretion.

I would only wish to add that the fact that the applicant's wife was dealt with so much more leniently than the applicant affords no basis for disturbing the applicant's sentence. It is plain that the judge who sentenced her accepted, as indeed the applicant has asserted, that her role was one undertaken at the persuasion of the applicant and that he was the prime mover.

In my opinion no basis has been established for disturbing the applicant's sentence. I would propose that leave to appeal be granted, but that the appeal be dismissed.

SPERLING J: I agree with the orders proposed by Studdert J. I would wish to add only the following for myself. In my view, there may be a miscarriage of justice allowing the admission of evidence on appeal if exculpatory evidence was not led at a sentencing hearing because of a threat which no longer exists at the time of the appeal. However, for the reasons which Studdert J has given, and with which I respectfully agree, I am of the view that there is no credible evidence that, at the time of the sentencing hearing, the applicant believed the lives of his children would be at risk if he gave what he now says is the true account of what occurred. 
CARRUTHERS AJ: I agree with the orders of the presiding judge and his reasons therefor. 
STUDDERT J: The orders of the Court will be those that I have proposed. * * * 
