

Standley versus Course Matter No 14456/91 [1998] NSWSC 202 (20 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
STANDLEY versus COURSE /91 March 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff claims damages arising out of personal injury. The personal injury was suffered in a motor vehicle accident that took place near Sarina in Queensland on 26 June 1990. 
There is no dispute as to the physical injuries suffered by the plaintiff. The parties are at issue on questions of both liability and quantum.

The plaintiff was born in the United Kingdom on 2 April 1958 (he is nearly 40 years of age). He was educated at Sir William Borlase Grammar School. After leaving school, he obtained employment in the stockbroking industry. He successfully underwent examinations for membership of the London Stock
Exchange.

In February 1980, he came to Australia. He continued working in the stockbroking industry (specialising in the area of options).

In March 1986, he was married. Between April 1986 and September 1987, he spent time working in the United Kingdom. In September 1987, he returned to
Australia. He worked for a number of employers before obtaining employment with Ord Minnett Securities as a manager in options trading.

In June 1988, the marriage produced a daughter. The plaintiff and his wife separated in February 1989. One of the causes of this separation was said to be an alcohol problem which was related to long working hours.

In June 1990, he returned to the United Kingdom for a short period for recruitment interviews. The last leg of his route back to Australia was a direct flight from Los Angeles to Sydney. Upon his return to Australia, he decided to take two weeks holidays.

The plaintiff does not remember the actual day upon which he returned to
Australia. On Monday, 25 June 1990, he flew to Brisbane. He hired a 1989 Ford
Falcon for the purposes of driving north (to see some of Australia that he had not previously seen). He drove the vehicle to Maryborough. He spent the night at Maryborough. The next day he was proceeding to Mackay.

During the trip north, he made two short stops for petrol and food. The first stop was for about 5 minutes. The second stop was at Rockhampton (about 10 minutes). The accident took place north of Koumala and about 20 kilometres south of Sarina.

He suffered multiple injuries in the accident (including a permanent paraparesis). He was conveyed by ambulance to Mackay Base Hospital. Later, he was taken to The Prince Charles Hospital in Brisbane (where he was an inpatient between 26 June 1990 and about 9 July 1990). He underwent surgery and received other treatment.

He was then taken to St Vincent's Private Hospital (where he was an inpatient between 10 July 1990 and 25 July 1990). On 25 July 1990, he was transferred to
Mt Wilga Private Hospital (Mt Wilga) for rehabilitation. He was an inpatient until 16 September 1990. His treatment included physiotherapy and hydrotherapy.

There was a need to use, inter alia, crutches or walking sticks. There was a need for domestic assistance. His wife returned to look after him. After a further separation, he had paid assistance (3-4 hours per week).

He returned to work in September 1990 (resuming his old job with Ord Minnett).
He had been receiving salary from his employer during the period between the date of the accident and his return to work. Because of his injuries, he was unable to cope with the work. His main problem was his lack of mobility. His ability to perform his job was also hindered by bowel and bladder problems.
The employer terminated the employment on 10 December 1991. The plaintiff has said that, prior to the accident, he intended to work for Ord Minnett for the rest of his career.

Thereafter, he unsuccessfully sought other work. During the period between
August 1993 and March 1994, he made an unsuccessful attempt as a self-employed broker.

Thereafter, he was unable to obtain work in Sydney. He moved to Brisbane to seek employment (in May 1994). He obtained employment. On 28 November 1994, he commenced his present employment (with Morgan Stockbroking Limited). He is employed as a manager in equity derivatives, receiving benefits much lower than received prior to the accident.

The plaintiff is now divorced. He lives by himself in a unit. He has employed help to provide cleaning services. The services involve about three hours per fortnight. He says that these services are inadequate for his requirements. He says that he has resolved his alcohol problem.

Presently, his main problem continues to be the lack of mobility. He keeps falling over. He uses a stick. He can't walk quickly. He can drive a vehicle with hand controls. He still has bowel, bladder and sexual problems. He is prone to fatigue. He is still suffering from depression and is undergoing treatment for that problem.

I shall now turn to the evidence adduced on the question of liability. Oral evidence has been given by the plaintiff himself, his former wife, Senior
Constable Cumming, Mr George, Mr Sommerville, the defendant herself and Senior
Constable Bodle. In addition to the oral evidence, the parties have tendered voluminous documentation (including Statements, reports and plans) and photographs.

During the hearing, I closely observed the demeanour of all witnesses in the course of the giving of their respective evidence. In assessing credibility, I have had regard to both demeanour and evidence.

The accident happened on the Bruce Highway near an intersection with Inneston
Road South. In the area where the accident took place, the highway had a bitumen surface and two lanes (one lane for traffic travelling north and one lane for traffic travelling south).

It was common ground that there was a wide sweeping bend about 400 metres south of the accident scene. Upon rounding that bend, the plaintiff would have had a clear and uninterrupted view for a distance of about 400 metres. It was a sunny day. The road conditions were dry. The road surface was in good condition. At the time of the accident, there were no vehicles travelling in a southerly direction. The plaintiff's vehicle and the defendant's vehicle were the only vehicles on the relevant section of the roadway. The distance between
Maryborough and the Inneston Road South intersection is 677.6 kilometres.

I shall now turn to the plaintiff's case as presented by Senior Counsel in his opening and in evidence in chief. At this stage of the proceedings, the thrust of the claim made against the defendant was that she moved out from a position at least partly on the side of the road sharply across in front of the plaintiff's vehicle.

The plaintiff said that he left Maryborough at about 1.30am. The accident took place at about 9.30 or 9.40am. He had been travelling at about 100km/h. He gave this oral evidence:- "Q. Would you tell us what you saw, what you did and what happened? 
A. Travelling north I saw a car on the left-hand side. It appeared to me to be either stationary or moving very slowly.

Q. Yes? 
A. As I approached the vehicle; I moved just very slightly to the right-hand side in case the vehicle rejoined the road fully and was travelling in front of me. I was concerned that it would reach speed. Then the vehicle moved more sharply across in front of me. I moved slightly to the right as an immediate reaction, then realised that I was potentially going to hit this vehicle, coming across me and swerved to the left. I had hit the brakes hard already and swerved to the left, started losing control to the left and had to swerve to the right and eventually lost complete control to the right-hand side, ending up in a ditch on the right-hand side of the road.

Q. The vehicle that you saw, when it moved out at what angle do you say it was? 
A. Oh, I would say immediately to start talking about the degree, I would say about 45.

Q. 45 degrees? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you see any street or reason on the right that would cause the vehicle to deviate in that way? 
A. No, not at the time.

Q. When you first saw it where was it on the roadway? You said it was on the left? 
A. On the left-hand side of the road where you would see a normal car travelling north would be.

Q. Would you describe where it was in relation to the bitumen? 
A. It was on the left-hand side possibly on the verge. I can't say exactly how much of the car was on the verge, the left-hand side verge, and how much was on the bitumen.

Q. You told us when you saw it it was either stationary or moving slowly? 
A. Yes." (Transcript p 10) 
The plaintiff was extensively cross-examined. The cross-examination and other material presented a picture significantly different to that put forward by the plaintiff.

He had spoken to the police at the scene of the accident. He does not remember what was said. It seems that they may have merely obtained his name. He had no recollection of speaking to the other driver. On 26 August 1990, he was interviewed by NSW police (including Constable Bodle). The police made a record of interview in a police notebook. The entry in the notebook was signed by the plaintiff. Because of the lapse of time, the police notebook has been destroyed in the course of normal procedure. There is a police Statement which is said to incorporate the entry that had been made in the notebook.

The interview took place at a time when the plaintiff was on weekend release from Mt Wilga. There has been lengthy cross-examination concerning the contents of the Statement. This cross-examination has thrown up considerable unsatisfactory evidence from the plaintiff. Largely, it seems that the plaintiff says that what appears in the Statement, represented what he believed to be true at the time that the interview took place. He now says that the Statement contains material that is not accurate. There is further information that he was able to provide which does not appear in the
Statement. It contains material that was not within his knowledge at the time (such as the registration number of his vehicle and the name of the intersection). He has come to that belief, not because of the discovery of any further information, but because of subsequent clarity of mind. He maintains that he was not in a fit state to undergo the interview and that the police refused to postpone it. After he considered that he was in a fit state, he did not give the police any further information concerning the accident.

The Statement (which was tendered as Exhibit 4) contains, inter alia, the following:- "4. About 9.40am on Tuesday the 26th of June 1990 I was driving motor vehicle
New South Wales registered number PQH663 along the Bruce Highway just south of
Sarina in Queensland. I had been travelling for about 5 hours as I was going from Maryborough to Mackay on holiday. On this stretch of road the traffic conditions were good. It was sunny and dry and there were not many other vehicles on the road.
Previous to the collision occurring I remember that there had been no vehicles in front of me for about 1 km. At this time I was driving the vehicle
North along the Bruce Highway and approaching the turnoff for Inneston Road
South. I would estimate my speed at 100Kph.
All of a sudden I saw a vehicle in front of me in my lane facing North. I could not say whether it was moving or stopped. I could not be positive if the vehicles indicator was on or not. I can't remember how far away from the vehicle I was when I first saw it. All I remember was having to brake heavily and swerve to avoid hitting the car.
The next thing I remember clearly was struggling to control the car, losing it to the right hand side of the road and going in to the ditch. Thats all I can tell you I can't remember too much." 
The plaintiff retained his present solicitors on 11 October 1990. On that day, he provided Mr Somerville with a Statement. A typed copy of that Statement is
Exhibit P. The document contains, inter alia, the following:- "As I was just about to drive past a car on the verge of the road on my left, it pulled out in front of me, apparently to turn into a small street on my right.

I hit the brakes and tried to swerve to the left. I avoided her, I was substantially out of control. My car left the carriage way to the right, went down an embankment into a creek bed." 
The Court was informed that the purpose of the tender of this Statement was to rebut the suggestion of recent invention. It is conceded that, if this version is given its literal meaning, it is not plausible in the circumstances of this case.

Police proceedings were taken against the plaintiff in the Magistrate's Court.
He was charged with failure to drive with due care. He received a Summons dated 30 October 1990. The matter was heard at Mackay on 12 April 1991. The plaintiff had legal representation (arranged by his present solicitors). The proceedings were defended. The defendant gave evidence in those proceedings (Exhibit 10). Her evidence was sound recorded. There may be some problems concerning the accuracy of the transcribed version of her evidence. The plaintiff did not give evidence in those proceedings. It is accepted that the version set forth in Exhibit P was not put to the defendant during her cross- examination in those proceedings.

The plaintiff is clearly an intelligent man and has provided competing versions of the accident. In my view, the version that he has sought to maintain in this Court was not plausible. It represents an endeavour to favourably reconstruct the circumstances of the accident. It was in conflict with other evidence placed before the Court. Largely, I do not accept his version of the accident and I prefer the conflicting evidence.

Constable Bodle gave evidence concerning the circumstances of the taking of the August 1990 Statement. He was not an impressive witness. I gained the impression that he had little recollection of those circumstances. Largely, I do not regard his evidence as being reliable. This assessment seemed to be accepted by Counsel.

The evidence suggests that the Statement provided to the police in August 1990 may have been obtained in circumstances where the plaintiff was placed at some disadvantage. In assessing the weight to be given to that Statement, I take these matters into account. However, I am not satisfied that he lacked capacity to give a reliable version of the accident. Indeed, it seems to me that the version he gave at that time is the only reliable version offered by him.

The version of the accident which appears in Exhibit P was obtained well before the hearing took place in the Magistrate's Court. The version offered in the Statement does not seem to me to be plausible. The plaintiff says that he acted on legal advice. It seems that a decision was made not to give evidence in the Magistrate's Court and not to rely on that version as a defence in those proceedings.

It emerged during cross-examination, that the plaintiff merely did not see the defendant indicating her intention to make a right-hand turn. He does not dispute that she may have in fact given such an indication prior to the making of her turn. At the time, he was unaware of the existence of the intersection.
He failed to observe it in his approach to the accident scene.

The defendant made two Statements to the police. Largely, they were in similar terms. The second was taken on 3 July 1990 and is typewritten (Exhibit E). It contains, inter alia, the following:- "About 9.40am on Tuesday 26 June 1990 I was driving my car, a Gemini panel van, north along Bruce Highway at a speed of about 80k/m per hour and travelling from Koumala. While travelling along this road I noticed that it was fine and clear and the road surface was of dry bitumen and in a good state of repair, flat, smooth and level without any potholes. This section of road has one lane each for north and southbound traffic and they are separated by a central broken line.

Just after I came around a bend in the road and approaching the turnoff of
Inneston Road South at Loloma, I put on my right indicator and commenced to slow down to make the turn. From the point where I first started to indicate to the turnoff would be about 250 metres.

Whilst travelling along this road there were no other vehicles in front or behind me and no vehicles travelling in the opposite direction. I checked the road through my rear view mirror and there was still no traffic coming so I started to turn. I know what this road is like, that's why I indicated so far back.

When I was well committed to the turn and facing in the direction of Inneston
Road South I noticed this white thing out of the corner of my eye on the right side of me, on the wrong side of the road. I looked around to my left and saw the car swing around to the left and then swung around like his two wheels in the air. It appeared to spin around like it was facing the way it came and then appear to flip before leaving the road and going into the ditch. From there I saw it just torpedo into the creek.

I stopped and ran down the road and saw that he had ended up in the creek.
Just after it happened another car came down the road then went to get help. I went and checked some houses for help then came back.

When I first noticed this other car I was just about at right angles to the highway on the southbound side. I didn't notice the other car at all before commencing my turn. The car didn't hit me at all as it swerved so hard around me. A short time later the Ambulance and Police arrived and got the man out of the car and into the Ambulance." 
The transcript of the evidence given by her in the Magistrate's Court has been tendered (Exhibit 10). Her oral evidence in this Court is recorded on pp -252 of the transcript.

The defendant was subjected to a searching cross-examination. As could be expected, there were discrepancies in the various versions offered over the years. There was significant consistency in the versions. She has given four accounts of the accident. Prior to her giving her evidence in this Court, she did not read either the prior Statements or her earlier evidence. She gave the impression of an honest witness doing her best to give a truthful and reliable version of the circumstances of the accident. Largely, I regard her evidence as being reliable and I accept her version.

As she approached the intersection, she was travelling in the centre of the carriageway. She continued to slow down. By the time she had put her indicator on, she was as close as she could be to the centre line. She was aware that some vehicles might overtake on the right-hand side, when she was well back from the intersection.

For completeness, I should mention one other area of conflict. The plaintiff said that he could not recollect the exact colour of the defendant's vehicle.
It may have been darkish (greenish or green grey) and a smallish van. The evidence of the defendant is that it was a red panel van.

The police investigation produced material which throws further light on the circumstances of the accident (inter alia, Exhibits D, F and G). It shows, inter alia, the results of the investigations concerning tyre marks on the road surface and the final destination of the plaintiff's vehicle. Exhibit G was intended only as a rough guide as to the tyre marks.

It seems from this material that the distance from the commencement of the first tyre mark to the point where the plaintiff's vehicle left the bitumen surface of the road may have been in the order of 135 metres. There was an initial section in the order of 60 metres. There was a gap in the order of 45 metres. There was a final section in the order of 30 metres. The Court was told that Mr George had recently done some calculations which showed a somewhat different picture.

Messrs Hazel and George have provided expert reports (Exhibits J-M). Mr George has given supplementary oral evidence and his views have been tested in cross- examination. Mr Hazel's reports were tendered by the plaintiff. Needless to say, the views stand in startling conflict.

Mr Hazel reached certain conclusions (including a conclusion that the plaintiff was driving his vehicle at a speed in excess of 160km/h). Mr George advances many criticisms of this conclusion. His ultimate position seems to be that there was insufficient data to justify the conclusion reached by Mr
Hazel. One crucial difference in the approach taken by each of them concerned the respective views taken to the tyre marks on the roadway. Mr Hazel saw them as skidmarks. Mr George saw them as yawmarks.

In a report dated 22 November 1993 (Exhibit K), Mr George's conclusions were expressed in the following terms:- "It is clearly apparent that Mr Hazel's investigation of the collision was completely erroneous right from the very start, having not investigated the matter in accordance with any scientific principles or technical accident investigation procedures.

He has not conducted any detailed site survey to determine the horizontal and vertical components of the falcon's fall, nor has he identified the dynamics of the falcon's movements after it left the highway.

Alternatively he has taken a guess of the speed and manner in which the falcon left the highway and used this as the basis for his continuing erroneous analysis.

He has then taken a further guess at the coefficient of friction followed by a misinterpretation of simple matters of physical evidence, treating yawmarks as skid marks. With respect to the dimensions of yawmarks, what is relevant is their radius, not their length.

Furthermore, at their origin, the yawmarks come from well within the northbound lane and in no way suggest that the falcon was travelling within the southbound lane or otherwise in the process of overtaking the vehicle driven by Miss Course.

Appendix A to Mr Hazel's report shows a list of some speed calculations he conducted during the course of his investigation. These equations can only be applied to a linear slow-to-stop scenario which is not appropriate for this particular motor vehicle collision." 
For the purposes of providing this report, Mr George was given a copy of the
Statement dated 26 August 1990. He was not provided with any other Statement from the plaintiff. He was asked to assume certain facts (Exhibit O).

In a supplementary report dated 23 November 1993 (Exhibit L), which was prepared after a site inspection, his further conclusions were expressed in the following terms:- "As can be seen from the above sensitivity tests there is a reasonable correlation between the two studies. However, with respect to the physical evidence associated with this collision, it is my opinion that there is insufficient data available with which to establish a conclusive speed for the falcon at the commencement of its yawmarks.

Firstly the estimated yawmark radius may be questionable due to some dihedral error associated with the perspective grid analysis caused by the superelevation effect in the roadway. Secondly, the deceleration rate of the vehicle is questionable which can have significant effects on any calculations.

Finally, at the time of the collision, the scene was not surveyed in a manner conducive to the requirements of such a detailed forensic analysis that could address the dynamics of this particular collision." 
In a report dated 1 October 1997 (Exhibit M), Mr Hazel rejected the criticisms made by Mr George and confirmed his earlier conclusions.

Whilst Mr George took the view that he could not calculate the speed of the vehicle, he accepted that it was obviously travelling at significant speed (a range of 105km/h to 130km/h was mentioned) at the time of the commencement of the tyre marks.

These proceedings were allocated a special fixture with an estimated hearing time of five days. At an early stage during the hearing, it became obvious that a hearing of both questions of liability and quantum would well exceed that estimate. By consent, the course was adopted of completing the plaintiff's evidence and then taking evidence on liability only. Dr Yeo's evidence had been taken prior to that time. At the conclusion of the fourth day of hearing, without opposition, I made the order that the question of liability would be first determined. The evidence was completed on the fifth day and submissions were then made.

I now turn to the question of liability. This is a question on which the plaintiff bears the onus. The plaintiff must satisfy the Court on the balance of probabilities that the defendant has been guilty of negligence. In my view, the plaintiff has failed to discharge that onus.

A significant amount of hearing time was devoted to the evidence taken from experts. Largely, this evidence related to the question of the speed at which the plaintiff's vehicle was travelling at relevant times. This question was somewhat peripheral to the principal issue of negligence on the part of the defendant.

In my view, it is not necessary to resolve the conflict between the experts.
The thrust of the evidence given by Mr George was to negative the positive conclusions reached by Mr Hazel. Ultimately, it does not really matter whether or not the plaintiff was travelling at a speed either in excess of or in the order of 160km/h. On any view, he was travelling at an excessive speed. There really seems to be no dispute that it could have been at least up to a speed in the order of 130km/h. I do not accept the plaintiff's evidence as to the speed travelled by him.

I now return to the claim of negligence made against the defendant. By the time it came to the making of submissions, the plaintiff's case had undergone some transformation. Whilst the case initially put was not actually abandoned, the emphasis was directed elsewhere. The change of approach seemed to be influenced by some optimism had as a result of evidence given by the defendant during cross-examination.

The principal submission made on behalf of the plaintiff is that the defendant was negligent in failing to keep a proper lookout when she was about to execute a right-hand turn across the path of oncoming traffic. It is said that, by such failure, she precluded herself from discontinuing with the right-hand turn or taking other action. In support of this submission, the
Court was referred to the Court of Appeal decision in Ilsley versus Boots [(1970) NSWR 551] at 554-555. The submission is founded on the evidence given by the defendant as to her failure to see the approach of the plaintiff's vehicle in her rear vision mirror (transcript p 250 - "it didn't register" and she didn't know why - "it had to be there").

There is discrepancy in the evidence given by the defendant as to when she put her indicator on. The plaintiff does not really dispute that she did signal her intention to turn right. The plaintiff accepts that this was done about -70 metres prior to reaching the intersection.

The defendant has said that she looked into her rear vision mirror on at least two occasions as she approached the intersection. On neither of the occasions did she see the plaintiff's vehicle. When she first glanced in her rear vision mirror, she was some distance from the intersection. It is not suggested that she should have seen the plaintiff's vehicle at this stage. The second occasion was when she was close to the intersection. Her evidence, in effect, concedes that she should have detected the presence of the plaintiff's vehicle on that occasion.

The starting point is the consideration of the question of whether or not the defendant's failure to detect the approach of the plaintiff's vehicle is a breach of duty. On behalf of the defendant, it is said that because of the respective speeds of the two vehicles, she would not have seen the plaintiff's vehicle. The defendant also drew attention to the dip in the roadway. These submissions do raise some doubt as to whether or not she should have seen the approaching vehicle (regardless of the concessions made by her). However, it is unnecessary for me to reach any final view on them. In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that there was a breach of the alleged duty.
Further, even if it be assumed that there was a failure to keep a proper lookout, I am not satisfied that any such failure had a causal relationship with the damage suffered by the plaintiff.

It is the plaintiff's case that there was breach when the defendant was about to execute a right-hand turn across the path of oncoming traffic. This case is doomed to failure if the plaintiff fails to demonstrate the necessary factual context.

It is trite to observe that each case will turn on its own circumstances. The facts in this case are not the same as before the Court in Ilsley. The observations made in that case are not determinative in the present circumstances.

The problem for the plaintiff is the deficiencies in evidence to substantiate a contention that she was proceeding to execute a right-hand turn across the path of oncoming traffic.

The execution of the right-hand turn sees the defendant moving from the northbound lane across the southbound lane into the entrance to Inneston Road
South. Largely, the plaintiff's vehicle was travelling along the northbound lane.

The plaintiff has not said that he was proceeding to overtake the defendant's vehicle by moving into the southbound lane. Senior Counsel for the plaintiff has pointed to evidence given by the defendant (transcript pp 231-232). It was fairly suggested that the Court could rely on this material. I do not consider that this material gives any real assistance in overcoming the evidentiary deficiencies.

The suggestion of overtaking in the right-hand lane does not appear in any of the versions given by him. He has merely said that he moved very slightly to the right-hand side in case her vehicle rejoined the road fully and was travelling in front of him.

The plaintiff sought to take some comfort in the tyre marks (see Exhibit G).
It shows the plaintiff's tyre marks as being marginally over the centre line for a brief period.

It seems to me that this does not assist the plaintiff. The tyre marks relate to the circumstances occurring after the plaintiff had applied his brakes and was taking evasive action. The plaintiff's own expert (Mr George) concluded that the tyre marks "at their origin ... come from well within the northbound lane and in no way suggest that" the plaintiff's vehicle "was travelling within the southbound lane or otherwise in the process of overtaking" the defendant's vehicle.

I do not accept that part of the plaintiff's evidence which was to the effect that the defendant came out from the verge and proceeded sharply across the front of the plaintiff's vehicle. I formed the impression that the plaintiff's legal advisers had more or less given up the propounding of a case founded on that evidence. The defendant rejected such a contention when it was put to her in chief. I accept her evidence on this matter. This evidence was not challenged in cross-examination. This version finds no support in the version given to the police in August 1990. It was not put to the defendant in cross- examination in the proceedings in the Magistrate's Court. There is no other evidence to suggest that she did pull over to the verge. Nothing is advanced to indicate why she should adopt such a course. She was travelling a short distance from Koumala to visit a friend who lived in Inneston Road South. It was something that she did with some regularity.

It seems to me that fault on the part of the plaintiff was the sole cause of the accident. He failed to keep a proper lookout and he was travelling at a speed that was excessive in the circumstances. He lost control of his vehicle whilst endeavouring to reduce its speed and avoid a collision. The accident would not have happened if he had been keeping a proper lookout and driving at a speed that was appropriate in the circumstances.

There are many implausible features about his versions. I need not dwell on these matters at this stage. His own version suggests that it is likely he was suffering from some fatigue. He had been driving for about eight hours and had made two brief stops only. One was for five minutes. The other was for ten minutes. He had driven for about 670 kilometres. He had recently returned from a long overseas flight.

It seems likely that he had been travelling at high speeds for much of the trip. The last leg of his journey had been through open country with little to occupy his attention. It is likely that he was fatigued and lost concentration. He was unaware of the presence of the defendant's vehicle on the roadway until shortly before the intersection. He was travelling at an excessive speed in the northbound lane. As soon as he became aware of her vehicle, he braked and took evasive action. Prior to seeing her execute the right-hand turn, he had failed to notice her indication of intention to take that action. He did not notice that her indicator was on. He was unaware of the approaching intersection. It is not a case where he had observed the presence of the defendant's vehicle and was in the process of overtaking that vehicle, when she proceeded across his path to execute her right-hand turn. He placed himself in circumstances where he lost control of his vehicle and so suffered his injury.

There will be judgment for the defendant. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the proceedings. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
