

Portpath Pty Ltd versus Kearns and Ors Matter No 4135/95 [1997] NSWSC 554 (12
November 1997) 
Last Updated: 6 March 1998 `

PORTPATH PTY LTD versus JAMES GORDON KEARNS & ORS` ` 4135/95` `12 November 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `
 `
 `JUDGMENT` `HIS HONOUR: The present dispute concerns a claim by Mr` 
Lorimer John Corbett for a declaration that he is the beneficial owner of 1773 redeemable preference shares in Equitable Life Insurance Company Limited. The contradictor is the Australian Securities Commission ("ASC").

The vehicle for resolving this claim is a 1995 suit between Portpath Pty Ltd and James G Kearns involving the affairs of a company called Nambucca
Investments Pty Ltd. The ASC claims that Mr James G Kearns was a trustee for debenture holders in that company at the time when it became obvious that there was a loss of some eight million dollars for those debenture holders.

On 9 February 1996, the ASC, which had become an intervener in that litigation, filed a notice of motion dealing with the statutory receivership of Nambucca Investments and on the same day Simos J ordered inter alia that Mr
Kearns be restrained from dealing with any of his assets (with certain exceptions) other than with the consent of the ASC or further order of this court.

Mr Corbett seeks to exclude the 1773 redeemable preference shares from the operation of this order on the basis that these shares are beneficially owned by him and not by Mr Kearns.

The first order that Mr Corbett seeks is an order that he be made a party to the proceedings. Such an order has to be made because that is the only way in which I can determine this question which has been well and truly argued before me for two days. However, this method of dealing with the litigation does pose a problem and that is the motion named as a respondent all the other parties to the original litigation, which has not yet been finally heard, and there are dangers in creating issue estoppels against parties who have not made any submissions about the matter.

However, this problem is ameliorated in part by two factors: that the ASC has resisted Mr Corbett's claim on every possible basis; and that the other parties were served with the notice of motion, but did not appear.

The case does raise some awkward problems in the area of assessing credibility. There is very little material on how to resolve these problems in the reports or textbooks. This is principally because the books are more concerned with what evidentiary material should go to a jury or tribunal of fact than with how one resolves problems of credibility. Of course, with juries, no explanation as to how the assessment of credibility was arrived at is expected. Sometimes Judges dealing with questions of fact outflank the problem by saying that they decided the matter as a jury question. However, when a Judge is making a decision on a matter of fact and credibility, it is incumbent upon the Judge to expose at least the basal reasoning process to the parties and I will endeavour to do that.

Although this terminology is inexact, I will for simplicity refer to Mr
Corbett's contentions as the plaintiff's case and refer to the ASC as the defendant and use the word "parties" to mean both the plaintiff and the defendant.

The plaintiff's case is quite simple. He says that he had been the key player in a very successful business between 1974 and 1990. That business was carried on through the vehicle of a company and Mr James G Kearns was involved in the business as a member of the board. Mr Kearns describes himself in some documents I have seen as a non-practising solicitor. Apart from his legal background, he appears to have had a strong commercial background, and, indeed, most of his activities in the last ten years or so have been in the commercial field rather than in the legal field.

Mr Corbett says that his business was restructured from 1974 onwards. He had to retain various employees with skill and to do this he had to give them some equity interest in the business. This was complicated and he left the details to Mr Kearns. As 1995 approached, the business was being restructured so that
Mr Corbett could retire from full time business activity and realise his investments in the business. Indeed, even by 1990, monies were coming out of the business which were surplus to Mr Corbett's requirements.

Mr Corbett says that he was very impressed with the business, legal and other technical experience of Mr Kearns and handed surplus monies to Mr Kearns to look after for him.

This really seems to be as far as Mr Corbett's evidence goes. There is material in his affidavit to suggest that he was aware of where his money had gone, but, to a great degree, this is a reconstruction based on what Mr Kearns told him subsequently rather than anything that happened or of which he was aware at the time.

Mr Kearns says that he invested a considerable amount of Mr Corbett's money on deposit with the Midland group of companies. Mr David Ainsworth was the managing director of that group. Mr Kearns says that, with the approval of Mr
Corbett and at the suggestion of Mr Ainsworth, the monies were on-lent to a company, Scotex Pty Ltd, upon various securities. Mr Kearns says that the money was then deployed in that way.

Mr Corbett says, and the other evidence corroborates this, that he never received any dividends or distributions in relation to the monies he invested.
This sounds strange because usually people make investments for the purpose of getting a return and like to see what return they are getting, but that is not perhaps a vital factor in the case.

There is virtually no documentary evidence as to what the relationship was between Mr Corbett and Mr Kearns prior to the investment of the monies with
Scotex Pty Ltd. It seems clear that the monies never went into any trust account that Mr Kearns may have held under the [Legal Profession Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/). The relationship could have been one of debtor and creditor. It could have been one of trustee and beneficiary or there may have been some other relationship.
The evidence does not exist.

Speaking completely neutrally and without any legal connotations, Mr Corbett had confidence in Mr Kearns doing with Mr Corbett's money what Mr Kearns thought best to do with it.

Mr Kearns says that in late 1992 there was a rearrangement involving Scotex and New Zealand companies Equitable Holdings Limited and Equitable Life
Insurance Company Limited. The material shows that, at least by this time if not before, Mr Kearns was personally involved in the Equitable group.

Apart from the affidavit evidence in this case, the evidentiary material can be considered as coming from two sources, first, the bundle of documents DX02 and secondly, the oral evidence, mainly cross examination. I will refer to material in the first category by using a prefix "D" and the page number in the bundle and in the second category by using the prefix "T" and the page number.

At D14 to 17 is a pro forma letter headed Equitable Holdings Limited, which required signature by a series of people including Mr Kearns, to confirm that they understood that the agreement was in accordance with the pro forma letter. The letter is dated 26 February 1993.

The purport of the document was that there was to be a rearrangement involving
Midland Securities Limited, Scotex Pty Limited, the Equitable group and others. Paragraph 4 of the letter contained the following statement: "We understand that in respect of the Scotex Security Midland Securities
Limited is the beneficial owner of that security in the sum of ...and Mr
Kearns is the beneficial owner in the sum of NZ$1,773,816." 
Paragraph 5(b), which dealt with the issue of redeemable preference shares in
Equitable Life Insurance Company Ltd to take the place of the Scotex Security, provides that: "1773 Redeemable Preference Shares in (Equitable Life Insurance Company Ltd) will be transferred by (Equitable Holdings Ltd) to Midland Securities Limited or its nominee in satisfaction of Mr Kearns' beneficial interest in the Scotex
Security. We record that Midland Securities Limited has instructed that these shares be transferred directly to Mr Jim Kearns directly."(sic) 
It is said by Mr Lawler of counsel, for the ASC, that that contemporaneous document shows that as at 1993 Mr Kearns was asserting that he owned the
Scotex Security and the 1773 redeemable shares, which were issued in exchange for it (at a large premium per share) and that this is completely inconsistent with the trust relationship.

Mr Lawler took me through other documents in 1993 and 1994, which again pointed to the scenario that Mr Kearns could only have been asserting that the shares were beneficially owned by him. For instance, at one stage, a restructuring within the Equitable group involved the shares being redeemed at nil so that certain other transactions which Mr Kearns wanted to effect could be put through. How, it might be said, could he have become involved in such proposals if he knew that the shares were not his beneficial property but were held on trust for Mr Corbett? 
The Equitable group operated out of Auckland, New Zealand. On 2 April 1993, after the pro forma letter to which I have already referred, Mr Kearns and Mr
Peter Spencer took control of the Equitable group with Mr Kearns having a thirty percent interest and Mr Spencer a seventy percent interest. Later the
Spencer and Kearns groups split up and there had to be some "adjustment" in order to deal with their commercial divorce.

Towards the end of 1994, there was involvement by Mr Kearns with Nambucca
Investments Ltd and other companies in that group. It is not necessary for present purposes to go into the full details of this involvement and, indeed, it might be counter-productive to do so in the light of the fact that the present suit has not yet come to a final hearing. Mr Kearns, however, wrote a
Deputy Chairman's report to the Equitable Life Insurance Company's board meeting for 23 November 1994, which he was not able to attend, which included a reference to refinancing Shutehaven in a way that would free up some three million dollars Australian. The report suggests that at least part of this funding might come from the Nambucca group "(which is now effectively under my control)". The report said also that at that stage Mr Kearns was completing a due diligence on the Nambucca group, which had grown haphazardly and had considerable properties of miscellaneous natures and a loan book.

Mr Kearns denies in evidence before me that he was in practical control of the
Nambucca group. He was faced in cross examination with various pieces of paper, which were generated in late 1994 and early 1995. He said of some of them that they were forgeries, but of a particular document, which was sent to the Protective Commissioner, that it was signed when he was tired; it was not drafted by him but drafted by Mr Poynten, a solicitor who also appears to be involved with Nambucca Investments Pty Limited, and he did not appreciate what he was signing. The document at D308 to 9 is dated 24 July 1995 and is signed "J G Kearns Trustee for Debenture Holders". As to Mr Kearns' explanation for this document, see T21.

When Mr Kearns got into the witness box, he was comprehensively cross examined by Mr Lawler. I did not think that Mr Kearns' demeanour was affected in any way by the cross examination. However, this is probably of little moment (except perhaps insofar as the Court of Appeal may consider itself free to re- evaluate the evidence) as if Mr Kearns was the rogue that the ASC says he was, it should be expected that he would always be ready with an answer. He did not even flinch when awkward questions were asked of him about the inconsistency of the statements which he had previously made with the statements that he was now making. This included such questions as these (T16): "Q. You had no reason to do other than to tell the truth in this document (ie
D17), did you? 
A. I told the truth in a limited form." and again at T19: "Q. How do you respond to the proposition that you are a person who is prepared to lie to others to advance your own interests? 
A. I would respond by saying that in various dealings there would have been occasions when I have not given people all the information that they may have sought but I do not actively go around lying to people.

Q. You do not actively go around lying? 
A. No." 
Another matter that affects the assessment of credibility concerns a declaration of trust, which was at one stage proffered to the ASC as being a document executed on 26 February 1993. No store was placed by the plaintiff on this document in the case before me. It is clear that the document that was proffered was not executed on 26 February 1993 but was executed sometime in 1995.

Mr Kearns said that there was a document of February 1993, which had become lost and the share certificate in respect of 1773 shares had also become lost.
He knew that there was a declaration of trust and that it was in what he considered to be the standard New Zealand form for declarations of trust in respect of shares. So he asked Mr Forgie in New Zealand to send him another copy and he executed it in 1995 with the date 26 February 1993. At T31 he was asked: "Q. This document, to anyone reading it, purports to be a document executed 26
February 1993, does it not? 
A. Yes.

Q. That is not the true position, is it? 
A. No.

Q. The document is quite misleading in that respect, you agree? 
A. Well, no. I do not agree in that my understanding of the law was you would date the document the date the trust came into effect.

Q. Is that a serious answer? 
A. Yes. As I practice it was common to establish family trusts dated the particular day even though preparation and execution was not effected until some time afterwards." 
Both counsel assisted me by preparing outlines of submissions in writing. The two sets of submissions I will leave with the papers. Mr Lawler's submissions, in paragraph 7 on pages 4 to 8, set out about fourteen reasons why there should be a finding that the relevant shares were held beneficially by Mr Kearns and not on trust for Mr Corbett. I do not consider that I need go through each of these in detail, and some I have already dealt with, but I will briefly consider the most significant matters raised by Mr Lawler. Of course, Mr Lawler only noted the factors which pointed in one particular direction. I will use the numbers in Mr Lawler's submissions.
 .1 There are a number of historical or contemporaneous documents which assert beneficial ownership for Mr Kearns personally, for instance, D14; the minutes of the meeting on 28 July 1994 (D43-44); Mr Kearns' report to the board meeting that I have already referred to on D130 and following; and Mr Kearns' handwritten note (D195 to 198).
 .2 The agreement in D471 providing for the redemption of the shares at par, namely $1,773 in lieu of $1,773,000, which is said to be fundamentally inconsistent with the trust.
 .3 The fact that when putting through a transaction about the transfer of a
Porsche motor car from his wife to Nambucca Investments Pty Ltd, Mr Kearns alleged that whilst some of the assets in his list of assets were behind a trust, he was the ultimate beneficiary.
 .4 & .5 The complete absence of the records that anyone would expect to find where over a million dollars was being held on behalf of another person.
 .6 Even the service of subpoenas to anyone who might be expected to have documents produced a nil result.
 .7 In view of the amount involved, the absence of documents could properly be described as "fantastic".
 .8 There was no credible reason why Mr Corbett's beneficial ownership was kept secret.
 .9 & .10 Are in the same plight. I should say that the only evidentiary material on this was that Mr Corbett trusted Mr Kearns to do the right thing by him. He did not want the employee shareholders in his company to be aware that there was this surplus pool of money lest they make demands that monies be reinvested in the business. But most of this reason for camouflage, to use Mr Kearns' word, had vanished by 1990.
 .11 It was not explained how the employee shareholders would become aware of those funds in any event.
 .12 Both Mr Corbett, at T55, and Mr Ainsworth, at T69, rejected the suggestion that there was any need to be coy about the beneficial ownership of the funds and indeed, Mr Corbett specifically rejected the suggestion that he would need to hide the existence of the funds from employee shareholders, T59.
 .13 Mr Corbett's purpose, as set out in his affidavit, that he merely was giving the monies to Mr Kearns to invest conflicts with Mr Kearns' explanation that they were being hidden from other shareholders of Mr Corbett's company.
 .14 There is no reason at all why Mr Kearns' business partner, Mr Peter
Spencer, would not be told that the monies were not Mr Kearns'. There was no reason why Mr Corbett's involvement should not have been disclosed. The only answer given to that, at T13, was that Mr Kearns did not consider he had Mr
Corbett's authority to disclose anything to Mr Spencer.

I would agree that that material does point towards the shares being held beneficially by Mr Kearns. I would also agree that the difference in the evidence given in his affidavit and the material which was referred to in paragraph 7 of Mr Lawler's submissions plus the acknowledgment in the transcript that Mr Kearns was not always completely truthful, would mean that one would have very grave suspicion about accepting his material.

Mr Skinner's submissions for the plaintiff were far less complex, the reason being of course that his case could be established relatively simply. He says that there is affidavit evidence from both Mr Corbett and Mr Kearns, supplemented to a degree by Mr Ainsworth, that the shares were beneficially owned by Mr Corbett. He says the contrary proposition involves establishing that Messrs Kearns, Ainsworth and Corbett have actively participated in a conspiracy to protect assets belonging to Mr Kearns. Insofar as those allegations were put to Mr Kearns and Mr Ainsworth, they were rejected by them and there is no reason to reject their evidence on this.

There was no allegation that Mr Corbett was privy to any such claim and it was acknowledged by the ASC that Mr Corbett really did not know what was going on and just left everything to Mr Kearns. Mr Skinner says that the reason for the camouflage is quite irrelevant. It could be explicable because of the long- standing association between Messrs Kearns and Corbett and matters were not disclosed to Mr Spencer because the relationship between Messrs Kearns and
Spencer was not of long duration. Mr Skinner says there is evidence from Mr
Corbett and Mr Kearns that the money belonging to Mr Corbett was left to Mr
Kearns to manage, and there is nothing to gainsay this.

The case really involves one assessing Mr Kearns' evidence. This is because Mr
Corbett knows really nothing more than this: that he gave some money to Mr
Kearns and thereafter left it to Mr Kearns to invest it for him. Mr Ainsworth can give a limited corroboration. The witnesses from the ASC were, of course, not present during any of the main action and can only reconstruct matters from documents in their possession.

The evidence discloses sufficient, I believe, for me to hold that some monies were passed from Mr Corbett to Mr Kearns for the purpose of investment around about 1990. There is not enough material to suggest that Mr Corbett and Mr
Kearns ever directed their minds to the precise basis on which those monies would be used. There is also no difficulty in finding that monies that at least passed through Mr Kearns' hands, went into the Midland group of companies and later into Scotex Pty Ltd, and that those monies were transmuted into the 1773 redeemable preference shares.

There is no real evidence that Mr Kearns was a wealthy man in 1990 with resources at his own hands that he could invest in Scotex Pty Ltd or otherwise, but on the other hand, there is no material against that proposition either. The only point that could be made is that there is no evidentiary material which could make me find that Mr Kearns actually paid out of his own funds for the investment in Scotex Pty Ltd. That investment could either have been paid out of monies that had been lent to Mr Kearns by Mr
Corbett or out of monies of Mr Kearns from independent sources or from monies of Mr Kearns' own or from trust monies.

In such a situation, it seems to me that the inference that should be drawn is that if Mr Corbett has money one day of a substantial nature, hands that money to Mr Kearns and then the monies find their way into Scotex Pty Ltd, it is more likely than not that the monies that went into Scotex Pty Ltd derive from
Mr Corbett. Again, that does not fully answer the question as to whether the shares were held in trust or whether there was some debtor/creditor relationship between Mr Kearns and Mr Corbett.

It is at this stage that one must pause and look at the matter technically.
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) provides that "in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities". The section then goes on to say that in assessing whether a case has been proved on the balance of probabilities, the court can take into account certain factors including the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding. The onus is thus on the plaintiff to establish on the balance of probabilities that the shares are held in trust for him.

Very often the sort of question involved in this case is raised by a trustee in bankruptcy where there is a dispute over property that once was the bankrupt's. In such a dispute where the onus is on the trustee, the court recognises the onus but also applies what was said by Madden CJ when giving the judgment of the Victorian Full Supreme Court in Michael versus Thompson <case>; [(1894) 20 VLR 548], 552 that where the facts concerning what has happened to the bankrupt's property are all in the camp of the bankrupt, even if the burden of proof is on the trustee, a very slight degree of proof should shift the evidentiary burden. I analysed this case and others in Ramirez versus Sandor's
Trustee 23 April 1997 unreported. Here, some of those problems do not arise as the onus is on the plaintiff, but, I believe, that one takes into account when dealing with the subject- matter of the proceeding that it does involve a situation where all the facts are in the plaintiff's camp and the defendant could not be expected to put forward much by way of material as to what happened at the time.

If one accepts Mr Kearns' evidence that he holds as trustee, then the plaintiff must succeed. Mr Skinner virtually says that here one has a case of
Mr Corbett, Mr Kearns and Mr Ainsworth all saying that there was a trust and that one finds both the trustee and the beneficiary saying there was a trust.
Why should not one just accept it? 
Mr Lawler, on the other hand, says that really it is only Mr Kearns' evidence that is going to decide the matter and when one looks at it, Mr Kearns' motive for taking that view is quite apparent. First, Mr Kearns must be concerned that when (or if and when) the ASC succeeds in showing that Mr Kearns was a trustee for debenture holders in Nambucca Investments Pty Ltd, any property that he owns beneficially will almost certainly be administered in bankruptcy.
Accordingly, his motive is to support his friend Mr Corbett because in that way Mr Corbett can get his money back, which he might not otherwise, and the assets will not be subject to being made available to the debenture holders.

I do not fully go along with that analysis.

Whatever view one takes of the evidence, Mr Kearns owes Mr Corbett a lot of money. If he is going to go bankrupt with a claim of some eight million dollars then it really does not matter whether the claim against him is eight million dollars or nine million dollars. Secondly, it would seem from the document which Mr Kearns proffered to the Protective Commissioner, D310, that most of Mr Kearns' assets are held behind some trust. There is other reinforcing evidence of this in the documents. If these matters are so, then even if the ultimate beneficial interest in some discretionary trust is in Mr
Kearns, it does not necessarily mean that those assets are going to be administered in bankruptcy for the benefit of the debenture holders, assuming that the ASC succeeds in its scheme.

Thirdly, the submission really stresses too greatly the degree of friendship between Mr Corbett and Mr Kearns. The evidence does show that Mr Corbett and
Mr Kearns had worked together on the board of directors of Mr Corbett's business, and that Mr Corbett trusted Mr Kearns to do the right thing by him with his money. There is certainly not the material to suggest that they were such "bosom buddies" that they would involve themselves in some sort of scheme to move monies out of the reach of the ASC or the debenture holders. There is no suggestion that Mr Corbett would, if he won this case, channel monies back to Mr Kearns. There is no suggestion that Mr Corbett is part of any conspiracy.

Essentially, Mr Lawler's proposition is that if X is shown to be a liar or his evidence is unreliable and at point of time A, X has no motive for lying, but, at point of time B, he does have a motive for lying, then it is more likely that what he said at A is true rather than what he said at B.

There are some common sense reasons for adopting that proposition and, indeed, one would not blame the jury or a tribunal of fact if it adopted the proposition, but I do not, with respect, think that it is one that should be treated as axiomatic.

Generally speaking, experience shows that people do tend to tell the truth. If there are sufficient factors that are operating on a person's mind, that primary proposition may weaken. Jeremy Bentham, in his Rationale of
Judicial Evidence (Hunt & Clarke London, 1827, re-issue Rothman and
Co, Colorado 1995) at Volume 1, page 194, truly says: "Mendacity or veracity will in each instance be the result, according as, in that particular instance, the force of the mendacity-prompting, or say seducing, motives, or that of the veracity-insuring, or say tutelary, motives, is the strongest." 
This I think sets the problem on far firmer ground than the proposition from Mr Lawler, which I have paraphrased. One does not only look at why circumstances might move a person to support a particular proposition now. One really has to look at what were the forces that were operating on that person both then and now.

In doing this, it is often dangerous to operate by some rules of thumb. Judges do notice in company cases that stretch over a long period of time that witnesses naturally tend to favour the party with whom they are currently doing business and that if a case extends over some years that there are perceptible changes as the nature of the business changes. However, that observation does not lead to any generally applicable rule.

I do not know the reasons why, in his dealings with Mr Spencer or the New
Zealand interests, or in his dealings with the previous proprietors of
Nambucca Investments Pty Ltd, Mr Kearns made the statements which he did. I can say that they would appear to be statements made in his interest. If by that it is being said that Mr Kearns then had some motive for making that type of statement and now has some motive for making the statements he now makes which are favourable to Mr Corbett, it does not take the matter very far. All the proposition does is to show grounds that one or other or both statements may be untrue. It does not throw any light as to which statement, if any, is untrue.

The onus is on the plaintiff. The plaintiff must put forward credible evidence as to why it is more likely than not that the case which both he and Mr Kearns put forward is correct. Really, to enable me to say that the case has not been made out, I would have to say, that on the whole of the evidence, I could not accept either any or most of what Mr Kearns has put to the court. I do not consider that any motive he may now have or may have had then is likely to assist me in the ultimate task of working out whether he is truthful now in what he says or not.

Fact finding is a very difficult exercise and to a great degree depends on a close analysis of the demeanour of the witnesses, the evidence given in court, the evidence given on other occasions, the impact of cross examination and a whole host of factors. In a note I have recently composed, which will be printed in (1998) 72 ALJ, I have set out fourteen propositions as to how one goes about this exercise but it does not seem to me that the majority of those fourteen propositions assist in the evaluation in the instant case. However, proposition eleven, "Just because a witness says that something is not so and is shown to be a liar, does not establish that that something is so" is of some value.

I would accept that Mr Kearns is not always a completely truthful person but having heard his evidence, having looked at the things that can be said against it, especially in paragraph 7 of Mr Lawler's submissions, it is my view that it is more likely to be correct in this instance than not. It follows that the claim that Mr Kearns holds the 1773 redeemable preference shares on trust for Mr Corbett must be accepted and, accordingly, the declaration as sought in the notice of motion should be made.

So far as costs are concerned, Mr Skinner asks for costs on the basis that costs follow the event. Mr Lawler says there are good reasons for not following that general rule, namely: that the ASC is acting in the public interest to protect the debenture holders; and that the proceedings were rightly opposed because of the matters of suspicion, which were caused by the documents that Mr Kearns created during , and to which I have referred in my judgment.

I dealt with the matter of costs for this sort of case in Ramirez versus Sandor's
Trustee (No 2) 23 October 1997, and in that case I held that the normal rule should apply but if it could be seen that there was so much suspicion brought about by the acts of the plaintiff, then either a proportionate order should be made or each party should pay their own costs. I do not consider that in the instant case it was the plaintiff who threw up any suspicious matters. Indeed, the grounds for the ASC opposing the matter were probably because of its file on the matter and the documents it had involving Mr
Kearns, rather than anything the plaintiff did.

I do not know how the Federal Court's decision in Qantas Airways Ltd v
Cameron <case>; [(1996) 148 ALR 378] affects the matter because the Full Federal Court now seems to have taken the view that the public interest is not irrelevant on the question of costs, though I think a different view has been taken in this court. However, in the instant case, the contest is really between the debenture holders and Mr Corbett rather than in something nebulous called "the public interest" and I believe that it is proper to make an order that the costs be paid by the party that has been unsuccessful, which will either be the debenture holders or the ASC in protecting the debenture holders.

I make orders 1 and 2 in the notice of motion of 8 April 1997. I order that the ASC pay the costs of Lorimer John Corbett of the notice of motion. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
