

Antony Klisovic versus Brenton Christopher Halligan [1996] NSWSC 593 (3
December 1996) 
ANTONY KLISOVIC v. BRENTON CHRISTOPHER HALLIGAN /92 
TUESDAY 3 DECEMBER 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an action brought by the plaintiff, Antony Klisovic, against a solicitor claiming damages for negligence. The short facts are that in June 1986, the plaintiff consulted the defendant's firm for advice as to his rights arising out of an accident in the course of his employment on 5 March 1981. I suspect that the solicitor took the view that the plaintiff's best interests resided with his retaining his workers compensation rights rather than terminating those rights by securing a judgment at common law, and for that reason did not actively pursue a possible common law action for damages. Be that as it may, it was clearly within the scope of the solicitor's retainer to advise in respect of the plaintiff's rights at common law, and he was in breach of his duty of care in failing to alert the plaintiff to the existence of the limitation period and the need to commence proceedings before March 1987.

In the circumstances, he is clearly liable in damages for negligence; and has indeed admitted that liability.

The defendant also admits that had proceedings been commenced in time, the circumstances surrounding the plaintiff's accident were such that he would, as a matter of virtual certainty, have succeeded in his action for damages against his employer, and it is therefore not suggested that there is any basis upon which those damages, as I am required to assess them for the purposes of this action, should be discounted to reflect any risk of failure in the primary action.

The parties have agreed that the proper approach to the assessment of damages requires that I evaluate the evidence which would have been before a judge of this court or the District Court had the action against the employer come to trial, as in the ordinary course it would have been expected to come to trial, in 1990 or 1991; and that having thus assessed the value of the common law right, which the plaintiff lost through the defendant's negligence, I should calculate or estimate or assess the value as at the same date of the plaintiff's rights under the Workers' Compensation Act, which had he pursued his common law remedy he would have lost, but which, by reason of the defendant's failure to commence the proceedings in time, he now retains: see
Scott v. Echegeray (1991) Australian Torts Reports 81.120. As occurred in that case, the parties before me agreed that although, clearly, as Mahoney,
JA. pointed out, evidence is admissible both as to the quantification of the damages award which the plaintiff might have expected to recover in proceedings in 1990/1991 and also as to the valuation at that date of his compensation rights, no such evidence would be adduced and I would be free to determine those issues upon the basis of my own professional and judicial experience.

On 5 March 1981, the plaintiff was working as a formwork carpenter with an employer named Rio Formwork. A sheet of plywood weighing about 55 kilograms fell from a height about three metres above him and struck him on the right elbow. I accept his account of his symptoms at that time and thereafter. He suffered very severe pain and his arm became swollen. He was transported from the building site to Royal North Shore Hospital where he was treated and allowed to leave. He was absent from work for about two weeks and was paid workers compensation. He returned to work on light duties only but after about two months resumed his full work. Although he was able to carry out his normal duties that was only at the cost of considerable pain in his arm, especially when required to do heavy lifting or to use a hammer, both of which activities formed a large part of his work. He had pain in the elbow radiating down the forearm into the hand. His hand and elbow were "stiff" which I take to mean that he had a subjective experience of a restriction of movement. His symptoms continued throughout the period to the notional date of trial but in the years and 1991, were less severe because he was engaged in lighter work during that period, as a forklift driver. It was still from time to time painful and stiff and on some occasions he was unable to straighten his elbow except by using his left hand to assist the movements of the right arm. After his initial consultation at the hospital he saw on several occasions a general practitioner at Willoughby whose name he is unable to recall, and shortly after retaining the defendant as his solicitor in June 1986, he consulted a
Dr. Purcell. That was in February 1987 and he was complaining of quite severe pain and swelling particularly when stripping formwork; difficulty in extending the right elbow fully, and, quite often, the need to use his left hand to straighten his elbow. He experienced pain when lying on his right side. The pain was not constant but intermittent and he required an occasional day off work. It appears however that on any such occasion he was paid either ordinary wages or workers compensation, and there would not have been any significant claim for loss of earnings had his action against his employer been brought to trial.

Dr. Purcell referred him to Dr. Honner, a surgeon specialising in treatment of the hand and upper limb. He examined the plaintiff on an unspecified date in ; he had x-rays taken by Dr. Dreverman on 1 July 1987. Dr. Honner made a diagnosis of post-traumatic arthritis of the right elbow with an associated ulnar neuritis of the right elbow, and he regarded the x-rays as confirming that clinical diagnosis and as showing quite significant arthritic changes effecting all parts of the elbow joint. Whilst attributing the condition to the injury in March 1981, he also thought that the plaintiff's continuing heavy work since that date contributed to his current state. He foresaw as a possibility that the plaintiff's symptoms would become worse in the future and that he might require surgical treatment. In a report dated 12 February 1992 (which I would think for practical purposes can be regarded as corresponding broadly to what Dr. Honner have said had he been called to give evidence in or 1991) Dr. Honner assessed his disability as amounting to a loss of 15% of the use of the arm.

Despite the severity of his symptoms, the plaintiff lost no substantial time from work because of his arm and apart from times when he was disabled by other unrelated injuries (a scalp laceration in April 1983, a back injury in about 1981 or 1982 which also recurred in 1994, an eye injury in 1981, and some strain of his neck and shoulder which put him off work from time to time between 1986 and 1988) he continued his ordinary employment including (apart from the period when he was employed as a forklift driver in 1990 and 1991) the heavy lifting and constant hammering which are part of the ordinary work of a formwork carpenter.

The plaintiff gave evidence which was admitted without objection, but the relevance of which is doubtful, that the condition of his arm has in fact got considerably worse since he resumed formwork carpentry in 1993; and that it is his present intention to undergo surgery to his right elbow, as suggested by
Dr. Honner, because of the deterioration of his condition; but that he cannot afford to take time off from work to have that operation at the present stage.

There was not a great deal of issue raised as to the extent of the plaintiff's disability at any relevant time, understandably in view of the fact that he has for the most part continued his pre-injury work. The principal issue which was raised was as to the causation of his present condition. When the plaintiff attended at Royal North Shore Hospital on the day of the accident, examination showed swelling and superficial raising but with a normal range of motion of the elbow. An x-ray was reported as revealing "no fracture but there was a well marginated loose body in the elbow possibly from the capitellum from an old injury". He was assessed in the trauma clinic on 9 March when all elbow movements were full other than extension which lacked five degrees. The hospital's report to the firm of solicitors of which the defendant was a partner states:- "The orthopaedic surgeon felt that the loose body pre-dated in (sic) injury and the lack of full extension was probably due to trauma from the injury." 
The plaintiff denies any previous injury to his elbow and I accept that he is unaware of any such; although that does not exclude the possibility that, perhaps in his childhood, an injury occurred which he does not now recall. Dr.
Cummine examined the plaintiff on behalf of the defendant on 13 June 1995. He said:- "The nature of the injury that this man sustained at the time he was struck by plywood in 1981 is unclear. The crucial point is examination of the x-ray taken at North Shore Hospital in 1981. It seems likely, given the evidence available to this point, that no fracture or dislocation occurred at the time, but largely a soft tissue injury. It would seem that the loose body within the joint and the early osteoarthritic change that was apparently noted was already present. In particular, given that a full range of movement was noted at that time, that is the day of the accident, it is all but certain that no significant bone or joint injury was sustained when he was struck by the plywood. It would seem that the well marginated loose body was almost certainly old, and it may well have originated from the capitellum as suggested in the North Shore report dated 2 March 1987." 
Dr. Ronald Thompson saw the plaintiff on 31 March 1987, the plaintiff having been referred to him by the defendant who was then acting as the plaintiff solicitor. The referral was for medico-legal purposes in connection with the plaintiff's workers compensation claim. The plaintiff objected to the tender of this report on the ground of legal professional privilege or, as it is now described in the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) , client legal privilege. Sections 118 and 119 of the Act preclude the adducing of evidence if, on objection by a client, the court finds that the adducing of the evidence would result in discloure of a confidential communication or confidential document made or prepared for the dominant purpose of the lawyer providing legal advice to the client (s.118) or made or prepared for the dominant purpose of the client being provided with professional legal services relating to litigation (s.119). Section 122 sets out certain circumstances in which client legal privilege will cease to exist, being circumstances where the substance of the evidence has been disclosed in such way as to destroy the need for continued confidentiality.

There is no doubt that the document prepared by Dr. Thompson and delivered by him to the defendant, the plaintiff's then solicitor, was a confidential document to which client legal privilege applied. It does not appear to me that s.122(2) or (4) had any operation in the circumstances of this case. In particular there is no evidence that the report, having been received by Mr.
Halligan, was deployed in any way for the purpose of any proposed workers compensation proceedings. Indeed it is highly unlikely that he would have done so because the report is, as will eventually appear, unfavourable to the plaintiff's claim. It does not appear to me that any other provision of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) would operate to destroy the privilege. It seems to follow that if the provisions of
Division 1 of [Part .10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/index.html#p3.10) of the Act are an exhaustive statement of the circumstances in which a party otherwise entitled to client legal privilege may lose that privilege, the present plaintiff is entitled to maintain his claim of privilege in respect of
Dr. Thompson's report.

If, on the other hand, the common law principles relating to the loss of privilege by waiver remain applicable, it would be necessary to consider whether the application of those principles should lead to the conclusion that privilege here was waived by the plaintiff. It was not argued that the principles of waiver had ceased to operate following the enactment of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). Those principles are to be found in a number of cases, the leading authority being
Attorney General for the Northern Territory v. Maurice <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 475.] A case where the facts were much closer to the present case is Benecke v. National Australia Bank [(1993) 35 NSWLR 110.] In
Maurice, the doctrine of waiver of privilege is clearly founded on considerations of fairness. In Thomason v. Campbelltown Municipal Council <case>; [(1939) 39 SR 347]; [56 WN 108], one of the issues in the case was what advice if any the plaintiff had received from her legal advisers as to her alternative legal rights. Jordan, CJ. said:- "In these circumstances, since the fact and nature of the advice is an issue in the case, I am of opinion that privilege cannot be raised to prevent the proof of the advice. The position is analagous to that which arises in a suit in equity to set aside a transaction on the ground of undue influence. In such a suit, it has always been the practice for the defendant to cross-examine the plaintiff with a view to proving that the plaintiff had competent legal advice when he entered into the transaction, and to call and examine the legal adviser if he is available." 
In Benecke, the question was whether prior litigation had been compromised by lawyers contrary to instructions, as the plaintiff alleged in her originating process and in evidence. It was held that the plaintiff had opened up the question of the authority of the lawyers to act as they did and thereby waived privilege in respect of the discussions between her and her lawyers leading up to the compromise of the earlier proceedings.

All of those decisions are of course before the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). In some respects, the Act makes express provision corresponding to the common law.
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s126.html), relating to the loss of client legal privilege in respect of related communications and documents, deals with a factual situation which is very similar to that which arose in Maurice. There is in the Act no express statement of any other circumstances in which privilege can be lost.
Nevertheless, it is difficult to believe that it could have been the intention of the legislature to provide a regime in which, for example in the circumstances which arose in Thomason and in Benecke, evidence could not be given of what transpired between the party and his or her legal representatives. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s9.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) preserves the operation of the principles of the common law, except so far as the Act provides otherwise expressly or by necessary intentment. It does not appear to me that the doctrine of waiver is excluded by the enactment of that legislation.

In the present case, the defendant admitted liability to the plaintiff. That is to say, the defendant admitted that he had failed to advise the plaintiff in respect of a possible cause of action for damages for negligence against his employer, failed to inform the plaintiff of the relevant provisions of the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), and failed to commence proceedings within six years of the accident. However, the admission of liability goes beyond that and is an admission that the defendant was negligent in those respects and that the plaintiff thereby suffered some loss. That must be so because the admission of liability is an admission of all of the elements of the plaintiff's cause of action. Thus, it was never part of the defendant's case at the trial to contend that the failure to commence proceedings in time was not negligent because those proceedings were likely to produce for the plaintiff a result far less advantageous than his workers compensation rights, having regard to the evidence available to the plaintiff including, inter alia, the report of Dr. Thompson. Nevertheless, the plaintiff could not know, at the time when he commenced these proceedings, what issues the defendant would raise. It was always open to the defendant, as soon as served with the plaintiff's statement of claim, to defend on a number of grounds including that the decision not to advise the plaintiff of the possibility of a common law action, even if it was a breach of duty, caused no loss because the plaintiff, properly advised at that time, would not have pursued such an action because the likely fruits of such an action would not have exceeded the value of his workers compensation entitlements. Thus, from the time when the plaintiff served a statement of claim on the defendant, it was always on the cards that the defendant would seek to defend on some such basis, and accordingly it was always the case that materials on which the defendant might need to rely in order to defend himself against the plaintiff's action would include such materials as the defendant, acting in the plaintiff's interests, had accumulated for the purpose of giving advice to the plaintiff and, if necessary and appropriate, taking proceedings on his behalf; that is to say, materials including the report of Dr. Thompson.

In those circumstances, it appears to me that the interests of fairness required that the defendant be at liberty to make use of all such materials as were in his possession, accumulated for the purposes of advising or taking proceedings on behalf of the plaintiff, and that the plaintiff, having commenced proceedings, must be taken thereby to have waived any claim for client legal privilege which might otherwise have attached to such materials.
For those reasons, I ruled that Dr. Thompson's report was admissible in evidence.

Dr. Thompson recorded an account of the history and of the plaintiff's symptoms from the date of the accident until the date of examination in terms entirely consistent with the evidence given by the plaintiff at the trial as to his present state. On examination he found very little. He found a full range of painless flexion and a barely measureable deficit in extension accompanied by pain at the extreme. That pain was located over the olecranon process of the right ulnar and the plaintiff complained of tenderness in that area but not elsewhere. Dr. Thompson saw x-rays dated 2 March 1987 and gave this description apparently of his own observations of those x-rays:- "A loose body in the lateral aspect of the right elbow joint and early osteoarthritic changes in the joint." 
He had a report of, but does not appear to have viewed, the x-ray taken on 5
March 1981 which, he noted, revealed "probably the same loose body" which he thought most likely due to an injury prior to 5 March 1981. He said:- "If the patient does genuinely have locking of the right elbow joint then the only reasonable explanation of that is probably a loose body which the x-ray of 5 March 1981 has demonstrated as ante-dated the injury of that date to the right elbow. This could also be related to the insipient osteoarthritic change in the right elbow joint noted in the x-ray of 2 March 1987 and the combination of the two could account for the symptoms ..." 
He thought the happening of the accident and associated injury to the elbow was coincidental and that the chronic disability which has ensued was unrelated.

It seems clear that if the x-ray of 5 March 1981 correctly interpreted, shows a loose body present in the joint, the ongoing disability must be regarded as coincidental and the injury sustained on 5 March regarded as no more than a transient soft tissue injury. However, it is the opinion of Dr. Honner and also it seems, Dr. Sanki, whose report was tendered on behalf of the plaintiff, that the interpretation of the 1981 x-ray may be open to some doubt. No doctor who has seen the plaintiff for the purpose either of treatment (otherwise than, of course, those who treated him at Royal North
Shore Hospital) or of qualifying to give evidence in these proceedings has actually seen the 1981 x-ray, and all of them have expressed their opinions only on the basis of the report dated 2 March 1987 from the assistant clincial superintendent of the hospital. Dr. Sanki examined the plaintiff on 31 October
His diagnosis was a soft tissue injury to the right elbow as a result of which he developed osteoarthritic changes. In relation to the x-ray, his report states:- "My experience of many occasions, soft tissue injury of the elbow can present on x-ray examination with (loose body) which is merely a calcification in the soft tissue or early osteoarthritic changes." 
Dr. Honner, the only medical expert who gave evidence in person, had not seen the 1981 x-ray but he saw the x-rays dated 23 June 1987 which were the subject of Dr. Dreverman's report of 1 July 1987. He did not agree with the suggestion that those x-rays showed a loose body in the joint. He said they showed, on the contrary, an extra calcification which appears to be attached to the lower end of the humerus bone, and also irregularity on the articulation of the ulnar with the humerus, and irregularity and early changes in the articulation of the radius with the olecranon, and irregularity and spurring on the medial side, that is the inner side of the joint. The term "extra calcification" could alternatively be described as an area of synovial osteochondromatosis (the expression used by Dr. Dreverman). Although Dr. Honner's evidence is not entirely clear on this point, my understanding is that he simply regarded that finding as irrelevant to the plaintiff's symptomatology. It made no difference to his clinical diagnosis of post-traumatic arthritis which he based upon the evidence of loss of extension accompanied by pain, and stiffness on movement, and the associated ulnar neuritis. It was significant in his opinion that the radiological signs of arthritis were throughout the elbow joint and not only in the lateral compartment which is where he would have expected to find them, and only where he would expect to find them, if the arthritis were not attributable to trauma but attributable to the pre-existing synovial osteochondromatosis. He was not prepared to say that, had there been a loose body present in the joint prior to 5 March 1981, the plaintiff would necessarily have had trouble with the joint in the course of his pre-accident heavy work. Nevertheless, it does seem to be relevant to take note of the fact that the plaintiff had done heavy work for many years without any trouble with the elbow, a fact which is at least consistent with the proposition that he had no loose body.

Given that history, the history of a continuity of symptoms from the date of the accident, the clinical presentation which is strongly indicative of osteoarthritis of post-traumatic origin, and the availability of another explanation of the x-ray appearance reported by some as showing a loose body,
I am satisfied that the plaintiff's symptoms and associated disability are indeed attributable, as Dr. Honner asserts, to the trauma sustained on 5 March when he was struck by the falling piece of formwork plywood, with a contribution to his present state from his continuing, with that injury, to carry out his ordinary work as a formwork carpenter.

Despite his injury and associated symptoms, the plaintiff suffered little or no loss of earnings up to the time when, had proceedings been pursued with reasonable diligence, his action for damages might have been expected to be heard in the District Court. Such loss as he did sustain was entirely recouped by workers compensation payments and inasmuch as those would have been ultimately deducted from any verdict entered in his favour, any loss of earnings up to the time of the notional trial may be disregarded. The same may be said of such small expenses as he had in fact incurred for treatment of his condition. Accordingly, when his case came to be determined in the District
Court, in 1990/91, the damages to which he would have been entitled would have been limited to:-
General damages.
Interest on general damages at two percent per annum (MVP (SA) Pty.
Limited v. Gogic <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 657.]
Provision for future economic loss.
Provision for the possibility that he might in the future incur expense for surgical treatment of his disability.

The possibility of surgery is not in fact referred to in any medical report which would as such have been available to the court in 1990/91. It was first raised as a possibility in the report of Dr. Honner of 12 February 1992. There the doctor said:- "There is a possibility his symptoms will become worse and he may require surgicial treatment in the future." 
It is, however, reasonably to be assumed that if his action had been pursued,
Dr. Honner who had seen him in 1987 would have been asked to review him prior to trial and the probability is that the possibility of eventual resort to surgery would have been raised and examined at any such trial.

However, counsel for the plaintiff submitted that it would be proper (and certainly convenient) to make no allowance for the cost of surgery, because it might never be incurred but if incurred would now be covered by the Workers
Compensation Act. Counsel for the defendant agreed. I therefore expressly refrain from making any allowance for the cost of future surgery, either as a component of damages or as a factor in valuing the plaintiff's residual right to benefits under the Workers Compensation Act. The prospect of surgery is, however, a factor to be taken into account as part of his general damages, and he is entitled to an appropriate allowance for loss of wages which would be incurred in the event that surgery is undertaken.

The allowance which would have been made for general damages would not have been very large, given that the evidence of the plaintiff is that there was very little disturbance of his ordinary activities of daily living, and the most significant effect of his injury was his experience of significant pain in the course of his daily work. It would have been appropriate to assess his general damages on the basis that such pain would have continued to accompany his ordinary activities for so long as he continued at work, subject to the possibility of its being relieved by eventual surgery; and the assessment would have taken account also of the possible need that he subject himself to surgery with all that is associated with it, and the worry or concern which the prospect of future surgery might reasonably be thought to engender in his mind. In my view, the proper assessment of general damages during the matter as it were through the eyes of a District Court judge in 1990/91 is a figure of $40,000.

The plaintiff's expectation of life at the time of such trial would have been about 38 years (he was born on 29 October 1955 and would have turned 35 on 29
October 1990; Australian Life Tables 1980-82). I would think the appropriate apportionment would have attributed about $20,000 of his damages to the period to the date of trial and that sum would have borne interest at two percent per annum for, say, six years, producing an allowance for interest of $2,400.

It would not have been appropriate to make any allowance for economic loss on the basis of any likely or presumed weekly loss of earnings but only to provide, by way of a somewhat arbitrarily chosen lump sum, for the possibility that the plaintiff would lose time from work, from time to time, in the future. The prognosis as expressed by Dr. Purcell on 30 October 1991 was that the plaintiff "would continue to have problems in the right elbow for the rest of his life"; Dr. Honner noted that the plaintiff was able to do his job with some difficulty but the prognosis was fair and that there was a possibility that his symptoms would become worse (report dated 12 February 1992). Dr.
Nield accepted the existence of a present disability when he saw the plaintiff on 15 June 1993 but thought the prognosis good, the elbow should not deteriorate further, and no treatment was indicated. Dr. Cummine and Dr.
Thompson offered no assistance as to prognosis. In the light of all of that evidence it seems to me that the picture which would have presented itself to the court in 1991 was of a man who, while he would continue to experience symptoms properly to be taken into account in the assessment of general damages, was not likely to experience anything other than occasional short periods off work, for which only a very modest provision ought be made (leaving aside for the moment the question of loss of wages associated with his possible operation). The workers compensation application filed on his behalf in July 1992 stated his average weekly earnings at approximately $600 per week. A schedule was produced purporting to compare the plaintiff's earnings year by year from 1983 to 1994 with award rates, and his average net earnings in the year ended 30 June 1995 with the average net weekly wage of two comparable employees. Those figures are not directly relevant but what is relevant is to note that as at 30 June 1991, the award wage for carpenters was $469 per week. No doubt actual earnings would have been increased by the possibility of overtime and the District Court judge may well have proceeded on the basis of a net wage of about $500 per week. Provision would have to be made, as I have said, for the possibility of periodical brief losses and for the possibility (but a remote one on the evidence as it stood in 1991) that the plaintiff would be driven to leave the workforce early. It appears to me that a provision in the order of $20,000 would have been appropriate and would probably have been the amount allowed.

Although the plaintiff's case was put on the basis that no allowance need be made for the medical and hospital expenses of a possible operation, a claim was made for the loss of earnings which would ensue in the event that the operation were to take place, and it seems to me that that is a claim to which the District Court judge in 1990/91 would have given effect by allowing for a loss of wages for three months (see Dr. Honner's report of 1 March 1994), discounted, however, for the possibility that the plaintiff would never come to surgery, and discounted further to a present value having regard to the probability that the operation, if it occurred, would be deferred for some years. I propose to include in the assessment of the probable damages which would have been awarded to the plaintiff in 1990/91 a figure of $3,000 calculated as follows: loss of wages - 13 weeks at $500 per week -$6,500.00, reduced by 25% to take account of the possibility that the plaintiff may never have undergone such surgery in any event. The resulting figure of $4,875 is discounted on the five percent tables to allow for a probable deferment of 10 years. The appropriate multiplier is .6139. The result of those calculations is $2,992.76 which I round up to $3,000.

Thus the amount which, in my view, would have been awarded to the plaintiff had he proceeded with his action to trial in 1990/91 would have been, on the balance or probabilities, $65,400.

That amount is to be reduced by an amount assessed as the value of the workers compensation rights which he retains by reason of the fact that he did not proceed at common law. His entitlement to lump sum compensation in respect of permanent disability of his arm was the subject of a consent award made on 6
April 1993 of $3,615 in respect of 15% loss of use of his right arm. To that amount needs to be added an appropriate lump sum representing the present value in 1990/91 of his entitlement to weekly payments of compensation thereafter. The plaintiff is a married man with two children presently aged 18 and 14 respectively (about 12 and eight at the notional date of trial). Had he incurred time off work before the children ceased to be dependent, any weekly compensation to which he became entitled on the basis of total incapacity would be calculated on the basis that he had a dependent spouse and two dependent children and would have amounted to something in the order of $285 per week. Any compensation to which he became entitled on the same basis after the children ceased to be dependent would have been ordered at a rate of approximately $202 per week. Compensation for partial incapacity at any time would reflect the difference between his probable earnings if not injured, and the amount to which, by reason of his injury, his ability to earn in suitable employment was reduced.

Any proposal for redemption of his compensation entitlements would have been based on an esimatation of the probability that he would suffer periods of incapacity in the future including incapacity relating to any likely surgery and incapacity attributable to his early departure from the workforce. The amount which would have been negotiated and approved by the court for such a redemption would certainly not have exceeded the amount which I have assessed as the value of those entitlements at common law and would very likely have been somewhat less. It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that the amount would have been in the order of $15,000.

It was submitted on behalf of the defendant that the value of the workers compensation redemption would equate to the amount which the District Court judge would have assessed as appropriate to award for the contingency of future earning loss. Although there is a great deal of similarity between the two assessments, as Clarke, JA. pointed out in Tipper v. Williams (No. 2) (Court of Appeal, unreported 6 May 1994), so that both should be valued in broadly the same way, that is not, I think, a proposition which leads to the conclusion that they must always be precisely the same. They will be the same where the plaintiff is partially incapacitated, the degree of incapacity appears to be fixed and permanent, and a continuing weekly wage loss can be calculated. They will be the same when all that is to be contemplated as future loss is, on the evidence, loss by reason of partial incapacity, which both at common law and under the Workers Compensation Act will be compensated by the award of a sum of money equal to the difference between what the plaintiff would probably have earned if not injured, and what he is, during any such period of partial incapacity, able to earn. They will not be (or will not necessarily always be) the same, where regard is to be had to the possibility of future periods of total incapacity, which would be compensated under the Workers Compensation Act only by the award of the statutory rate of compensation but would be compensated at common law by a sum equal to the value of the net wages. The provision to be made, by the award of an arbitrary cushion, in respect of the present plaintiff takes account of the possibility of periods of total incapacity as well as periods of partial incapacity.
Accordingly, in my view, it is proper in the circumstances of this case to regard the amount which would probably have been allowed by way of common law damages for future economic loss as a sum exceeding the amount which would have been paid by way of redemption of his future workers compensation entitlement.

It was further submitted on behalf of the defendant that the amount of the difference between the assesed value of the workers compensation benefits and the assessed value of the common law claim should be discounted for certain contingencies including those related to liability at the trial (but that goes out because the defendant has admitted that the plaintiff would have succeeded); the possibility that the plaintiff in the District Court may have settled his case for less than full value because of concerns about liability, because of the likelihood of a jury trial, and because of natural reluctance to undergo the rigours of a fully contested hearing; reservations about the plaintiff's credit said to arise from his failure to reveal in his evidence in chief other injuries which had taken him out of the workforce for a substantial period and a bowel problem of long standing duration likely to have a similar effect in the future. It does not appear to me that any of these matters is of particular substance and I am not satisfied that any of them warrants any discount of the figures which I have already assessed.

It appears to me that the figure of $15,000 advocated by Mr. Fletcher appropriately represents the redemption value of the plaintiff's residual workers compensation rights and to it must be added the value of his entitlement to lump sum compensation in respect of the disability of his right arm (s.66). Accordingly I assess the value of his workers compensation rights in 1990/91 at the notional date of trial as amounting to $18,615 which amount is to be deducted from the amount at which I have assessed his damages. The resulting figure of $46,785 is (as the parties are agreed) a sum in respect of which the plaintiff is entitled to interest from the date of the notional trial and I allow interest thereon for five years at 12.5%, $29,240.

There will be judgment for the plaintiff for $76,025.
 * * * 
