

Oztan and Ors versus New South Wales Insurance Ministerial Corporation Nos. Ca /92; Dc 28481/85; Dc 29485/85; Dc 29495/85; Dc 25105/86 Motor Vehicles [1996] NSWSC 36 (26 February 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), CLARKE(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 6 November 1995 #DATE 23:11:1995 #ADD 26:2:1996 
Counsel for the Appellants:    S G Campbell 
Solicitors for the Appellants:   Gadens
Ridgeway 
Counsel for the Respondent:    G A Laughton 
Solicitors for the Respondent:   Creagh and Creagh
ORDER
Appeals allowed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P This appeal concerns the requirement of "due inquiry and search" in the case of a claim for damages for bodily injury caused by, or arising out of the use of, a motor vehicle upon a public street in this State, where the identity of the motor vehicle cannot be established.
 
Motor accident - claim for damages
On 3 September 1992 in the District Court Smyth DCJ dismissed claims brought against the New South Wales Insurance Ministerial Corporation (the
Corporation) by Mr Mustafa Oztan, his wife Haxibe
Oztan and his children Oztan
Oztan and Hatice Oztan (aged 8 and 13 1/2 years at the time of the accident).
The claims were brought against the Corporation as the successor to the
Government Insurance Office of New South Wales. That insurer had originally been sued by Mr and Mrs Oztan and by the children by their tutor, Mr Mustafa
Oztan, pursuant to [s 14A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/s14a.html) of the [Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/). As at the date of the subject motor accident on 21 September 1985, that
Act provided: "14A(1) Where the death of or bodily injury to any person is caused by or arises out of the use of a motor vehicle upon a public street in New South Wales but the identity of the motor vehicle cannot after due inquiry and search be established, any person who could have enforced a claim for damages against the owner or driver of the motor vehicle in respect of the death or bodily injury may enforce against the Government
Insurance Office the claim which the second-mentioned person could have enforced against the owner or driver of the motor vehicle.

The inquiry and search referred to in subsection (1) may be proved orally or by the affidavit of the person who made the inquiry and search." 
The foregoing provision was inserted by the Amending Act No 86 of 1984, <case> and Schedule 1(9). It is the successor to <case>(a) of the Act which formerly provided for the liability of a Nominal
Defendant in such a case. It was common ground that the Corporation is now liable in the place of the
Government Insurance Office.
The facts of the accident involving the Oztan family were recounted, relevantly, in the evidence of Mr Mustafa Oztan. Very little detail was given concerning the involvement of his wife and children. But the transcript shows that their claims were also before Smyth DCJ. In his judgment, his Honour dealt with the claims of the four plaintiffs, treating them without relevant differentiafion for the purpose of deciding the issue of liability.
According to Mr Oztan's evidence, he was born in Turkey in 1950. He arrived in Australia in 1972. On 21 September 1985 he was driving his car in the direction of the intersection of Woodfield Road and Fairfield
Road,
Bankstown. His wife and two children were travelling as passengers. He stopped his car at traffic lights which controlled the intersection. Suddenly, his vehicle was struck from behind by a motor vehicle later found to be driven by
Mr Brian Wormald. Mr Wormald's vehicle had, in turn, been struck from behind by another vehicle. It is the negligent driving of the lastmentioned vehicle which was alleged to give rise to the civil claims heard by Smyth DCJ. No negligence was alleged on the part of Mr Wormald who, like Mr
Oztan, was waiting at the intersection, complying with the traffic signals. The motor vehicles owned and driven by Mr Wormald and
Mr Oztan were damaged by the impact. Mr Oztan claimed that he, and the members of his family, were injured by the impact. For their injuries and losses they sought to recover damages.
Because they claimed that the identity of the motor vehicle responsible for the impact could not be established, they brought their proceedings to enforce their claims, initially against the Government Insurance
Office. Before the trial, the Corporation was substituted as the party sued.
There was no doubt that an incident such as was described occurred involving Mr Oztan's motor vehicle. This fact was confirmed in oral evidence given at the trial by Mr Wormald.
A report of the incident was confirmed by oral evidence given by Senior Constable Glen Mills to whom report of it was made.
 .
Moreover, there was an independent eye witness of the incident, a Mr
Robert John Hutchison. He identified himself to Mr Wormald soon after the impact. He indicated that he had seen the incident and recalled the number plate of the offending third vehicle. He told Mr Wormald the number which he, in turn, repeated to Mr Oztan. The latter noted the registration number of a card which Mr Wormald had given him containing (amongst other things) details of Mr Wormald's name and telephone number. The number as written by Mr Oztan on that card was "JXK 593".
Mr Oztan instructed solicitors (other than his present solicitors) soon after the incident. On September 1985 he instructed them to commence a claim for damages on his own behalf and on behalf of his wife and his two children.
On 25 September 1985 the solicitor assigned to the case ordered a copy of the police traffic accident report. That was apparently received in
December 1985. Following receipt of that report, a letter was sent by the solicitors to Mr Hutchison requesting particulars in relation to the accident.
A reply was received to this inquiry. It read: "In regards to motor vehicle accident 21-9-85 
I, Robert John Hutchison ... was standing at the intersection of
Fairfield Street and Woodville Road with my daughter who
I was taking to a girlfriend's house for a summer party when I heard the screech of brakes. I looked to the inside lane and saw a white Renault 10 motor car with brakes locked fully on for about seconds before he hit the first car pushing it forward onto the second car. The car that hit them bounced to the left and rolled forward into the centre lane and kept moving slowly thru the traffic lights and stopped for a second to look back then moved forward another 20 feet and stopped and looked back.
It was then I got his registration number, and the driver then took it of (sic) down Woodville Road 
Note: The car was not unidentified as stated above and although
I cannot recall the registration number as it was some time back it was definitely
NSW plates with 'P' plate hanging beside it and I have given registration number to both partys (sic) involved in the accident and I very carefully took the number down. Even though it was only 5 second or so I could see the plate quite clearly.
 * Driver of Renault was of European background with full black beard, black hair and glasses.

The above description was exactly as seen by me.
R Hutchison "
To this description was annexed a sketch of the accident scene. I reproduce that map in these reasons. (Map Not Reproduced)
It was apparently Mr Wormald who gave the details of the number plate reported by Mr Hutchison to the police. Those details were contained in the original P4 motor traffic report prepared by Constable Mills. That document was received into evidence by Symth DCJ at the trial. In the report the identification of Mr Oztan is given as unknown. A similar description is contained for the third vehicle, although its make is described as "Renault".
The registration number was whited out in the original P4 report. However,
Smyth DCJ observed that, by looking through the document from the back page, it could clearly be seen as containing the entry "JXK-593". This confirmed the report to police of the registration number initially noticed by Mr Hutchison as reported to Mr Oztan.
 
Reasons of the primary judge
Smyth DCJ recounted the foregoing evidence. He added reference to the oral testimony of Senior Constable Mills who stated (seemingly for the first time at the trial) that he had carried out a computer check of the registration number JXK-593. It came up as a stolen vehicle. His recollection was that it was registered either in Victoria or in some other State and was not a New South Wales vehicle: "HIS HONOUR: Q. Constable, can you recollect now whether the vehicle was reported as being stolen in New South Wales or was it reported as being stolen from another State? 
A: I believe it was stolen from another State.

COUNSEL: Q: You say you believe it was stolen from another
State. Did you make any notes which confirm what your belief is? 
A: No.

Q: Is it possible that you have confused it with the notion that it was a New South Wales vehicle stolen and reported interstate?
Is that a possibility? 
A: No.

Q: Why isn't that a possibility? 
A: Because it was - it was not a New South Wales registered vehicle." 
Smyth DCJ referred to other conflicts in the evidence, eg about the description of the car by Mr Hutchison's statement and Mr Wormald's evidence.
They agreed that it had been a Renault. They disputed whether it was series number 10 or 12 and whether it was white (as Mr Hutchison recalled) or mustard/orange (as Mr Wormald described it).
Smyth DCJ went on: "The probabilities are that the vehicle would have exhibited damage to the front of it, having been involved in a relatively substantial impact with Mr Wormald's vehicle. No inquiries were made by or on behalf of the plaintiffs other than the fact that it was reported to the police station at Bass Hill.

I am satisfied that no advertisements were placed in any newspaper and certainly there was no suggestion that any inquiries were made in the local area ... It is quite clear that the driver of the motor vehicle concerned would not have responded to any such advertisement but there are factors which give me concern. No inquiries were made in relation to the Victorian car or, if I could rephrase that, the car registered in Victoria as JXK-593 to establish whether it was still a stolen vehicle or when it was stolen or what type of vehicle it was. No inquiries were made in and around the area although the course taken by the offending vehicle turning off Woodville Road to the left would at least suggest, if nothing more, that it may well at that stage have been a local vehicle. No inquiries, were made of any motor repair premises to establish whether such a vehicle had been repaired shortly after the accident and the description of the car being either a white Renault 10 or an orange/mustard Renault 12. One could not exclude the possibility that some local resident may have had some information if it had it been brought to his or her attention. ...

It seems to me that there were avenues available to the plaintiff with a reasonable prospect of success of actually identifying the offending vehicle. I am not satisfied to the requisite degree the vehicle causing the collision was a vehicle the identity of which could not be ascertained after due search and inquiry and there will be verdicts for the defendant." 
As noted above, his Honour treated the outcome of the claim by Mr Oztan as governing the outcome of the associated claims by his wife and children.
 
Appeal to the Court of Appeal .
The appellants have now all appealed to this Court from the judgments entered against them by Smyth DCJ. They contend, in effect, that his Honour erred in the approach which he took to the requirement that they establish "due search and inquiry" as a pre-condition to recovery. The notice of appeal also raised a ground complaining of the lack of reasons in his Honour's opinion. Various factual findings were challenged. At the hearing of the appeal, the appellants sought to raise the additional ground that his Honour ought to have considered the circumstance that two of the plaintiffs were minors and that this fact should, differentially, have been taken.
into account in considering their separate positions and what it would have been reasonable for them to have done by way of due search and inquiry.
This last point can be quickly disposed of contrary to the submissions of the appellants: 
The exact age of the children of Mr Oztan was not, remarkably enough, established by the evidence. The trial seems to have been conducted on the footing that the outcome in the case of the father would govern the outcome of all claims; 
The children were, in any case, represented by their tutor who was Mr
Mustafa Oztan. He was their father and agent. The burden of conducting "due inquiry and search" for them fell upon him; 
No point appears to have been taken at the trial on the differential position of the children. Had this been done, it would have been open to the
Corporation to ask questions or call evidence. In the way the trial was conducted, it would involve a departure from due process now, in the appeal, to permit the children to raise this objection for the first time.
Coullon and
Ors versus Holcombe and Ors. <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 1], 7; and 
No formal amendment of the notice of appeal was sought or granted.
Significantly, no such point is raised in the original notice of appeal.
In this Court, as at trial, we should confine our attention to the sufficiency of the "due search and inquiry" conducted by and on behalf of Mr
Mustafa Oztan. Did it, contrary to the holding of Smyth DCJ, reach the standard which the law requires? 
Applicable principles
The requirement of establishing "due search and inquiry" in order to make good a claim against the Nominal
Defendant was initially quite stringently explained and enforced by the courts. Doubtless this followed the introduction of a novel entitlement to claim against a statutory corporation sole, defending a fund to which motorists generally contributed by their insurance premiums.
Lawyers of the older generation remember the test stated by Jordan CJ in
Blandford versus Fox <case>; [(1945) 45 SR 241 (FC)], 245: "It has been pointed out that this part of the statute gives rise to obvious danger of abuse, and that cases arising under it therefore call for cautious approach. Millar versus Millar <case>; [(1940)
SASR 185] at 188f. ... (T)he provision of <case>(a), making due inquiry and search a condition precedent to the cause of action, affords little projection against such abuse. A person capable of staging a sham would not be likely to fail to make meticulous inquiry and search since he would have the best of reasons for knowing that they would be fruitless. The provision is designed rather to ensure a genuine effort to obtain information on the part of bona fide claimants. ...
 hat is meant by due inquiry and search, and is there any evidence on which reasonable men could find that due inquiry and search had been made? I think that due inquiry and search means such inquiry and search as is reasonable in the circumstances. To be reasonable it must be as prompt and thorough as the circumstances will permit. It must be such as a reasonable man who had recourse only against the actual offender would make if he were desirous of identifying the offender in order to commence proceedings against him.
The inquiries must if possible be set on foot before the scent is cold and they must be made by all such means as are reasonably practicable in all quarters in which there is a reasonable prospect of obtaining useful information."
If the foregoing passage were applied in its full vigour to the facts of this case, as revealed above and as found by Smyth DCJ, the appellants would fail. There were, as his Honour pointed out a number of steps that could have been taken. As counsel for the respondent Corporation pointed out there were additional steps that the representative of the appellants could have explored, including other avenues to track down Mr Hutchison who went missing in the interval between the incident and the trial. The representative could also have interviewed
Senior Constable Mills and turned up the information, first revealed at the trial, concerning the computer search of interstate vehicles.
He could also have made inquiries of interstate motor vehicle registries or at least the Victorian registry which Senior Constable
Mills appears to have considered to have been the best avenue of inquiry.
Tested by the rather stringent standards expressed in Blandford versus Fox, I would have difficulty in holding that an error had been established on the part of Smyth DCJ. On the contrary, his Honour appears to have approached the consideration of the statutory pre-condition in the manner which was familiar to me in the early days of my legal practice. Testing the inquiry and search conducted by and for the appellants, it could certainly not be said that they did everything that would have been done if there were no recourse against a statutory fund and it was necessary to establish the identity of the driver in order to have any chance of recovery. As his Honour demonstrated, the inquiry and search conducted fell short of these standards.
However, in 1975 the High Court of Australia considered the requirements imposed by the obligation to undertake due inquiry and search as a precondition to recovery against the Nominal Defendant. In Harrison v
The
Nominal Defendant [(1976) 50 ALJR 330 (HC)] In the course of doing so, the
High Court injected an element of enhanced realism in what could reasonably be expected of an injured person (or that person's agents). The conduct of a charade or the pursuit of routine advertisements and inquiries that were not, realistically, likely to produce results was held not to be the requirement of "due inquiry and search" as the legislation provided.
The judgment of the High
Court was given by Barwick CJ (McTiernan, Stephen, Mason and Jacobs JJ agreeing). His Honour said, at 331: "Hutley J (sic) in his reasons for judgment, does not suggest that there was any real likelihood that any of the steps in which he made reference would have enabled the identity of the vehicle to be established But his Honour thought that those steps, the taking of which he realised may be no more than a ritual and unlikely to be productive, ought to have been taken I must say that I disagree with this approach to the relevant question.

The question is not simply whether due inquiries and search had been made. The terms of the subsection ought to be borne in mind. They cover the case of death as well as of bodily injury caused by or arising out of the use of a motor vehicle in a public street in particular circumstances, namely those in which 'the identity of the motor vehicle cannot after due inquiry and search be established'. Where this is the situation, a right of action against the Nominal Defendant is given.
 
The stipulation that the identity of the vehicle is incapable of being established is made for the protection of the Nominal
Defendant. It imposes no obligation, as such, upon the plaintiff, though, the plaintff to succeed must establish that the identity is incapable of being established as in the terms of the section The word 'after' in the sub-section does not, in my opinion, require that some inquiry and search must necessary in fact always precede some other event or the drawing of a conclusion. If in the circumstances of the case, it is evident that the identity of the vehicle could not be established by due inquiry and search, the stipulation in my opinion, may be held to be established, although no inquiry or search destined to be futile has been made. The section does not, in my opinion require that in every case irrespective of its circumstances, some inquiry and search should have been made. Whether or not the identity of the vehicle might have been established after inquiry and search appropriate to the circumstances of the case had been made is a question of fact.
... The presence of the word 'due' in the sub-section emphasises that the question is whether the identity of the vehicle cannot be establishes though such inquiry and search as might appropriately be made in the circumstances of the case had taken place."
It is the duty of this Court to test the conclusion expressed by Smyth
DCJ in this case against the exposition of the law in Harrison. Ritual inquiries and charade procedures that may have been thought necessary in conformity with Blanford versus Fox are no longer necessary if the tribunal of fact comes to the conclusion that "due" inquiry and search would have produced no real results to identify the motor vehicle.
 
The Primary judge erred
Smyth
DCJ was aware of Harrison. He referred to the decision in his reasons. But he still felt that various inquiries could and should have been made which he was unable to say would necessarily have been fruitless. I see force in his Honour's reasoning. I take into account that this is an appeal.
It is necessary for the appellants to show error. It is not sufficient to establish that, at trial, a different mind would have reached a different result.
The error which I see in the approach of Smyth DCJ is, with respect that his Honour appears insufficiently to have attended to the instruction in
Harrison.
The requirement of due inquiry and search is for the protection of the
Nominal Defendant. But this is not a case (as many are) where there may be doubt that an incident occurred at all involving an unidentified vehicle.
Here, there is no real room for dispute that Mr Oztan's vehicle was struck as described by him, by Mr Wormald and as recorded contemporaneously by Mr
Hutchison and Senior Constable Mills. Furthermore, the identity of the vehicle which occasioned the impact has not in fact been established. So the sole question is the adequacy ("due") of the inquiry and search. Given the conduct of the vehicle immediately after impact, in swerving away from the scene, proceeding forward, passing through an intersection contrary to red lights and decamping from the scene, it is quite fanciful (as Smyth DCJ recognised) to think that the driver would have responded to routine inquiries. The road is described as extremely busy. Some inquiries were made immediately after the impact by Mr Wormald but without result. The prospect of the chance discovery of a neighbour, household or repair works which knew the identify of the motor vehicle seems equally remote.
That leaves the apparently more fruitful source of inquiry provided by the record of the number plate recalled by Mr Hutchison. There is no real doubt about that number.
It was recorded at the time by Mr Oztan and that record was in evidence. The same number was reported to the police by Mr
Wormald.
But it seems clear that no registration plates conforming to that number were on issue in New South Wales at the time. Plates earlier issued answering to that number had been surrendered. The faint suggestion that the surrendered plates might have found their way into use is fanciful and must be rejected.
As to the possibility that the plates were issued by an interstate licensing authority, it will be remembered that Mr Hutchison was quite adamant that they appeared to be of the New South Wales variety. At the relevant time,
New South Wales registration number plates were of a distinct colour and appearance. The exclusion of an interstate origin by the one witness who saw the plates appears so affirmative as reasonably to exclude that fine of inquiry. Whilst it is true that investigations of Constable Mills might have produced a vein of gold, the chances seem as slight as those usually experienced by gold prospectors. Smyth DCJ correctly, in the evidence, concluded that no advertisements had been published. But, equally correctly, he concluded that it was most unlikely that any such advertisements would have produced results.
Whilst the burden of establishing due inquiry and search rested upon the appellants, the Nominal Defendant has now long had the details of Mr
Hutchison's recollection of the registration number of the offending vehicle.
I find it difficult to believe that, had there been an interstate stolen but insured motor vehicle answering to the number described, this would not have been drawn to the notice of the court. It would have been a complete answer to the appellants' claim. At least in the case of the children (in respect of whom the limitation period would have been postponed) it might have afforded them, belatedly, an avenue of redress.
In all of the circumstances, the proper factual inference to be drawn is either that Mr Hutchison mistook the identification of the registration number of the responsible vehicle or that a mistake occurred in recording that number at the scene of the collisions. Such a mistake would be understandable in the shock and excitement of such an event. Faced with that conclusion and with the affirmative statement by Mr Hutchison that the vehicle was certainly of New
South Wales registration, the imposition of an obligation on the appellants (and their representatives) to proceed to search the motor registries of every
State of Australia on the off-chance of finding the identity of the offending vehicle seems unrealistic. It partakes of the ritualistic conduct which the
High Court in Harrison was at pains to criticise.
 .
So here stands this case. An incident certainly occurred involving Mr
Oztan (and his family). The incident was caused by a Renault sedan which fled the scene and has not in fact been identified. Inquiries were made to pursue the recorded number of the vehicle as reported by an eye witness. But these inquiries failed to identify the vehicle, leading to the conclusion that the recorded number was mistaken. Advertisements, door knocks and other investigations seem unlikely to produce the identity of the vehicle, given this way in which it hastened away from the point of impact. The belated suggestion that it might have been a stolen interstate vehicle was nowhere recorded. And in any case, it conflicts with the strong statement of the eye witness that the registration plates were of New South Wales origin, having an appearance distinctively different from those of Victoria and most other
States. Whilst it is true, as Smyth DCJ concluded, that further inquiries and searches might have been done, I consider that his Honour erred in applying an excessively stringent requirement of inquiry and search. By the application of the approach mandated in Harrison, I consider that such inquiry and search as was conducted was, in the circumstances, adequate ("due") to permit the appellants to pursue their claims against the Corporation.
I do not regard this as an entirely clear case. I acknowledge that different minds might reach different conclusions. The case is at the borderline. But having come to the conclusion which I have, I am bound to give effect to it.
 
Notice of contention
By a notice of contention, the Corporation asserted that there was evidence that the unidentified vehicle was registered pursuant to the law of a place other than New South Wales within the meaning of <case> of the Motor
Vehicles (Third Party insurance) Act 1942. Consequently, it was contended that the appellants had no entitlement under <case> of the Act to bring any proceedings against the Corporation. Alternatively, it was contended that the appellants had failed to demonstrate that the vehicle in question was not a
Victorian registration number JXK-593 and that due inquiry and search would have included a search of the Victorian registry.
As to the alternative contentions, I consider that these are adequately met by what I have said above. Given the strong statement of Mr Hutchison that the registration plates were of New South Wales origin and the negative result of the inquiry as to those number plates in New South Wales, I am not convinced that due inquiry and search in this case would necessarily have obliged the appellants' solicitors to check interstate registries. It might have been prudent for this to have been done. But given the strong statement of an otherwise observant independent and apparently reliable witness, I am not prepared to say that the failure to make the investigation deprives the inquiry and search of the necessary quality of adequacy.
The same conclusion answers the contention based upon s 14B of the Act.
There is no affirmative evidence that the vehicle involved in the collision with Mr Oztan's vehicle was "registered pursuant to the law of a place other than New South Wales" as <case> of the Act provides. On the contrary, the statement of Mr Harrison denied this. The only evidence which raises the possibility is that of Senior Constable Mills. But that was simply his belated recall of an unrecorded computer search he thought he had conducted years earlier. There was no record of it. The Corporation, which could have removed any possibility of its liability by the proof of interstate registration, failed to produce the record. Even now, if the existence of such registration (and insurance) could be established it could be open to the Corporation to seek recovery. In the state of the evidence as it was left at the trial, it was not afirmatively shown that <case> of the Act applied whilst the onus of establishing the pre-condition to attract the application of <case> rests upon the claimant enforcing a claim for damages. It seems to me that the burden of attracting the application of <case>, to exclude entitlements under <case>, rests upon the person that asserts that the pre-condition to the exclusion of s 14B applied. That person was the Corporation. It might have given proof. If such proof existed, it held back from offering it. In saying this I do not mean to shift the burden of proof of due inquiry and search which rested throughout on the appellants. But in the light of the testimony of Mr
Hutchison, accepted by the primary judge, a forensic and quite possibly the legal burden was cast on the respondent if it seriously wished to contend that actual interstate registration and insurance was affirmatively established.
I would therefore reject the assertions contained in the notice of contention.
 
Conclusions and orders
The result is that the decisions of Smyth DCJ cannot stand. I propose the following orders: 
Appeals allowed; 
Set aside the judgments in favour of the defendant entered by his Honour
Judge Smyth of the District Court on 3 September ; 
In lieu thereof, return the proceedings to the District Court for the determination of the entitlement, if any, of each of the plaintiffs against the New South Wales Insurance Ministerial Corporation, such entitlement to be determined conformably with the decision of this Court; 
Order that the Corporation pay the plaintiffs' costs of the first trial;
Order that the respondent pay the appellants' costs of the appeal; and 
Certify, in respect of the costs of the appeal, that the Corporation, if otherwise so qualified, should have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA I agree with Kirby P.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA I agree with Kirby P.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/36.html  
