

Regina versus Eminoni Matter No Cca 60473/97 [1998] NSWSC 267 (22 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
REGINA versus Kenneth Charles Edward EMINONI 
CCA 60473/97 June 1998 
Grove J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: I will ask Barr J to give the first judgment. 
BARR J: The applicant seeks leave to appeal against sentences imposed upon him by O'Reilly DCJ. Between 26 January and 2 April, 1997 the applicant committed eight armed robberies at business establishments, mainly post offices. On each occasion he was armed with a replica automatic pistol, entered the premises and pointed it at the person he wished to rob. 
On each occasion he expressly or impliedly threatened to shoot that person. On each occasion he obtained a sum of money. The sums ranged from $270 to $5,200.
On one occasion he also took money from a customer of the business. On another he robbed the business of cigarettes. All together he took more than $13,000.

On seven of the counts his Honour imposed concurrent fixed terms of five years, and on the last count a concurrent minimum term of five years and an additional term of three years. The total effective sentence was therefore of eight years, comprising a minimum term of five years and an additional term of three years. The maximum penalty for each of the offences was 20 years' penal servitude.

His Honour took into account in imposing sentence three further offences, namely knowingly taking part in the supply of heroin, possessing heroin, and failing to appear on bail.

His Honour drew attention to the careful planning that had gone into the offences, to the fact that they were committed whilst the applicant was on bail, and to the conclusion that the robberies were undertaken purely for the purpose of obtaining money to spend on heroin.

The applicant was born on 4 July, 1975 and was 22 years old when sentenced. He went through six years of high school and completed his Higher School
Certificate. By that time however he was seriously involved with alcohol and cannabis. Although he gained an apprenticeship as a baker he gave that up after a year because, he said, he found the travel too difficult.

In May, 1996 he suffered head injuries, probably in an assault, although that is not certain because he has no memory of the events. He was taken to Auburn
District Hospital and transferred to Westmead Hospital. A CT Scan showed the existence of a 1.5 centimetre left posterior parietal extradural haematoma, an intracerebral haematoma in the left temporal lobe, multiple contusions on the sub-frontal region together with obstructive hydrocephalus and a shift of mid- line structures to the right, secondary to the effects of his injuries in the left cerebral hemisphere.

He remained in hospital and was treated appropriately. He was put onto a rehabilitation program, and after his discharge, onto a vocational program through the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service. A neurophsychological assessment performed as part of that program showed that there had been no decline in intellectual functioning from pre-morbid levels.

According to the report of Dr K Macarthy, the consultant in rehabilitation medicine at the Brain Injury Rehabilitation Service, Westmead Hospital, the applicant sustained a significant traumatic brain injury consistent with an assault, from which he appeared to have high level cognitive deficits, especially impaired verbal comprehension, impaired memory with inefficiency of new learning, and subtle executive dysfunction. His deficits include poor self monitoring, impulsivity, poor anger control, and a difficulty in preventing actions although he is aware that they may have significant adverse consequences. Dr Macarthy concluded with the remark that the applicant might seem wilful, but he might have difficulty in altering his behaviour. His
Honour took that report into account in sentencing the applicant.

It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that the sentence was manifestly excessive in view of the applicant's plea of guilty, his age, his prospects of rehabilitation, and the fact that he had been injured in one of the attacks.

It was submitted that his Honour failed to give appropriate weight to the consequences of the applicant's brain injury, and to the need for him to rehabilitate, and that his Honour failed to appreciate that the applicant's disability was also a catalyst for the development of his addiction to heroin.

It is well established that the existence of a significant psychiatric condition at the time of the commission of an offence can be an important mitigating factor, depending on the circumstances. However, none of these offences appears to have resulted from the circumstances which attended the applicant as a result of the head injuries he received.

As his Honour remarked, each of these offences was the result of careful planning. The purpose was to obtain money to buy heroin. Heroin was a substance to which the applicant had become addicted after he began voluntarily taking it instead of other drugs to which he could have lawfully resorted to control pain.

It could not be suggested that there was a direct link between the sequelae of his injuries and the commission of the offences, for example, because he did something on impulse and found it difficult to stop doing something he knew he should not do.

Even so, his Honour took the circumstances into account in fixing the total sentence and the additional term. His Honour did so because of the special needs of the applicant for rehabilitation, and to assist him in staying away from heroin.

His Honour also expressly took into account all the other subjective features of the case, principally the applicant's early admissions and co-operation with the police, and the early pleas of guilty. His Honour noted that although the evidence against the applicant was strong in some of the counts, it was not so in others. His Honour observed that the applicant was entitled therefore to more than a simple pragmatic discount.

Given that these offences were deliberately and carefully resorted to for the purposes of obtaining money for heroin, substantial sentences were called for.
The resulting sentence demonstrates that his Honour applied a substantial discount for the combined effect of the features that I have mentioned.

Reference was made to sentencing statistics, but I regret that I have obtained little assistance from those statistics in view of the fact that there were eight offences here, and a number of matters to be taken into account.

I think that the sentence which resulted from the recognition his Honour gave to the subjective features, including the applicant's condition and his need for rehabilitation, were appropriate in all the circumstances. I would refuse leave to appeal against the sentences.

GROVE J: I agree. The order of the court therefore is that leave to appeal is refused. * * * 
