

Leda Holdings P/L versus Crone and Associates P/L 7 3 Ors; National Mutual
Trustees Ltd versus Super P/L (In Liq) (formerly Leda Constructions P/L) and 5 Ors;
MMI Ltd versus Leda Holdings P/L and 4 Ors [1997] NSWSC 49 (21 February 1997) 
LEDA HOLDINGS PTY LTD versus CRONE & ASSOCIATES PTY LTD & 3 ORS 
NATIONAL MUTUAL TRUSTEES LTD versus SUPER P/L (IN LIQ) (formerly LEDA
CONSTRUCTIONS P/L) & 5 ORS 
MANUFACTURERS MUTUAL INSURANCE LTD versus LEDA HOLDINGS P/L & 4 ORS /95, 55026/96, 55027/96 
Monday, 17 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
CONSTRUCTION LIST 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: There are before me several motions for summary relief by way of striking out or the summary dismissal of claims, for the disallowance of amendments and for other related relief in proceedings number 55059 of 1995 (the Leda Holdings proceedings), proceedings number 55026 of 1996 (the National Mutual Proceedings) and proceedings number 55027 of 1996 (the MMI proceedings) (the related actions). In an ideal litigious world the related actions would form one action as they arise out of construction defects in a twenty three level city commercial development (the building) on property known as 2 Market Street Sydney. The circumstances giving rise to the related actions are unexceptional and fall within the description of a conventional construction dispute. However, appearances are misleading and the initiation of the related actions by the Leda Holdings proceedings has unearthed a multiplicity of disputes among several parties. 
It will be necessary to detail the claims which have been raised in the related actions in order to have some understanding of the basis for the relief sought in the motions before me. In this respect, I was considerably assisted in the understanding of the procedural steps taken by the various parties in the related actions by diagrammatic representation of the related actions presented by counsel for Leda Holdings Pty Ltd (Leda Holdings). Those diagrammatic representations are Sch 1 to these reasons. A glance at Sch 1 is sufficient to demonstrate the procedural absurdities which have been reached in the related actions and, whatever the outcome of the subject motions, it is clear that the Court will have to intervene to ensure that the disputes go forward in some orderly way which, hopefully, will not visit unnecessary costs upon individual litigants nor consume excessive amounts of the Court time for the hearing of these disputes. It is clear from Sch 1 that there are duplications of disputes in the related actions and as a first step it will be necessary to eliminate those duplications. To date, I think, with respect to the parties, that considerable effort has been addressed by them to the working out of solutions to these procedurally based difficulties. That has proved unsuccessful: hence the several motions before me which have been heard together.

For the most part, the evidence was tendered or admitted in two or more of the constituent proceedings in the related actions. I have not found it necessary to differentiate the evidence in that way in considering the several motions.
In some instances I have entertained submissions without the requirement of a formal notice of motion. For example, in the case of W T Malouf Pty Ltd , if it is successful in its motion brought in the Leda Holdings proceedings it will seek similar orders in the MMI proceedings and the
National Mutual proceedings in respect of cross-claims against it brought by
Leda Holdings. In the case of the motion filed by Leda Holdings in the MMI proceedings, the outcome of that motion was dependant upon the outcome of the hearing of the remaining motions before me. In relation to the motion brought by Malouf in the Leda Holdings proceedings, counsel agreed to defer argument concerning the Leda Holdings claim in contract based upon an alleged guarantee by Malouf and an assignment of its benefit. Motions for security and for particulars were not the subject of argument and have not been disposed of in these reasons.

The background to the disputes as revealed by the assumed facts of the pleadings and the evidence dates back to a retainer by Leda Holdings of Crone & Associates Pty Ltd (Crone) to provide architectural services as set out in correspondence between those parties between 5 January and 31 March 1987.
The retainer was for the provision of architectural services in relation to the design and construction of the building. By deed dated 14 August 1987 (amended by deed dated 11 May 1988) (the building contract) Immer No. (145)
Pty Ltd (Immer), as proprietor, and Super Pty Ltd (In Liq), then known as Leda
Construction Pty Ltd (Super), as builder, Super agreed to construct or cause the construction of the building in accordance with certain plans and specifications. On 26 August 1987 a construction management agreement (the construction management agreement) was entered into whereby W T Malouf
Constructions Pty Ltd (Malouf Constructions), then known as Leandex Pty Ltd, undertook to provide construction management services for the construction of the building and which included services at the design stage. At that time
Immer owned portion of the land upon which the building was to be constructed and, at a later time, Leda Holdings became the proprietor of the balance of the land upon which the building was constructed. In the Leda Holdings proceedings, Leda Holdings alleges that it was a party to the construction management agreement and was entitled to the benefit thereunder of a guarantee by Malouf of the due performance of the obligations of Malouf Constructions under the construction management agreement. Shortly after the execution of the construction management agreement, Crone produced specifications for the glazing facade of the building. By deed dated 17 May 1988, amended by a supplemental deed dated 22 December 1988 (the trust deed), a trust (the Market
Street trust) was constituted with Jacinth Pty Ltd (Jacinth) as trustee. By a novation agreement dated 17 May 1988 between Super, Immer and Jacinth, as lessee, the terms and conditions of the building contract were ratified and confirmed and Super and Jacinth each agreed to be bound by the terms of the building contract as if Jacinth had been originally named as a party thereto.
Under the novation agreement Super released Immer from its obligations under the building contract while Jacinth agreed to assume all existing and future liabilities of Immer under the building contract. In October 1988 Leda
Holdings and Immer sold to Jacinth, as trustee of the Market Street trust, their respective interests in the land upon which the building was to be built. By agreement made 17 November 1988 as amended on 29 June 1990 (the joint venture agreement), Leda Holdings, National Mutual Trustees Ltd (National Mutual), MMI Ltd (MMI), then known as Manufacturers Mutual Insurance
Ltd, and others entered into a joint venture arrangement which had the effect of amending the trust deed by allotting to MMI and an associated company ,000,000 `A' class units and 150 `B' class units in the Market Street trust. Immediately previous to the joint venture agreement, Leda Holdings held ,000,000 `A' class units and an associated company held 150 `B' class units. In December 1988 National Mutual was substituted for Jacinth as trustee of the trust. On 30 January 1989 Permasteelisa Pty Ltd (Permasteelisa) entered into a contract with Malouf Constructions for the design and construction of the glass facade of the building (the facade sub-contract). On 28 June 1991
MMI redeemed half of its holdings in the trust and that redeemed half was reissued to MMI General Insurance Ltd (General), the second plaintiff in the
MMI proceedings. Leda Holdings remained the holder of 50 per cent of the units issued in the trust. By virtue of a novation agreement dated 28 June 1991 the joint venture agreement was novated in favour of General. In the MMI proceedings Donald Crone & Associates Pty Ltd is joined. This joinder is simply the result of a lack of certainty on the part of MMI as to the party who provided architectural services for the design and construction of the building. Proceedings have been taken against Syedale Pty Ltd in the Leda
Holdings. It is also a defendant in the National Mutual proceedings. Syedale was a project manager engaged in relation to the project. Proceedings against
Syedale are not intended to be continued.

To complete the identification of parties, in the National Mutual proceedings,
Permasteelisa has proceeded by way of first cross-claim against Rice Daubney arising out of the terms of its engagement by Syedale as architects to provide expert advice to Syedale on Permasteelisa's design and construction of the curtain wall of the building.

In the Leda Holdings proceedings I granted leave to Leda Holdings to further amend its summons which it did by its second further amended summons filed, out of time, on 2 December 1996. It is convenient to consider the motions so far as they concern the Leda Holdings proceedings by reference to that pleading. However, it will be necessary later in these reasons, to some extent, to trace the amendments to the Leda Holdings summons by reason of the relief sought on behalf of Crone which turns on the possible operation of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) in respect of those amendments.

In the Leda Holdings proceedings, Leda Holdings proceeds against Crone,
Permasteelisa, Malouf and Syedale. Leda Holdings seeks damages against Crone for breach of its contract of retainer to provide architectural services in connection with the design and construction of the building and for breach of a concurrent duty of care in the design and preparation of the specification for the building. The particulars furnished of such breaches rely upon a specification by Crone of "minimum heat strengthened" external glass for the building which permitted the use of unsuitable "toughened glass" which had a tendency to "spontaneously fracture". It further particularises that Crone had acted in breach of its retainer and negligently in approving a certain "mock- up" unit for the glass to be used in the building, so approving the use of toughened glass for the external glazing. It is further alleged that Crone, in breach of its retainer and of its duty of care to Leda Holdings, failed to provide adequate "quality control" during the carrying out of periodic inspections of constructions works by failing to detect that toughened glass was being used for external glazing of the building. The damages said to have been suffered by Leda Holdings in respect of such breaches are particularised as follows: "The Plaintiff has suffered loss and damage as a result of the First
Defendant's breach of the Architect's Agreement, or alternatively as a result of the First Defendant's negligence.

Particulars 
The Plaintiff is one of the unit holders in the Market Street Unit Trust, the other unit holder being Manufacturers Mutual Insurance Limited. The Trustee of the Trust is National Mutual Trustee's limited.
 
As a result of the defect in the glass, the glass in the Project will need to be replaced. At this time, the Plaintiff is unable to particularise the amount which will need to be paid to have the glass replaced, but the amount will be in excess of $10m.
 
In the alternative to the claim made in paragraph (b) hereof, as a result of the defect in the glass, there has been a diminution in the value of the Project. Precise particulars of the diminution in value will be provided in due course." (Pars 6(a) - (c)) 
The claim against Permasteelisa is based upon a relationship of proximity between Leda Holdings and Permasteelisa arising out of the undertaking by
Permasteelisa of the design and construction of the glass facade of the building under the facade subcontract and that of Leda Holdings as outlined above. Leda Holdings claims damages for failure to use reasonable skill and care in the performance of such work.

The claim against Malouf arises out of the construction management agreement, in particular, the guarantee thereunder by Malouf of the due performance of the obligations cast upon Malouf Constructions. Reliance upon the construction management agreement is variously put on the basis that Leda Holdings was a party to the construction management agreement, though not therein named, and, in so far as is necessary to support that construction, Leda Holdings seeks rectification of the construction management agreement. Alternatively, it is alleged that the construction management agreement came into existence in circumstances in which there was a "convention" that Malouf "had agreed to guarantee to (Leda Holdings) ... or alternatively for (its) benefit ... the performance of Malouf Constructions as a construction manager for the ". Similar contentions are advanced in relation to what is described as an alternative construction management agreement. That agreement is particularised in pars 10 and 11 of Leda Holdings' claim for relief in its summons. If all else fails, Leda Holdings relies on a construction of the construction management agreement, in particular cl 10.01 of that agreement, which involves the propositions that the guarantee by Malouf was given to Leda
Limited and Immer and that, by Immer's sale of its interest in the building to
Jacinth on 4 October 1988, Immer assigned the benefit of that guarantee to
Jacinth as trustee of the trust. Leda Holdings contends that "it has the benefit of the Guarantee ... having regard to the fact that Jacinth holds the on trust" for Leda Holdings and MMI. Lastly, it offers the basis that the guarantee "is a covenant which touches and concerns land or which was given for the benefit of the unitholders of the trust" and so "can be enforced ... by (Leda Holdings) without any express assignment by Immer". The summons then alleges breach by Malouf Constructions of its construction management duties in connection with the design and construction of the facade in permitting the use of toughened glass. Leda Holdings also relies upon a concurrent duty of care on the part of Malouf to ensure that Malouf
Constructions carried out the duties of construction manager with reasonable care. Leda Holdings claims that it suffered loss and damage as a result of
Malouf Constructions' breach of the construction management agreement, or as a result of its negligence, which damages are particularised as follows: "The Plaintiff has suffered loss and damage as a result of Malouf
Constructions' breach of the CM Agreement or alternatively the Alternate CM
Agreement, or alternatively as a result of Malouf Constructions' negligence which it claims against the Third Defendant under the terms of the Guarantee or alternatively the Alternate Guarantee.

Particulars ~~The Plaintiff repeats and relies upon the particulars sub joined to paragraph 6 hereof. ~~As a result of the defective glass, the glass in the Project will need to be replaced. In the event of such glass replacement, Leda Holdings' loss or damage relates to the contribution (under clause 30.3(a) of the Trust Deed) which, inter alia, Leda Holdings may have to pay.
 
In addition, Leda Holdings holds units in the Trust, the property of which is a marketable commodity and is tradable (sic) subject to pre-emptive rights vesting in the other unit holders. As a result of the defective glass, the value of Leda Holdings' units has been diminished.
 
Further or in the alternative, Leda Holdings claims the damages which are claimed against it in the proceedings commenced by NMTL (55026/96) and MMI (55027/96). In so claiming, Leda Holdings should not be regarded as admitting that it breached any warranties or was otherwise liable to either NMTL or MMI. " 
The same damages are claimed on the basis of Malouf's negligent failure to ensure the proper performance of its services by Malouf Constructions.

The claim against Syedale is not pursued.

Malouf has not pleaded to this latest amended summons of Leda Holdings. The defence filed on behalf of Malouf does not raise an issue of release from liability as is raised in the affidavit of Michael Joseph Malouf (M J Malouf) sworn 25 July 1996 read in support of Malouf's motion. In that affidavit, M J
Malouf deposes to the facts that he was formerly director of Malouf
Constructions which went into voluntary liquidation on 9 September 1991 and was dissolved on 15 August 1992. He traces the contracting history affecting the parties through the construction management agreement, the sale of 2
Market Street to Jacinth, the retirement of Jacinth as trustee of the Market
Street trust, the appointment of Syedale as project manager and in turn the appointment of Rice Daubney by Syedale as architects to provide architectural services in respect of the curtain wall installation for the building. He also traces the substitution of Australian and Pacific Projects Corporation Pty Ltd as project manager, in substitution for Syedale, in September 1989.
In annexures A to H to that affidavit, he evidences communications dating back to September 1989 passing between Syedale, Pacific, representatives of Super from which communications it may be inferred that, as early as the second half of 1989, problems concerning the glazing panels of the building's curtain wall had surfaced. Also annexed to the affidavit are two deeds of mutual release entered into by Super, Leda Limited, Immer and Malouf Constructions on 27
March 1991 and 20 March 1992, respectively (the mutual releases). Those releases purported to release the executing parties from liability under the construction management agreement as varied, with the second of those deeds providing clarification of the operation of the earlier deed of release. No point has been taken that these matters of release do not form part of the pleadings.

There was read in support of the motion on behalf of Crone the affidavit of
Janice Mary Saddler (Saddler), sworn 16 August 1996, which traces the history of amendments in this matter and annexes certain correspondence between
Syedale and Rice Daubney in February and December 1989, together with a project record of the fact that the twenty third level work of Permasteelisa had been completed as at 24 February 1990. The correspondence includes a letter from Rice Daubney to Syedale of 8 December 1989 which noted that the glass used on the building did not conform to the specification, an observation that was followed by technical considerations as to the behaviour of toughened glass and heat strengthened glass, a question that appears to be at the heart of the technical dispute amongst the parties.

In support of its motion Permasteelisa read the affidavit of Catherine Jane
Morton (Morton ) sworn 7 June 1996. That affidavit also traces the legal steps that resulted in National Mutual becoming trustee of the Market Street trust and MMI a unitholder. It identifies the time when the glass panel facade of the building was installed as being between January 1989 and October 1990 and states that failures in the glass facade began to occur from February 1991.
The affidavit also annexes certain technical reports relating to the glass facade which National Mutual obtained in 1994. In relation to the defective glass the affidavit states that where certain failures occurred in the facade
Permasteelisa had replaced the panels at its own expense. Morton states that
Leda Holdings had not suggested that the bringing of the Leda Holdings proceedings was occasioned by any failure on the part of National Mutual as trustee to bring a claim against Permasteelisa. The trust deed, the joint venture agreement and the construction management agreement as amended were admitted into evidence, as was a letter from Permasteelisa's solicitors to the solicitors for Leda Holdings of 9 May 1996 and the reply thereto of 15 May
In that correspondence Permasteelisa brought into question the right of
Leda Holdings to bring the Leda Holdings proceedings as a unitholder in the
Market Street trust. The response traced the development of the legal relations amongst the parties going back to the appointment of Crone as an architect in 1987 by Leda Holdings and distinguished the position of Leda
Holdings from that of a beneficiary taking a derivative action where the cause of action reposed in the trustee.

Although the motions presently being heard represent less of a challenge to the National Mutual proceedings than the motions relating to the other two proceedings in the related actions, it is necessary, I think, to examine the nature of the National Mutual proceedings. I propose to examine the issues on the basis of the issues raised by the amended summons filed on 4 October 1996.

National Mutual sues as the trustee of the Market Street trust, as the owner of the building, as a party entitled to the benefit of covenants contained in the building contract, as a party entitled to the benefit of certain covenants under the joint venture agreement and as one entitled to the benefit of covenants under the construction management agreement. Those circumstances it is alleged gave rise to other tortious liability on the part of the defendants in the National Mutual proceedings.

National Mutual sues Super, Leda Holdings, Malouf, Crone, Permasteelisa and
Syedale. The proceedings against Syedale are not pursued. Perhaps, more than any other single factor, the fact that Leda Holdings is a defendant in the
National Mutual proceedings and, as appears later in these reasons, in the MMI proceedings, represents the complicating feature of the related actions which has stood in the way of a simplification of the procedural steps necessary to bring these disputes to a hearing. The circumstances giving rise to the joinder of Leda Holdings as a defendant in those related actions are, I think, also the context for viewing the contentions of the applicants for summary relief that the Leda Holdings proceedings are derivative in nature and, in fact, represent an attempt by a beneficiary to enforce a cause of action which reposes, if at all, in its trustee. For reasons that appear below, I consider that view of the Leda Holdings proceedings to be ill founded.

The claim by National Mutual against Super is in negligence and alleges various duties of care arising out of a relationship of proximity to be drawn from the position of National Mutual as owner of the land on which the building was being constructed, the obligations of Super under the building contract and the assumption of responsibility by Super in continuing to construct the building. The particulars of damages alleged are as follows: "As a result of the breaches referred to in paragraph 7 hereof, the Plaintiff has suffered loss and damage.

PARTICULARS 
The Plaintiff is Trustee of the Trust and owner of the Building.

As a result of the defect in the glass, the glass on the Building will need to be replaced. The Plaintiff has not yet incurred the expense of having the glass replaced, but estimates that the cost of such work will be in excess of $10m.

In the alternative to the claim made in paragraph (b) hereof, as a result of the defect in the glass, there has been diminution in the value of the
Building. Particulars of the diminution in value will be the subject of expert evidence." (Par 8 (a) - (c)) 
The claim against Leda Holdings includes claims of a similar nature to those made against Super. In addition, National Mutual relies upon causes of action arising out of the joint venture agreement under which Leda Holdings undertook to cause Super to construct and to complete the building in accordance with the building contract and warranted that the subject plans and specification for the building had been prepared in a competent and professional manner and with due care and skill. The duty of care is variously described as one to avoid a loss to National Mutual as owner of 2 Market Street by causing Super to construct the building in accordance with the building contract; a duty to ensure, in terms of the warranty in the joint venture agreement, that the plans and specifications for the building had been prepared with due care and skill, together with other duties of a like nature to those alleged against
Super. As an alternative basis, National Mutual asserts that it is entitled to enforce the covenants and warranties to the joint venture agreement as trustee of the interests of MMI.

The claim against Malouf is also based upon the relationship of proximity arising out of the position of National Mutual as trustee of the Market Street trust, as owner of 2 Market Street and upon the position of Malouf under the construction management agreement under which Malouf guaranteed the due performance by Malouf Constructions of its duties as construction manager. The duty to National Mutual is described as one to take all reasonable care to ensure due performance of Malouf Constructions' obligations under the construction management agreement so as to avoid loss to National Mutual. A further duty of care is alleged to have arisen out of the assumption of responsibility to avoid loss to National Mutual in terms of the guarantee contained in the construction management agreement. It is alleged that this assumption of responsibility, in part, arose out of the continuation of the performance of services as construction manager by Malouf Constructions until and the "continuing" nature of Malouf's guarantee under the construction management agreement. The damages claimed are as particularised in the claim against Leda Holdings.

The claim against Crone is alleged to also arise out of a relationship of proximity and a duty of care to avoid loss to National Mutual as owner of 2
Market Street and the position of Crone as architect to provide architectural services in relation to the building, particularly to provide adequate designs, approve certain "mock-up" tests and carry out certain quality control duties. The damages relied upon are as particularised in relation to the Leda
Holdings claim.

The claim against Permasteelisa is also based on a concept of proximity of relationship giving rise to a duty of care. The requisite proximity is alleged to arise from the position of National Mutual as owner of 2 Market Street and the duties undertaken by Permasteelisa under the facade subcontract. The damages claimed are as particularised in the action against Leda Holdings.

In considering the MMI proceedings I have used the amended summons. In the MMI proceedings, MMI sues Leda Holdings, Super, Crone, Donald Crone &
Associates Pty Ltd (arising out of the uncertainty of the proper defendant) and Permasteelisa. In the MMI proceedings, for the purpose of these motions, nothing of significance turns on the fact that MMI redeemed certain of its units in the Market Street trust and that units were, in turn, reissued to
General. MMI relies, in the MMI proceedings, on its position as a unitholder, as an intending lessee of part of the building and upon the role of Leda
Holdings, Crone, Super and Permasteelisa under the various legal arrangements to which I have made reference. It alleges that its damage arises in four different capacities, namely as unitholder in the Market Street trust, as a tenant of a portion of the building, as a sublessor or potential sublessor and as a party to the joint venture agreement.

The claim against Leda Holdings alleges that it was a unitholder in the Market
Street trust, was the developer of the project for the construction of the building, that it provided management services in connection with that construction and took responsibility for the development of the building. It relies upon breaches of warranty by Leda Holdings under the joint venture agreement, in particular, that it would cause Super to construct the building in accordance with the building contract, that the plans and specifications would be prepared with due care and skill and that the building was being constructed and would be completed in accordance with the building contract.
It alleges breach of those obligations by not ensuring that the glazing specification excluded the use of toughened glass in the building's facade in permitting the use of toughened glass. The damage alleged is as follows: "By reason of the breaches by Holdings referred to in C14 MMI ~~has~~ and MMI
General have suffered loss and damage.

Particulars 
Further particulars will be provided a reasonable time before the hearing.
However, MMI's loss and damage was incurred in ~~three~~ four different capacities: ~~first~~ firstly, as a unitholder in the Trust, the value of whose interest in the Trust has diminished; ~~secondly~~ secondly, as a tenant in the Building, whose enjoyment of occupation ~~has~~ diminished as a result of disruption concerning the glass panel failures and is likely to further diminish as that disruption is likely to increase in future; thirdly, as a sub-lessor or potential sub-lessor, whose returns are likely to ~~diminish~~. diminish and the value of whose interest, on any assignment, has diminished; and fourthly, as a party to the JVA.

MMI General's loss and damage arises from its interest in units in the
Trust and as a party to the JVA." (Par C20) 
MMI also raises a negligence claim against Leda Holdings arising out of a relationship of proximity, from the circumstances set out in the summons, in which it was alleged that it was foreseeable that MMI, as a unitholder in the
Market Street trust and as a party committed to enter into a lease of portion of the building, would suffer loss if the facade was not designed and constructed, and the management services of Leda Holdings were not provided, with reasonable care and skill. Such foreseeable damage includes an adverse effect upon the obtainable rent for premises within the building or upon the value of the building and of MMI's unitholding, or upon the enjoyment of occupation of the building. Arising out of those circumstances, it is said that Leda Holdings owed MMI a duty of care to ensure that the building was designed and constructed in a competent way. Breach of that duty is alleged to have been occasioned by the failure of MMI to prevent the use of toughened glass in the building's facade and its failure to warn about the potential problems associated with the use of such glass. The particulars of damage arising from such breaches are those particularised in relation to the breach of warranty claim against Leda Holdings.

The claim against Super in negligence is in like terms to the negligence claim against Leda Holdings, with particular reliance upon Super's obligations under the building contract and of its knowledge that the building was being constructed for a joint venture which included MMI. The particulars of damage are those furnished in relation to the claim against Leda Holdings.

A similar claim in negligence is made against Crone and its associated company, relying on similar circumstances to those alleged in relation to the claims against Leda Holdings and Super, and placing particular reliance upon the obligations of Crone under its retainer as architect in relation to the building. The damages alleged against Crone are as particularised in relation to the claim against Leda Holdings.

In the affidavit of Duncan McKellar Campbell (Campbell) sworn 1 November 1996 filed in support of Crone's application, Campbell, the solicitor with the conduct of the matter on behalf of Crone, traces the history of amendment to the MMI summons; refers to a communication between Permasteelisa and
Pilkington, presumably the glass supplier, on 10 July 1990, which records an incident when a panel of glass exploded on the site of the building before installation; and communications passing between Malouf Constructions,
Syedale, Rice Daubney and Pacific between July 1989 and December 1989 which raise the question whether the glass being used complied with the specification and the possibility of its spontaneous disintegration.

The claim against Permasteelisa in negligence is not dissimilar from the other negligence claims in the MMI proceedings. It places particular reliance upon
Permasteelisa's position under the facade subcontract and upon its role as a specialist in the glazing industry. The breach of its duties includes procuring and using toughened glass which it is alleged was persisted with "in the face of warnings from Syedale" after 28 September 1989 and from Rice
Daubney after 8 December 1989. The particulars of damage are those relied upon in relation to the other claims in the MMI proceedings.

In support of Permasteelisa's motion there was read the affidavit of Catherine
Jane Morton sworn 8 July 1996 which was in terms similar to her affidavit sworn in the Leda Holdings proceedings.

In the Leda Holdings proceedings Crone seeks the following orders: "1. That the proceedings be dismissed as against the First Defendant, in whole or in part, pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/index.html#p13)
Rule 5(1)(a) of the Supreme Court Rules.
Alternatively, that the Further Amended Summons be struck out as against the First Defendant, in whole or in part, pursuant to Part 15 Rule 26(1)(a).

A. Alternatively, that the amendments made by paragraphs C5A to C5L of the Amended Summons and Further Amended Summons be disallowed.
 
B. Alternatively, that the said amendments be allowed on terms that they take effect from the date of filing of the Amended Summons.
 
C. That the Respondent/Plaintiff within 7 days file and serve on the
Applicant/First Defendant a Statement of Particulars of Damage, stating with precision:- 
What damage is said to have been caused by the Applicant's/First
Defendant's: 
Breach of contract; and 
Negligence; and 
How such damage is said to have been brought about thereby.
 
D. That the Respondent/Plaintiff, within 14 days, provide the particulars requested by the Applicant/First Defendant by letters of 15 and 27 March 1996, paragraphs 7, 8, 9, 16 and 19." 
The relief sought in pars 2B - 2D was not the subject of argument and is not addressed in these reasons. The motion on behalf of Permasteelisa seeks an order: "That the further amended summons be struck out or dismissed as against ." 
Malouf seeks the following orders: "1. These proceedings be dismissed pursuant to Part 13 rule (1)(a) of the
Supreme Court Rules.
In the alternative to order 2, the further amended summons filed in these proceedings be struck out pursuant to Part 15 rule 26(1)(a) of the Supreme
Court Rules.
The plaintiff pay the applicant's costs of the proceedings.
Such further or other orders as to (sic) Court thinks fit." 
During the course of argument, it was accepted by counsel on behalf of Leda
Holdings that there were deficiencies in the further amended summons so far as it addressed the question of the guarantee by Malouf and the alleged assignment of its benefit. That resulted in the granting of leave to amend as earlier referred to in these reasons and to the agreement between Leda
Holdings and Malouf that the challenge to so much of the claim against Malouf based upon that guarantee and assignment should be deferred. That left so much of the motion as challenged the cause of action in negligence based upon
Malouf's duty of care to Leda Holdings to ensure that Malouf Constructions carried out its duties as construction manager with reasonable care and as relied upon the mutual releases.

In the National Mutual proceedings, there is a motion on behalf of
Permasteelisa for security which, by consent, has been adjourned pending the determination of the questions raised by the other several motions in the related actions.

There is a further motion on behalf of Crone for the provision of particulars which has not been argued and is not the subject of these reasons. The motion filed on behalf of Malouf seeks substantially the same relief in relation to the National Mutual proceedings as it seeks in relation to the Leda Holdings proceedings. For its part National Mutual seeks the following orders: "1. That proceedings no. 55059 of 1995 be consolidated with the proceedings herein on the basis that proceedings no. 55059 of 1995 proceed as a cross- claim by the Second Defendant in the proceedings herein.
Alternatively, that the proceedings herein be tried at the same time as proceedings no. 55059 of 1995;
That the proceedings herein be tried at the same time as proceedings no.
 of 1996;" 
In the MMI proceedings, Leda Holdings' notice of motion seeks the following orders: "1. That these proceedings be dismissed pursuant to Part 13 rule (1)(a) of the
Supreme Court Rules.
In the alternative to Order 1, that the Summons be struck out pursuant to
Part 15 rule 26(1)(a) of the Supreme Court Rules." 
Permasteelisa seeks the following orders: "1. The Plaintiff's claim against the Fifth Defendant be dismissed or alternatively stayed in so far as it relates to loss and damage sustained in the Plaintiff's capacity as unitholder in the Market Street Trust (the
Trust) pursuant to Part 13 rule 5 of the Supreme Court Rules.
In the alternative, the following parts of the Plaintiff's Summons be struck out pursuant to Part 15 rule 26 of the Supreme Court Rules: those parts of paragraphs A20 and C53 relating to the Plaintiff's claim for loss and damage sustained in its capacity as unitholder in the Trust; subparagraphs A2, C49(a), C49(e), C50(a) and C50(e)." 
The relief sought on behalf of Crone and its associated company is as follows: "1. That the proceedings be dismissed as against the Third and Fourth
Defendants, in whole or in part, pursuant to Part 13 Rule 5(1)A of the Rules of the Supreme Court.
Alternatively, that the Amended Summons be struck out as against the Third and Fourth Defendants, in whole or in part, pursuant to Part 15 Rule (1)A.
Alternatively, that paragraphs C41 and C45 of the Amended Summons, in so far as they plead a cause or causes of action for damages for negligence in carrying out periodic inspections and reviewing and approving the mock-ups, be disallowed, alternatively allowed only on terms that they take effect from 18
October 1996." 
While Malouf is not a defendant in the MMI proceedings, it is a cross- defendant in the cross-claims brought by Leda Holdings and Super and, to the extent that it is successful in its motion in the Leda Holdings proceedings, it would seek to have like relief in relation to the cross-claims in the MMI proceedings although no formal notice of motion has been filed.

The principles applicable to the granting of summary relief such as is sought in the various motions before me are not in issue: see General Steel
Industries Inc versus Commissioner for Railways & Ors <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125] at 128-130. I also think that the observations of Kirby P, as his Honour then was, in Wickstead & Ors versus Browne [(1992) 30 NSWLR ] at pp 5 and 6 are pertinent to the circumstances of the related actions. Those observations follow: "It is only in respect of the disputed cause of action pleaded in negligence, based upon a common law duty of care allegedly owed to the appellant, that I differ from Handley JA and Cripps JA. I appreciate that the approach to be adopted in a case such as this, as required by General Steel Industries Inc v
Commissioner for Railways  <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125] at 130, permits the court to consider even extensive argument before determining (relevantly) whether the clear lack of a cause of action entitles the party seeking to summary termination of that part of the case: cf
Commonwealth of Australia versus Dixon [(1988) 13 NSWLR 601] at 611f.
We have certainly had extensive argument. It must be acknowledged that, in complex litigation, there are distinct advantages in cutting away hopeless causes of action. They may distract attention from viable claims proper to be litigated. They may prolong expensive litigation. They may give rise to error in the conduct of the trial.

I also acknowledge the force of the considerations which Handley JA and Cripps
JA have collected to demonstrate that the appellant's cause of action in negligence faces serious legal difficulties and, accordingly, may fail: cf P
Cane, Tort Law and Economic Interests (1991) Oxford, Clarendon Press at f; Glanville Williams and B A Hepple, Foundations of the Law of Tort
London, Butterworths at 16.

However, for five reasons I do not believe that that part of the case should be excised from the proceedings and terminated at this stage:
Conformably with the decision of this Court, the matter will now proceed to trial. It will be tried upon the two causes of action which the Court has unanimously upheld, viz, the statutory count based upon the Code and the claim for breach of fiduciary duty. If there were to be no trial, there might be particular reasons for affirming the conclusions which Handley JA and Cripps
JA have reached. Then, the summary termination of this claim might save the respondent altogether from the "vexation of the continuance of useless and futile proceedings": see Dey versus Victorian Railways Commissioners <case>; [(1949) 78 CLR 62] at 84; Pannizutti versus Trask [(1987) 10 NSWLR 531] at 536.
But as the trial must now proceed, there is merit (as it seems to me) in permitting the appellant to present his case in various ways. The marginal utility to the respondent of preventing the appellant from proceeding upon the alternative cause of action in negligence is minimal. But the marginal cost of doing so would be very great if, subsequently, the trial was concluded, limited by the orders proposed, and it was then held, either by this Court or by the High Court of Australia, that the appellant's cause of action in negligence was viable;
Common experience teaches that it is usually more efficient and just to consider the viability of a cause of action when the facts said to support it are adduced and the suggested action can be judged with a full understanding of all relevant evidence. Testimony gives colour and content to the application and development of legal principle. That is why leave is usually required for an appeal from interlocutory orders. Appellate courts, including this Court, will usually require evidence to be adduced and a trial concluded before considering the application of the law to that evidence. Out of the detail of the evidence ultimately proved, affecting the relationship of the respondent and the appellant, may arise a finding of a duty of care which the common law of negligence would uphold;
It is notorious that the law of negligence has undergone considerable changes in recent years, including in Australia. Handley JA and Cripps JA have collected in their reasons some of the main cases. In the context of a claim of breach of a duty to prevent economic loss I do not consider that it is safe to conclude, in this interlocutory application, that the authority of the Full
Court in Coroneo versus Australian Provincial Assurance Association, Ltd <case>; [(1935) 35 SR 391] at 393 still states the applicable law in this jurisdiction. At least, it would require more argument to persuade me, conformably with more modern re- statements of the law of negligence, that this decision still represents good law. It was written long before the modern re-formulations of the common law duty to prevent economic loss. It concerned, in any case, a claim by a mortgagor against a mortgagee: a relationship wholly different from that relied upon by the appellant here. The evaluation of the claim would be greatly assisted, to say the least, by the consideration of the full detail of the evidence concerning the relationship between the appellant and the respondent. That evidence will be adduced now, as relevant to the claim for breach of fiduciary duty. I see no reason why we should prematurely shut out the appellant from arguing that the same facts give rise also to a duty of care in negligence at common law. The English cases cited to establish the contrary are instructive, but they are not binding on this Court. They do not necessarily state the law of Australia. They should not be treated as if they do, certainly at this stage of the proceedings." 
On appeal, the High Court reversed the majority decision so far as it disallowed the claim in negligence and, in so doing, Deane J for the Court, in granting special leave and allowing the appeal, stated: "In circumstances where the question on an appeal will not be whether the applicants had a good cause of action in negligence but whether the applicants had a good cause of action in negligence but whether the circumstances of the case were such that the claim in negligence should be struck out on a preliminary application, it is apparent that the appropriate course is for the appeal to be disposed of immediately if the members of the Court, as presently constituted, have formed a clear and unanimous view that the claim in negligence should be allowed to proceed to trial. We have formed such a clear and unanimous view.
 "Accordingly, with the consent of both sides, we proceed immediately to deal with the substance of the appeal. As we have indicated, we have come to a clear conclusion that in all the circumstances of this case, including the circumstances that the action against the respondent will be proceeding to trial on other counts in any event the claim in negligence should not have been struck out.
 "We note that we are in general agreement with the reasons given by Justice
Kirby in the Court of Appeal for that conclusion and that we do not dissent from His Honour's acknowledgment of" `the force of the considerations which Handley and Cripps JJA have collected to demonstrate that the [applicants'] cause of action in negligence faces serious legal difficulties and, accordingly, may fail.' " (1993 10 Leg. Rep. p SL2) 
The central thrust of the defendants' challenge to the Leda Holdings and MMI proceedings lies in the concept of those proceedings, as brought by the unitholders in the Market Street trust, in the nature of a derivative action where the cause of action lies in the hands of the trustee and where the damage is not measured by a diminution in value of unitholding, but by the loss or damage to the corpus, in this case, the commercial property represented by the building. Again, I do not understand there to be any dispute between the parties concerning the principles applicable to such derivative actions or to similar principles affecting the interests of shareholders in corporations. I have been referred to Gould & Anor v
Vaggelas & Ors [(1984) 157 CLR 215] where, at , Gibbs CJ described the legal principles applicable to a shareholders' derivative action in the following terms: "It is clear that it was not right to identify the Goulds with the company,
Gould Holdings Pty Ltd ("Gould Holdings"), which the Goulds formed to make the purchase, notwithstanding that they were the sole shareholders. It is of course elementary to say, as was said in Prudential Assurance Co. Ltd. v.
Newman Industries Ltd. [No. 2] (18), "that A cannot, as a general rule, bring an action against B to recover damages, or secure other relief on behalf of C for an injury done by B to C. C is the proper plaintiff because C is the party injured, and, therefore, the person in whom the cause of action is vested".
Any loss suffered by Gould Holdings as a consequence of the fraud can be recovered only by the company itself. Even if the company had not commenced an action within the limitation period, its failure to enforce its own rights would not have enhanced the rights of the Goulds: see Prudential Assurance
Co. Ltd. v. Newman Industries Ltd. [No. 2] (19). However, although the Goulds cannot recover damages merely because Gould Holdings has suffered damage, and cannot recover damages which are merely a reflection of a loss suffered by the company, they may recover damages for the loss which they personally have suffered and which is separate and distinct from the loss suffered by the company. That this is so is clear in principle, but if authority is needed, the judgment in Prudential Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Newman Industries Ltd. (20) provides it." 
The passage in Prudential Assurance Co Ltd versus Newman Industries Ltd & Ors (No 2) [(1982) Ch 204] is that to be found at pages 222 - 223 as follows: "In our judgment the personal claim is misconceived. It is of course correct, as the judge found and Mr. Bartlett did not dispute, that he and Mr. Laughton, in advising the shareholders to support the resolution approving the agreement, owed the shareholders a duty to give such advice in good faith and not fraudulently. It is also correct that if directors convene a meeting on the basis of a fraudulent circular, a shareholder will have a right of action to recover any loss which he has been personally caused in consequence of the fraudulent circular; this might include the expense of attending the meeting.
But what he cannot do is to recover damages merely because the company in which he is interested has suffered damage. He cannot recover a sum equal to the diminution in the market value of his shares, or equal to the likely diminution in dividend, because such a "loss" is merely a reflection of the loss suffered by the company. The shareholder does not suffer any personal loss. His only "loss" is through the company, in the diminution in the value of the net assets of the company, in which he has (say) a 3 per cent shareholding. The plaintiff's shares are merely a right of participation in the company on the terms of the articles of association. The shares themselves, his right of participation, are not directly affected by the wrongdoing. The plaintiff still holds all the shares as his own absolutely unencumbered property. The deceit practised upon the plaintiff does not affect the shares; it merely enables the defendant to rob the company." 
Leda Holdings and MMI contend that, if similar principles were to apply to a unitholder under a trust, it would be no bar to their respective actions as their respective causes of action are not derivative proceedings but actions, variously, for breach of contract or for negligence in respect of duties of care owed to them, as distinct from some cause of action vested in the trustee. They, in my view, correctly point out that this is the very distinction recognised in Gould.

I think it is quite wrong to view the actions brought by Leda Holdings and MMI as actions for damages for the recovery of which the cause of action reposes in the trustee. While the damages so claimed by Leda Holdings and MMI are in part expressed in terms of the diminution in value of their respective unitholdings, in principle, in my opinion, there is no reason why that should not form part of the damage suffered by them as a result of the contractual or tortious breaches alleged by each of them against the respective defendants. I think it is clear, from the outline of the causes of action which I have traced earlier in these reasons, that both Leda Holdings and MMI are suing in respect of alleged wrongs committed against their respective interests and not in respect of any alleged wrong against the trustee. In my opinion, the approach adopted by those seeking to strike out, or a dismissal of, the claims of Leda Holdings and of MMI pays insufficient regard to the circumstances of proximity relied upon by each of Leda Holdings and MMI in seeking to establish a sufficient relationship to support the existence of a duty of care being owed to each of them. I refer, for example, to the fact that Leda Holdings was a joint venturer in the development of the building with MMI who was also involved in the development as an intended lessee of a portion of the completed building, in addition to the other facets arising out of various legal relationships created as earlier described in these reasons.

There may be some significant difficulty confronting Leda Holdings and MMI in establishing damages by way of diminution in value in their respective unitholdings, as distinct from the damages to which National Mutual, the trustee, may be entitled in terms of the damage occasioned to the building by the various breaches relied upon. However, I do not see that as justifying a rejection, at this stage of the proceedings, of the respective claims by Leda
Holdings and MMI, nor do I think their respective claims, so far as they include diminution in value of their respective unitholdings, warrant a characterisation of those claims as a derivative action in which they seek to place themselves in the shoes of the trustee in respect of some cause of action vested in the trustee.

George Fischer (Great Britain) Ltd versus Multi Construction Ltd Dexion Ltd (third party), [(1995) 1 BCLC 260] provides a useful comparison being a case brought by a shareholder where the immediate damage was suffered by the corporation. The relationship between the shareholder and the corporation was that of holding company and subsidiary. The major question posed to the English Court of
Appeal was identified as follows: "As a matter of law, is a shareholder in a company entitled to recover damages for a diminution in the value of its shareholding in the company or in the distribution by way of dividends or otherwise of profits of the company, where such diminution results from loss inflicted on the company by the defendant's breach of its contract with the plaintiff?" 
The court noted that: "...in order to succeed, the shareholder must go on to prove that (i) it did suffer such a loss (ii) it can quantify the loss by evidence; and (iii) the loss is not too remote, ie because on the facts known to the defendant at the time of the contract it was reasonably foreseeable that if the defendant was in breach of contract, the plaintiff would suffer such a loss. See as to this the classic statement in the judgment of the court delivered by Asquith LJ in
Victoria Laundry (Windsor) Ltd versus Newman Industries Ltd (Couldson & Co Ltd (third party)) [[1949] 1 All ER 997] at -1003, [[1949] 2 KB 528] at 539-540." 
In recognising such a right of action, the court distinguished the dicta in
Prudential on the basis that in the instant case the subsidiary had no cause of action. While there is some doubt whether the same result would flow under
Australian law and whether the distinction drawn by the Court may rob the case of much of its persuasiveness in the context of the related actions, in my opinion, it still affords a useful example to point up the difference emphasised by the plaintiffs in the related actions between their respective claims for damages and the derivative action considered in Prudential.

So far as a derivative action is sought to be brought by a beneficiary arising out of damaged trust property, the principles were collected, for the main part, in Ishac versus David Securities Pty Ltd (No 9) (Young J, 5 June 1992, unreported) by his Honour's review of the principles stated in Hayim v
Citibank NA [[1987] AC 730], of the cases therein referred to and of the decision of the
Full Court in Middleton versus O'Neill <case>; [(1943) 43 SR 178], particularly the statement of Jordan CJ at 186 dealing with the right of beneficiaries to institute proceedings to get in assets of the estate, where it was stated that "(i)t is well settled that as a general rule it is for the executors and not the beneficiaries to institute legal proceedings against outsiders for the purpose of getting in estate assets, and that the mere fact that the executor has refused to take such proceedings does not entitle the beneficiary to do so ... Special circumstances are required ..." (see also
Jacobs Law of Trusts in Australia (5th ed) p 640).

It was submitted on behalf of Leda Holdings, for the purpose of argument accepting that the Leda Holdings action was a derivative one, that special circumstances existed in this case, principally, in the possible prejudice to
Leda Holdings if the defendants in the National Mutual proceedings were able to rely upon a defence under the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) which would not have been available to them in the Leda Holdings proceedings by reason of the difference in time when those two proceedings were instituted. I do not regard that as a special circumstance and in any event I understand
Permasteelisa to be prepared to accept, as a condition of any order dismissing or striking out the claims against it, some condition precluding such a prejudice arising.

I have been taken to numerous provisions of the trust deed, in particular cl .3, which declares that a unitholder shall have no proprietary interest in the trust fund and that the right of a unitholder is limited to the right to require the due administration of the subject trust fund: and to cl 11.23 which vests in the trustee the power to institute proceedings at law. I think these, and the other provisions to which I have been taken, only go to reinforce the accepted principles that the unitholders under the trust have no derivative right of action in respect of trust property except in special circumstances.

It has been submitted on behalf of Crone that the proceedings by Leda
Holdings, and presumably by MMI, involves a claim for loss or damage to property in which neither of them has any legal or possessory title, and that any contractual rights they may have in respect of such is insufficient to support the actions they have brought: relying upon R G & T J Anderson
Pty Ltd versus Chamberlain John Deere Pty Ltd [(1988) 15 NSWLR 363.] In my opinion, that case has nothing to say about the causes of action relied upon by either Leda Holdings or MMI. As presently formulated, there may be some aspects of the particulars of damage relied upon by Leda Holdings or MMI which are inelegantly or inadequately expressed. However, I think that is no basis for striking out any part of the pleadings. When statements of the evidence of damage have been furnished by Leda Holdings or MMI it may be necessary to revisit the claim for damages in some respects. However, I do not regard it as an appropriate time, now, to require particulars nor to strike out aspects of the pleadings particularising damage.

In so far as the defendants have challenged the existence of a duty of care to found the causes of action based in tort, I am satisfied that it would be quite contrary to principle to accede to such contentions and summarily dismiss the subject causes of action in the related actions. The observation of Kirby P in Wickstead come to mind. As I have stated earlier in these reasons, Leda Holdings and MMI rely on a complex legal and factual set of circumstances from which they seek to draw a relationship of proximity or an assumption of responsibility such as may found a duty of care being owed to each of them by the respective defendants. It is far from clear that Leda
Holdings or MMI are bound to fail in establishing that any of the defendants so owed them the duty of care relied upon.

So far as reliance is placed by Malouf on the mutual releases, notwithstanding that counsel envisaged the possibility of presenting further submissions when outstanding pleadings were attended to, I think that is a matter which may be addressed in these reasons without unfairness to the parties. The granting of the mutual releases is not a matter which, in my opinion, justifies a conclusion that the respective causes of action against Malouf must fail.
Quite apart from any other consideration, it is noted that neither Leda
Holdings nor MMI were parties to the alleged releases.

Furthermore, one could envisage a question of construction calling for a reading down of the express terms of the mutual releases by having regard to the matters in contemplation by the mutual releasors at the time of giving the mutual releases (see Banque Brussels Lambert versus Australian National Industries
Ltd (Rolfe J, 31 March 1995, unreported) and the authorities there collected).

Similarly, although the question of the entitlement of Leda Holdings to rely upon the alleged guarantee by Malouf under the construction management agreement has, by agreement between counsel for Leda Holdings and Malouf been deferred, and while the question of the amendment of pleadings relating to those issues is incomplete, I think it is appropriate for me to express the view that that cause of action should go forward, particularly when Leda
Holdings also sues upon a construction of the construction management agreement which involves a claim for rectification. I would anticipate that the pleading difficulties, which to this point have been the subject of discussion between those parties, can be adequately addressed by them in that way.

Counsel on behalf of Permasteelisa placed his argument on three broad bases, namely, that there was no reasonable cause of action disclosed, that the proceedings were vexatious and were an abuse of process; in the latter two bases adverting to the existence of three lots of proceedings with overlapping causes of action. For the reasons I have given, I do not regard the proceedings as disclosing no reasonable cause of action and, to some extent, the existence of three separate claimants is inescapable, given Leda Holdings' position as claimant and as defendant in the National Mutual and the MMI proceedings. That is not to say that the procedural labyrinth of the related actions is beyond repair. It is just that it should not be "repaired" in the manner contended for by the applicants.

So far as reliance has been placed upon the expiration of time within which any of the proceedings may be brought, I am firmly of the view that, in litigation of this kind, it would be completely inappropriate to dismiss any of the subject claims on that basis. The evidence which has been lead is very limited and far from conclusive of the question that the time had expired within which these claims could be brought: particularly in relation to claims in tort. Although Wardley Australia Ltd & Anor versus The State of Western
Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514] was concerned with a vastly different set of facts, it is a timely reminder of the caution to be exercised in granting summary relief on a limitations point. I refer further to this issue when considering Crone's objections to the amendments to the summons in the related actions.

It does not follow from what I have so far stated that I see no difficulty in the presentation of the case for damages by Leda Holdings or MMI related to the diminution in value of their unitholdings. On the face of it one would expect that the damages alleged to have been suffered by National Mutual as trustee would leave little room for independent damages having been suffered by the unitholders. Nevertheless, that is the distinction which Leda Holdings and MMI insist is made by each of them in their respective claims for damages and that there is no overlapping or duplication of their respective claims for damages and that of National Mutual. The witnesses statements which the parties will be required to file should clarify that matter.

There remains the entitlement of the plaintiffs in the related actions to have the amendments as filed and, if so, whether any conditions should be imposed upon leave to make those amendments. In the Leda Holdings proceedings, initially, the cause of action against Crone was expressed only in contract, alleging breach of Crone's retainer as architect "to provide to (Leda
Holdings) architectural services in relation to the development at 2 Market
Street, Sydney". In particular, Leda Holdings relied upon a term and condition of the retainer that Crone would use due care in the design work to be undertaken and in the preparation of the specification. The breach alleged was a failure on the part of Crone to design the work and prepare the specification in that it designed and specified "a facade glazing by designing and specifying that toughened glass be used ...". It was said that the glass so specified and used was inappropriate in that it fractured spontaneously, resulting in the damage claimed by Leda Holdings.

On 28 February 1996 Leda Holdings filed an amended summons said to be pursuant to an order made by me on 16 February 1996. That order granted leave to amend by 22 February 1996. Accordingly, the leave pursuant to which the amendment was said to have been made had ceased to have effect at the time the amended summons was filed. Although this was clearly so, Crone filed a defence to that amended summons on 8 March 1996. Crone now contends that the amended summons was of "no effect and should be disallowed". Alternatively, it is submitted that the amendments contained in paragraphs C5A to C5L inclusive be allowed only on terms that the amendments take effect from the date of filing of the amended summons. I note that the period within which a party is required by any order to amend any pleading "may be extended by consent without an order for extension" (Supreme Court Rules Pt 2 r 3(3)). There has been no suggestion that the filing of a defence to the amended summons on behalf of
Crone was done inadvertently or in ignorance of the fact that the time for filing the amended summons under my order of 16 February 1996 had expired. In my view, Crone should be taken as having consented to the filing and serving of the amended summons out of time. In any event, having regard to those matters, I think the circumstances warrant that an order be made extending the time for filing the amended summons to 28 February 1996. I am somewhat comforted in that approach by the fact that Permasteelisa also filed a defence to the amended summons on 18 March 1996.

However, the matter does not end there as, on 20 March 1996, Leda Holdings filed a further amended summons expressed to be pursuant to my order of 8
March 1996. It was on that date that I granted leave to Crone to file in
Court its defence to the amended summons. However, the leave granted by me to
Leda Holdings on 8 March 196 was to file a further amended summons by 15 March , so that, by the time the further amended summons was filed, the leave granted by me had ceased to have any effect. I have earlier in these reasons outlined the circumstances in which the second further amended summons was filed by Leda Holdings. The second further amended summons filed on 2 December was also filed when the time specified for the making of the amendment had expired. That leave required the amendment to be filed by 29 November .

In considering whether the time for filing the second further amended summons should be extended, as I consider it should, the question arises whether any term or condition should be imposed as a condition of that extension. I consider that an extension is warranted having regard to the fact that the further amended summons and the second further amended summons, so far as they affect Crone, raise substantially the same questions as does the amended summons. Furthermore, I consider that, given the implied consent of Crone to the filing of the amended summons out of time and without the requirement of the imposition of conditions as part of that consent, and having regard to the substantial similarity between the amended summons, on the one hand, and the further amended summons and the second further amended summons so far as they make claims against Crone, I see no reason why conditions, save for the usual order as to costs, should now be imposed on the extension of the leave granted to file those amendments. Accordingly, to regularise that which has taken place, I extend the time for the filing of amendments pursuant to my order of March 1996 to 20 March 1996 and the time for the filing of amendments to the summons pursuant to the leave granted on 15 November 1996 to 2 December 1996 and order that Leda Holdings pay the defendants' costs occasioned by and incidental to the amendments.

It follows from what I have done that the amendments will operate from the date of the institution of the proceedings. I would also reach the same result by the application of Pt 20 r 4(5) of the Supreme Court Rules, assuming that any causes of action raised under the amendments would be statute barred if the amendments were taken to operate from the date on which they were made. I am by no means satisfied by the evidence of Saddler, Malouf and Campbell that the limitations period had expired in respect of those causes of action prior to the dates of the respective amendments. The evidence is extremely limited and is taken up mainly with communications passing between parties other than the plaintiffs in the related actions. Further, the damage to the building from the type of defects from which the glass facade allegedly suffered is such that it may well be quite difficult to determine when time under the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) began to run. It does not necessarily follow that time would begin to run from the failure of the first panel. I think it is a matter of common experience that disputes of this kind are notorious for posing a difficulty in determining when time began to run in the particular circumstances; particularly is this so where causes of action in tort are relied upon.

In my view, the core of the case against Crone in the summons was that, as architect, it permitted the use of inappropriate glazing in the facade of the building. In the summons, that permitting of the use of the inappropriate glass was alleged to have arisen through the form of the specification. In the amendments, the permitting of the use was expanded to include approval of mock-up tests and failure of quality control of services which permitted the use of the inappropriate glass. I would paraphrase that material by saying that at all times Leda Holdings has charged Crone, as the architect for the project, with having permitted the use of inappropriate glass in the facade of the building and that the permitting of that use stemmed from its specification and was not picked up by it through the mock-up tests nor through quality control services. Analysed in that way, I think this case should be distinguished from Australian Mutual Provident Society versus Dowell
Australia Ltd (Rogers CJ Comm D, 8 November 1988, unreported) and reflects a set of circumstances akin to that considered in Brickfield Properties Ltd v
Newton [(1971) 3 All ER 328] at 326.

It has not been argued that the inclusion of a cause of action based on a duty of care in tort concurrent with Crone's duty under contract falls outside the operation of that subrule.

The fact that Crone in conducting its defence may be required to call a witness from overseas which it may not otherwise have been required to rely upon but for the subject amendments is not a sufficient basis for refusing those amendments nor, in my opinion, in the circumstances which have occurred in this case, for imposing conditions upon the granting of the amendments.

In the MMI proceedings, Crone raises similar arguments in relation to the amended summons as was raised on its behalf in relation to the Leda Holdings proceedings. The amended summons was filed on 18 October 1996 and was expressed to be filed pursuant to leave granted by me on 27 September 1996.
That leave expired on 3 October 1996. It is submitted on behalf of Crone that the amendment is "without leave and ineffective and should therefore be disallowed". I note, however, that Crone pleaded to that amended summons by its defence dated 30 October 1996 and for similar reasons given in relation to the leave to amend in the Leda Holdings proceedings, I am of the opinion, that to the extent necessary, the leave granted by me on 27 September 1996 to amend the summons should be extended to 18 October 1996 and that no terms, as a condition of such leave, should be imposed of the kind sought by Crone. MMI is to pay the defendants' costs occasioned by and incidental to the amendment.

No point has been taken in relation to the addition of General as a party. In my view, the amendments, clearly, are based on substantially the same facts as are alleged in the summons which is based upon the design obligation of Crone and its obligation to carry "out the general architectural work in relation to the construction of the building". The summons alleged an obligation of Crone to ensure that the facade was constructed with reasonable care and skill. The particulars of breach relied upon a failure in the preparation of an appropriate specification, of a failure to advise against the use of toughened glass in the building's facade, upon an allegation that it approved the use of toughened glass in the facade and confirmed that the glass complied with its specification and upon an allegation that it failed to carry out any proper investigation into the appropriateness of toughened glass for its use in the building's facade. In the amended summons those matters are more particularised by reference to the failure to detect the use of toughened glass during inspections and by its reliance upon Crone's alleged approval of the mock-ups. In my opinion these amendments fall clearly within [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/index.html#p20) r 4(5). The time at which the amendments will take effect will be from the time of the institution of the MMI proceedings.

In relation to the outstanding motions, I have indicated that I would expect the outstanding matters at issue between Malouf and Leda Holdings in relation to the guarantee and assignment based causes of action will be resolved without the need for further Court intervention. In relation to Crone's motion for particulars, the hearing of those motions should be deferred until statements of evidence have been filed.

There are outstanding applications for security for costs which, as matters stand, will be addressed on 21 February 1997. It is my preliminary view that those applications are probably premature, given the numerous related issues which I think will have to be considered in evaluating both the entitlement to security and the quantum of security if it is to be ordered. Again, it is my preliminary view that those applications should be addressed when the plaintiff's statements of evidence have been filed. In this respect, I have it in mind that directions should be given that the statements of evidence in chief, including experts reports on quantum, of National Mutual and MMI should be filed first, followed by those of Leda Holdings and that the remaining defendants file their statements of evidence in support of their respective defences and cross-claims at an appropriate time thereafter. When those statements have been filed all the statements in reply should follow at the one time.

I have stated earlier in these reasons that, while the relief sought by the applicant defendants should be refused, apart from the applications for particulars and for security for costs, I consider the procedural aspects of the related actions to be answerable to some form of repair. It is my view that orders to the following effect would have some procedural utility:
Consolidate the Leda Holdings proceedings with the sixth cross-claim of
Leda Holdings in the National Mutual proceedings, so that the time of the institution of the Leda Holdings proceedings, for the purpose of limitations, is preserved.
Strike out the fifth cross-claim of Leda Holdings in the National Mutual proceedings, save possibly for the claim for contribution made in that cross- claim.
Strike out the second cross-claim of Leda Holdings in the MMI proceedings, save only for the cross-claim for contribution.
Strike out the third cross-claim of Super in the MMI proceedings, save only for the claim for contribution.
Order that the hearing of the National Mutual proceedings so consolidated and the MMI proceedings be heard together and that evidence in one be evidence in the other so far as it is admissible.
Direct that the hearing proceed with the adducing of the evidence of
National Mutual, then of MMI followed by Leda Holdings, Super, Malouf, Crone and Permasteelisa.

The only formal order that I make is that the following motions be dismissed:
In the Leda Holdings proceedings: 
A. In the motion on behalf of Crone: the relief sought in pars 1, 2, 2A and
B.

B. In the motion on behalf of Permasteelisa, the relief sought, other than as to costs.

C. In the Malouf motion, without prejudice to its rights to further move the
Court for summary relief, the relief sought, other than as to costs.
In the National Mutual proceedings: 
A. In the motion on behalf of Malouf, the relief sought other than as to costs.

B. In the motion on behalf of National Mutual, the relief sought, other than as to costs.
In the MMI proceedings: 
A. In the motion on behalf of Leda Holdings, the relief sought, other than as to costs.

B. In the motion on behalf of Permasteelisa, the relief sought, other than as to costs.

C. In the motion on behalf of Crone, the relief sought in pars 1, 2 and 3.

When the matter is listed for directions and for the hearing of the outstanding motions on Friday 21 February 1997 the parties are to bring in short minutes of order which should include the following: 
A. Orders to dispose of the motions the subject of these reasons.

B. Orders as to costs supported by submissions in writing.

C. Orders dealing with the subject matter of paragraphs 1-5 above.

D. Directions to tidy up outstanding pleading matters, including the filing of consolidated pleadings in conformity with the proposed orders as contemplated in pars 1-5 above.

E. Directions for preparation for hearing, in particular the provision of statements having regard to the order of filing statements contemplated in these reasons.

As to costs I am disposed to order that costs of each application be costs in the respective proceedings in which they have been made. However, as requested, I will defer any order as to costs until the parties have had an opportunity to consider these reasons.

In considering directions I think it is premature to include matters such as orders of reference under [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/index.html#p72) or orders for the separate determination of particular issues, although it may be thought that the circumstances of the related actions may warrant consideration of those matters when interlocutory steps have been completed.
 * * * 
