

Regina versus Taylor Matter No Cca 60461/97 [1998] NSWSC 162 (27 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 May 1998 
REGINA versus WARREN TAYLOR /97 February 1998; 27 April 1998 
Wood CJ at CL, Smart J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown Appeal against Inadequacy of Sentence 
FILE NO/S: 60461/97 
DELIVERED: (1) Wednesday, 25 February 1998 
Monday 27 April 1998 
HEARING DATE: (1) Wednesday, 25 February 1998 
Monday 27 April 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Warren TAYLOR 
JUDGMENT OF: WOOD CJ at CL, SMART J, SPERLING J 
COUNSEL: * Crown: L M B Lamprati * Respondent: T Buddin SC 
SOLICITORS: * Crown: S E O'Connor * Respondent: Wiradjuri Aboriginal Legal Service 
CATCHWORDS: ADEQUACY OF SENTENCE - DISCRETIONARY CONSIDERATIONS 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex Tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO. OF PAGES: 10  February 1998 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: The Director of Public Prosecutions appeals against a sentence imposed in the District Court comprising a minimum term of two months and an additional term of 22 months for breaking and entering a home and assaulting a 62 year old lady in her home, occasioning her actual bodily harm. The judge took into account an offence of aggravated cruelty to an animal. The Director contends that the sentence was manifestly inadequate. 
The victim lived alone. About 6.30pm on 18 June 1997 she was siting in the loungeroom of her flat, having her tea. She heard a knock at the front door and went over and opened the door but she did not see anything. She returned and finished her tea. About ten or fifteen minutes after the first knock, she heard three loud knocks at the front door. The small dog barked. She went to the front door and stood there. Mr Taylor, a young man of 21, opened the door, entered the flat and shut the door. She was alarmed. She started screaming and pushed him in the chest. The dog flew at this man and he flung it away. He pushed the victim in the chest and she felt a bump on her head. She fell backwards and knocked over the fan heater. She continued to scream and the man ran off. Neighbours came to her assistance, she was taken to hospital for observation and remained there for about four hours. Her back was sore. She had to undergo treatment for soreness in the back of her neck and shoulder region. As at 12 August 1997 her pains were continuing. The incident has made her very frightened and led to marked disturbances in her sleep. The incident has had a deep impact upon her.

In his record of interview Mr Taylor said that he had spent the day down at the river with his brother and some other men drinking. He was not sure about the time he went to the victim's unit but thought it was late at night. He knocked at the door and just went in. A little dog bit him. He went to the unit to "get some money". He did not know prior to entry if anyone was in the flat. At one stage he claimed that she opened the door. When he got inside he pushed her over. He flung the dog off. He asserted that he was drunk at this time. He took her money or some of it and purchased a meal. Mr Taylor's memory of events was such that he was unable to contradict what the victim said.

In his evidence Mr Taylor apologised for his conduct to the old woman and for killing her dog. He did not know that she lived in the flat prior to entering.
The Judge found that Mr Taylor had genuine remorse for his crimes. In cross- examination Mr Taylor claimed that he had some money as it was his pay day and that he entered the victim's place because he thought it was a mate's flat.

He told the judge that he had been very scared in gaol during the period of 20
June 1997 to 15 August 1997 awaiting sentence. It was his first time in gaol.
He was frightened of being assaulted by other inmates. He had been in segregation and he had been tempted to hurt himself in gaol. He was transferred from Junee Gaol to the Prison Hospital at Long Bay due to a diagnosis of depression and at risk of self harm. He was still at risk as at August 1997.

At the time of sentencing he was awaiting further assessment of his mental health. The Judge took into account the pre-sentence report and the statement of Mr Taylor's brother. Mr Taylor suffered severe deprivation in his childhood and teenage years. He saw his father being stabbed to death when he was a little boy. It also appeared that Mr Taylor had a lengthy drug and alcohol history. The Judge accepted that he was usually of a gentle disposition.

However, his prior record which involves thefts, burglaries and wilful damage/injure property, cannot be ignored. Problems appear to arise when he is intoxicated.

The pre-sentence report referred to Mr Taylor's developmental disability. This had not been tested. The Judge noted Mr Taylor's admissions during the recorded interview and that he had pleaded guilty at the earliest opportunity.
The Judge thought that if Mr Taylor had put his mind to it, denying that he was the offender, the Crown case might have failed for lack of identification.
That is a point on which minds might differ.

The Judge concluded that the cause of Mr Taylor's criminal conduct on the night of 18 June was his being under the influence of alcohol. The Judge was much moved by the hard and difficult experiences of Mr Taylor in gaol for nearly two months, his depression and his risk of self harm.

I do not find the subjective features of Mr Taylor as compelling as the judge.
Nothing seemed to have been done about his alcohol problem despite a number of appearances before various courts. Obviously steps had to be taken to address this. In the course of his submissions before this Court, counsel for Mr
Taylor propounded that there were personal circumstances on his client's behalf which were exceptional and which justified the very low sentence which was imposed. They included his immediate admissions to the police, without which he may not otherwise have been convicted, his plea of guilty at the earliest opportunity, his remorse, his relative youth, his relatively minor record which meant that he had not previously been to gaol, his being significantly affected by alcohol and his history of alcohol abuse, his deprived background including witnessing the murder, the difficulties which his hearing problem would have occasioned him, his psychological condition, his finding of life in gaol very hard, his aboriginality, his being on parole until June 1999 and a sympathetic pre-sentence report.

The Crown contended that the Judge had made an unrealistically lenient assessment of the facts of the case. It is a very serious offence to break and enter the home of an elderly lady, assault her and occasion her actual bodily harm. People of the victim's age do not recover quickly and the effects tend to be long lasting. Every citizen is entitled to feel safe in his or her home.

I acknowledge the substantial element of restraint which this Court exercises in considering any Crown appeal. However, in my opinion the sentence imposed did not attach nearly enough weight to the gravity of the offence. The sentence imposed by the Judge was, on that ground alone, manifestly inadequate. That view is based upon the material and in some instances the lack of material before the sentencing judge.

I have deliberately not embarked upon a consideration of the exercise of this
Court's discretion. The Judge did not have before him an up to date report of
Mr Taylor's medical condition. We have since been furnished with material that suggests that he has a significant mental condition. We do not know how long his treatment is going to last or what the future will hold. Thus, it is not appropriate to embark upon a consideration of the exercise of the Court's discretion, nor upon any resentencing until this Court has further information. One possibility, and it is only that, is that material may be put before this Court which indicates a programme which addresses curing Mr Taylor of long term alcohol abuse. That has to take place. It had not been addressed at the time of hearing.

WOOD J: I agree for the same reasons as those expressed by Smart J. The sentence in this case was manifestly inadequate. Accordingly it will be necessary for this Court to consider the further stages related to the exercise of discretion and resentencing, if that becomes appropriate in the light of contemporary assessments. That material is not presently before us and accordingly I agree that it is necessary to defer further consideration to such time as the Court can be properly placed in possession of the relevant material. 
SPERLING J: I also agree with the finding that has been made and with the course that is proposed. 
WOOD J: The order of the Court today will simply be this; that the appeal is stood over for further mention before the Registrar of the Court of Criminal Appeal on a date to be fixed on application to the registrar, that date to be no later than five weeks from today, with a view to relisting the appeal for further hearing before us. 
Monday 27 April 1998 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: On 25 February 1998 this Court held that the sentence imposed was manifestly inadequate. I will not repeat the circumstances of the offence. These reasons should be read with our earlier reasons. 
The question for decision is whether notwithstanding the manifest inadequacy of the sentence at the time at which it was imposed this Court should in the exercise of it's discretion decline to intervene and dismiss the appeal.

This Court has had a substantial body of material placed before it that was not before the sentencing judge. That material discloses facts which make this case an exceptional one.

On 2 December 1997 Mr Taylor, who was on parole, reported to the offices of
Mildura Community Correctional Services. He was in difficulty with his psychiatric condition and medication. He was hearing voices and the instructions he received through them resulted in some unusual conduct.

On 3 January 1998 he was admitted to the Psychiatric Department of the Mildura
Base Hospital. His voices were telling him to harm himself. The history was that he was quite all right until he was gaoled.

Mr Taylor has spent these periods in hospital: 3 to 8 January 1998, 6 February to 10 March 1998, 20 to 23 March 1998, 25 March to 3 April 1998, 8 to 14 April
That adds up to nearly two months. The readmissions were due to paranoid thinking and command hallucinations telling Mr Taylor to hurt others and himself. The diagnosis was schizophrenia most probably perpetuated by alcohol and Marijuana.

The hospital's report of 23 April 1998 relevantly reads: " ... he has been medication compliant but symptoms have been unremitting. On his last admission he was commenced on Clozaril to which Warren does appear to be responsive. At this stage he is on an increasing regime and requires close follow up to ensure compliance. Involved with the medication is a blood monitoring regime which requires weekly blood monitoring for an 18 week period and monthly thereafter. His 18 week blood monitoring regime expires on 1/8/98.

Since commencing Clozaril his symptoms have subsided to a degree, however he still suffers from auditory hallucinations but they no longer dominate his thoughts. He has remained largely compliant with support and that is expected to improve as he reaches his optimal medication dosage." 
One measure of the seriousness of Mr Taylor's condition is that it is considered that it would be quite dangerous for him to travel from Mildura to
Sydney.

Upon his release from hospital Mr Taylor has been closely supervised by the
Mildura Community Correctional Services being monitored by an officer of this service on Monday, Wednesday and Friday of each week. Further he is always supervised by his mother when he leaves his residence. She attends all appointments with him so that he is kept fully aware of any follow up and his next appointment.

He suffers from short term memory loss and disorientation. He is a very confused young man. He has recently turned 22. It is apparent that Mr Taylor is a seriously ill young man who is receiving intensive care and extensive supervision. He can not be left to fend for himself. If returned to gaol there is a serious risk that he will harm himself.

As the Community Correctional Officer looking after Mr Taylor observed: "He tends to have very unpredictable psychotic episodes that require quick admission to the psychiatric unit for an indefinite period." 
That officer has found that Mr Taylor cannot cope with a change in an appointment. Some progress has been made in the rehabilitation of Mr Taylor but it still has some considerable way to travel. Given his illness and difficulties it will probably never be complete but there are hopefully indications that he will reach a stage where with medication and help he will be able to manage and keep out of trouble. He will be on parole for another 14 months and under close supervision which will assist greatly.

I return to the gravity of the offence and the serious and sad impact which the events have had upon the victim. They have troubled me greatly.

The situation with Mr Taylor is difficult and precarious. Private and public deterrence are important but the rehabilitation of a seriously ill young offender is also important. The community does understand in relation to public deterrence that careful consideration has to be given to young persons who are seriously ill psychiatrically.

I have not overlooked that there is medical treatment available in gaol and that there is a gaol hospital with a psychiatric unit. In the present case a regime of supervision and treatment has been embarked upon with some measure of success amongst considerable difficulties. Returning Mr Taylor to gaol would probably destroy much of what has been achieved with him. A further regime would have to be established. Its effectiveness is unknown. There is a very real risk of self harm.

The facts before the Court are significantly different from those before the sentencing judge. Taking into account all of the circumstances, the aspect of double jeopardy and the fact that the applicant has now been released from gaol for some eight months and a rehabilitation regime of some difficulty is well under way, I am of the opinion that in the wholly exceptional circumstances of this case that the Crown appeal should be dismissed in the exercise of the Court's discretion.

WOOD CJ at CL: I agree. 
SPERLING J: I also agree. 
WOOD CJ at CL: The order of the Court then is that the appeal is dismissed. * * * 
