

Xipolitas versus Auburn United P/L [1996] NSWSC 219 (21 June 1996) 
XIPOLITAS versus AUBURN UNITED PTY LIMITED /91 WC 12231/89 
Friday 21 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, POWELL JA, BEAZLEY JA 
CATCHWORDS: WORKERS' COMPENSATION - APPEAL - Trial Judge's findings of fact - Conflicting Medical Opinion 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
The appellant, whilst employed by the respondent as a builders' labourer, sustained injuries arising from two accidents occurring in August and November 1988 respectively. The trial judge, Moran J, held that the appellant had been partially incapacitated for the period 12 December 1988 - 30 April 1989, but that any incapacity had ceased by 30 April 1989. The trial judge accepted the evidence of the respondent employer's medical witnesses over that of the appellant's. The appellant submitted that the award made against him was "against the weight of evidence". He also submitted that the trial judge had erred in his findings that he had a pre-existing back injury and that apart from the period of partial incapacity, the appellant was not otherwise entitled to compensation.

HELD: (1) It was open to the trial judge to prefer the evidence of the respondent's medical witnesses and any appeal which challenges those findings must fail. (2) Provided there was evidence upon which the trial judge could base his findings of fact, those findings are not subject to appellate review.
 
ORDERS . Appeal be dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: The appellant in this case was unrepresented in this court, and put submissions on his own behalf very briefly. The court reserved its decision in order to consider the appeal papers both from the appellant's point of view, and at the same time as objectively as possible, to see whether the appellant had any arguable grounds of appeal.

Having considered the appeal papers accordingly, and also now having had the opportunity of reading in draft Beazley JA's review of the evidence and the trial judge's opinion in the case, I will not set out separately the details of the case, as what Beazley JA has written seems to me to cover the substance of the case, and I agree generally with what she says.

I would add that, stated in general terms, the case is one where the appellant worker's physical condition and state of health, and their connection with his employment by the respondent, were the subject of conflicting medical opinion; the assessment of the medical opinion depended in part on the trial judge's view of the appellant and the reliability of his communications to the doctors; and that factor influenced the trial judge's general acceptance of the medical opinion adverse to the appellant.

As there is no sign in the trial judge's reasons that he made anything that could be regarded as an appellable error in forming his opinion of the appellant, his factual conclusions on the case must stand, and, consequently, so also the orders he made.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
POWELL JA: I agree with Beazley JA.

BEAZLEY JA: The appellant appeals from the judgment of Moran J dated 11 September 1991 in which his Honour held that the appellant had been partially incapacitated by injuries sustained during the course of his employment with the respondent, from 12 December 1988 to 30 April 1989, but that any incapacity had ceased by 30 April 1989. The sole ground of appeal was that "the Award made against the appellant was against the weight of evidence".

At the hearing of the appeal, the appellant, who appeared in person, submitted that the trial judge erred in his findings that he had a pre-existing back injury and that apart from the period of partial incapacity, the appellant was not otherwise entitled to compensation. The appellant submitted that he was "quite healthy" when he left Darwin and it was only after he commenced employment with the respondent that he had any problem with his back and neck and that his "problems with his stomach" also got worse.

Background 
The appellant, who was born on 6 November 1954, commenced employment with the respondent as a builders' labourer at the end of July 1988. Prior to then, the appellant had worked in various capacities, including as a welder, a builders' labourer and as a sand blaster in Sydney, Darwin and Gove. In 1987, whilst employed as a welder in Darwin, the appellant injured his knees, the right knee more so than the left. The appellant conceded that at the time of this accident he had experienced pain in his right buttock. The appellant also suffered from a pre-existing epigastric condition, a duodenal ulcer having been diagnosed in 1986.

The appellant gave evidence that, approximately 2 weeks after he commenced his employment with the respondent, whilst using a heavy jackhammer to free formwork from concrete, the jackhammer slipped, causing him pain in his shoulders and lower back. He lost no time from work but consulted his general practitioner, Dr Naidu, who sent him for x-rays. On 8 November 1988, the appellant was carrying a 6 metre beam when he tripped over a ramset nail set in the concrete floor, lost his balance and fell backwards. He said he hurt his top and lower back and also grazed the side of his neck and shoulder. He immediately reported his injury to first aid and was directed to see a general practitioner, Dr Teh, whose practise was opposite the building site where he was working. Dr Teh certified him unfit for work for 2 days. He returned to work after this period, although he said that he did not feel "100%". He complained that at this time he had difficulty sleeping, could not use his left shoulder properly and had a stiff back and stiff neck. He again consulted his general practitioner, Dr Naidu, and was referred to Dr Ness. The appellant continued to work until 12 December 1988, when he was dismissed from his employment with the respondent for arriving late at work and also for taking too much time off work. It appears that part of the time off work was due to the appellant's hospitalisation between 26 September 1988 and 1 October 1988 for epigastric pain and again on 18 November 1988 when he underwent an endoscopy.

On 28 July 1989, the appellant filed an application in the Workers'
Compensation Court claiming that he had been injured on 8 November 1988 and had suffered back and neck injury or aggravation of existing injury to back and neck. The application was amended at the commencement of the hearing on 3
May 1991. The details of that amendment are not disclosed by the appeal papers. The matter was adjourned, part heard, to 9 September 1991. On that day, the Court granted leave to further amend the application. The amendment further particularised "an aggravation of existing injuries", "functional overlay" and "aggravation and/or precipitation of a stomach ulcer condition". From the judgment at first instance, it appears that the appellant alleged that the initial injury in early August 1988 causing pain to the shoulders and low back was sustained due to the nature and conditions of the appellant's employment.

The appellant was seen by a number of doctors both for treatment and for medico-legal purposes. The trial judge reviewed the evidence of Drs Ness,
Tahmindjis (who was the only doctor to give oral evidence), Naidu and
Bannister, being the medical evidence relied upon by the appellant, and the evidence of Drs Bodel and Millons relied upon by the respondent.

The trial judge noted that the appellant had consulted Dr Tahmindjis, general practitioner, on 27 April 1988, prior to the commencement of his employment with the respondent. At that time, the appellant was complaining of problems with his knees. In his report dated 28 August 1991, Dr Tahmindjis noted that at the time of the consultation in April 1988, the appellant referred to "back pain" although that was not the main area of the appellant's complaint. Dr Tahmindjis next saw the appellant on 10 August 1988 when he complained of pain in his leg and back and also mentioned the problems with his knees. Dr Tahmindjis saw the appellant on 21 December 1988. He said that at this time the appellant was "very disturbed emotionally". He also complained of disability in his knees, pain in his upper thoracic spine and in his pelvis and hips. Dr Tahmindjis expressed the opinion that the appellant had back problems when he saw him in April and August 1988. Dr Tahmindjis said this may have been caused initially by strain sustained at the time of the knee injuries in Darwin in 1987, and perhaps also by the nature of the heavy work that the appellant had done. He reported that by February 1989, the appellant's main complaint was in relation to his neck and back. Dr Tahmindjis considered that the November 1988 accident most likely aggravated the appellant's back condition.

The appellant had been referred to Dr Ness prior to the November 1988 accident. Dr Ness first saw the applicant on 27 October 1988 in relation to his right knee. However, after this first examination, Dr Ness reported to Dr
Naidu that the appellant had complained about his back and that x-rays taken at the time demonstrated degenerative changes. Dr Bannister had accepted that a diagnosis of degenerative changes in the cervical spine causing the disabilities of which the appellant complained was reasonable, as there appeared to be some narrowing of the discs in the cervical area. This latter observation may have been a reference to the opinion of Dr Bodel, who found degenerative changes in the cervical spine, which he considered "could be causing persistence of symptoms". His Honour observed that Dr Bannister had not been given any history of any back problem following the 1987 incident. It appears that his Honour thereby rejected Dr Bannister's opinion that the appellant's symptoms were related to the incident which occurred on 8 November
His Honour did not comment upon Dr Bannister's opinion that the appellant's disability was not related to an aggravation of pre-existing changes in the lumbar region.

Dr Bodel stated that on clinical examination on 14 December 1989, "the appellant's claimed level of disability was in excess of what could be supported by objective abnormality". He expressed the opinion that the "specific effects of the incident at work on 8 November 1988 would have ...ceased to have any part in his ongoing clinical picture" by April 1989.

Dr Millons examined the appellant on 14 March 1990. The appellant denied suffering from any back or neck problems prior to the incident on 8 November , but gave Dr Millons a history of his knee injuries. Dr Millons found little evidence to substantiate the appellant's complaints of continuing disability. He considered that a CT scan finding of minimal bulging at L4-5 was of no consequence. He also considered that although x-rays demonstrated degenerative changes in the appellant's neck, those changes were not causing the appellant any disability.

His Honour preferred the evidence of Drs Bodel and Millons to the evidence of the appellant's doctors and, in particular, to the evidence of Drs Bannister and Ness. It was open to the trial judge to prefer the evidence of these doctors and any appeal which challenges his Honour's finding in this regard must fail. There was also ample evidence upon which his Honour was entitled to find that the effects of the first injury in August 1988 lasted only a few days and that the incapacity from the second injury in November 1988 had ceased by April 1989. In relation to the first finding, the appellant gave evidence that after the incident in August "I had recovered. It wasn't giving me much problem". There was also medical evidence to support this finding.
For example, Dr Wilding gave evidence that the appellant reported to him that "he was off work for a day but his symptoms had settled". I have already referred to certain of the medical evidence which supports the second finding.
It is not necessary to repeat it. Provided there was evidence which it was open for his Honour to accept, his findings are not subject to appellate interference.

I have referred to the fact that the appellant was granted leave to amend his application to claim "functional overlay" and "aggravation and/or precipitation of a stomach ulcer condition". The functional overlay claim was supported by the report of Dr Grady, psychiatrist , whom the appellant saw on June 1991. Dr Grady found that there was an "adverse emotional reaction to persistent painful disabilities from his accident". The appellant was also seen by Dr Dyball, psychiatrist, on behalf of the respondent. Dr Dyball said the appellant had no psychiatric condition although he had periods of situational stress. The trial judge made no findings in relation to the appellant's psychiatric condition and the appellant made no specific complaint about that in his short submission to the Court. In any event, the psychiatric evidence was not sufficient to support any continuing disability beyond the period found by the trial judge. Dr Grady's view, to the extent that it supported any other case, was based on a factual situation which was rejected by his Honour.

There was no evidence to support the claim that the appellant's stomach ulcer condition was work-related. The only reference to this condition in the medical reports was as part of the history taken by the various doctors as recorded in their reports. That history was inconsistent and there was no report from Dr Sheridan who, apparently, was treating the appellant for this condition.

In my opinion, the appeal should be dismissed.
 * * * 
