

William Robert Low versus Paul Gerard Cooley By His Next Friend Rosemary Ann
Cooley [1997] NSWSC 137 (16 April 1997) 
WILLIAM ROBERT LOW versus PAUL GERARD COOLEY BY HIS NEXT FRIEND ROSEMARY ANN
COOLEY /96 
WEDNESDAY 16 APRIL 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MASON P, PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA 
CATCHWORDS: Negligence - contributory negligence.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: In this matter the plaintiff Paul Gerard Cooley was born on 27 December 1986 and he suffered an injury when he was nearly eight years old on 26 November 1994. He had ridden the small bicycle which he owned from a walkway across a footpath and out onto Harcourt Parade, Rosebery when he was struck by the defendant's motor vehicle.

He suffered extremely severe injuries which included the fracture of the base of his skull and of his left superior orbit. He may or may not suffer permanent brain injury, one does not know. On admission to casualty he had a
Glasgow coma scale of six and post-traumatic amnesia lasted for seventeen days. He has been diagnosed as having suffered a moderately severe head injury which has affected his memory, concentration and behaviour and left him with speech disorder.

His residual disability had not crystallised by the date of the trial nor I assume has it yet though the trial proceeded only in relation to the issues of liability and contributory negligence.

Many witnesses were called during the case. There was the plaintiff himself who gave unsworn evidence and said he could not remember the accident. He was subject to fairly detailed cross-examination. His father gave evidence as to the condition of the bicycle he was riding. A neighbour, who witnessed the accident, a Mr Con Skaros, gave evidence. A boy who was following him on a bicycle, Mr Clayton John Reid also gave evidence as did Constable Andrews who attended the scene of the accident. Mr Gomes, a design engineer employed by the council, gave evidence; an expert on motor cycling, Mr Max Thompson, gave evidence. In addition there was various documentary evidence tendered on behalf of the plaintiff.

On behalf of the defendant, apart from documentary evidence, there was evidence given by the defendant himself and also a traffic engineer he called,
Mr William J S Bailey. The matter proceeded for three or four days in front of his Honour Judge McLachlan who eventually handed down a reserved judgment on June 1996 finding the defendant guilty in negligence and finding the plaintiff liable as to twenty five per cent on the issue of contributory negligence.

The essential facts are hardly in dispute. The defendant on his motor bicycle was travelling at forty kilometres an hour, possibly a little more. He knew the area extremely well, he had travelled on it frequently. He was well aware that children played on the neighbourhood and presumably crossed the road. He did not see the plaintiff until the plaintiff was right in front of him about two metres. Expert evidence was given about stopping time.

There was evidence about the speed limit as to which Mr Donohoe, learned senior counsel for the appellant, pointed out to us that it was never specifically put to the defendant that he knew the speed limit was forty.
However, there was plenty of evidence that the speed limit had, about a month before the accident, been reduced to forty kilometres an hour and that there were signs in the locality drawing that fact to people's attention. One can infer that on the basis of his frequent activities he either knew or should have known that the speed limit at this point was forty kilometres an hour. It is of importance because it is fairly clear from the testimony of the experts on either side that if he drove recklessly at forty kilometres an hour his chances of stopping, in order to avoid children who suddenly dart onto the road, would have been limited indeed.

Mr Donohoe raised an issue really going to the incompleteness of his Honour's findings - that there was no finding by his Honour as to what vehicles were parked on the left hand side of the road, when seen from the defendant's point of view. This is true enough but the evidence on this topic is extremely hard to understand. One version of the evidence was that there was a van blocking the entrance from the walkway onto the road. Another witness recalled that there two cars close by. Yet another source of evidence suggested that there was only one car, much further up the road, which would have little to do with the accident.

The importance of this from the appellant's point of view is that the appellant was trying to make out a case which must have been impliedly rejected by his Honour, namely that the child came out suddenly from between two vehicles, making it virtually impossible for the appellant to do anything about the child until the accident had happened. His Honour did not specifically make detailed findings on the matter but I think it is consistent with his Honour's reasons that his Honour rejected the arguments which were endeavoured to be put by the appellant. This does not seem to me surprising in view of the confusing nature of the evidence in question.

Indeed if one had to make a finding of what the more probable situation was, I should have thought it would be advisable to go to the P4 which shows only one parked car and that parked at a point where its situation has nothing to do with the negligence in question.

Again Mr Donohoe made much of the fact that there was no adequate finding, in his submission, by his Honour of the precise point of impact. Again in my view that does not greatly matter. What his Honour did find, and what I think must be good law, is that it is unreasonable for the driver of a motor cycle to travel at or above a permitted speed limit, not adverting to the question of whether children were on the road, although he knows children do frequent that road.

In the circumstances of the case, in my view his Honour is perfectly correct and the appeal should be dismissed with costs. As to the cross-appeal brought by the plaintiff to reduce the twenty five per cent to some lower figure, that cross-appeal must also in my view be dismissed with costs. After all the plaintiff, although only a child, did, as I understand the evidence, drive straight onto the road without looking at the right or left and I can see no reason why his Honour's finding on contributory negligence should be disturbed. So in conclusion, in my view, both the appeal and the cross-appeal should be dismissed with costs.

MASON P: I agree.

PRIESTLEY JA: I also agree.
 * * * 
