

Girlock (Mfg) P/L versus M E Caprion [1996] NSWSC 357 (16 August 1996) 
GIRLOCK (MFG) PTY LIMITED versus MICHAEL ERNEST CAPRION /95 DC4822/89 
Friday 16 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MEAGHER, BEAZLEY JJA AND SIMOS AJA 
CATCHWORDS: JURY VERDICT -Whether issue ought to have been left to jury - whether award of damages by jury excessive 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: This is an appeal from a jury verdict given in the District Court on 1 December 1995. The case before the jury was one whereby it was alleged that the plaintiff had suffered two heart attacks in the course of his employment. There was a dispute as to whether the heart attacks were causally linked to the employment. It is apparent from the jury's verdict in favour of the plaintiff, who is the respondent in these proceedings, that the jury accepted the medical evidence to the effect that there was the necessary causal connection. There is no appeal from the liability aspect of the jury's verdict. There are only two points raised on the appeal. First, whether the likelihood or possibility of the respondent receiving a redundancy payment ought to have been left to the jury, and the further issue as to whether the award of damages made by the jury was excessive.

The respondent was born in 1926 in Mauritius. He came to Australia in 1968 and commenced working with the appellant in that year. The nature of his work was initially as a labourer. He was promoted during the course of his employment to the position of leading hand setter, and from time to time acted as foreman when the foreman was on leave. He had been employed with the appellant for a period of about eighteen years prior to the cessation of his employment on 28
January 1986. At that time he was aged almost fifty-eight years.

At the time of ceasing work with the appellant, the respondent was paid an amount of just over seven thousand dollars. This was described in a letter written by the appellant to the respondent as comprising two amounts - the first an amount of over six and a half thousand dollars by way of termination pay and an amount of about six hundred and forty dollars by way of normal pay.

At the time that the respondent ceased work, the appellant was in the process of closing down its business operations in New South Wales and moving to
Melbourne. As part of that process it had commenced making redundancy payments to various of its workers. The evidence about the redundancy payments arose during the course of the evidence of a Mr Brown, who was the appellant's production manager, and it arose as a result of a question asked by his
Honour. Thereafter, there was further questioning of witnesses in relation to the redundancy payments and I will deal with the content of that evidence in a moment.

However, returning briefly to the evidence given by Mr Brown, he said that employees of the appellant were progressively laid off from March 1986 for a month period through to about March of 1987. The business, as I have said, moved to Melbourne and it appeared that some employees were given the option of moving to Melbourne but others were not.

Mr Brown gave evidence that the respondent would have been eligible to have been offered a redundancy package had he been employed by the company between
March 1986 and March 1987. It will be recalled that the respondent ceased work with the appellant on 28 January 1986.

Further evidence on the question of redundancy was given by Mr Ferguson. Mr
Ferguson had been the shift supervisor on the afternoon shift in the employ of the appellant. He was the respondent's immediate supervisor. Mr Ferguson gave evidence that Girlock was closing its operations and that he was given the opportunity to take a redundancy package, which he accepted. He said that a number of other employees of the company were also offered a redundancy package.

He did not recall, however, how his own redundancy package was calculated. He recollected, though, that upon his termination his total package with accruals was about $30,000.00. He later gave evidence that the portion attributable to the redundancy payment was about twenty-four thousand dollars. At the time that he received the redundancy payment he had been employed by the appellant for a period of about five years and his annual gross salary at that point in time was about forty thousand dollars. He did recollect that the redundancy packages involved some method of calculation whereby payment was made for each year of service, so that the longer an employee had been with the company the greater the payment was.

He also gave evidence that the appellant differentiated its redundancy payments depending upon whether an employee was categorised as a staff employee or as a wages employee. The staff employee received the higher redundancy package. Mr Brown and Mr Ferguson were both staff employees, whereas the respondent was a wages employee. That was the state of the evidence in relation to the redundancy package at the conclusion of the hearing.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that, in that state, there was insufficient evidence to allow the matter to go to the jury. In making that submission, he directed the Court to a number of legal principles and a number of authorities, none of which are challenged on the appeal. The issue at the end of the day is how those principles ought to be applied to the facts of a particular case. It is perhaps, however, salutary to remind ourselves of the essential principles which govern the issue with which I am presently dealing.

There is no doubt that the plaintiff during the course of the trial and throughout the whole of the trial bore the burden of proof. That burden extended to proving the heads of damage and the various items comprised in the claim for damages. It has been recognised time and time again by the Courts that the assessment of damages in personal injury cases sometimes involves a degree of speculation. However, speculation cannot be regarded as an adequate alternative to evidence.

This principle was dealt with in the decision of this Court in Allan v
Loadsman [[1975] 2 NSWLR 789] and most particularly in the judgment of Samuels J at 793. At 794 Samuels J, having referred to the statement of Lord Justice Bowen in Ratcliffe versus Evans [[1892] QB 524](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1892%5d%202%20QB%20524 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 532 that: "[a]s much certainty and particularity must be insisted on, both in pleading and proof of damage, as is reasonable" commented: "Of course "reasonable" covers a great deal of territory, and where precise evidence is not obtainable, which will sometimes be the case, the court must do the best it can." 
A like comment was made in the earlier decision of Callaghan versus William C
Lynch Pty Limited [[1962] NSWR 871] in a judgment of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of New South Wales. It is perhaps appropriate to quote a portion of that judgment, at 877, where the Court said: "In actions for personal injuries, the Court or jury is constantly required to form an estimate of chances and risks, which cannot be determined with anything like precision: and no better example can be given than the possibility that an injury will improve or deteriorate. Obviously the law will disregard possibilities that are slight, or chances which are nebulous; otherwise all the circumstances of the situation must be taken into account." 
In Biggin & Co versus Permanite Limited [[1951] 1 KB 422] Devlin J, as he then was, remarked that where precise evidence is obtainable, the Court naturally expects to have it, where it is not, the Court must do the best it can.

In the present case precise evidence was not available. This is undoubtedly because the issue came up during the course of the trial. A call was made for the production of evidence in relation to redundancy payments to workers employed by the appellant and paid between 1 January 1984 and 31 December , and the trial judge indicated that he would accept facsimile evidence from Melbourne in answer to such a call. The matter did not seem to be taken further, but the jury had already heard evidence that this company had stopped operations, and counsel for the appellant at the time did indicate to the
Court that there might be some difficulties for a number of reasons obtaining the information, but the matter went no further.

In my opinion it was open to the trial judge to allow the issue of the redundancy payments to go to the jury. There was evidence, which was not shaken in any way, that there had been a series of redundancy payments and such redundancy payments were available to wages staff, as was the respondent.
There was some evidence of the manner in which the appellant had approached the redundancy packages which it offered. That evidence was two fold. First, the evidence of Mr Ferguson as to the amount which he in fact received, albeit that he was a staff member and therefore entitled to a higher redundancy payment than wages staff. There was also the evidence that the redundancy package was based upon the number of years of service.

Notwithstanding the imprecision in that evidence, an imprecision which included the fact that there was no evidence as to what the outer limits of the redundancy packages were, there was material upon which the jury could make some assessment. Accordingly it was appropriate to leave it to the jury, and the first ground of appeal must fail.

The second issue which was raised on the appeal was that, whether or not it was open to the trial judge to leave the question of a possibility of a redundancy payment to the jury, the award for the non-pecuniary aspect of damages was excessive. Again counsel for the appellant favoured the Court with a series of principles upon which this Court should approach a jury verdict in relation to damages. It is convenient to refer to those briefly.

He submitted that whether an award of damages is so unreasonable as to require its displacement is a question of law. He said that the appropriate test was stated by the High Court in Carson versus John Fairfax & Sons Limited <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 44] at 61. There, in the majority judgment, comprising Mason CJ and Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ, their Honours said: "The governing principle applying to an appeal against a jury verdict on the ground that it is excessive was expressed in Triggell versus Pheeney [(1951) 82 CLR ]
by Dixon, Williams, Webb and Kitto JJ in these terms: `The rule when a court of appeal is asked to set aside a verdict of a jury on the ground that the damages awarded are excessive is the same in libel actions, as in any other cases, viz, that the verdict should not be disturbed unless the amount is such that no reasonable body of men could have awarded it.'" 
Counsel for the appellant referred the Court to other ways in which the test had been formulated. None of these are in dispute and they amounted to the same proposition.

Counsel for the appellant also stressed that the amount for non-pecuniary aspects of general damages must be based upon notions of fairness and moderation. Amongst other authorities he referred the Court to the judgment of
Sir Victor Windeyer in Skelton versus Collins which was reported in <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 94.] The particular passages on which he relies commenced at 131, at which point Sir Victor Windeyer was analysing the different juridical base, which applies to an award of damages for pecuniary loss, and that which applies in respect of non-pecuniary loss. At 132, however, Sir Victor said: "Of course, recognising that general damages for `loss of amenities', including distress and uncertainty caused by a knowledge of the curtailment of life, are by way of solace does not help much towards determining what amount it is proper to award in a particular case." 
His Honour continued: "But I confess to knowing no real measure that can be used. The only guide suggested is fairness and moderation, whatever those may denote." 
Counsel for the appellant further submitted that Sir Windeyer stated, and that it is a principle governing the award of the non-pecuniary aspects of general damages, that the question of moderation has to be approached having regard to the amount of pecuniary damages which have been awarded. In this case, he pointed out, that award seems to be one hundred percent of the claim, notwithstanding that there was at least one basis upon which it could have been less, given that the appellant ceased business operations in New South
Wales in 1988, some three years before the appellant reached the age of 65. He further submitted that Sir Victor Windeyer laid down the principle of law that the damages for past pain and suffering and loss of amenities of life were not to be very great indeed, and that aspect of the claim should not be given much weight. I, for myself, cannot see that Sir Victor Windeyer laid down such a principle. It seems to me that the correct principle is in the passage to which I have referred, namely that the only guide suggested is fairness and moderation.

When one further takes into account the principles which govern this Court in dealing with an appeal from a jury verdict, it seems to me that this verdict is not one with which the Court ought to interfere. The verdict may well contain a component for the loss of the chance of obtaining a redundancy payment. If that is the case, even if the verdict might be considered generous, I still do not think it exceeds the bounds of a reasonable jury verdict such as this Court ought to interfere. Even if it does not include any award for the loss of the chance of obtaining a redundancy payment, I still do not think this is a case where this Court ought to interfere.

The appellant's case was that up until the time when he went off work because of his heart condition, he had been a reliable worker. He had a normal home life. It would appear that his overall social situation was such that he enjoyed the simple pleasures of life, as was discussed during the course of the argument, and it is those things which are now interfered with. Indeed, as one reads the evidence, it would seem that at about the age of 58, because of his heart condition, the appellant's life really shut down to all intents and purposes. In those circumstances I do not think that this Court ought to intervene and in my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

MEAGHER JA: I agree. 
SIMOS AJA: I agree with the judgment of my sister Beazley J and would only add one or two brief comments. In my opinion there was evidence sufficient to go to the jury on the issue of the possibility of the plaintiff receiving a redundancy payment, and also in all the circumstances sufficient to enable the jury to quantify an amount of damages referable to that issue, recognising, of course, in that connection, that the jury would need to draw appropriate inferences from such evidence in arriving at an appropriate award.

In addition to the other passages in judgments to which we were referred by counsel for the appellant, as mentioned by my sister Beazley J, counsel for the appellant also referred us to a joint judgment of Gibbs and Stephen JJ in
Sharman versus Evans <case>; [(1977-78) 138 CLR 563] and I would like to quote a small part of that judgment as follows (at 589): "Many consequences of injury are not capable of remedy by the receipt of damages, particularly those of the most personal character - the loss of opportunity of a fulfilling marriage, of parenthood, of sexual satisfaction, of the realisation of ambitions. It is very much at these detriments that the warning against any attempt at 'perfect' compensation must be aimed. The authorities also require, as does good sense, that to the extent that damages awarded under other heads produce freedom from economic uncertainty and the availability of funds for pleasurable activities, the less will be the loss to be compensated under this head. This will be of particular relevance when a considerable sum is assessed for lost earning capacity." 
Counsel for the appellant placed very considerable weight on that passage and
I appreciate the force of what he submitted. However, we must remember that the test as to whom the verdict of a jury may be set aside is a very stringent one and has been expressed by Gibbs J in Precision Plastics <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 362] at 369 as follows, that in the case of a jury: "The appellate court will only interfere if it arrives at the conclusion that the damages are so large or so small as to be unreasonable - so excessive or so inadequate that no jury could reasonably have awarded them, or, as is sometimes said, out of all proportion to the circumstances of the case." 
Recognising everything that counsel for the appellant has submitted I do not believe that the verdict of the jury falls within the terms of that principle and, accordingly, I agree that the appeal should be dismissed.

MEAGHER JA: The order of the Court, therefore, is that the appeal is dismissed with costs. * * * 
