

Regina versus Alexander William Madden No. 60547 of 1994 Criminal Law and
Procedure [1996] NSWSC 26 (15 February 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ at CL(1), ALLEN(2) AND DUNFORD(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY 11
December 1995 #DATE 15:12:1995 #ADD 15:2:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant    P Kintominas and R Rasmussen 
Solicitor for the Appellant   M Croke 
Counsel for the Respondent    R N Howie QC, Crown Advocate 
Solicitor for the Respondent  
S E O'Connor, Solicitor for
Public Prosecutions
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
HUNT CJ at CL This is a Case stated for the opinion of this Court by Judge
Flannery QC of the District Court. It arises out of an appeal to that Court from the Local Court, brought pursuant to [s 122](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s122.html) of the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), by the appellant in this Court (Alexander William Madden), who had been charged with the offence which, despite the change in its terminology, will no doubt continue to be known as "goods in custody".
So far as it is here relevant, [s 527C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s527c.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) provides: "(1) Any person who: has any thing in his custody, ... (or) has any thing in or on premises, whether belonging to or occupied by himself or not, or whether that thing is therefor his own use or the use of another;...
 which thing may be reasonably suspected of being stolen or otherwise unlawfully obtained, shall be liable on conviction before a stipendiary magistrate to imprisonment for six months, or to a fine of five penalty units.

It is a sufficient defence to a prosecution for an offence under subsection (1) if the defendant satisfies the court that he had no reasonable grounds for suspecting that the thing referred to in the charge was stolen or otherwise unlawfully obtained."
The charge against the appellant is that he had in a safety deposit box in his name, at the branch of the Westpac Bank at 273 George Street City, the sum of $174,500 which may be reasonably suspected of being stolen or otherwise unlawfully obtained." ((1) Where a charge under [s 527C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s527c.html) concerns banknotes, the issue relates to whether those particular banknotes may be reasonably suspected of being stolen or otherwise unlawfully obtained, not whether they are the proceeds from the disposal of some other thing which is so described:
Grant versus The Queen <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 503] at 713-714.)
The issue which the prosecution must establish under [s 527C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s527c.html) is not whether the arresting police officer or the court reasonably suspects that the thing was unlawfully obtained; rather, it is whether such a description may objectively relate to the thing itself - that it is something which might reasonably be suspected of having been unlawfully obtained. ((2) Willis v
Burnes <case>; [(1921) 29 CLR 511] at -117; Regina versus Michael Ernest Carter (CCA, 9 March 1978, unreported) at ,6; Regina versus Abbrederis [(1981) 1 NSWLR 530] at 714-715; Regina versus Chan [(1992) 28 NSWLR 421] at 425, 433, 435-436.) The issue is one of suspicion (which must be a reasonable one), not of either knowledge or belief. ((3) Tucs v Manley [(1985) 62 ALR 460] at 461, 464; Anderson versus District Court (at 714);
Regina versus Chan (at 437).) It is unnecessary to prove that the person charged entertained, or may have entertained, such a suspicion. ((4) This is an issue which my be raised in relation to the defence afforded by [s 527C(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s527c.html) Note that this defence does not amount to a statutory reversal of the onus of proof: Ex parte Patmoy; Re Jack (1944) 44 SR 351 at ; Tegge versus Caldwell [(1988) 15
NSWLR 226] at 227-228; Anderson versus District Court (at 716-717).) Nor is it necessary to prove that the thing was in fact unlawfully obtained.
((5) Rex v
Grace (1930) 30 SR 158 at 163; Regina versus Michael Ernest Carter (at 10); Regina v Chan (at 433).)
The effect of this statutory framework is thus that the state of knowledge of the person charged as to the provenance of the particular things found in his custody is irrelevant to the prosecution case; but, if the court is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt upon the state of the evidence before it that those things may be reasonably suspected of being stolen or otherwise unlawfully obtained, the person charged must, in order to escape conviction, discharge the lesser civil onus upon him of satisfying the court that he had no reasonable grounds for suspecting that they were stolen or unlawfully obtained. ((6) Regina versus Brian John Buckett (CCA, 19 May 1995, in the course of being reported) at 9.)
In determining whether the prosecution has made out its case, the court may have regard to the nature of the thing in question (the subject of the charge), the circumstances in which it was found in the defendant's custody and the behaviour of the defendant with respect to it, including any lies which he tells or evasion which he exhibits as to his custody of it and its provenance. ((7) O'Sullivan versus Tregaskis <case>; [(1948) SASR 12] at 16; Anderson v
District Court (at 714-715); Regina versus Chan (at 437-438). In so far as the decision of Travers J in Yeo versus Capper [(1964) SASR 1] at 5-6 may be interpreted as being contrary to that proposition, it is contrary to the authorities cited in this footnote, and it should not be followed.
The facts found by the judge, as set out in the Stated Case, were that the appellant conducted a business by the name of Australian Autos, a business which generated large sums of money and in which the cash payments received were not always banked. On the day before the money was found in the appellant's safety deposit box, he was shown two keys by a police officer and asked what they were for. He identified them as security keys, and he said that the security consisted of "deeds and that" at the Dulwich Hill branch of the Westpac Bank. When asked whether there was "any money there", the appellant replied in the negative.
He was asked whether he had any other security boxes at other banks, and he again answered in the negative. He said that the only money which he had in accounts was that which he had received from the business. He was asked "Do you have any cash anywhere?", to which he replied "No, you've got all of that". The circumstances in which the appellant was being interrogated by the police have not been disclosed in the Stated
Case. The judge held that the appellant's denial that he had any other security boxes at other banks, his assertion that the only money which he had was from his business and his denial that he had any cash anywhere were false.
 .
A document in evidence (bearing a date some ten months before the money was found in the appellant's safety deposit box) recorded a loan in the amount of $180,000 made to the appellant by a Mr Khodjasteh, for a term of twelve months at 16 1/2% interest per calendar month and repayable by twelve monthly instalments. The document was executed by Mr Khodjasteh but not by the appellant. The loan was effected by the payment of cash. No monthly payments had been made, no interest had been paid by the appellant to Mr Khodjasteh, and no part of the loan had been repaid. The judge held that he was not satisfied on a balance of probabilities that any of the bank notes received by the appellant from Mr Khodjasteh had been placed in the safety deposit box in which the sum of $174,500 was found.
The judge held that he was satisfied by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt that the sum of $174,500 found in the appellant's safety deposit box may be reasonably suspected of being unlawfully obtained, but he was not satisfied by the appellant on a balance of probabilities that he had no reasonable grounds for suspecting that the banknotes referred to in the charge were unlawfully obtained.
In reaching the last of those conclusions, which rejected the appellant's defence pursuant to [s 527C(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s527c.html), the judge took into account the appellant's undoubted business acumen, the secreting of such a large sum of money for approximately eight months in a safety deposit box and the appellant's continuing liability to pay interest at the rate of 16 1/2% per calendar month on the loan from Mr Khodjasteh.
The question which is posed for this Court's determination is whether the judge's finding that the offence had been proved was erroneous in law. That is not an appropriate question to be asked in a Stated Case. The procedure provided by [s 5B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5b.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) is intended to permit the
District Court judge to obtain advice from this Court upon questions of law which will assist that judge in determining the fate of the appeal to that
Court pursuant to [s 122](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s122.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/). ((8) Re Van De Lubbe (1949) 49 SR at 312.) The procedure is not intended to provide a means of challenging the ultimate determination made (or to be made) by the judge upon that appeal to the District Court, as there is no right of appeal to this Court from that determination. The question asked here is in form no more that an attempt to exercise such a right of appeal. It is for that reason that this Court has said, and often repeated, that it is necessary that the particular question or questions of law upon which advice is to be obtained are specifically stated.
((9) See, for example, Re Van De Lubbe (at 312); Law Society versus Goodwin [(1972) NSWLR 462] at 464.)
The Stated Case identifies the appellant's contentions as asserting that the judge erred in law upon four matters relating to the findings which he made, but it does not identify them as questions of law for the opinion of this Court. They are stated in the form of grounds of appeal. They are not well expressed. Construing them as liberally as possible, the contentions appear to be these: 
It was not open in law for the judge to find the existence of a reasonable suspicion that the money had been unlawfully obtained by reason of the fact that the appellant had retained such a large sum of money in his safety deposit box for a period of eight months which he had borrowed with a liability to pay interest at a rate of 161/2% per calendar month. 
It was not open in law for the judge to draw inferences adverse to the appellant from the facts that he had not executed the loan document, that the loan was effected by cash, that no interest or instalments had been paid and no part of the loan had been repaid, and that he had made the false statements to the police to which reference has already been made. 
It was not open in law for the judge to draw inferences adverse to the appellant from the fact that safety deposit boxes are a method of concealing large sums of money.

It was not open in law for the judge to conclude that he was not satisfied that there were no reasonable grounds for suspecting that the bank notes found in the appellant's cash box were unlawfully obtained by reason of the facts which have already been identified.
It is not easy to find the questions of law raised. Nor have we been assisted by the written submissions made by counsel for the appellant, which refer to the other evidence before the judge and to other findings which are said to have been implicitly made by the judge.
This Court may not have regard to matters outside the Stated Case. ((10)
Thomas versus The King <case>; [(1937) 59 CLR 279] at 286; Regina versus Chan (at 431).) If an appellant wants to rely upon express or implicit findings made by the judge, it is his obligation to ensure that those findings are expressed by the judge in the Stated Case. ((11) I understand that the general practice is that the stated case is drafted by the prospective appellant to this Court for signature by the judge.) Sometimes, reasons for judgment given by the judge are attached to the Stated Case for this purpose. It would not, however, be correct to attach a transcript of the evidence. This Court is concerned usually with the facts found by the judge, not with the evidence as a whole.
If there is a challenge to the evidentiary basis for any of those findings, the relevant parts of the evidence should be set out in the Stated
Case. A judgment given by the judge prior to stating a Case for the opinion of this
Court does not always identify every matter upon which the judge relied in making such findings. That is why the relevant parts of the evidence should be set out in the Stated Case if it is necessary to consider the evidentiary basis for any findings of fact.
If it is said that there was ,as the appellant here has argued, some significance to the questions of law to be determined by this Court in the fact that a particular question was not asked, that fact should be expressed as such in the Case Stated. In the present case, the appellant has alleged a breach of the rule in Browne versus Dunn ((12) (1893) 6 R 67), but there is nothing in the Stated Case to demonstrate that there was such a breach; and, even if there were such a breach, that does not amount to an error of law. ((13)
Poricanin versus Australian Consolidated Industries
Ltd [(1979) 2 NSWLR 419] at -427.) This point was not pursued.
When the defective nature of the Stated Case was pointed out, counsel for the appellant sought to formulate a specific question of law which would be of assistance to the judge in determining the fate of the appeal to the District
Court and which would resolve the principal issue which it had been intended to raise for this Court's opinion. The question of law was finally expressed in this way - whether, in order to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the money found in the appellant's safety deposit box may be reasonably suspected of being unlawfully obtained, the judge had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that that money was not the money received by the appellant by way of a loan from Mr Khodjasteh.
It was submitted by the appellant that, because the issue as to a loan had been raised in the case, the answer should be in the affirmative. It was pointed out that the only finding referred to in the Stated Case was one that the judge was not satisfied on a balance of probabilities that any of the bank notes received by the appellant from Mr Khodjasteh had been placed in the safety deposit box in which the sum of $174,500 was found. That, it was said, is not sufficient, as it leaves open the reasonable possibility that the money in the appellant's safety deposit box had come from that loan. That reasonable possibility had to be eliminated by the prosecution, so that a finding was required that beyond reasonable doubt the money was not that received by way of loan.
Reliance was placed by the appellant upon what was said by Abadee J in
Regina versus Chan, ((14) (at 440-441)) which (it was submitted) assumes that the prosecution must exclude any competing hypotheses consistent with innocence before the court may be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the money may be reasonably suspected of being unlawfully obtained. No such assumption was made by Abadee J. The submission overlooks what his Honour had said earlier in his judgment ((15) (at 437)) that, if the court is "able to say that the strongest positive or definite inference (of a number available) is that the thing was unlawfully obtained, then it is entitled to draw that inference as being the reasonable one in the circumstances".
The requirement that the prosecution establish beyond reasonable doubt that something "may" reasonably be "suspected" is not an entirely clear concept. ((16) Anderson versus District Court (at 715).) There is unfortunately no ratio upon this particular issue to be discerned from this Court's decision in
Regina versus Chan. Abadee J, as I have said, held that the inference which the section requires must be the strongest positive or definite of the inferences available. Mahoney JA held ((17) (at 424)) that, where there were more than one suspicion which may reasonably be entertained, the court did not have to determine which was the most likely of the possible suspicions. I merely said ((18) (at 426-427).) that the weight to be given to each of the conclusions open upon the evidence was itself a question of fact, and that it was for the
Court to determine whether the conclusion which the section requires has been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt. All three of us, however, were agreed that the mere fact that there is more than one conclusion reasonably open upon the facts does not mean that, in law, the prosecution has failed to establish its case. ((19) (at 424, 426, 437). That necessarily follows from the nature of the conclusion which the section requires. That unanimous determination by this Court is a sufficient answer to the principal question of law now posed for this Court's determination. I propose that that question be answered "No".
The remainder of the appellant's argument in the written submissions and before us did not deal with each of the appellant's contentions individually.
Indeed, the first of those contentions is factually inaccurate as to the issue in relation to which it is said in the Stated Case that the judge took those matters into account, and both the first and fourth of the contentions misstate the issues which the judge had to decide. Instead, that argument proceeded upon the bases that none of the matters which the judge has taken into account when drawing inferences adverse to the appellant was relevant to the inferences which he drew, and (b) that, if they were relevant, they provided insufficient foundation for those inferences.
The principal matter taken into account by the judge to which objection was taken is the fact that the appellant, as a person of undoubted business acumen, retained such a large sum of money in his safety deposit box over a period of eight months. Money, it was said, is legal tender and its possession is prima facie lawful in any quantity. That may be so, but that fact did not stand alone. The large sum of money was retained by the appellant in his safety deposit box at a time when he apparently had a continuing liability to pay interest to Mr Khodjasteh upon approximately the same sum at the rate of /2% per calendar month. It was argued by the appellant that such circumstances may give rise to speculation why he had borrowed the money but it could not thereby taint its provenance. Not even those facts stood alone.
The circumstances of the alleged "loan" were also relevant. The document by which such loan was evidenced was not executed by the appellant, thereby giving no written record of the appellant's apparent promise to
Mr Khodjasteh to make monthly repayments of the loan and to pay what was on any view an exorbitant rate of interest. No such repayments of the loan or payments of interest were in fact made. The alleged loan was effected by the payment of cash. The appellant lied as to the existence of the safety deposit box and as to the existence of any such amounts of cash.
All of those matters were relevant to the issue which the judge had to determine. The other matters in issue which the judge took account have already been identified when I attempted to restate the appellant's contentions, and it is unnecessary to repeat them. I am satisfied that each of them, taken in combination with the others, was also relevant to the issues which the judge had to determine. ((20) I make it clear that I have not considered any question of procedural fairness in reliance being placed upon those matters, as that issue has not been raised in the Stated Case.) This
Court does not know from the Stated Case whether the matters so identified were the only matters which the judge took into account when drawing the inferences adverse to the appellant. There is, therefore, no question of law which can arise for this Court's opinion as to whether such matters provided a sufficient foundation for those inferences.
In my opinion, this Court should decline to answer the question originally posed by the Stated Case because it was inappropriate, and also because it cannot be answered upon the material contained in the Stated Case.
I propose that the question subsequently formulated for this Court's determination be answered "No", and that an order be made that the Stated Case be returned to the District Court for the hearing of the appeal to that Court to proceed in accordance with the opinions expressed by this Court.
The Crown sought an order that the appellant pay its costs of the Stated
Case. ((21) This Court's power to order costs is discussed in Clyne v
Wrigley(1980) I NSWLR 559 and in Proust versus Blake [(1989) 17 NSWLR 267.)] Such an order was opposed upon the basis that the opinions expressed in this Court's judgment may cause the judge to change his mind as to his intention to confirm the appellant's conviction in the Local Court. If that is what happens, it will not be a consequence of anything which this Court has said in relation to the issues raised by the Stated Case itself, which was poorly drafted and which raised no appropriate question of law. Every issue argued before this
Court was determined against the appellant. I propose that an order be made that the appellant pay the respondent's costs.
JUDGE2
ALLEN J I agree with Hunt CJ at CL.
JUDGE3
DUNFORD J I agree with Hunt CJ at CL.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/26.html  
