

Regina versus Lommahadthai Matter No Cca 60595/96 [1997] NSWSC 638 (11 December )
 
Regina versus Krong Lommahadthai /96 December 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Dunford J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA versus Krong LOMMAHADTHAI 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentences imposed by the Chief Judge of the District Court, Blanch J, following pleas of guilty by the appellant to three charges of being knowingly concerned in the importation into Australia of prohibited drugs, namely heroin. Because of the length of the sentences imposed, I consider that the application for leave to appeal should be granted and I will refer to the appellant on that basis. 
The appellant came for sentence, together with three co-offenders. Two of the co-offenders were sentenced in respect of one offence each. Another of the co- offenders was sentenced in respect of two offences. However, in dealing with the respective criminality of the co-offenders, Blanch J said: "It will immediately be apparent that Mr Lommahadthai was an organiser of the importation and that he was involved in organising three separate offences.
Obviously his situation is far more serious than that of the other three co- offenders, firstly because he was, on the evidence, an organiser of the importation and second, because he was involved in more offences.

As between the other three accused, it is difficult to point to any higher degree of culpability of one than any of the others, except of course that
Miss Yuttayot was involved in two offences and not just one." 
His Honour went on to say that on the evidence it was plain that Mr
Wongvairojona and Miss Thamarankul were simply couriers and the role of Miss
Yuttayot was that of what might be described as a messenger.

The practical effect of the sentences imposed upon the appellant, in combination, was that he was sentenced to imprisonment for thirteen years, with a non-parole period of nine and a half years.

Senior counsel for the appellant acknowledges that the head sentence was unquestionably within the range of a proper exercise of sentencing discretion and has directed the whole of his argument to the non-parole period, which he says is excessive.

It is argued on behalf of the appellant that the non-parole period, which is per cent of the total sentence, is too high in proportion to the total sentence. In addition, so it is argued, when it is compared with the corresponding proportion which applies in relation to the co-offenders, it can be seen to be unwarranted. Percentages have been calculated in that respect.

In truth, the percentage which the appellant's non-parole period bears to his total sentence is not materially different from the percentage which Mr
Wongvairojona's non-parole period bears to his total sentence. If the percentage of the appellant's non-parole period to his total sentence had been the same as that which applied in the case of Mr Wongvairojona, then the non- parole period would have been less by only a couple of months.

The female co-offenders, Miss Thamarankul and Miss Yuttayot, on the other hand, were given non-parole periods which bore a substantially lesser percentage when compared with the total sentences imposed. In their cases, however, there were subjective considerations which were referred to sympathetically by the sentencing judge. Senior counsel for the appellant has drawn the attention of the court to Griffith versus The Queen <case>; [167 CLR 372], in which the High Court referred to some matters which may be relevant to the relationship between a head sentence and a non-parole period and has pointed out, correctly, that there is no express explanation given by the sentencing judge in the present case of the relationship between the various non-parole periods and head sentences. That is left to implication.

In R versus Ferrer-Esis [(1991) 55 ACR 231], it was said that non-parole periods in cases of this kind would be "generally fixed within the order of approximately 60 to 75 per cent of the head sentence". In the present case, the non-parole period was fixed within that range, although it was close to the top of the range.

The various co-offenders, as the Chief Judge indicated, stood in a very different position from that of the appellant. He was one of the organisers of the drug importation. They were couriers or messengers. One of the young women became involved in the matter because of some personal attraction to the appellant and, according to the Judge, was not in a position to cope with the situation in which she found herself. The co-offenders gave assistance to the authorities and were given discounts for future assistance. It was the confession of one of the young women which brought to light the first importation the subject of these proceedings and in her case it was her confession that was the only evidence against her.

In the case of the other female involved as a courier, there were depressing subjective features and difficulties facing her during the custodial portion of any sentence that she might serve. There were particular problems associated with her incarceration which his Honour took into account. As has already been mentioned, there was no material difference in the proportion of non-parole periods and head sentences as between the case of the appellant and the case of the other male co-offender.

The involvement of the appellant in these importations was on an organisational and entrepreneurial basis. His activity was that of organising drugs, travel and payment and overseeing and supervising departure and arrival and unloading of couriers at final destination. I agree with the submissions made on the part of the Crown that activity of that kind merit strong condemnation, both by way of head sentence and by way of a substantial non- parole period. It was legitimate for the Chief Judge in the present case to take the view that it was proper to specify a non-parole period which was near the top of the range indicated in Ferrer-Esis. No error of fact or principle has been demonstrated in the exercise of discretion involved in this sentencing.

As I have already indicated, the case is a proper one for leave to appeal, but
I would consider that the appeal should be dismissed.

BARR J: I agree 
DUNFORD J: I also agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court will be leave to appeal granted, but the appeal is dismissed. 
REGINA versus Krong LOMMAHADTHAI 
SENTENCING - DRUG IMPORTATION - appellant pleaded guilty to three offences of being knowingly concerned in importation of heroin - involved in organisational and entrepreneurial basis - sentenced to thirteen years with non-parole period of nine years six months - no challenge to head sentence - non-parole period said to be excessive - HELD - challenge to sentence not made out. 
O R D E R S Leave to appeal against sentence granted.  Appeal dismissed.
 * * * 
