

Penrith District Rugby League Football Club Limited versus Bradley Scott
Fittler Penrith District Rugby League Football Club Limited versus Matthew Charles
Sing Nos. 4562/95 [1996] NSWSC 523 (31 October 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
SANTOW J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 29, 30, 31 January, 1 February 1996 #DATE 8:2:1996 #ADD 11:3:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiff       B Coles, QC and J Higgins 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff      Boulton
Rex Julian 
Counsel for the Defendants       B J Gross QC and R W White 
Solicitors for the Defendants     Thurlow
Fisher
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
SANTOW J The Plaintiff, Penrith District Rugby League Football Club Limited, ("Penrith Club")seeks injunctive relief. It is to restrain two leading Rugby
League Footballers, Bradley Fittler and Matthew Sing ("the Defendants"), employed by the Penrith Club under what are called "Playing Contracts", from either playing without the Club's consent in any Rugby League football match other than for the Plaintiff (or as the relevant Playing Contract permits), or entering into any arrangement to play the game of Rugby League for any other club. This injunctive relief is sought only for 1996, this being the concluding year under the relevant Playing Contracts.
This question depends on whether, in the events that happened, the Playing
Contracts were discharged because they were either repudiated by the Plaintiff and such repudiation accepted, or else frustrated. Alternatively, if the
Playing
Contracts were not discharged, it depends on whether injunctive relief should nonetheless be denied the Plaintiff for discretionary reasons elaborated below.
 
THE PRINCIPAL CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES
The Defendants claim and the Plaintiff denies, that each
Playing Contract was repudiated by Penrith Club, in withdrawing from participation in the
Premiership Competition conducted by the New South Wales Rugby League Limited ("the League") in conjunction with the Australian Rugby League Limited ("ARL"), (collectively "the Leagues") for the competition proposed to be conducted by Super League, thereby breaching a term of the contract, express or implied, that obliged Penrith Club to participate in the Premiership
Competition, or alternatively that obliged Penrith Club to continue to employ the Defendants to play Rugby League football for Penrith Club and in such
Premiership Competition, or frustrated, on a similar basis, if not immediately then with such prospect of serious interference with performance that no injunction should lie.
It is contended by the Defendants that they accepted such repudiation at least on the first basis, and that, by repudiation or frustration the Playing contracts were thereby terminated.
If the contracts were not terminated by repudiation or frustration, the
Defendants contend that such injunctive relief should be denied for discretionary reasons; in particular because of laches or delay, or because it would place the Defendants in breach of certain Loyalty Agreements to the
League, or because it would compel the Defendants to forego their chosen occupation or carry out a contract of personal services, or because it would involve a breach of the corporate objects of Penrith Club.
 
ELABORATION OF FACTUAL BACKGROUND
The material facts, though not their legal consequences, were largely agreed or not iissue. I set these out below.
 
Circumstances of entry into the Playing Contracts
On 26 August 1993,
Bradley Scott Fittler entered into an employment agreement with the Penrith Club, a company limited by guarantee, as is the
League.
The agreement was in he standard form of Playing Contract approved by and uniformly used by the Leagues. On 25 July 1994 Matthew
Charles Sing entered into such an employment agreement with the Penrith Club. This also was in the standard form in use by the Leagues.
While some of the special conditions in the Sing Playing Contract differed as to remuneration from those in the Fittler Playing Contract, this difference was simply this. Mr Sing, who received a smaller playing fee, received in addition a per game match fee, for each "first grade game" of $1,000, plus a representative bonus" for certain representative games. It was not in dispute that these were games either controlled by or otherwise within the jurisdiction of the Leagues. I shall refer to the two agreements collectively as "the Playing Contracts".
At the time each of the Defendants signed the Playing Contract with the
Penrith Club its home ground was Penrith Park and each of the Defendants lived within the Penrith District. Training took place at Penrith Park where the
Club had extensive facilities. At the time of signing, the only competition for Rugby League football then in existence or contemplation by the parties was that conducted by the Leagues.
The participation contemplated by the Playing Contracts in clause 3 thereof was the subject of a final proviso to the effect that "such participation shall not interfere with the usual occupation of the Player".
Thus for example Mr Sing was able to complete his apprenticeship as a Fitter and Turner whilst playing under these Playing Contracts - they were not such as to require full-time employment. I will return to the detailed provisions of those contracts later, simply setting out the broad situation of the players at the time they entered into the Playing Contracts.
There is no dispute that
Bradley Fittler, the current Australian Captain of Australia's representative Rugby League team, fielded under the auspices of the
League, is one of the outstanding Rugby League players in this country.
Thus it was undisputed that "in terms of his playing ability his performance and his achievements he stands at the pinnacle of the game in this country"; decision of the Appeals Committee of the New South Wales Rugby League Limited December 1995.
It was similarly undisputed that Matthew Sing, whilst not being entitled to lay claim to be on exactly the same level as Bradley Fittler, in terms of performance, experience and ability, is certainly one of the top thirty Rugby
League players in this country.
Each of these players is, despite his already considerable playing experience, still in the early stages of a career which might be expected to last anywhere from another five to ten years at the top level.
 
Registration of the Player and Participation by the club in the Premiership
Competition - Rules of the League and the
Playing Contract
It can be taken that each signed Playing Contract was forwarded to the
General Manager of the League, as contemplated by note (ii) in the Playing contract (which appears immediately following the player's execution).
The Rules and Regulations of the League accompany its Articles of
Association and incorporate its definitions. The Playing Contract is linked to these constituent documents of the League in various ways. Thus clause 11 of the Playing Contract requires the player to acknowledge his awareness of the
Memorandum and Articles of the Penrith Club the League, and the ARL and of the
Rules and Regulations of the Club. Clause 17 of the Playing Contract renders each party bound by the Memorandum and Articles of the Club and its Rules and
Regulations.
 .
Rule 46 of the League relevantly provides: "46. A copy of every Playing Contract entered into between a
Club and player shall be lodged for registration with the League by: a date not later than twenty-eight (28) days after the date of its execution... " 
It can be taken that the Playing Contract was duly registered.
In addition, contemporaneously with execution of the Playing Contract, it can be taken that the Player's Registration Form incorporated in the contract was lodged with the League to enable the relevant player to be registered.
This was required of the player pursuant to para (i) of such Form, whereby the player agrees "to be bound by the Memorandum and Articles of Association and the Rules of the League Limited". Rule 47 of the
League's Rules under the heading "Premiership Competition Rules" requires that: "Registration of Players 
A player shall not play for any Club in the Competition or any other Competition conducted by the League unless he is registered by the
League as a player with that Club.
All applications for registration for the purposes of the first series of Matches in the Competition in each year must be lodged with the League by not later than three days prior to the date of the commencement of the Competition".

Rule 48 provides that: "The League shall not register a player with the Club for the purposes of his playing in the Competition or any other
Competition conducted by it and a player shall not be eligible to play in any such
Competition unless:
He is a Member of the Club
A Playing Contract between the Club and the player is registered with the League pursuant to these Rules
An application for Registration in the prescribed form to these Rules duly completed and signed by the player and a duly authorised representative of the Club is lodged with the League and approved by it.

He is not contracted to play for any other Club or Rugby
League body in Australia." 
It would appear that registration is a once and for all exercise; that is to say such player registration is not required for each year.
The capitalised terms above are defined so that, relevantly, "Club" includes the Penrith Club under Article 1, of the League's Articles. "The
Competition" is defined in the accompany Rule 37 to mean "the New South Wales
Rugby League Premiership Competition" and "Playing Contract" in that same Rule means "a contract between a player and a Club in the standard form approved by the League from time to time".
 .
The Premiership Competition Rules of the League and in particular Rules to 42, make clear that a Club's participation in the
Competition is not a right of that Club. Rather it depends upon the Club first applying to the
League in the prescribed form and then the Board of Directors of the League exercising their discretion to grant the application of the Club to enter a team or teams in "any Competition conducted by the League". Furthermore, the
Board of Directors may cancel the application of a Club previously approved if the Club or any member thereof has not complied with any terms or conditions previously attached to the approval.
 .
Importantly, Rule 42 provides: "42. Each Club admitted into the Competition agrees to abide by the Memorandum and articles of Association, the Rules and
Regulations of the League and decisions of the Board of
Directors of the League and any Committee of the League made pursuant thereto and any terms and conditions imposed upon its admission to the Competition."
The
High Court in dealing with the equivalent predecessor provisions of the League's constitution in Wayde and Anor versus New South Wales
Rugby League
Limited <case>; [(1985) 180 CLR 459] held that the League was empowered through its directors to exclude any club from the Premiership Competition. It is not disputed that the present constitution of the League similarly empowers the directors of the League so to do.
Thus the end result is this. The Playing Contract, reinforced by the
Rules of the League, binds the player to comply with the League Memorandum and
Articles and Rules (as well as the Memorandum and Articles and Rules of the club). The Penrith Club is directly bound by the Memorandum and
Articles of the League and its rules, so there is no need for it to be bound to them also by the Playing Contract. Nonetheless the latter incorporates reference to these constituent documents of the League in both clause 11 (binding the
Player) and in the Players
Registration Form. I deal later (see "The Playing
Contracts") with the Playing Contract, its detailed terms and those constituent documents and Rules in more detail 
The ARL/Penrith Club Commitment Agreements Late 1994 - February 1995
The next relevant event was the Penrith Club, in what appears to be late , entering into an agreement with the ARL and the League. The ARL and
League agreed to the Penrith Club participating in a "National Competition" (see below) for the playing seasons 1995 to 1999 inclusive.
The Penrith Club on its part agreed not to participate in any other competition not conducted or approved by the ARL and the League.
The Penrith Club still undertook to observe and perform all obligations expressed in the Articles of Association and Rules and Regulations of the League on the part of the Clubs and their respective representatives. In the event that the ARL should conduct a
National
Competition in lieu of the League during the currency of the agreement, the Club agreed thereafter to observe and perform all obligations expressed in the Articles of Association and Rules for the time being of the
ARL in lieu of the League's. Similarly, the Club agreed to observe and perform all directions and requests of the League and of ARL relating to the signing and lodgment of Players Contracts and the form in which those must appear.
Subsequently in November 1994 a further agreement was discussed in a letter from the General Manager of Penrith Club to Ken Arthurson of the
League. Penrith Club made clear that the further agreement is to be signed on the understanding "that at least seventeen of the Winfield Clubs sign it and also on the understanding that if other clubs can legally rescind the contract, we reserve the right to do so as well". Subsequently in February, a second agreement was signed though without express reference to these conditions. That agreement gives commitments to what is described as the
National Competition, for the seasons 1995 to 1999 inclusive. This is to be a
Rugby League National Competition under the logo and banner of ARL in lieu of the League and upon the basis that the League conduct and administer the
National Competition "at least for the time being" (see recital (ii) of the previous agreement incorporated by reference in the second agreement).
 
The Loyalty Agreements signed by the
Defendants
There is no evidence as to whether the players and in particular the
Defendants were aware of the conditions attached to the signing of the second agreement. Even if they were, the action that they took on 3 and 4 April 1995 in signing what were called "Loyalty Agreements" with ARL and the League clearly could not be said to be in conflict with their Playing Contracts, though not compelled by them either. Thus on 3 April 1995, Mr Sing, for a payment of $50,000 from the League, agreed to what were described as "commitments to the League Competition" contained in clause 2 thereof
Essentially the commitments required the player for up to eight years not to enter into any "Contractual Arrangement" relating to playing in any "Match" or "Competition" other than the Rugby
League Competition which the ARL and the
League "do and will in the future conduct". There are other commitments in support of that fundamental obligation, including an obligation not to play in any Match or Competition other than for a club or team approved or sanctioned in writing by both the ARL and the League. I should add that the commitments apply both during the term of the Current
Playing Contract and for a reducing set of alternative periods set out in the Schedules to that agreement. I do not need for present purposes to elaborate further on the restraints that the player thereby undertook. Their legality was not in issue before me and are the subject of separate Federal Court proceedings.
Mr Fittler on 4 April 1995 for a consideration of $300,000 and for a
further guarantee to meet any shortfall between the payment received by the player under his contract to play in the League Competition and $500,000, undertook equivalent obligations to those of Mr Sing.
I accept the evidence given that neither player entered into these further Loyalty Agreements at the request of the Penrith Club or with the knowledge of the Penrith Club at the time they were entered into, nor in a form which mirrored any condition the Penrith club sought to attach to its
Commitment Agreement.
 
The
Super League Arrangements with Penrith Club and Players - 3 May 1995
The next significant event is Penrith Club's entry into what I will conveniently call the Super League arrangements. These involved a Deed of
Indemnity and Heads of Agreement both dated May 1995. Under these arrangements speaking generally, Penrith Club in conjunction with an only partially associated entity and licensee AH PE Pty Limited, committed itself to supporting the competing Rugby League football competition called colloquially "Super
League" set up under the control of News Limited and its associated entities. It is not disputed that, as decided by the arbitrator (page 31 paragraph (xii) in the Award of 22 December 1995): "When the Club signed the agreement with News Limited on 3 May it did so with the intention which it published and continued to publicly maintain after 3 May 1995 that it would in the 1996 and following years participate not in the
Premiership Competition conducted by the New South Wales Rugby
League and the Australian Rugby League but in the competition proposed to be conducted by the Super League organisation, News
Limited and Star League Pty Limited. This was expressly and very clearly admitted in paragraph 5 of the Defence filed by the Club."
Parties to the Deed of Indemnity (DX5) were News Limited, its affiliate,
Star League Pty Limited, AH PE Pty Limited and the
Penrith Club. Whereas, the
Heads of Agreement (DX6) were between News Limited, Star League Pty Limited and AH PE Pty Limited as licensee.
Those two agreements need to be read with the associated Super League Employment Contract for the players. This was between the entity referred to as "SL Employer" being the relevant licensee (AH PE Pty Limited), the relevant "SL Player" (being the relevant player) and
Star League Pty Limited. To that Employment Contract is attached what are termed "Star League Standard Terms" (DX11). Those terms are important. They make clear the basis of the proposed "SL Competition", that is the Super
League Competition set up by News Limited and Star League Pty Limited. The
Licensee AH PE Pty Limited is licensed to participate in the case of the
Penrith Club (with similar associated licensees for each of the other clubs who are to participate in the Super League competition).
AH PE Pty Limited commenced as a shelf company associated with the law firm Atanaskovic Hartnell (hence the initials "AH"). The "PE" refers to
Penrith.
The licensee issues what are called Club Shares to the Club. These appear to be matched by an equal number of shares held for the
News Limited interests. The precise rights attaching to these two groups of shares are not before me. Mr Levy, the Deputy Chief Executive of Penrith Club was not aware of the number of other shares but it was accepted that the hareholding if
Penrith Club was not a majority one. It was also common ground that the
Penrith Club did not control a majority of the Board though had Board representation. At the time, it was common ground that the Leagues were in a bitter and protracted dispute with the News Limited interests in control of
Super League.
Mr Levy, whom I found a frank and candid witness, though on the potential flexibility of the Super League arrangements somewhat disingenuous, gave evidence that the end result of these arrangements was that the team which would participate in the 1996 Super League Competition is the corporation AH
PE Pty Limited which holds the licence to play in that Super League
Competition.
This was the corporation which under these arrangements both employs the players and employs and controls the coaching and other administrative and training staff involved in participation in that
Competition (transcript 100). Mr Levy agreed that the players participating in the Super League Competition were required to sign the Standard Employment
Contracts to which I have earlier referred and to which were incorporated the "Star League Standard Terms" (transcript 101).
Mr Levy acknowledged that the licence held by AH PE Pty Limited was one which could under the documentation be terminated, sold or transferred by the
Star League Employer, that is, the Licensee, to any other entity; this arose pursuant to clause 7 of the Star League Standard Terms in the event of player default under the terms (transcript 102).
By virtue of clause 2 of the Deed of Indemnity, and as confirmed by Mr
Levy in evidence, (transcript 100) Penrith Club released and discharged each of the Rugby League players now employed by the Club from the provisions of the relevant Playing Contract to whichsuch player is a party. This was agreed by the Penrith Club as being "to the extent necessary for such Player to observe or perform his obligations under any contract of employment such player has already entered into or hereafter entered into with Licensee ...
including without limitation, in the case of a Player, such
Player's
SLS Contract (including the Standard Terms referred to therein)..." "The SLS Contract" is the employment contract between the Licensee and each Player (see recital B). This was to operate from 1 January 1996. It was acknowledged that: "the intent and effect of each such release and discharge being, inter alia, that such player may perform his obligations under his Super
League Contract (including my (sic) such Standard
Terms) on and from 1 January 1996 without breaching his contract or other arrangements with Club ".
It is a proper conclusion conceded by Mr Levy from that documentation and its consequential practical effect that Penrith Club could not now participate in any Rugby League Competition, including Super League, as for practical purposes it had thereby transferred its football operations to a licensee not presently under its control, AH PE Pty Limited.
It is of course equally clear that such arrangements would preclude either Penrith Club, or the player, from playing in the Rugby League competition organised by the Leagues. However, there are also a number of features of the Super League arrangements which make playing in the Super
League Competition for AH PE Pty Limited radically different from playing under the Playing Contract for the Penrith
Club. This is when regard is had to the documentation earlier referred to and in particular the Star League
Standard Terms attached to the employment contract required of every player. I set these differences out below: 
The player is employed not by Penrith
Club but by the Licensee, an entity not under the present control of Penrith Club. 
Not only is the employment contract liable to termination upon a player default (see clause 7 of the Standard Terms) "but also is liable to be assigned by the SL Employer (the licensee AH PE Pty Limited) to any Entity, (meaning any club not a party to the agreement) which holds or will hold a licence granted by Star League Pty Limited to the SL Employer in relation to participation by the SL Employer in the SL Competition"; see definition of "Entity" and "Licence" and "SL Employee" in clause 1.1 of the Standard Terms and clause 13 of the Standard Terms. 
Employment under these arrangements is as a "full-time employee of the
SL Employer" unless Star League Pty Limited and the relevant Licensee otherwise consent; clause 2.1 (b) of the Standard Terms. This is in contrast to the provisions of the Playing Contract and in particular the express preservation of the player's opportunity to pursue his usual occupation in the final proviso to clause 3 thereof. 
Promotional opportunities are wholly controlled by the SL Employer and
Star League Pty Limited though consent may not be unreasonably withheld in certain limited circumstances; compare clause 4.4 of the Standard Terms to the relative absence of control of such opportunities under the Playing Contracts.

The central provision of the Standard Terms (clause 4.1(a)) is that the player shall "play Rugby
League football for the SL Employer at such times and at such venues as SLL may nominate". "Rugby League football" is defined (clause .1) as meaning, from time to time, "the code of football known as
Rugby League and all hybrids or similar manifestations of such game (including without limitation the game played in the SL Competition and Other
Competitions)".
There is nothing in the provisions of the Standard Terms which relate the
Rules of Rugby League football to those promulgated by either the ARL or the
Leagues.
It is significant that in Article 1 of the Articles of Association of the Penrith Club (to which, by clause 17 of the Playing Contract,
Penrith Club is also bound) "the game" is defined as meaning "the game of Rugby League
Football played in accordance with the laws laid down by the International
Rugby League Board as amended to meet local requirements". There is thus no necessary identity between the variations to the Rules that might be made by
Star League Pty Limited and the Rules that might apply in Rugby League as organised by the Leagues. The scope for divergence from the traditional rules is emphasised by the definition of "Other Competitions" in the
Star League
Standard Terms as meaning "any seven-a-side, ten-a-aside or eleven-a-side football competition, interstate representative football competition, international club football competition, international football competition or other football competition organised or arranged by or in conjunction with
SLL." 
Mr Levy acknowledged that a player under the Star League arrangements, while not playing a lot more matches, would be playing some more matches than under the existing arrangements; transcript 104. 
The Standard Terms require that the SL Player comply with "the
Player's Code" and to the extent applicable "the SL Rules". Mr Levy acknowledged that neither had yet been formulated, (in contrast to the very comprehensive Rules in the Player's Code applicable in relation to the
Leagues; transcript 105). 
The Standard Terms subject the player to disciplinary sanctions and disciplinary and appellate procedures, yet to be formulated and before a judiciary and appeals body, neither of which yet exists. This is in contrast to the detailed sanctions procedures and various judiciary and appeals bodies applicable to the Leagues and their Competition - see in particular Rules 9 through 35 inclusive of the League Rules and the various committees set up under Rule 2; transcript 105 and clause 4.5 of the Standard Terms. 
There is no opportunity under the full-time Super League arrangements to representcity,
State or country in games organised by the Leagues; contrast
Rules 7 and 8 of the League Rules which forbid a club granting a clearance for a player or otherwise entering into a contract or agreement with a player which precludes that player from playing or training in various such representative games; and see evidence of Mr Levy; transcript 96-7. 
The player is subjected to physical and drug testing, the basis and protocols for which have yet to be defined, though Mr Levy contended that these were being formulated; see transcript 106 and compare what can be taken in the absence of evidence to the contrary to be established facilities for drug testing having regard to the references thereto in the relevant Playing
Contract. Thus in particular clause 3(e) and clause 10(i) where reference is made to "The Australian Rugby Football League Limited Doping Policy and
Procedures List of Prohibited Drugs".

Clause 4.5(e) of the Standard Terms requires the player "to do such other things as the SL employer or SLL may reasonably require", whether through "an officer, coach, trainer, club health practitioner or other authorised person". Thus if the Defendants were forced into Super League against their wishes, they would be in the position if they wished to play football with Super League of having to comply with wishes of persons who were employees of the SL Employer; see Mr Levy's evidence at transcript 106. Mr
Levy then asserted that they would also be employed by the Penrith Club, but gave no explanation as to why that should necessarily be so. At transcript 107 the following question and answer ensued: "Q. Do you agree that, in fact, Penrith has, in effect, handed over the control of its football operations to an entity known as AH PE Pty Limited?
A. Correct." 
The player under clause 5.3 of the Standard Terms if requested by Star
League Pty Limited is required to disclose all sources of income. Mr
Levy gave evidence that this was for the purpose of enabling the Super League
Organisation to police their salary cap provisions, the salary cap being the overall limit on the spending by an individual licensee on its playing personnel. This was with the idea that every Club would have the same salary cap so that in financial terms all of the teams participating would be doing so on the basis of equal strength; transcript 107. 
Mr Levy confirmed that there were no such requirements in the Playing
Contracts, though there was a salary cap that the ARL is under. Such cap imposed no obligation on the player to disclose to the ARL income or tax returns; see transcript 108.
 
Clause 7.1 of the Standard Terms provides different rights with respect to termination which are distinctly more onerous on the player than those under the Playing Contract. Thus the player can be terminated if the player fails to perform any of its obligations under the agreement which in the opinion of Star League Pty Limited is material and fails to rectify the failure within fourteen days of notification; or if for a period exceeding 120 days the player is in the reasonable opinion of two medical practitioners, one selected by Star League Pty Limited and the other by the Licensee (note not by the player) unable to participate in or train for the Super League Competition or any Other Competitions or rugby league football competitions generally as may be required under this Agreement during that period. Finally the player faces termination if he fails to pay any fines notified to him under clause .2 within five business days of first receiving the relevant notice (being fines which the SL Employer or the Licensee may at its discretion impose where the agreement might otherwise be terminated). 
In contrast, as Mr Levy acknowledged (transcript ), the provisions for termination under clause 9 of the Playing Contract for failure to play the
Game for the Club "conscientiously and to the best of his ability and skill", involves the safeguard of a special tribunal. This is one which the player is represented.
The Tribunal determines what action should be taken for misconduct or acting in a manner inconsistent with the integrity of the game under clause 10. The Playing Contract then provides for a special hearing at which the player is entitled to be legally represented and at which the rules of natural justice shall apply, before any termination can be imposed. 
Finally, there is an arbitration mechanism to deal with disputes in the Playing Contract (clause 14) which is wholly absent from the Standard
Terms.
I should add that the Heads of Agreement to which I have earlier referred reinforces the position that the relevant licensee is AH PE Pty
Limited. Mr
Levy acknowledged in cross- examination in regard to this documentation, that "under the Super League Competition format there is no such thing as grades", that is to say "no first grade, reserve grade or any other grade type classification of players from the club, there is only in effect one grade".
Mr Levy said that while so far as Penrith was concerned it would be entering under the Super League arrangements teams for various grades, there was nothing in the documentation that provided for the Super
League arrangements that required grades; transcript 115. What was laid down in the
Heads of Agreement, at clause 3.5 was that AH
PE Pty Limited would participate in the Super League Competition "with its best team".
Significantly, under clause 2(c) of the Deed of Indemnity, the Club agrees to use its best endeavours to ensure that each player - which would include the Defendants - observes and performs his Super League Contract (including any such Standard Terms) on the footing that the relevant
Employment
Period commences on 1 January 1996.
In aid of that provision, Penrith Club agrees with News Limited, Star
League Pty Limited and the Licensee "to take all steps, execute all documents and do all things reasonably required by News to give effect to clauses and or as reasonably required by News otherwise to ensure that the intended result of clauses 1 and 2 are achieved".
Under clause 2(e) of the Deed of Indemnity, Penrith Club agrees with News
Limited, Star League Pty Limited and the Licensee to take such action "as News may request in writing" "to progress or further or ensure the success of the
Proposal (as referred to in the Heads of Agreement) ... (which action may be required despite the fact that such specific action was not expressly so contemplated)".
The "Proposal" referred to in the Agreement is essentially as set out in
Recital A, namely: "Setting up the system for a rugby league football competition which is an alternative to that competition run by or in conjunction with the New South Wales Rugby League
Limited and the Australian
Rugby Football League Limited".
I quote these provisions as the Penrith Club contended in argument that it had not been established that the formal contractual arrangements between the Penrith Club and the Super League Entities would operate so inflexibly as to preclude the Plaintiffs offering to the Defendants (but only if they wish to take it up) the opportunity to provide positions in a team in the Super
League Competition in which the Plaintiff is participating. The Plaintiff contended in argument that it can readily be inferred (having regard to the significance of the Defendants as players and the commercial importance of accommodating them as players and the commercial importance of accommodating them as players) that arrangements could readily be made to field them "in any suitable team". In that context the Plaintiff contended that it was to be borne in mind that the obligations of the employer are to pay the player, and offer to the employee work of the general kind which it is assumed that the parties to the contract expect should be performed.
The Plaintiff also contended in argument that whether a footballer can be said to be playing "for the Club" is a question of fact. Thus if the player plays the game of football pursuant to a contract with the Club, on terms whereby he is remunerated by the Club, in circumstances where the Club is a participant in commercial arrangements pursuant to which the teams will be fielded, and where that latter activity is within the objects of the Club which include assisting other parties to field teams, then the conclusion may readily be reached that the player is playing the game "for the Club". To these considerations was to be added the circumstance that it is commonly known and understood between the parties and generally, that the Penrith Club will be participating in the 1996 Super League Competition.
Finally
Mr Levy by affidavit on 1 February 1996 asserted: "2. Should the Defendants return to Penrith they could do so on either of two bases:- by entering into a new agreement on suitable terms with the
Super League structure, subject to the mutual agreement of all parties concerned; or by continuing their contract with the Plaintiff who could make suitable arrangements to have them played in a premiership competition at the highest level in which the Penrith district will be participating.
Notwithstanding the Super League documentation referring to the entity AH PE Pty Limited, I am absolutely certain that such documentation would not impede the Plaintiff providing players of the outstanding calibre of the Defendants to play rugby league football for the Penrith district.
The Penrith district will retain the same culture as in previous years. Its showpiece will continue to be Panthers (Panthers Licensed Leagues Club) with which the football arm will continue to be closely affiliated and identified "
It is appropriate that I deal briefly with these contentions at this point, as they affect the overall factual matrix to the Playing Contracts, against which subsequent events are to be considered.
Taking the last contention first, it is perfectly clear from the Star
League contractual arrangements to which I have earlier referred that the player is not employed "by the Club" but by the Licensee, and is automatically released to the extent necessary from the Playing
Contracts for this purpose and under circumstances in which the Penrith Club is obliged to bring about that result. The very detailed requirements of the Star League Standard Terms for players pre-suppose a totally incompatible system of control and supervision both of the players and of the game than is incorporated in the
Playing Contracts. This must be so, even were the Playing Contracts capable of operating, as the Penrith Club contends, in circumstances where there is no participation in the League's Premiership Competition (a contention to which I return later). That the Penrith Club is loosely said to be participating in the 1996 Super League Competition does not alter the legal position so clearly established by the documents themselves. This is so even if it be the case that the
Penrith Club is associated with the separate legal entity, which it does not presently control, known as the Licensee.
To suggest, as does Mr Levy, with no evidence in support of that from the
News Limited interests, that the Defendants could return to
Penrith Club on a basis where they could forego Super League playing arrangements for continued participation "in a premiership competition at the highest level in which the
Penrith district will be participating", is disingenuous. If it is suggested that the latter premiership competition were Super League, why would Super
League vary its arrangements for two players, no matter how eminent, for playing arrangements radically different from Super League, if not incompatible? And if the latter premiership competition were in fact the
League's, how could Penrith Club participate with a team of first class standard when its other players were playing Super League - even if
News
Limited and its affiliates agreed? There is no evidence that it could in reality find players for two first class teams without diluting the standard of each. Common sense indicates the contrary.
Nor is it to the point to suggest that it must be established by the
Defendants that the formal contractual arrangements between the Penrith Club and the Super League Entities would operate "so inflexibly as to preclude the
Penrith Club offering to the Defendants the opportunity to provide positions in a team in the Super
Lease Competition in which the Plaintiff is participating". In circumstances where the documentation clearly requires that the Defendants cease to the employed under their existing Playing Contracts, insofar at least as those Playing Contracts are incompatible with the very different arrangements contemplated by the Star League' Standard Terms, then no amount of flexibility could accommodate the
Super League arrangements to those in the Playing Contract itself. The differences which I have identified are radical. If the Plaintiff means that the Defendants would be offered a flexible choice to come across to play in the Super League Competition, as against having no games to play otherwise, (as Penrith Club does not claim to have sufficient players for more than one elite team), then that again requires the Defendants to forsake their Playing Contracts for radically different arrangements. Penrith Club would no doubt wish to accommodate the
Defendants if it could. But such accommodation of necessity involves forsaking the Playing Contracts for employment with a different employer and under radically different employment arrangements. And of course there is no evidence from News Limited or its affiliates that it would offer such flexibility, even were it in its commercial interests to do so, as seems dubious.
 .
Indeed work of the kind which the Playing Contracts contemplate is of a very different nature to that contemplated by the Super
League arrangements; the one is part-time, the other full-time; each is with different employers, one the Penrith Club the other a licensed shelf company; one is personal to the employer, the other liable to be assigned. And, most fundamentally, one contemplates games played under the League's established structure, being the
Premiership Competition games with availability for representative games, whilst the other involves games under an entirely different administration much of which has yet to be put in place and for a competition in hostile opposition to the League's competition. No matter how friendly personal relations may continue to be between the Defendants and the Penrith Club or individuals there, that gulf could not realistically be ignored.
 
Correspondence leading to the claimed Repudiation and Acceptance - the
Defendants join Eastern Suburbs
This then was the setting for the letter written by Mr Wayne Beavis of
All Sports, the managers for the Defendants, on 27 June 1995 to Mr Levy as
Deputy Executive of the Penrith
Club. The letter written on behalf of Mr
Fittler, is as follows: "We act for the abovenamed Player, a member of your Club's
First
Grade side.

As you are aware, Brad signed a loyalty agreement with the
Australian Rugby Football League Limited and New South Wales
Rugby League Limited - the Leagues - on 4 April 1995. That agreement obliges Brad not to play with any
Club other than one affiliated with the Leagues for a period of eight (8) years.

It is now public knowledge that at some time thereafter your
Club entered into a franchise agreement with News Limited's
Super League whereby Penrith will field a team in the proposed
Super League competition. The Club proceeded to enter into that agreement fully aware that our client and a number of other members of the First Grade side had signed loyalty agreements with the Leagues.

One consequence of this action by the Club is to put our client's playing contract in conflict with his loyalty agreement. Another more important consequence is that such action on the part of the club constitutes a fundamental breach of our client's playing contract insofar as it is implied by that Agreement that at all times the Club will ensure that it would maintain its position as a member Club of the Winfield
Cup conducted by the Leagues. It is now apparent that your
Club will not be a participant in any competition conducted by the Leagues after the conclusion of the current season given the announcement by Super League officials that its competition is to commence in early 1996.

Our client has received advice that the Club's action is either a repudiation or anticipatory repudiation of our client's playing contract. For our client's part, he elects to accept such repudiation or anticipatory repudiation thereby terminating his playing contract at the cessation of your affiliation with the Leagues at the end of the 1995 Season.

Hence, our client now considers himself free to negotiate his playing future with other Australian Rugby League Clubs to take effect as and from the commencement of the 1996 Season consistent with his loyalty agreement."
To this, Mr Levy replied to Mr Beavis on 11 July 1995 in the following terms: "Thank you for your letters of 27 June 1995 in relation to Brad and Matt.

Penrith District Rugby League Football Club Limited (the "Club") entered into an agreement with News Limited and others on 03 May .

Due to the terms of that agreement, we do not accept that either
Brad or Matt's playing contracts have been breached by the Club in any way. You will, of course, be aware that a company called
AH PE Pty Limited will be playing in the Super League competition and until such time as the
Club enters the Super
League competition, we do not accept that any repudiation or anticipatory repudiation has taken place.

The Club, at this stage, has not finally decided whether it intends to enter the Winfield Cup competition next season, but we will let you know how that decision progresses. Whatever the outcome of that decision it does not necessarily affect the
Club's obligations to Brad and Matt or theirs to the Club until the expiry of their current playing contracts."
The final paragraph of the above letter is somewhat disingenuous. It should have been manifestly clear from the Super League agreements that the
Club's capacity to enter the Winfield Cup Competition in the 1996 season was incompatible with the Super League arrangements.
On 28 August 1995, Mr Beavis wrote in identical terms on behalf of Mr
Fittler and Mr Sing to Mr Levy seeking certain assurances.
I quote the relevant part of that letter: "1. That Penrith District Rugby League Football Club ("the
Club") will participate solely in the competition conducted by the Australian Rugby League and the New South Wales Rugby League ("the Leagues") in the 1996 Playing Season.
That the Club will not permit any of its first grade side to be diverted to an alternate side participating in any competition conducted by Star League Pty Limited or any associated entity during the 1996 Playing Season.
That the Club ensure that up to and including the 1996
Playing Season all sponsorship opportunities will be applied to the benefit of the Club's participation in the competition conducted by the Leagues and conversely that no such sponsorship opportunities will be directed to the benefit of any participation by the Club in any competition conducted by
Star League
Pty Limited or any associated entity.

Brad is well aware that Star League Pty Limited and the Club are challenging the Loyalty
Agreements made with the Leagues in the
Federal Court of Australia However, Brad is not willing to permit the Club to await the final outcome of those proceedings before providing your response to the above requested assurances. This is because our client has a Playing Contract with the Club whereby each party covenants to the other to participate in the competition conducted by the Leagues until the end of the 1996 Playing Season and the legality and operation of the said Playing Contract cannot be affected by the outcome of the Federal Court proceedings."
To that letter Mr Levy replied to Mr Beavis on 1
September 1995 with a letter erroneously headed "Re Brad Fittler". But it can be taken that a letter in identical terms was written in relation to Brad Fittler. I quote the relevant portion: "Adopting your numbering, I make the following comments: .
Penrith District Rugby League Football Club ("the Club") has not made a decision whether to apply for participation in the
ARL/NSW/RL Competition in 1996
The contractual relationships between the Club and each of our current players are confidential and not open to disclosure to other players.
The directors of the Club are under a legal obligation to ensure that the opportunities of the Club are for the benefit of the Club. The directors will continue to act in accordance with their obligations.
The arrangements between the Club and the Leagues are independent of arrangements between the Club and the players.
However, we understand Matt's concern and have answered your questions as comprehensively as is possible at this stage.
The Club is involved in legal proceedings and it must await the outcome. However it will continue to honour its obligation to Matt Sing."
It would appear that Mr Sing had already set about entering into a standard form Playing Contract with
Eastern Suburbs District Rugby League
Football Club Limited, by 24 August 1995. A defective contract was signed at a substantially increased annual playing fee, namely $275,00 for 1997, $300,000 for 1998 and $325,000 for 1999. It will be seen that the remuneration omits the 1996 year. It was replaced by the Playing Contract subsequently entered into by Mr Sing on 15 September 1995 with Eastern
Suburbs District Rugby
League Football Club Limited with the foregoing remuneration correctly related to the years 1996, 1997 and respectively.
Mr Fittler entered into a Playing Contract with Eastern Suburbs District
Rugby League Football Club Limited on 5 October 1995, also at substantially increased remuneration, viz $700,000 for 1996, $725,000 for 1997, $750,000 for , $775,000 for 1999 and $800,000 for the year 2000.
I now return to the correspondence which preceded the last two mentioned
Playing
Contracts.
On 6 September 1995 All Sports replied to Penrith Club's letter in the following terms: "Regrettably, the responses set out in that letter fall short of the assurances sought in our correspondence of 28 August last.

Brad is entitled to those assurances and is also entitled to rely on a covenant in his playing contract whereby each party covenants to the other to participate in a rugby league competition conducted by the Leagues until the end of the 1996 season.
 
Your response undoubtedly constitutes a breach of Brad's playing contract and particularly the aforesaid covenant and a repudiation of his playing contract on the part of the Club.

Hence Brad now instructs that he accepts the Club's repudiation of his playing contract dated 6 July 1994 and the collateral agreement dated 26 August 1993 and hereby terminates that playing contract and collateral agreement forthwith." 
I have assumed that a similar letter would have been written on behalf of
Mr
Sing. I should add that the reference to "the collateral agreement" earlier referred to in Mr Fittler's letter is not relevant for present purposes.
Mr Levy on 8 September 1995 responded to Mr Beavis as follows: "Thank you for your letter of 6
September 1995.

I do not accept that the response set out in my letter of 28
August 1995 falls short of your request for assurance. There is no such covenant in Brad's current playing contract requiring the Club to participate in a Rugby League
Competition conducted by the Leagues.

Further, my response could no way be construed as grounds for repudiation of Brad's playing contract.

Brad is not entitled to terminate his playing contract and the
Club reserves its right to bring an action against him if he breaches it."
The acceptance of the repudiation which Mr Fittler and Mr Sing rely upon, is that contained in the letter of 6 September 1995 (according to the points of claim submitted to the arbitration which took place on 22 December before the Appeals Committee of the League). The Penrith Club does not appear to have relied upon Mr Beavis' letter of 27 June written on behalf of Mr
Fittler as itself constituting a breach, according to paragraph 8 of the decision of the Appeals Committee of 22 December 1995. This was not disputed before me. Paragraph 8 goes on to say "Indeed, the Club's case is that
Fittler's and Sing's contracts with the Club remain on foot and bind them to play for Penrith. The position as at 6 September 1995 when Fittler purported to accept the Club's alleged breach of contract was at 7that time neither party had purported to terminate the contract other than by the letter of 27
June 1995".
On 8 September 1995 Mr Levy replied to Mr Beavis' letter of 6 September in the following terms: "Thank you for your letter of 6 September 1995.

I do not accept that the response set out in my letter of 28 
August 1995 falls short of your request for assurance.

There is no such covenant in Brad's current playing contract requiring the club to participate in a rugby league competition conducted by the Leagues. My response could in no way be construed as grounds for repudiation of Brad's playing contract.

Brad is not entitled to terminate his playing contract and the club reserves it right to bring an action against him if he breaches it."
In the events that have happened, I do not consider that anything turns on whether the claimed repudiation and claimed acceptance of that repudiation were completed by 27 June 1995 or 6 September 1995. One difference, were this to matter, between the earlier letter of 27 June 1995 from Mr Beavis and the later letter of 6 September 1995 is this. In the former letter, the termination is stated as occurring "at the cessation of your affiliation with the Leagues at the end of the 1995 season", with freedom claimed in that letter thereafter to negotiate the players playing future to take effect as and from the commencement of the 1996 season. Whereas, in the letter of 6
September 1995 the termination is expressed to be "forthwith". Thus for that reason, should it matter, the purported termination, if it occurred, would not have occurred until at the earliest 8 September 1995. That in fact is how the matter was argued before me. Subsequent Events leading to
Arbitration of the
Dispute
The next letter that was written was from Mr Levy to Mr Fittler on 29
September 1995 in the following terms: "We have read reports in the media regarding your agreement to play with Easts in 1996 and beyond.

You are under contract to Penrith for the 1996 season. The Club has not released you from that contract. The Club has honoured its contract with you and intends to continue to do so. We expect you to continue to honour your obligations with the Club.

Your so-called
Loyalty Agreement with the ARL does not affect your contract with the Club.

Brad, we in no way wish to treat you harshly in respect of your football career, but the fact remains that players contracted to
ARL aligned clubs will have to complete their contracts before starting with Super League. If this situation changes we may re-consider our position.

I confirm that you will continue to receive our full support as a most valued member of our playing staff.

Please confirm or deny the reports regarding your intentions in ."
To this letter Mr Fittler responded with a curt reply on 11 October 1995 saying "the opinions contained in that letter are without substance" and asking that all future correspondence be directed to the solicitor's office.
There was subsequent correspondence between the Chief Executive Mr Quayle of the ARL with Mr Cowan, Chief
Executive of Penrith Club where, in response to Mr Quayle's request for confirmation that the Players Contracts with
Penrith Club had been terminated, Mr Cowan replied: "Brad Fittler and Matt
Sing are both under contract with this Club for the 1996 season. At this stage it is not our intention to release the players from their contracts"; letter of 13 November 1995.
On 20 November steps were initiated for the dispute to be referred to an Appeals Committee. The matter was subsequently dealt with, following points of claim and points of defence and the hearing of oral argument, when the Appeals Committee gave its determination on 22 December
I should add that the Appeals Committee dealt with the matter pursuant to clause 14 of the
Playing Contracts and before a body of three Vice-Presidents of the League who, pursuant to the relevant Rules (see Part 1, Rule 2) appointed as an additional member of the Committee a legally qualified person Mr B W Collins,
QC. In my judgment of 30 January 1996 I pointed out that this was by no means compelled by the Rules, though open.
I should at this point record those relevant findings of fact of the
Committee which were accepted by both parties without dispute for the purposes of this appeal, to the extent that I have not already made reference to such findings. 
For the reasons given by Bradley Fittler, Matthew Sing and Mr Beavis it is important for players to conduct a thorough preparation for each of the intensively competitive rugby league seasons lying ahead. 
This preparation involves considerable work and application from an individual point of view. This includes careful attention to diet and physical fitness.
Decision of Appeals Committee 22 December 1995 at page 12 "(vii) Both Sing and Fittler have already commenced to train with the Eastern Suburbs Club for whom they have signed to play commencing in the 1996 premiership season.

In addition to footballing aspects of pre-season preparation there are a number of important considerations personal for each player the most significant being the players living and domestic arrangements.
At page 13 
The 1995 season was all but completed overall and the club had completed all of the matches in the premiership competition which it was due to play having regard to the fact that it had not made the final 8."
At page 29 "(iv) Each of the players lived in Penrith at the time he signed the playing contracts at the time the letters were written in
September 1995.

The NSWLR was definitely proposing to conduct and would in all certainty conduct a premiership competition as it and its predecessor had been doing since early this century. see, for example the judgment of the High Court of Australia in Wayde v
New South Wales
Rugby League Limited <case>; [(1985) 180 CLR 459] at -462.

The premiership competition itself begins in February or
March of each year.

Pre-season competitions of different kinds are customarily condensed before that time (in fact each of the player's contracts refers to 'pre-season competition's such as the Challenge Competitionl/Sevens Competition'. Both these competitions are conducted by the NSWRL and involve premiership clubs including Penrith (at page 30).

As we have concluded players who wish to move ftom one club to another such as Fittler and Singftom Penrith to Easts find it necessary to make arrangements concerning their permanent accommodation so as to be conveniently located for training, club commitments and home games to be played by the new club.

Pre-season training for the season commenced in
February/March begins in the latter part of the preceding year. Both Fittler and Sing have been training with Easts Rugby
League Football Club for sometime. (at 31).
 .
The Appeals Committee concluded at paragraph 59: "The decision of the committee is that the Playing Contracts between Bradley
Scott Fittler and the Penrith District Rugby
League Football Club Limited and Matthew Charles Sing and the
Penrith Distnct
Rugby League Football Club Limited have been validly terminated by each of the players."
For the reasons stated in my earlier judgments of 30 January 1996 this
Court may consider the dispute before it without being bound by the decision of the arbitrator or as required to treat it as "final and binding", having regard to the contrary intention which I have concluded was expressed in the arbitration agreement; see [s28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s28.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) .
I turn now to the Playing Contracts themselves, as entered into by Messrs
Fittler and Sing with the Penrith Club. In so doing I need to consider their effect in conjunction with the Memorandum and Articles of Association of
Penrith Club itself, and those of the League and to the extent relevant the
ARL, together with the Rules and Regulations of the League earlier referred to.
I have earlier identified the way the Playing Contract is linked to them and the extent.
 
THE PLAYING CONTRACTS
Each of the
Playing Contracts is a standard form playing contract issued in a form approved by the League and headed at the top by the logo of the
League and of the ARL. By clause 1 the relationship is acknowledged to be one of employer and employee.
By clause 2 the term of the agreement expires on 31 August 1996 so that its practical effect is that it is now only to operate for one further playing season. I should at this point note that it appears that the arrangements with the Eastern Suburbs Club in respect of each of the
Defendants permits the termination of the respective Playing Contract for each of the Defendants in the event that a Court should determine that the Penrith contracts are enforceable.
The principal obligations for the provision of services by the player are contained in clause 3. Because of its importance, I quote that clause in full: "3. SERVICES 
The Player will whenever and wherever reasonably required, during the playing season(s) of the New south Wales Rugby League Limited ("the
League"), well and faithfully and to the best of his ability and skill play the Game for the Club in such team and grade as the Club shall from time to time specify; report promptly for, and participate fully in, all pre-season and post-season
Games and all training sessions conducted by, or participated in, by the Club; play the Game in a sportsmanlike manner and in accordance with its rules; obey all reasonable directions of the club relating to training for and playing the Game; undergo drug testing if and when requested to do so by the
Club or the League; agree to be bound by and observe the provisions of the
Memorandum and Articles of Association and Rules of the Club, the League and the Australian
Rugby Football League Limited ("the Australian Rugby League"); act dress and behave in public in a professional manner; not play in any Rugby League Football match other than for the Club or in a representative match sanctioned or approved by the League or the Australian Rugby League (except with the express prior written consent of the Club); join and remain a member of the Club throughout the period of this Agreement; complete the New South Wales Rugby League Player
Registration Form; participate in all activities required by the Club or the
League for the promotion of the Game and in particular: punctually attend public functions organised or supported by the Club or the League; and punctually attend appointments arranged by the Club or the
League to make appearances in public or on radio or television.
 
PROVIDED that such participation under this sub-clause shall, if required by the Club, be not more than four hours in any one month AND PROVIDED FURTHER that such participation shall not interfere with the usual occupation of the Player. Any fee payable to the Player by the League for such participation shall be negotiated between the Player and the League." .
The definitions in clause 19 are relevant to the foregoing clause. Thus words have the meanings assigned to them in the Memorandum and Articles of
Association of the League and "the Rules" mean "the Rules and Regulations of the League". "The Game" means "the Game of Rugby League Football". All definitions are "except where inconsistent with the context".
Clause 4 contains the provisions for payment, read with Schedule 1.
Significantly, the remuneration applicable both to Mr Fittler and Mr Sing is not remuneration based on paragraph 1 of Schedule 1. That provides for a payment per Premiership Competition Match. Premiership Competition means "the
New South Wales Rugby League Premiership Competition presently conducted by the League or any competition subsequently replacing the same" see clause 19.
Rather the remuneration is what is termed a "playing fee" within clause 4(2) rather than the premiership competition match fees referred to in clause 4(1).
I should add that the Playing Contract uses upper and lower case for the defined term "Premiership Competition", for no apparent reason.
That fee was in the case of Mr Fittler $115,000 in 1994, $150,000 in 1995 and $155,000 in 1996; see paragraph 2 of Schedule 1.
Paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 insofar as it deals with playing fees rather than the premiership competition match fee presupposes that a figure has been stated in column 1 of paragraph 2 though in fact no such figure is stated.
Thus paragraph 3 may not have any application in the present circumstances.
However, paragraph of Schedule 1 does appear to have application. It divides the remuneration by way of playing fee (or if applicable, premiership competition match fee) as to 88.46% for remuneration for actually playing "in all matches of the Premiership Competition in which the Player is selected by the Club or as a sick leave payment in respect of matches in which the Player is unable to play because of injury or illness sustained during the
Premiership Competition", with the remaining 11.54% being paid leave made up of 5 weeks holiday leave and 1 week long service leave respectively.
Paragraph (5) of Schedule 1 appears not to be relevant since the relevant column has not been completed. Paragraph 6 provides as follows: "Payment for any matches played, other than premiership competition matches shall be determined at the sole discretion of the Club."
It appears from material submitted by
Mr Levy in a memorandum of 2
February 1996, agreed between the parties that no player at the Penrith Club under the existing Playing
Contracts receives remuneration solely by way of
Premiership Competition Match fees. However, the more junior players receive a combination of playing fee plus Premiership Competition Match fees, the latter of smaller amount than the playing fee, around a range of $1,000 to $3,000. Mr
Sing illustrates that. However, over a season, those Premiership Competition
Match fees are cumulatively, not insignificant.
Finally, there is a reference also to remuneration in clause 28, where each player receives on a pro rata basis a share in % of the total prize money received from the pre-season competition such as the Challenge
Cup/Sevens Competition, being in each case League sponsored competitions.
There is another provision of the Contract, clause 8, dealing with the consequences for apportionment of the Playing Fee which ordinarily is payable in two equal half-yearly instalments. This apportionment arises if, as clause
A provides, "prior to the commencement of the Premiership Competition in any year" ... "the Club shall form the opinion that" the Player has failed to recover from an injury earlier sustained so as to become unfit to play the
Game for the Club in consequence of such injury. In those and analogous circumstances, depending on a medical examination in accordance with the procedures laid down with clause 8, the player, where judged unfit to play, at the Club's election suffers a termination of the agreement discharging the
Club from liability but requiring the Club nonetheless to pay a pro rata portion of the playing fee accruing to the player "from the date on which the
Player commencing training with the Club for the season to the date on which this agreement is terminated", see clause 8A(b).
The Defendants contend that under the Super League arrangements, it is clear that this apportionment procedure could not apply since training is all year round and there is no longer any reference point in the Premiership
Competition relevant to the Super League games as such. Thus the Defendant contends that the apportionment clause could in those circumstances not have the intended operation, this being to the detriment of the player.
So far as the references to Premiership Match fees in paragraph of
Schedule 1 are concerned, the Penrith Club contends that they have no significance so far as Messrs Fittler and Sing are concerned because they are not paid on a Premiership Competition Match fee basis. That is not however correct so far as Mr Sing is concerned as he is paid by a combination of
Playing Fee and Premiership Match fees. In any event for both Defendants, it is clear enough that the apportionment of the Playing Fee referred to earlier in paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 is predicated upon playing in all matches of the
Premiership Competition in which the Player is selected by the Club. These provisions would simply have no application in a context where no participation occurred in the Premiership Competition. Since the apportionment is necessary to meet the statutory obligations to pay holiday leave and long-service leave, the apportionment is of considerable significance, as otherwise the Penrith Club would not be in compliance with those statutory obligations unless separately agreed. There was no evidence of any such separate agreement for any player.
Finally, the fact that some players depend upon Premiership Competition
Match fees as a supplement to their playing fees indicates that at least for them the Playing Contract is predicated upon participation in the Premiership
Competition.
There is some force in the argument that a Playing Contract which is in standard form but adapted to particular remuneration arrangements of either Playing Fee alone or Playing Fee plus Premiership Competition Match payments, would more probably than not embody the same overall assumption as to participation in Premiership Competition Matches. This is reinforced by the wording of the earlier mentioned apportionment of 88.45%/11.54% and by the pro rata payment arrangements in the circumstances of clause 8, Those of course are universally applicable to all players of the Club.
Clause 5 provides for publicity. Relevantly, clause 5(a) states that: "The Player shall seek all necessary approvals and consents from the League" so far as writing columns for publication is concerned. Clause 5(b) precludes a Player deliberately making any statement or comment "detrimental to the interests, welfare or image of the Game or the League or the Club".
Clause 6 deals with injury insurance and health fund membership and has no particular significance for present purposes.
Clause 7 provides a warranty as to physical and mental condition and again, significantly,any dispute in regard to termination of the agreement for breach of warranty is subject to determination by the Appeals Committee of the
League.
 .
I have already referred to clause 8. It is worth noting that it is applicable should the Player suffer a pre-existing injury "prior to the commencement of the Premiership Competition". While the Penrith Club contends that simply provides a convenient time reference point and does not pre-suppose participation in the Premiership Competition, I have already shown how the clause in its provision for apportionment of the Playing Fee pre-supposes participation in at least a seasonal playing competition rather than one like Super
League contemplating training the whole year round.
Clause 9 provides for a mechanism to deal with the situation where the
Club concludes that "the Player is not playing the Game and training for playing the Game for the Club conscientiously and to the best of his ability and skill".
The determination of the Club is subject to important safeguards from the
Player's viewpoint whereby the Player may appeal to a tribunal consisting of one person nominated by the Player, one person nominated by the
Club and one person nominated "by the Chairman of the League".
Clearly that latter nomination and the appeal mechanism generally pre-suppose that the League Chairman will continue to effect such nomination.
In circumstances where the Club is no longer a participant in the League and in a hostile relationship, it would be quite unreasonable to expect the
Chairman of the League to continue to play the role there contemplated.
To this the Penrith Club replies that the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) in [s8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s8.html) provides for a default mechanism in the exercise of power to appoint an arbitrator. Hence the parties must therefore have had that in mind as a fall-back, such that the provision for the Chairman of the League was not so pivotal that the agreement necessarily proceeded only on the assumption of continued relationship with the League, though drafted with that clearly in contemplation.
In clause 10 provision is made for dealing with "misconduct". Clause (3)(j) provides for "misconduct" as including: "being guilty of any other form of conduct prejudicial to the Club or the League".
In clause 11, the Player acknowledges that he has had made available to him a copy of the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Club, the
League and the Australian Rugby
League together with the Rules and Regulations of the League and that he is aware of the provisions of those documents.
Again, this assumes their continued relevance.
Clause 14 provides that all disputes must, as a condition precedent to bringing any action in relation to the same, be referred to arbitration by the
Appeals Committee of the League, whose decision on all questions of fact shall be final and binding. Again, an arbitration clause of this sort, being an important protection to parties who may wish to avoid reference to the Court for reasons to do with publicity as well as access to expertise, reinforces the assumption of a continued friendly relationship with the League. Again, the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) in [s10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s10.html) provides a general power of the Court to fill the vacancy. Nonetheless it appears that the parties drafted their agreement on the assumption of a continued relationship with the League, even if such clause had its default provision under the statute.

The confidentiality provisions in clause 15 preclude disclosure of the terms of the agreement to any person or entity "other than the League". Again, this pre-supposes a continued association with the League.
In clause 17 the following provision appears under "Collateral
Agreements", "This Agreement embodies all of the terms of the agreement between the parties except those contained in the Memorandum and
Articles of Association of the Club and the Rules and
Regulations of the Club by which each party agrees to be bound.
Each party acknowledges that no representation has been relied upon in entering into this Agreement which has not been expressed herein."
The Defendants contend that when that obligation is read with the relevant provisions of the Memorandum of Association of Penrith Club, this by necessary implication if not explicit express provision binds the Penrith
Club in various ways to the Memorandum and Articles of Association and Rules of the
League.
Thus under clause 2 of the Memorandum of Association of Penrith Club it is provided that "the Company shall affiliate with the
New South Wales Rugby League
Limited..."
That provision links with the Memorandum of Association of the League and in particular clause 4(1) which provides as follows: "The League may grant affiliation to any organisation or body of persons formed for the purpose of conducting a competition in the metropolitan area of Sydney, which competition is not confined to terms formed within the boundaries of any one
District Club on such terms and conditions as the Board of
Directors determine."
It might be said that the supposition or assumption underlying clause 2 of the Memorandum of Association of Penrith Club in its imposition of an obligation to affiliate, is the continuance of amicable relations between the
Club and the League rather than the entry into of hostile Super
League arrangements.
Reinforcing that association is the requirement of clause 10 of the
Memorandum of Association of Penrith
Club that no amendment may be made to its
Memorandum of Association until approved by the League with a corresponding provision in relation to the Articles of Association in Article 34.
Furthermore, any question as to the interpretation of the Articles of Penrith
Club must be referred in writing for determination by the League and any inconsistency between the Articles under provision of the constitution of the
League is invalid to the extent of the inconsistency; see Article 63. Articles , 74 and 75 of the Articles of Association of the League, under the heading "[Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of Clubs" reinforces the close dependency of Clubs' constitutions to the aims and wishes of the League.
In clause 4 of the
Memorandum of Association of Penrith Club are the stated objects of the company. Object 4(b), not expressed however in terms of obligation, is "to enter teams in the Sydney Rugby League Premiership
Competition or such other competition or competitions in which the League may invite the Club to participate ".
However, Object (f) of clause 4 is wider in scope and provides: "to establish support, maintain, train, coach and field in
Rugby League football matches, teams of Rugby League Footballers and to promote the status of professional Rugby League
Footballers, or to assist other parties to such ends and to assist Rugby
League Footballers generally."
The Penrith Club points out that such an object would in its concluding words permit not only the fielding of teams by Penrith Club itself, but also assisting other parties and in that sense would permit assistance to an associated entity such as is contemplated in Super League.
To this, the Defendant would reply that whatever scope clause 4(f) might give to assistance of other parties, for Penrith Club to hand over its football operations to AH PE Pty Limited, a company not even presently controlled by Penrith Club, is the carrying out of a purpose not remotely within the Objects permitted by the Memorandum of Association of Penrith Club.
Returning to the specific clauses of the Playing Contract so far as material, clause 20, under "Duties of Player" deals with reporting of injuries and the like as well as promotional activities being precluded that are in conflict with any of the Club's major or minor sponsors. There is no express reference to the League in that clause and indeed clause 20(g) simply refers to "the playing of Games for the Club".
Clause 24, dealing with the suspension of a player, is predicated upon the suspension of the player by various League committees, namely the
Judiciary Committee, the Drugs Judiciary Committee or the Appeals Committee".
Clause 26 of the Playing Contract contains an agreement by the player which precludes the player entering into discussions to play the Game for any other club. This is with an exception in paragraph (a) whereby the Club is not to withhold consent once the Club "has completed its premiership competition commitments for that year". I note here that the reference to "premiership competition" is in the lower case, though there is nothing to suggest that that indicates an intention to denote any other competition than that conducted by the League. It certainly would not suggest the Super League competition carried on in hostile competition with the League.
Clause 26(b) precludes the earlier prohibition from applying in the case of the 1995 season with any of the four new clubs who had then joined the
Premiership Competition in that year, again predicating the arrangements upon the Premiership Competition.
Finally, attached to the Playing Contract and entered into pursuant to clause 3(j), is what is called the "Players Registration Form". Under it, the player agrees "to be bound by the provision of the Memorandum and Articles of
Association and Rules of the League Limited" and "to undergo the prescribed tests as laid down by the League Drug Control committee if requested to do so". There is also an authorisation "to the League" to use the name and photograph of the player for the purpose of promotion of the game subject to remuneration being paid by the League for such use.
Finally, the player agrees "to make myself available for selection for representative teams and acknowledge that if I am selected for but withdraw from such teams or make myself unavailable for such selection I will not be able to play for my Club in any game in which I would not have been able to play had I been a member of such representative teams ".
That last provision is closely linked to the Rules of the League which, in Rules 7 and 8 earlier referred to, prohibit a club from refusing to issue a clearance for a player or from entering into a contract or agreement with the player which precludes the player from playing or training "with any
Australian, State, State of Origin, Country of Origin, Combined Metropolitan,
Group or Inter-Group Team ...".
It is not disputed that the representative games their referred to are operated under the auspices of the League and thus pre-suppose a continued association with the League.
The Penrith Club contended that references to "the Game" in the Playing
Contract was simply defined in clause as "the game of Rugby League
Football". However, the Defendant contends that when considered in the context of the various references to the League and the express obligation of the
Player to comply with the provisions of the Memorandum and Articles of
Association of the League, as well as the subordination of the Club to the
League in its Club's Memorandum and Articles of Association all pointed to an underlying factual matrix whereby "the Game" was to be understood as the game as administered by the League. Thus clause 3(b) of the Objects of the League are: "to foster and control the game of Rugby League Football throughout the state of New South
Wales and the Australian
Territory and generally to take such action as may be considered conducive to its best interests ".
The Penrith Club contends that the references in clause 3 support the notion that this is a Playing Contract of a simple play and pay kind, with no necessary requirement that the play be in the Premiership Competition conducted by the League. Thus clause (h) in its prohibition on playing in any
Rugby League football match other than for the Club "or in a representative match sanctioned or approved by the League or the Australian Rugby League" is itself subject to the parenthetical exception where this is "with the express prior written consent of the Club". That is said by the Penrith Club to reinforce, along with the definition of the game as not specifically related to the game as conducted by the League, the notion that the Playing Contract, while designed to cater for participation in the Premiership Competition conducted by the League, can also operate without participation in that competition.
The provisions of the Playing Contract to which I will later refer, making reference to the League, are, according to the Penrith
Club, to be read as simply applicable while the Penrith Club is playing in the
Premiership Competition. The Plaintiff emphasises that if the League does not accept the application of the Club to play in the League, that, of itself, could not be expected to terminate the obligations of the Player to the Club or the Club to the Player. Such obligations of the Player as refer or relate to the Premiership
Competition or the League would simply be waived or rendered inapplicable, according to the Plaintiff.
One difficulty with this contention is that there is in fact a definition of "the Game" in the Articles of Association of Penrith Club itself, to which the Penrith Club is bound both by the force of its own constituent documents and by clause 17 of the Playing Contract. "The Game" is there defined as "the game of Rugby League Football played in accordance with the laws laid down by the International Rugby League
Board as amended to meet local requirements". Significantly, clause 19 of the Playing Contract provides both the simple definition of the Game as "the game of Rugby League Football" whilst earlier states that "Words have the meanings assigned to them in the
Memorandum and Articles of Association" (meaning those of Penrith Club). The latter may reasonably provide a gloss on the later simple definition of the
Game which is in no way inconsistent with that simple definition.
To this is to be added the provisions dealing with disciplinary matters under the rules of the League contained in Rules 27 to 35. The linkage between those disciplinary provisions in the Rules and the provisions dealing with misconduct and the integrity of the game in clause 10 of the Playing Contract is clearly evident.
I will return to that contention, after considering the other provisions of the Playing Contract and their interaction with the relevant constituent documents of both the Penrith Club and the League, as well as the Rules applicable to the League which accompany its constituent documents. That is in order to ascertain whether, there is a breach of an implied, or express and implied term, that the Penrith Club will either apply to continue in the
League, or will continue in the League, as a player in the Premiership
Competition. I will alternatively consider whether the Playing Contract would be frustrated in the event that the Penrith Club did not participate in the
Premiership Competition or did not participate, and in addition participated in the Super League Competition.
 
THE LEGAL QUESTIONS
There were two preliminary questions requiring prior decision dealt with in my two judgments of 30 January
The first was whether the decision of the Appeals Committee of the League of 22 December 1995 operates as an estoppel per rem judicatem, so precluding the Penrith Club from asserting that the Playing Contracts which it seeks to enforce have not been validly terminated.
The second was whether any decision by such Committee on any questions of fact in the course of making its determination operates as an issue estoppel so as to preclude Penrith Club from controverting such decision in this Court.
In my two judgments of 30 January 1996 I concluded that Penrith Club was not so precluded from asserting that the Playing Contracts which it seeks to enforce have not been validly terminated (being the dispute referred to the
Appeals Committee and determined in favour of the Defendants).
I next concluded that any arbitral decision on any questions of fact did not preclude
Penrith Club in this Court from asserting to the contrary in this Court or submitting further evidence. As it happens, there was no material dispute before me on many of the factual matters so decided.
The legal questions which remain, substantially as formulated by the parties, are set out below.

Question 1 -Whether, on the proper construction of each of the Playing
Contracts, including clause 17 and the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Penrith Club, and to the extent relevant, the Memorandum and Articles of
Association and the Rules and Regulations of the League, Penrith Club was under an express or implied term obliged to participate in the League
Premiership Competition presently conducted by the League? 
Question 2 - If question 1 is decided in favour of the Defendants, whether in the events that happened
Penrith Club repudiated its contract such repudiation being accepted by the Defendants, or whether, in any event, if the contract has not been validly terminated, Penrith Club is entitled to equitable relief whilst it threatens to breach the contract? 
Questions - In the alternative or in addition, whether the conduct of
Penrith Club more particularly described below, breached a term which was express (alternatively, partly express and partly implied) that the Defendants would be employed by the Penrith Club until 31
October 1996 to play Rugby
League football for Penrith Club; in the League Premiership Competition.
 (With both requirements to be satisfied)
The conduct in question 3 (as formulated by the Defendants), is that on May 1995 Penrith Club entered into an agreement (Exhibit DX5) with News
Limited, Star League Pty Limited and AH PE Pty Limited whereby AH PE Pty
Limited would participate in the proposed Super League Competition, and thereafter Penrith Club evidenced its intention that it would not itself employ the Defendants to participate in the ARL Premiership Competition or in any other Rugby League competition in 1996, but would use its best efforts to ensure the success of AH PE Pty Limited in the proposed Super League
Competition, using players released by it or otherwise induced by it to be employed by AH PE Pty Limited for that purpose.
I foreshadowed that I would consider this question on the alternative basis that requirement (a) alone may suffice. 
Question 4 - Even if the relevant Playing Contracts have the meaning for which Penrith Club contends, namely that on their proper construction Penrith
Club was not obliged to participate in the Premiership Competition: 
The entry by Penrith Club into the agreement of 3 May 1995 with News
Limited, Star League
Pty Limited and AH PE Pty Limited (Exhibit DX5) and/or
The announced intention of Penrith Club to participate in the Super
League Competition and not the Premiership Competition of the ARL and the
League, which I shall refer to collectively as "the Leagues "; and/or
The means of such participation and/or
The conduct of Penrith Club from August 1995 to seek to ensure the success of AH PE Pty Limited in the Super League Competition.
 were events which frustrated the contract and discharged both parties from further performance. 
Question 5 - Alternatively whether, if no frustrating event has yet occurred or will occur until Penrith
Club carries out its announced intention to participate in the Super League Competition, then no injunction should be granted to enforce a contract for which there is real prospect that it may later be discharged by frustration.
 
Question 6 - If the foregoing questions are decided in favour of Penrith
Club such that the Playing Contracts remain on foot and with no real prospect that they may later be discharged by frustration, whether Penrith Club is disentitled to equitable relief by way of injunction because: 
Of laches;
The grant of an injunction would place the Defendants in breach of their
Loyalty Agreement with the Leagues entered into on 3 April 1995;
The grant of an injunction would compel the Defendants either to forgo their chosen occupation or to carry out a contract of personal services; or
Such relief would sanction a failure by Penrith Club to act in accordance with its corporate objects and assist threatened acts of Penrith
Club which may be done otherwise in pursuance of its corporate objects, such failure being the failure to participate in the Premiership Competition, and such threat being the threat to participate in the Super League Competition.
These issues and events are to be considered against the terms of the relevant Playing Contracts earlier described and, so far as permissible, their factual matrix.
I deal first with Questions 1, 2 and 3 together as it is convenient to group these under the heading "Repudiation and Breach of Contract". I then deal with Questions 4 and 5 under the heading "Frustration", followed by
Question 6 under the heading "Discretionary Grounds for Denial of Injunction".
Repudiation and
Breach of Contract - Questions 1 to 3
At paragraph 48 of the decision of the Appeals Committee of 22 December it is concluded "That the parties to the Playing Contract intended that each player would Play for the Club in the NSWRL Premiership
Competition in the form then being conducted by the NSWRL.
In our view, the words used by the parties to the contract impose a corresponding obligation upon the Club to participate in the Premiership Competition ".
The arbitrators evidently did not rely upon the doctrine of frustration but rather the further finding that by the actions taken by the Penrith Club it evinced an intention not to be bound by the Playing Contract to participate in the League's Premiership Competition; see paragraph 57(VI) of the decision.
I am not of course bound by that conclusion or the basis for it. The proper starting point is an examination of the express terms of the Playing
Contract. As is said by Mason J in Codelfa Construction Pty Limited versus State
Rail Authority <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337] at 352 concerning surrounding circumstances: "The true rule is that evidence of surrounding circumstances is admissible to assist in the interpretation of the contract if the language is ambiguous or susceptible of more than one meaning. But it is not admissible to contradict the language of the contract when it has a plain meaning. Generally speaking facts existing when the contract was made will not be receivable as part of the surrounding circumstances as an aid to construction, unless they were known to both parties, although, as we have seen, if the facts are notorious knowledge of them will be presumed "
In the present case, the claimed ambiguity relates to the references to the League and the Premiership Competition in the
Playing Contract; in particular whether they bespeak the obligation earlier posited of the Penrith
Club, to participate in that competition or merely operate so long as the
Penrith Club in fact participated in that Premiership Competition, such that the Penrith Club could waive their application to the Player if it did not.
One can take it that in a standard contract of this sort, not materially varied, prior negotiations would centre only on price.
The express terms of the Playing Contract are replete with references to "the League" and to "the Premiership Competition" and contain no express provision to the effect that Penrith Club was obliged to participate in the
League Premiership Competition. However, I am satisfied that, as in Codelfa at 354, the assumption that the Penrith Club would participate in that
Competition was clearly "a matter which was in the common contemplation of the parties yet was not a contractual provision actually agreed upon, for the simple reason that it was a matter of common assumption ".
That it was a matter of common assumption is borne out by the acknowledged fact that at the time the Playing Contracts were entered into there was no other competition than the League's Premiership Competition and that competition had been conducted by the League since early this century.
However, to say that something "was a matter of common contemplation between the parties is not enough in itself to justify the implication of a term ... .
It must appear that the matter of common contemplation was necessary to give the contract business efficacy and that the term sought to be implied is so obvious that it goes without saying." Codelfa at 354 per Mason J.
Was that matter of common contemplation such as to justify the implication of a term as necessary to give the contract business efficacy?
When reference is made to the contract itself, there are some indications that the contract is flexible enough, to permit the player to compete in at least an occasional rugby league football match which might be other than for the
Club or other than in a representative match, sanctioned or approved by the
League or the Australian
Rugby League. Thus clause 3(h) of the Playing
Contract provides a parenthetical exception where the player obtains the express prior written consent of the club. Indeed clause 3, in terms, makes no reference to playing in the Premiership Competition as such. However, it is fair to say that the whole structure of the contract, its references to "grade" in the principal provision employing the Player in clause 3(a) and to the League there and throughout and in particular concerning the League's role in such matters as drug testing, dispute resolution, approvals and consents to publicity and to the other provisions relating to remuneration to which I have earlier referred, as well as the linked constituent documents and rules of the
Penrith Club and League, all emphasise the common assumption that the player will participate in League sanctioned matches and in particular the
Premiership Competition and other representative games. This is even if, in theory, some of those provisions at least were waivable by the Penrith Club, where rendered inapplicable, such as if the Club were excluded from the
Premiership Competition by the League.
These provide a strong basis for at least the common assumption or common contemplation that the Penrith Club would participate in the
Premiership Competition. However, as the Plaintiff emphasises, it could only do so in the state of affairs applicable to such contracts contemplated prior to the commitment agreements, by applying to the League for a favourable exercise of the League's discretion in that regard.
Indeed that state of affairs, to the extent it may be called in aid in interpreting contractual provisions of ambiguous effect, emphasises that participation in the League Premiership Competition was not a right on the part of the Club but a privilege granted in the discretion of the League.
Thus the Plaintiff contends that it might not be unreasonable for the contract to contemplate a state of affairs where such participation was not enjoyed.
However, when a close analysis is made of the detailed provisions of the
Playing Contracts to which I have just referred including remuneration provisions and their apportionment (in the circumstances for example of clause and in relation to holiday leave pay and long service leave pay), no other conclusion can be reached but that the Playing Contracts proceeded on the common assumption of participation by Penrith Club and the Player in the
Premiership Competition. There is of course further reinforcement of that conclusion when regard is had to the fact that the Player subjects himself via the Player's Registration Form executed pursuant to clause 3(j) of the Playing
Contract to the Memorandum and Articles of Association and Rules of the
League, whilst both Club and Player agree to be bound under clause 17 of the
Playing Contract by the Memorandum and Articles of Association and
Rules and
Regulations of the Penrith Club. I have earlier described the various provisions of those constituent documents and Rules and Regulations and how they reflect a common assumption that "the Game" referred to in the Playing
Contract, though simply defined as "the game of Rugby League Football" in clause 19, is clearly understood as the game as currently regulated in all its aspects including rules, discipline and grades by the League and the ARL. This is especially when regard is had to the earlier mentioned definition of the
Game in Penrith Club's own Articles of Association, whose definitions are incorporated by clause 19 and whose observance both parties undertake in clause 17, where these constituent documents of the club are referred to as "collateral agreements" .
When that concept of "the Game" as "governed by the laws laid down by the International Rugby League Board as amended to meet local requirements" is contrasted with the description of the game to which I have earlier made reference as embodied in the Star League documentation including both Heads of
Agreement and Deed of Indemnity and the associated Super League Standard
Terms, it could not have been within the common contemplation of the parties under the Playing Contracts that the game would be played under Super League conditions and with the radically different features which I have earlier set out - radically different for both Club and Player.
But was the matter of common contemplation to be elevated to an implied term, as being both necessary to give the contract business efficacy and "so obvious that it goes without saying"? I adopt here the more precise test for implying a term as stated by the majority judgment in B.P. Refinery
Pty Ltd versus Hastings Shire Council <case>; [(1977) 52 ALJR 20] and adopted by Mason J with the concurrence of the other members of the High Court in
Secured Income Real Estate versus St. Martin's Investments
Pty Ltd <case>; [(1979) 144 CLR ] at 606. The conditions to be satisfied are: 
It must be reasonable and equitable; 
It must be necessary to give business efficacy to the contract, so that no term will be implied if the contract is effective without it; 
It must be so obvious that "it goes without saying"; 
It must be capable of clear expression; 
It must not contradict any express term of the contract.
A fundamental difficulty with the implication of a term simply obliging
Penrith Club to participate in the League Premiership
Competition, as distinct perhaps from applying to participate, is that such participation is not in the control of the Penrith Club, certainly not at the time the Playing Contracts were entered into. That depended upon the Penrith Club first applying annually and second, that application being granted. While a later contractual arrangement with the League, to which I have earlier referred in my Judgment, entered into towards the end of 1994 and subsequently expanded in February , gave Penrith Club certainty until 1999 as to its participation, those events do not pre-date the contract or provide part of its factual matrix at the critical time. Thus to assume an obligation on the part of the Penrith
Club in favour of the player that it would do that which was not in its power unassisted to bring about, pre-supposes that Penrith Club was prepared to take the commercial risk of having to pay the player even if the League were to exclude Penrith Club from the Premiership Competition and the opportunity to earn revenue through its participation.
There was of course no contemplated
Super League at the time the relevant Playing Contracts were entered into so that no alternative source of revenue could have been in the contemplation of the parties. Thus it must be questioned whether such a term in those circumstances would even be "reasonable and equitable".
It is true that a number of provisions of the contract to which I have referred, such as arbitration or drug testing, depend in a practical sense upon participation in the League in one way or another. Also that it would only be reasonable to expect that the League would co-operate in their implementation in circumstances where Penrith Club was not itself, and by its own actions, taken outside the League. Thus none of those provisions could be expected still to operate in circumstances where Penrith Club did not play in the Premiership Competition under the umbrella of the League, especially if this were the result of its own actions. Thus obligations imposed upon the
Player such as to obtain approvals from the League for publicity under clause (a) might be waived by Penrith club where not applicable or appropriate because of those changed circumstances. Likewise, reference to "the commencement of the Premiership Competition in any year" such as found in clause 8A may, in theory, be explained as simply using these as convenient time reference points. Even the dispute provisions in clause 14 and the earlier "best effort" provisions in clause 9, contemplating as they do arbitration by the League or participation by the Chairman of the League in a tribunal, could still work by application of the default provisions of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) ; see in particular [ss8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s8.html) and [9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s9.html).
However, the remuneration provisions to which I have earlier made reference, though deleting the Premiership Competition
Match fees in paragraph of Schedule 1 nonetheless still proceed on the express basis that there is to be participation in the Premiership
Competition; see paragraph 4 of the first schedule and note also the apportionment provisions in clause 8 to which
I have made earlier reference. There is also some significance in the fact that other players who enter into these Standard Form Playing Contracts sanctioned by the League who are more junior, are paid in part by Match Fees which are clearly those of the Premiership Competition. It would be an unexpected result that Penrith Club would only have in contemplation participation in the Premiership Competition in relation to some players who are receiving Premiership Competition Match Fees but not others who are not.
However, while it might be said that the Playing Contract lacks business efficacy at least in the remuneration context in circumstances were implication of such a term to be denied, it does not follow that the parties must have intended such a term to be implied. It is at least equally possible that they did not turn their minds to the possibility of non-participation.
Then when one turns to the requirement that the implied term must be so obvious that "it goes without saying" there are further difficulties. Is the implied term to be simply an obligation to make application for admission to the Premiership Competition each year? In that case, what happens to the practical working of the contract if that application is refused? Or is the obligation to go further and actually achieve participation each year, in which case why would Penrith Club wish to place itself at risk in circumstances where there was no Super League in contemplation when the
Playing Contracts were entered into?
I conclude that the situation here is very similar to that which led
Mason J in Codelfa at 355 to conclude: "Even so there remains an insurmountable problem in saying that 'it goes without saying' that had the parties contemplated the possibility that their legal advice was incorrect and that an injunction might be granted to restrain noise or other nuisance, they would have settled upon the term implied by the Court of
Appeal or that implied by the Arbitrator and by Ash J at first instance. I doubt whether the fiction of treating the parties as reasonable andfair makes the problem any less difficult. This is not a case in which an obvious provision was overlooked by the parties and omitted from the contract. Rather it was a case in which the parties made a common assumption which masked the need to explore what provision should be made to cover the event which occurred In ordinary circumstances negotiation about that matter might have yield anyone of a number of alternative provisions, each being regarded as a reasonable solution.
 
The difficulty which I have with the implication of the term here is much the same as the difficulty that Lord Reid had in 
Davis Contractors Ltd versus Fareham Urban District Council <case>; [(1956)
AC 696] in accepting that the doctrine of frustration rests on an implied term (at 719-721). It is greater because in many situations it is easier to say that the parties never agreed to be bound in a fundamentally different situation which has unexpectedly emerged than it is to assert that in a like situation the parties have impliedly agreed that the contract is to remain on foot with a new provision, not adverted to by them, governing their rights and liabilities.

My reluctance to imply a term is the stronger because the contract in this case was not a negotiated contract."
The present situation is precisely one where I conclude that the parties made a common assumption which masked the need to explore what provisions should be made to cover the event which occurred, namely the Penrith Club choosing not to participate in the Premiership Competition of the League but rather electing to support a competing competition set up by Super League.
It follows that the answer to Question 1 is "No". It also follows that
Penrith Club did not breach the express or implied term referred to in
Question 1 and thus did not repudiate its contract in the manner claimed by the Defendants, with the result that the purported acceptance of that claimed repudiation did not terminate the Playing Contracts.
 
Alternative Express, or Express and Implied, Term
However, that still leaves the alternative term said to be either express or alternatively partly express and partly implied, referred to in
Question 3. This was put by the
Plaintiff as to the effect that the Defendants would be employed by Penrith Club until 31 October 1996 to play rugby league football: for Penrith Club; in the League Premiership Competition with both requirements to be satisfied.
I have earlier concluded that I do not consider that there is an obligation express or implied upon Penrith Club to participate in the League
Premiership
Competition. From this it follows that the cumulative requirement in (b) above is not satisfied.
As I had foreshadowed to
Counsel in argument, I would also consider the possibility that any express, or express or implied term, was limited to one which required that the Defendants would be employed by Penrith Club until 31
October 1996 to play Rugby League Football for Penrith Club.
That is to say, that Penrith Club would be in breach of such a term if it entered into arrangements which required the relevant players to cease to play for the
Penrith Club. It will be recalled that the Super League arrangements which I have earlier described, contemplate, not that Penrith Club will play Super
League Football but rather will participate through a separate company, AH PE
Pty Limited, associated with but not presently controlled by Penrith Club. AH
PE Pty Limited will employ all the footballers who are to be made available by
Penrith Club for this purpose who are released to the extent necessary from their Playing Contracts to do so.
 .
There is of course no express provision in the Playing Contract that the
Club will provide the opportunity to the footballers who are contracted to it to exercise their special skills and talents by providing match opportunities.
However, as was said in Curro and Anor versus Beyond Productions Pty Ltd [(1993) 30
NSWLR 337] at 342: "Ordinarily an employee cannot demand to be given work and the obligation of the employer is limited to payment of the agreed remuneration. Turner versus Sawdon and Co (1901) 2 KP 653. As Dixon J said, this is an application of the principle that 'they also serve who only stand and wait': see Automatic Fire Sprinkers
Pty Ltd versus Watson <case>; [(1946) 72 CLR 435] at 467. However, there is a well established exception to this general rule in the case of actors and others in a similar position who are vitally interested in opportunities to perform or exercise a skill or talent in public."
There was ample evidence before me to the effect that the opportunity to play football at the highest standard was of vital concern to each of the
Defendants. Their opportunity to obtain additional remuneration through endorsements, for example, or otherwise to obtain the benefit of publicity (see clause 5 of the Playing Contract) and to obtain selection in representative games were all dependent upon the ability to play in top-rate competition. And clause 3(a) of the Playing Contract expressly provides that they will play "for the Club", not for some other legal entity. This latter obligation is "whenever and wherever reasonably required, during the playing seasons of the New South Wales Rugby League Limited".
Applying the tests for an implied term of this sort, for Penrith
Club to enter into arrangements with Super League not only precluding the Club from providing the teams itself for first class games but merely procuring the opportunity to play through an associated entity, and then under conditions radically different from those under the Playing Contract is, in my judgment, a clear anticipatory breach of the Playing Contract. Perhaps one of the most significant matters in which the Super League arrangements differ is that
Super League contemplates that the player be full-time playing football.
Whereas, clause 3 in its final proviso expressly provides for the benefit of the Player that "such participation shall not interfere with the usual occupation of the Player".
I have already concluded that it is not for the Defendants to have to demonstrate that more flexible arrangements than those to which Penrith Club have legally committed themselves would accommodate the critical terms of the
Playing Contract in favour of the players to which I have earlier made reference. Furthermore, it is simply not credible that the Defendants should be required to assume that the Super League Standard Terms would be varied to accommodate the Playing
Contracts or that Penrith Club would be excused from its fundamental obligations to support Super League by releasing its players to the extent necessary.
Thus, summing up, I consider that the relevant implied term in the present case is that the Penrith
Club will continue to be in a position to field its own teams for Rugby League football so that players remain employees of the Club in playing rugby league football and have the opportunity to play rugby league football in the best teams that the Club can field.
It may well be that such an implied term, while of the kind necessary to give business efficacy to a particular contract, and otherwise satisfying the requirements for its implication, is also one which is a legal incident of a particular class of contract, namely one of employment, personal to the parties; Codelfa at 345, Liverpool City Council versus Irwin <case>; [(1977) AC 239] at 576.
I further conclude that there is an express provision of the Playing
Contract (clause 3) which requires that participation "shall not interfere with the usual occupation of the Player". Clearly the Super League arrangements would do so. Thus I conclude that entry by Penrith Club into the
Super League arrangements with their contractual obligations upon both Penrith
Club and any player that participates in them, constitute an anticipatory breach of the Playing Contract. I am satisfied that the breaches are in each case sufficiently serious that they would give rise to a right to terminate and thus amount to an anticipatory repudiation of the
Playing Contract. This in turn gives rise on the Player's part to a right to accept that repudiation and thus terminate the contract.
Whilst the basis upon which the Players have claimed that the contract is repudiated differs from the repudiation which I have concluded has occurred, nonetheless such repudiation suffices to justify the denial of any injunction to the Plaintiff since readiness and willingness to perform on the Plaintiff <case> could not be established; see generally
Carter Breach of Contract second edition 1991 at 228-233 and the authorities there cited.
 
Frustration - Questions 4 and 5
I have earlier concluded that whilst it is not appropriate to imply a term that on the proper construction of the Playing Contracts, Penrith Club was obliged to participate in the Premiership Competition, nonetheless continued participation was the common assumption upon which the parties entered into the
Playing Contracts. The question therefore arises whether, in the events that have happened, the performance of the contract is so radically different from performance in the circumstances which the contract contemplated, that the contract has been frustrated;
Davis Contractors Limited v Fareham Urban District Council <case>; [(1956) AC 696] at 728-729 per Lord Radcliffe and at 719-721 per Lord Reid.
Frustration no longer depends on any theory of implied term;
Codelfa at .
Non fulfilment of the common assumption is in circumstances where
Penrith Club have replaced their own direct participation in the Premiership
Competition under the supervision of the League with an obligation to support the participation by another entity AH PE Pty Limited in the Super League
Competition, directly competitive with the League. This is, furthermore, under arrangements whose practical effect is that Penrith Club not only cannot now participate in any League sponsored Rugby League
Competition itself but also cannot itself participate in Super League directly. Rather it has transferred its football operation to a licensee presently not under its control, AH PE
Pty Limited. In those circumstances, there can be no doubt that performance of the Playing Contract is either not possible, or so radically different from performance in the circumstances which it contemplated, that one would ordinarily conclude that the contract had been frustrated in the events that have happened. This is reinforced by the radically different employment arrangements applicable to players in Super League.
There is however an important distinction between the conventional cases of frustration which arise from some supervening event outside the control of the parties and the present situation where it is the action of the Plaintiff that has led to this radical difference. It is well settled that self-induced frustration cannot be relied upon. But what happens where the party seeking to rely on the frustration is the innocent party who was not responsible for bringing about the circumstances which are claimed to frustrate the contract?
In my judgment, it would be grossly inequitable if a party could shelter behind the fact that it had brought about the frustrating event in order to avoid what would otherwise have been the consequences of such frustration, namely discharge of the contract at the behest of the other party. There is
English authority that such an inequitable outcome is not the result. Rather, the innocent party may rely upon the circumstances brought about by the other party to the contract as giving rise to frustration; see F. C Shepherd and Co.
Ltd v
Jerrom [(1987) QB 301]; it should follow that the party responsible for bringing about the frustration may not. The case and the underlying principles are discussed in G. H Treitel Frustration and Force Majeure Sweet and Maxwell at 488-9 which I quote below: "A problem which has given rise to some difference of judicial opinion is that which arises where an employee is prevented from rendering the agreed services because of his imprisonment for a criminal offence. At first sight, it seems clear that the prevention is due to the deliberate act of the employee, so that he should not be able to rely on it as a ground of discharge.
This is the position taken in the United States by the
Restatement ((97) Para 458, Illustration 5.) and by the
Restatement 2d, which gives the example of an employee who is imprisoned for burglary and concludes that he is not discharged but is liable in damages because his inability to perform his part of the contract is due to his fault. ((98) Para 264,
Illustration 5.
 
In England the question of the effect of imprisonment on contracts of employment has arisen (in an indirect and somewhat curious way) in cases in which employees who were told by their employers that their employment had been terminated in consequence of their imprisonment then claimed compensation for unfair dismissal. ((99) Under the Employment Protection 
Act 1978, Pt. V, as amended by Trade Union and
Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, s.300(2) and Sched.
 and Trade Union Reform and Employment Reform Act 1993, ss.49 and and Scheds. 8 and 10.) Since dismissal may be unfair without being wrongful, the issue in these cases was not whether the employer was in breach but simply whether the contracts had come to an end as a result of dismissal (i.e. by the employer's acceptance of the employee's breach) or of frustration: on the latter analysis, no question of compensation for unfair dismissal could arise. After some conflict in the authorities, the view has prevailed that in such circumstances the contract comes to an end by frustration rather than by dismissal. The point may be illustrated by reference to F. C Shepherd and Co.
Ltd versus Jerrom ((1) [(1987) QB 301], 607; contra, Norris versus Southampton C.C. [(1982) I.C.R. 177.] For the question whether the imprisonment is, or can reasonably be supposed to be, sufficiently long to frustrate the contract, see ante, Paras 5-049, 5-050.) where an apprentice who had become involved in a fight between two motorcycle gangs was convicted of conspiracy to commit assault and sentenced to a period of Borstal training, of which he served 39 weeks. The employers told his father that they were not prepared to take him back and subsequently resisted his claim for compensation for unfair dismissal on the ground that the contract had been frustrated. It was to rebut this defence that the apprentice argued that there had been no discharge by frustration since the alleged frustration had been self-induced. Acceptance of his argument would have entirely perverted the purpose of the rule that frustration must not be due to the fault of the party relying on it. That purpose is to prevent the party at fault from relying on an allegedly frustrating event (where it is due to his fault) and so to impose a liability on that party. In F.C
Shepherd and Co. Ltd versus Jerrom the apprentice sought to rely on his own criminal conduct in order to establish a right to compensation for unfair dismissal. The Court of Appeal rightly rejected his claim and held that the contract was frustrated.
This is wholly consistent with Lord Sumner's formulation that "Reliance cannot be placed on self-induced frustration" ((2)
Bank Line Ltd. versus Arthur Capel and Co. <case>; [(1919) AC 435], 452.); for the party relying on frustration was the employer, and he had not induced the frustration.
I should add that I have found no Australian cases dealing with this novel point, and it is not dealt with by statute; see [Frustrated Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fca1978247/) . However, I adopt what is said as to principle by J W Carter and D
J Harland in Contract Law in Australia Butterworths, 2nd edition 1991 at 677: "Most descriptions of the concept of frustration refer to the absence of default by either Party. ((187)
In The Super Servant
Two <case>; [(1990) 1 Lloyd's Rep 1] at 8 the statement of the principle refers simply to the person relying on frustration. If the onus were on the party invoking the doctrine to prove that frustration was not self-induced there would, logically, be a need to prove not only the absence of default by that party but also by the other party. ((188) See [(1942) AC 154] at 199, 200.)
This would be unreasonable and unduly restrict the scope of frustration. For example, a party may rely on frustration, even if the other party is at fault, and claim to be discharged.
Proof of the existence of fault should only be required if a claim for damages is also made. It would then be necessary to establish that default amounted to a breach of contract.
This analysis is supported by a recent decision of the Court of
Appeal holding ((189) See F C Shepherd and Co Ltd versus Jerrom [(1987) QB 301.)] that the sentencing of an employee to a custodial term for criminal conduct may be relied on by the employer as frustrating the contract, even though the delay in performance causing frustration is in a sense caused by wrongful conduct on the part of the employee."
D W Greig and J R L Davis The Law of Contract The Law Book Company 1987 at 1322 correctly identify the reason for confusion: "The notion of self-induced frustration is at times misunderstood. Frustration is an argument put forward by one of the Parties to the contract, as a reason for his failure to Perform. Because of the interdependence of the performance of contractual obligations, if one party is excused, the other is also (see, for example, Jackson versus Union
Marine Insurance Co
Ltd (1874) LR 10 CP 125 at 144 per Bramwell B.; Constantine
Steamship case [(1942) AC 154] at 163 per Viscount Simon LC).
But the point remains that frustration is, in essence, a reason for relief advanced by only one of the parties (and normally resisted by the other; see Davis Contractors Ltd versus Fareham
Urban District Council <case>; [(1956) AC 696] at 720 per Lord Reid). Thus self-induced frustration refers to the situation in which the party alleging the termination of the contract has brought about the supervening event.
In so adapting contractual principle to achieve a common sense and equitable result, there is one theoretical difficulty to which I should refer.
It is one to which none of the text writers make reference, as a difficulty.
It is well settled that once the requirements of frustration are satisfied, the effect of the doctrine is to discharge the contract, in the words of Lord
Sumner "forthwith, without more and automatically"; Hirji Mulji versus Cheong Yue
SS.
Co. [(1926) A. C. 497] at 505. Thus a contract may be discharged, even though both parties continued, for some time after, to behave as if the contract were still in force; Treitel at 498.
However, the essence of this exception to reliance on self-induced frustration is that the party who induced it cannot invoke the doctrine to discharge the contract, but only the innocent party. From this it must follow that for this purpose only, the general rule gives way to the principle that such a situation of frustration discharges the contract, not automatically, but only at the suit of the innocent party.
The other consequence is that discharge for frustration may remove any possibility for suing for breach on the part of the innocent party against the party who brought about the frustration.
Consider in this context the case where the very action, or elements of it, which brought about the frustration were also a breach of the contract, as is the case here. It would appear that the innocent party has an election. That party can either sue for breach or alternatively invoke frustration and discharge the contract. The latter course would appear to leave no room to sue for breach save breaches which have already occurred before the time of frustration; see [ss7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fca1978247/s7.html) and [8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fca1978247/s8.html) of the [Frustrated Contracts Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fca1978247/) and Carter (supra) at 446: "The significant difference between discharge for breach or repudiation and discharge by frustration is the ability to claim damages. ((73) See Hongkong Fir Shipping Co. Ltd versus Kawasaki
Kisen Kaisha Ltd. <case>; [(1962) 2 QB 26]; and above, Para. 645.) If a frustrating event occurs before any breach has been committed there will be no question of either party claiming damages from the other. Similarly, if the frustrating event occurs before the acceptance ((74) See generally above, Paras 750-777.) of a repudiation of obligation which precedes the time of performance no claim for damages will be available to the promisee. ((75)
Avery versus Bowden (1856) 6 E. and B. 953; <case>; [119 ER 1119]; Peter Turnbull and Co. Pty. Ltd. versus Mundus Trading Co. (Australasia) Pty. Ltd.
 <case>; [(1954) 90 CLR 235] AT 471.) However, if a breach occurs prior to the frustrating event then frustration does not, at common law, divest the promisee of the right to damages, although the fact that the performance of the contract is subsequently frustrated may be relevant to their assessment. ((76) Cf Watts Watts and Co. Ltd. versus Mitsui and Co.
Ltd. [(1917) AC 227.)"]
However, the short answer to any theoretical difficulty on this score, is that the election remains with the innocent party, who can take the impact on any damages claim into account, in choosing between the two courses of claiming for frustration, or claiming discharge for breach. Neither theoretical difficulty should deter the availability of frustration as a remedy, where invoked by the innocent party, as here.
The remaining potential obstacle in concluding that the Playing
Contracts are discharged by frustration is that the frustration is prospective rather than immediate. However, we are here dealing not with the anticipated occurrence of a future event but with the anticipated effects of a past event, namely the entry by Penrith Club in May 1995 into the Super League arrangements. The general rule is that the question of discharge is to be determined by reference to the time of the occurrence of the allegedly frustrating event. However, the contract will nonetheless be discharged if at the time a reasonable person would have taken the view that this past event would lead to a sufficiently serious interference with performance to bring about discharge.
It is not necessary to wait and see whether such interference actually takes place, or would have taken place if attempts to perform had not been abandoned; indeed the contract will be discharged even though subsequent events show that there would have been no such interference. See Treitel at 365-6 and Embiricos versus Sydney Reid and Co. [(1914) 3 KB 45.]
Here the consequences of entering into the Super League arrangements are clearly foreseeable and cannot in any event be seriously in dispute. While evidence was given that the Defendants could readily enough re-adapt to the
Penrith team, that is not to the point.
Under the Super League arrangements they do not play for Penrith Club but for AH PE Pty Limited. But even were that not so, any reasonable person would conclude that the Defendants would inevitably be participating in arrangements so radically different from those the subject of the common assumption between the parties at the time the
Playing Contracts were entered into, that those contracts have been frustrated. It follows that performance under them has been discharged so far as the Defendants are concerned, taking them to have so elected.
 
Discretionary Grounds for Denial of Injunction - Question 6
Given my earlier answers to Questions 1 to 5, it is not necessary for me to answer this question. The question is of course directed at whether there are any discretionary bases for denying an injunction to the Plaintiff on the basis that the Playing Contracts remain on foot. I have earlier concluded that in any event because the Plaintiff is not ready and willing to perform an express, or an express and implied term of the contract, an injunction would be denied.
It is not necessary likewise that I consider whether any failure by
Penrith Club in regard to the Playing Contracts or its actions in entering into the Super League arrangements would contravene its corporate objects.
 
CONCLUSIONS
I conclude that: 
There was no term, express or implied, in the Playing contracts (including to the extent relevant the constituent documents and rules of the
Club or the League) which obliged Penrith Club to participate in the League
Premiership
Competition presently conducted by the League. 
It follows that no repudiation of the Playing Contract based on breach of such a term occurred or was capable of acceptance. 
However the conduct of the Penrith Club did result in it committing an anticipatory breach of a partly express and partly implied term that the
Defendants would be employed by Penrith Club until 31 October 1996 to play
Rugby League football for Penrith Club; accordingly that Penrith Club would continue to be in a position to field its own teams for Rugby League football so that players remain employees of the Club in playing rugby league football and have the opportunity to play rugby league football in the best teams the
Penrith Club can field and so that such participation shall not interfere with the usual occupation of the Player. 
Such anticipatory breach is sufficiently serious as to give the Players the right to accept such breach as an anticipatory repudiation and thereafter terminate the Playing Contracts. 
Such anticipatory breach suffices to justify denial of any injunction to the Plaintiff, since readiness and willingness on the Plaintiffs part could not be established.

Subject to the Defendants so electing, the Playing Contracts have been frustrated, in the events that have happened, with the result that both parties would be discharged from further performance. 
In light of the earlier conclusions I do not need to consider any other basis for denying the Penrith Club entitlement to equitable relief by way of injunction. 
ORDERS
I direct the parties within seven days to submit orders giving effect to this judgment. 
So far as costs are concerned, prima facie costs should follow the event and thus be awarded to the Defendants in each case. However, if necessary, I will hear Counsel on costs when the matter next comes back before me.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/523.html  
