

Regina versus Graham Loughlan Harrison [1997] NSWSC 46 (20 February 1997) 
REGINA versus Graham Loughlan HARRISON /96 February 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, NEWMAN J, IRELAND J 
RESULT: Crown appeal against sentence allowed 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Crown appeal - sentence for gravely serious offences made concurrent with existing sentence - increase in total sentence by only a little over eight months - failure to reflect sentence which, together with existing sentence, represented totality of criminality for all offences.
 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: This is a Crown appeal in relation to sentences imposed upon the respondent (Graham Loughlan Harrison) by Judge Christie QC at Lismore on 13 February 1996.

The respondent pleaded guilty to the charges laid in two indictments. The first, relating to a seventeen year old girl (TJK), contained four charges of aggravated sexual intercourse without consent (the aggravation in each case being a threat to inflict actual bodily harm with a knife) and one charge of sexual assault by forced self-manipulation (in which TJK was forced by threat to penetrate her own vagina with her finger). The second indictment, relating to an eighteen year old girl (CH), contained one charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm. When the respondent pleaded guilty to that charge he asked the judge to take into account in sentencing him an assault upon a nineteen year old girl (AML), who had been a companion of CH.

The judge imposed concurrent sentences in relation to all offences, so that the longest represented the punishment for the totality of the respondent's criminality. It was a sentence of penal servitude for twelve years, consisting of a minimum term of nine years and an additional term of three years. The
Crown asserts that this was manifestly inadequate in the circumstances, and that in any event a finding made by the judge in favour of the respondent upon a matter of mitigation was not open on the evidence.

The events which gave rise to the first indictment took place on 11 July 1992.
Those which were relevant to the second indictment had occurred almost twelve months earlier, on 16 July 1991. It is convenient to deal with them in chronological order.

In 1991, the respondent picked up CH and AML, who were hitch-hiking on the
Pacific Highway at Coolangatta. After almost two hours, they had reached
Wooyung near Byron Bay and the respondent drove on to a secluded track near the beach, pretending to show his passengers the sights. The three got out of the vehicle. After making a remark to divert CH's attention, the respondent put a piece of string around her throat and his arm around her neck, asking whether she liked being hurt and asking AML whether she wanted CH to be hurt.
The respondent also had a ball of string, and he told AML that he wanted to tie up CH. CH managed to stab the respondent with a penknife, and AML ran away. The respondent left CH and drove off. CH suffered abrasions and AML suffered abrasions, bruising and strains.

In 1992, the second complainant (TJK), was hitch-hiking from Murwillumbah to visit a friend in the village of Tyalgum. The respondent picked her up and took her to Tyalgum, then drove through the village. When the complainant asked to be dropped off the respondent took out a knife having a serrated blade about fifteen centimetres long, threatened the complainant with it and continued driving. The respondent produced a pair of handcuffs and forced the complainant to handcuff herself. He told her that he wanted to have sexual intercourse, and he said that he would stab her if she tried to attract attention. He told her that he would insert his knife into her vagina and mutilate her so that she would be unable to bear children. He told her that he would have anal intercourse with her. He threatened to throw her over a cliff when he had finished with her.

The respondent stopped the car in a remote place and made the complainant, still handcuffed, remove her pants and underpants. He had her perform fellatio upon him. He moved the edge of the knife blade along the back of her neck, sticking the point into her scalp and cutting off strands of her hair. He said that he was going to urinate into her mouth and make her swallow, but he did not carry out that particular threat. He told her that he intended to ejaculate into her mouth and to make her swallow his semen. He did carry out that threat. He made her bite his penis, to masturbate him and to perform further fellatio upon him, running the point of the knife up her thigh while she did so. He put his finger into her vagina, and he made her do the same with her own finger. He threatened to photograph her using a dildo. He drew her attention to the gear lever of the car, which was mounted on the floor and had a knob. He asked her whether her vagina would fit over it.

The respondent drove off with the complainant still handcuffed, but the handcuffs were later removed. He stopped the car on a number of occasions but then drove on because people were nearby. Eventually he stopped on a beach track and made the complainant get out of the car. Still holding the knife, he took her into the bush and showed her a hole in the ground about one and a half metres by seventy centimetres by sixty centimetres. He told her that he had dug it a few years ago in case he should ever need it and that it could be her grave. They returned to the car. The respondent struck the complainant on the head. He made her take off her underpants and bra, then to get out of the car again. They walked towards the beach whilst he was still holding the knife. He made the complainant sit on a sleeping bag which he had taken out of the car. He told her about sexual acts which he had recently made two hitch- hikers do to each other. (This reference to those events having taken place recently suggests that it may not have been to the events which were relevant to the second indictment, but nothing now turns on that.) They talked for a long time. He made her undress herself, then him. He again made her perform fellatio upon him. Then he had penile-vaginal intercourse, ejaculating onto her stomach. He repeated the act later. He bit her nipple, and he told her that he ought to bite if off and take in with him. During these events, the respondent showed the complainant a glimpse of a black wallet containing a silver badge which looked like a police badge. He told her that he was a police officer. It turned out to be an army badge.

Again, the respondent drove off and, by a long and roundabout route, he delivered the complainant to her home in Murwillumbah. On the way, he told her that he had planned the whole thing and that this was something which he did only about once a year. When she was finally allowed to go, the complainant had been with the respondent for almost seven hours. She suffered a substantial emotional reaction to her experiences, she had difficulty sleeping and coping with a technical college course she was undertaking, and she required counselling.

The respondent was twentytwo and twentythree years, respectively, when these offences were committed. He already had a criminal record in Queensland for offences of dishonesty and violence (stealing, false pretences, stealing with violence whilst armed and assault occasioning actual bodily harm), and he had served a custodial sentence at the time of the 1991 offence. He had also performed community service, and he had been ordered to undergo medical, psychiatric and psychological treatment for his anti-social behaviour. During (between the two sets of offences with which this appeal is concerned), he was convicted on a charge of harassment by telephone and fined.

Two days after the offences were committed upon TJK, the respondent abducted a young woman from outside Toowoomba, Queensland, having answered a classified advertisement which she had published in the local newspaper looking for employment and arranged to meet her and to drive her to the place where some work was to be done. They left the car at a quarry with which the respondent said that he had had some association and which he wanted to show her. When they returned to the car, he produced a knife and told her to shut up and keep still or she would "get it". He handcuffed her. When she struggled, he punched her on the side of her head a number of times, and she desisted from further struggle. He drove off, with the woman still handcuffed. He commenced to masturbate. The woman asserted that she was HIV-positive, but the respondent replied that he did not care as he had Hepatitis B. He forced her to perform fellatio upon him while he scraped the knife on the top of her head. He said that he would scar her with the knife, and cut off her nipple. He required her to masturbate while he watched and masturbated himself. He suggested that he would urinate in her mouth and ejaculate on her face. He forced her to perform fellatio upon him again, then to bite his penis. Further fellatio followed.

The respondent then placed a plastic bag over the woman's head which he tied with a rope around her head, claiming that this would hide her identity whilst he photographed her. She had difficulty in breathing until she managed to tear a hole in the bag. He said that he had planned to kill her because he had a bet with a mate which of them would make the headlines first by such a killing. There was a struggle in which he punched her again, but eventually he removed the bag from her head, leaving the rope in place. He squeezed her around the neck, telling her how easy it would be to kill her. He then went through her handbag and removed some cash and her credit card, and he forced her to disclose the PIN number. He then drove back towards Toowoomba, and left her in the bush near the place where he had picked her up.

The respondent was arrested on 16 July 1992 in relation to this last series of events and he has been in custody ever since. He was dealt with in the
District Court at Toowoomba for a breach of a probation order to which he was subject at the time. The breach involved an assault upon a young woman with a knife, and the making of sexual overtures to her. He was imprisoned for eighteen months.

The respondent was later dealt with in the same Court for offences committed in January 1992 (that is, between the two series of events with which this
Court is concerned), consisting of two offences of stealing with actual violence whilst armed with an offensive weapon, two offences of indecent assault and deprivation of liberty He had forced a woman into his car at knifepoint, taken $200 and a credit card from her handbag and forced her to withdraw money from an ATM. Back in the car, and at knifepoint, he put his hand on her breast and kissed her several times on the mouth. He then forced her to perform fellatio upon him and he masturbated until he ejaculated. He then drove her back into town. He received concurrent sentences of imprisonment, of which the longest was for seven years, partly concurrent with the previous sentence so that they commenced on 3 November 1992. A new non- parole period of six years was fixed, and the judge expressed concern that the respondent should not be released until the Parole Board was satisfied that he was no longer dangerous.

The respondent was then sentenced in the Supreme Court of Queensland for the offences which had taken place at Toowoomba, two days after the events which gave rise to the charges in the first indictment before this Court. The sentences imposed were made almost concurrent with those imposed shortly before in the District Court (commencing on 23 November 1992), the longest being for twelve years, thus increasing the total sentence by five years, but the judge did not increase the non-parole period of six years already set and which related to all of the periods of imprisonment imposed since his arrest on 16 July 1992. An appeal was dismissed.

The respondent was transferred to New South Wales to face the charges laid against him here and, for that purpose, to serve the Queensland sentences,[1] which were re-determined in this State as an effective total of eleven years and almost four months, consisting of a minimum term of six years, also commencing on 23 November 1992 and expiring on 22 November 1998, with an additional term of five years and almost four months. As the respondent was still serving the sentence from Queensland at the time when he came to be sentenced in New South Wales, the principle of totality applied so that Judge
Christie had to consider a total sentence for the New South Wales offences which - together with that re-determined sentence relating to the Queensland offences - represented the totality of the respondent's criminality for all of the crimes in Queensland and in New South Wales for which he was in custody.[2] The longest sentence which he imposed (a total of twelve years with a minimum term of nine years, representing the offences charged in both indictments) also commenced on 23 November 1992, so that the total overall sentence has been increased for those offences by only a little over eight months, and the effective minimum term has been increased by only three years.

It is against that background that the Crown appeal must be considered. One of the more obvious issues debated before the judge was the risk that the respondent would re-offend in the light of the pattern of behaviour which he had displayed in all of the offences referred to in the evidence. The Crown called Dr Robert Delaforce, a consultant psychiatrist, upon this issue. Dr
Delaforce took a history from the appellant of a confused childhood in which he became unwillingly involved in his mother's sexual relationship with many men and had difficulties at school, an adolescence during which he committed a number of minor crimes, and a young adulthood when he had various problems with employment and with substance abuse. The doctor diagnosed a recognizable mental disorder called an antisocial personality disorder, the essential feature of which is a pervasive pattern of disregard for, and violation of, the rights of others, which begins in childhood or early adolescence and continues into adulthood. The features of that disorder which the respondent displayed include the failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviour, aggressiveness, a very low tolerance to frustration, a lack of remorse and a tendency to rationalize his behaviour.

Dr Delaforce said that treatment for that disorder would be ineffective, and that the risk of antisocial and dangerous behaviour was high, although the disorder may become less evident or abate during the fourth decade of life.
(The respondent is presently twentyeight years of age.) He concluded that the respondent - " ... represents a real risk of re-offending in a similar manner in the future. It would not be unexpected if he offended in a more dangerous manner with serious physical harm to a victim. However, I would emphasise that I do not have grounds for stating that this is a likely outcome." 
In his evidence, the doctor said that the probability was that the respondent will re-offend, which he based upon the escalation in the severity and the frequency of the offences and his behaviour during those offences. He said that the respondent had a propensity to commit more serious offences, which he based upon the respondent's statements to him that, in July 1992, he had been a predatory man going around looking for a victim, and that he had wanted to "go out in a big way" such as an armed robbery or a sexual offence.
He said that he could not see that a person with the respondent's disorder could gain enormous benefit from treatment to the extent that he would be a minimal or insignificant risk on release. He did concede in cross-examination that he was not up to date with the psychological counselling which the respondent had had in custody in the sixteen months since he had seen him. As to the possibility that the respondent's disorder may abate, he said that, from about the age of thirtyfive, a person suffering from that disorder may change his behaviour - although he said that the change may result from either abatement or the person becoming more clever at controlling it. He concluded by saying that his prognosis in relation to the respondent was at least poor.

In view of some arguments put by the respondent to this appeal, it should be emphasized that a sentencing judge is not required to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that a prisoner will in fact re-offend in the future. It is sufficient if a risk of re-offending be established by the Crown. In Veen v
The Queen [No 2[,3 the sentencing judge found that the prisoner - " ... is potentially - or, indeed, certainly - a continuing danger to society when released, in that he is likely to kill again or to inflict serious injury upon his release by reason of his brain damage should he be under the influence of alcohol and find himself in any situation of stress."[4] 
The High Court held that the evidence amply supported the finding that "the applicant is a continuing danger to society".[5] The principle of proportionality was restated by reference to "the protection of society from the risk of recidivism on the part of the offender".[6] 
In the present case, the judge said in his remarks on sentence: "There is no evidence before me that would indicate that the risk of you offending has yet passed." 
That somewhat limited finding was undoubtedly correct, although it left open the more important issue as to the risk that the respondent would re-offend in the future. Unfortunately, the judge did not expressly return to that issue.
He went on immediately to deal with the efforts made by the respondent to rehabilitate himself. He said: "There is ample evidence that would indicate to me that you have embarked upon a road which will undoubtedly lead to your significant further education, and I would think one is entitled to confidently expect that eventually would lead to your rehabilitation." 
This would appear to be a reference to a series of reports from educational officers within the Department of Corrective Services as to courses which the respondent had successfully undertaken whilst in custody and from prison officers and chaplains as to his behaviour in custody, all of which the judge described during argument as "astounding".

The Crown has attacked the judge's approach as one of making a finding of dangerousness and then failing to give effect to that finding. It is, however, difficult to discern precisely just what the judge's approach was. It may be that what he intended to find was that, by reason of the success which the respondent had had in these courses (which included a reasonably substantial part of a legal qualification), he would no longer be at risk of re-offending by the time when he was to be released. If that be so, then his process of reasoning was (with respect) somewhat naive, as even the most brilliant of students may still be a grave risk to the community in the way the respondent was before he was arrested. His capacity for academic learning no doubt existed at that time also (albeit undemonstrated), and there is no necessary inconsistency between academic brilliance and an antisocial personality disorder. The only evidence which the judge had before him was that of Dr
Delaforce, who made it clear that psychiatric treatment would be ineffective.
If he had been asked, it is fairly certain that the doctor would have said that education would have produced no better result.

The judge was nevertheless not obliged to accept the Crown case in aggravation that the respondent had an at least poor prognosis, and that the risk of antisocial and dangerous behaviour was high. At the same time, there was nothing of substance upon which any reasonable finding could be made in favour of the respondent in mitigation that his psychiatric condition would abate. In those circumstances, it would be preferable to interpret the judge's somewhat elliptical remarks on sentence which have been quoted as leaving the issue of dangerousness in effect in limbo, and as having been intended merely as a finding that the respondent's conduct whilst in custody was a sufficient basis for satisfaction that he would - for whichever reason - behave himself when released. That is not a conclusion with which many others would agree, but it was (albeit only marginally) open to the judge on the evidence, and thus it is not one with which this Court could interfere.[7] The Crown's challenge upon this issue must therefore be rejected.

Of more substance is the Crown's complaint that the judge gave too much weight to his finding of rehabilitation. It is always important in seeking to determine the sentence appropriate to a particular crime or crimes to have regard to the gravity of the offences viewed objectively, for without such an assessment the other factors requiring consideration before arriving at the proper sentence to be imposed cannot properly be given their place.[8] Except in well-defined circumstances such as the youth or the mental incapacity of the offender (there is nothing to suggest that the respondent's antisocial personality disorder qualifies as the latter[9]), public deterrence is generally regarded as the main purpose of punishment, and the subjective considerations relating to the particular prisoner (however persuasive) are necessarily subsidiary to the duty of the courts to see that the sentence which is imposed will operate as a powerful factor in preventing the commission of similar crimes by those who may otherwise be tempted by the prospect that only light punishment will be imposed.[10] 
What all of those principles make clear is that rehabilitation (or reform) - the hope that the offender will be released back into the community a better person than when he or she left it - is only one of the purposes of punishment and that, when some measure of rehabilitation has been achieved, such a subjective consideration remains necessarily subsidiary to the need for the sentence to act as a deterrent to the public. We are satisfied that the judge gave far too much weight to what he saw to be the respondent's prospects of rehabilitation in this case.

Because release on parole is a privilege, and not a right, and because there is therefore always the possibility that the total sentence might have to be served in custody, it is to the total sentence that attention must first be paid.[11] The judge had expressed his view of the objective circumstances of the New South Wales offences in this way in his remarks on sentence: "The circumstances of this particular offence are in my view so grave as to constitute very nearly the worst type of circumstance that could arise in relation to this type of offence. I acknowledge of course that you returned this young victim to her home, physically unharmed, at the end of the day's activities. During the course of those activities, this young lady would have confidently expected at various stages of the events that she would not survive. Indeed you clearly inferred to her that he would not.
 ...

I find it difficult, although I am possessed of a fertile imagination, to imagine an attack of this nature very much worse than that which you perpetrated upon this young girl. What emotional sequelae she suffers is anybody's guess and I have no evidence before me in relation to that." 
In another place, the judge said that it was the pleas of guilty which saved the respondent - "... from what otherwise would be a sentence which in my view would at least approach the maximum sentence available for this type of offence which is twenty years penal servitude." 
The respondent has attacked any interpretation of those statements by the judge as amounting to an acceptance by him that, had he not pleaded guilty, the present case was in fact within the worst category of aggravated sexual assault, warranting the maximum sentence of penal servitude for twenty years provided by [s
J](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61j.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). That section includes the case where actual bodily harm has in fact been inflicted, whereas here there were only threats of such harm. That point is well made, but that is not what the judge said. What he said was that, without the plea of guilty, the sentence would be one which "would at least approach" that maximum sentence. It is, however, unnecessary to attempt to divine what length of sentence the judge may have been contemplating, although he did later suggest (in circumstances to which reference will be made shortly) a sentence of fifteen years. The passages are quoted in order to demonstrate that the judge did take a very serious view of the objective gravity of the facts of this case, a view with which we entirely agree.

The issue on this appeal is whether the judge gave effect to that very serious view of the objective gravity of the offences in the sentences which he imposed. In our view, an increase in the overall total sentence of only just over eight months is so inadequate as representing the gravity of the offences which the respondent committed in New South Wales as to demonstrate that the judge must have misunderstood the principles to be applied.[12] We reach the same conclusion when the increase in the minimum term by only three years is considered.

Of even greater substance, however, is the Crown's complaint that the judge erred in making the sentences which he imposed wholly concurrent with those which the respondent was already serving. His remarks on sentence are at best equivocal as to the approach which he took to the principle of totality which he had to apply. What he said was this: "I accept those arguments that have been put to me that I must look at the totality of these events in determining what sentence should be served. I take the view which I expressed during argument and I here repeat, that in my view, were I to deal with you for the offences for which you were sentenced in
Toowoomba on 23 November 1992 and these offences, I would be obliged consistent with my duty to sentence you to a period of fifteen years. That can not be the situation having regard to the totality of all of the matters that
I need to take into account." 
In the context of the passage itself, it appears that "these events" to which emphasis has been added in that quotation were the offences committed in
New South Wales. The context in which the passage itself is located does not suggest otherwise. The fact that the sentence which he imposed was twelve, and not fifteen, years makes it clear that the judge felt that he was obliged to disregard the Queensland offences.

That was a substantial error of principle, the correct principle (as stated earlier in this judgment) being that the principle of totality required the judge to consider a total sentence for the New South Wales offences which - together with the redetermined sentence relating to the Queensland offences - represented the totality of the respondent's criminality for all of the crimes in Queensland and in New South Wales for which he was in custody.

In this State, the Crown does not need to obtain leave to appeal against sentence. In that respect, what the High Court said in Everett versus The
Queen[13] concerning the rarity with which such leave should be granted, and only where a matter of principle is concerned, has no direct application in
New South Wales. Nevertheless, this Court has always restricted success in
Crown appeals to those where it is necessary to make some statement of principle or to correct manifest inadequacy or inconsistency in sentencing principles, and these in any event constitute errors in point of principle.[14] We are satisfied that the present is a case in which there has been error in principle made by the judge, so that the Crown case must succeed.

An affidavit by the respondent and up to date reports from those within the gaol system, tendered for the purpose of re-sentencing, show that he has continued with his substantial further education and to be well behaved. One of them, from a teacher, was sent to the respondent's solicitors without being sought. It is concerned mainly with remorse which the respondent is said to have expressed to her for the offences which he committed, which remorse she describes as extraordinary and, in her belief, genuine. She says, in effect, that she has not known any other inmate with such personal integrity, resolve and sound potential for a successful future. We comment only that, apart from the contrition inherent in his pleas of guilty, this is the first sign of such remorse on the part of the respondent, and that it is notable that, in his own detailed affidavit tendered on appeal, the respondent himself does not assert it. We accept, however, that remorse has now been expressed, but it would need a careful assessment of the respondent himself to determine whether it is genuine remorse for the offences rather than mere regret for their consequences to himself.

Provided that the principle of totality is observed, it would not matter whether the sentences for the offences committed in New South Wales were expressed to be cumulative upon or concurrent with the sentences for the offences committed in Queensland; what counts is the effective total length of the sentences imposed.[15] There would have been less room for error if the judge had selected the first alternative in the present case. As he did make them concurrent, however, it would make the result clearer if this Court were to do the same on resentencing.

When sentencing after a successful Crown appeal, this Court must recognize the element of double jeopardy involved in having twice to stand for sentence by imposing a sentence which is ordinarily somewhat less than the sentence which it considers should have been imposed at first instance.[16] That is the approach which we have taken in this case. It will be necessary to deal only with the sentence imposed upon the first count in the first indictment, which was the longest and which represented the punishment for the totality of the respondent's criminality. We agree with the judge that there were no special circumstances warranting a variation of the statutory ratio between minimum and additional terms provided by [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). There has been nothing shown in the fresh material which satisfies us otherwise.

We make the following orders:
The Crown appeal is upheld in relation to the sentence imposed by Judge
Christie QC on the first count of the indictment to which the respondent pleaded guilty on 29 January 1996.
That sentence is quashed and, in lieu thereof, there is imposed a sentence of penal servitude for sixteen years, consisting of a minimum term of twelve years and an additional term of four years.
The minimum term commenced on 23 November 1992 and will conclude on 22
November 2004. The respondent will become eligible for release on parole on 23
November 2004.
The other sentences imposed by Judge Christie on both indictments are confirmed.
 [1] This was pursuant to the [Prisoners (Interstate Transfer) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pta1982359/). He states an intention to return to Queensland when possible.
 [2] L Vogel & Sons Pty Ltd versus Anderson (1968) 120 CLR 157 at 168;
Regina versus Holder & Johnston [[1983] 3 NSWLR 245] at 261;
Regina versus Bakhos [(1989) 39 A Crim R 174] at -178; Regina versus Harrison [(1990) 48 A Crim R 197] at -199; Regina versus Close <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 465.] [4] The findings are quoted at pp 469-470 of the Report.
 [5] (at 470).
 [6] (at 472).
 [7] The authorities are collected in Regina versus Simmons [(1995) 79 A Crim R ] at 35.
 [8] Regina versus Dodd [(1991) 57 A Crim R 349] at .
 [9] Regina versus Steven Edward Bus & AS (CCA, 3 November 1995, unreported) at 6-7.
 [10] Regina versus Rushby [[1977] 1 NSWLR 594] at -598.
 [11] Regina versus Moffitt [(1990) 20 NSWLR 114] at 118, , 134-135.
 [12] Regina versus Tait & Bartly <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295] at -300.
 [14] Everett versus The Queen (at 300).
 [15] Regina versus Hayes [[1984] 1 NSWLR 740] at 742;
Regina versus Gordon [(1994) 71 A Crim R 479] at .
 [16] Regina versus Allpass [(1993) 72 A Crim R 561] at .
 * * * 
