

Totally and Permanently Incapacitated Veterans' Association of New South
Wales Limited versus Gadd Matter No 2626/98 [1998] NSWSC 688 (8 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 14 January 1999 `TOTALLY AND PERMANENTLY INCAPACITATED VETERANS' ASSOCIATION OF NEW SOUTH
WALES LIMITED versus GADD` `2626/98` `8 December 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a notice of motion for an interlocutory injunction to restrain the plaintiff suspending the defendant from membership on any of the grounds set out in its letter of 7 April 1998. 
It is not necessary to set out what is in that letter or to set out the request for particulars which the defendant/cross-claimant made in his detailed letter of 18 April 1998. That letter was part of DXO2 which was before me in the separate question, and an additional copy has been left in the file.

A cross-claim by Mr Gadd was filed on 24 June 1998 seeking a final injunction that the plaintiff be restrained from suspending him on any of the grounds set out in that letter. There is also a claim by Mr Gadd that any action by the directors of the plaintiff to suspend him would be oppressive conduct under s of the Corporations Law.

That matter came into the expedition list, but no dates were available this year and it presently stands in the expedition list on 18 December 1998, so that, if the Judge then dealing with that list thinks it appropriate, it can be given a hearing date early in 1999.

At that hearing the question will be whether any order should be made pending a determination by the plaintiff company. It may be that the trial Judge will take the view that until there is an actual suspension no equity arises.
However, if the question is whether there has been unconscionable conduct already, then the question as to whether there has been a denial of natural justice by not providing proper particulars will doubtless be a live issue.

Mr Gadd says that there have been no proper particulars given to him in answer to his letter of 18 April and that the plaintiff should be ordered to give those particulars. Mr Mendel for the plaintiff says that all the particulars are in the five affidavits which have been filed. Mr Gadd denies this. It will be a matter for the trial Judge to deal with this dispute if he thinks it relevant.

At present there is no threat to suspend the defendant on the basis of the letter of 7 April until at least after the hearing of the cross-claim, though
Mr Mendel says that that situation may change, depending on the conflicts between the plaintiff and the defendant from now on.

However, the plaintiff is prepared to say that it will not suspend the defendant on any ground arising out of the letter of 7 April, without first giving him five days' notice of that intention. That is sufficient to prevent any injunction being given.

Accordingly, so far as the notice of motion is concerned, I should not order any particulars to be given because the particulars being sought are not particulars of the litigation, but particulars concerning a possible suspension, which may or may not take place. The furnishing or non-furnishing of those particulars is a matter to be considered on the question of natural justice generally, if that becomes relevant. Secondly, there is no current threat which warrants an injunction.

Accordingly I dismiss the notice of motion of 12 November 1998.
 (Mr Gadd and counsel addressed on costs) 
The notice of motion is dismissed with costs. The exhibits should remain with the papers.
 * * * 
