

Garcia versus Chuen and Ors Matter No 3371/93 [1997] NSWSC 184 (9 May 1997) ` 
Gloria Garcia also known as Gloria Lam versus Lam Tin Chuen also known as Wilsom Lam & 2 Ors` ` 3371/93` `9 May 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /93 - GLORIA GARCIA ALSO KNOWN AS GLORIA LAM versus LAM TIN CHUEN ALSO KNOWN AS WILSON LAM & 2 ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal from Master McLaughlin in litigation that has been pending between the parties for the last four years. The learned Master summarily dismissed the proceedings in their amended form on the basis that the amended statement of claim showed no cause of action. 
The basis of the present proceedings is a deed of assignment made between the plaintiff and the first defendant on 26 November 1991. That deed recited that a company, Ling Bros Pty Ltd, was the registered proprietor of land in
Elizabeth Bay and that the first defendant was to receive certain rights in respect of that land. The first defendant then by that deed made certain covenants. The relevant covenant is that he would "as beneficial owner of the shares of Ling Bros Pty Ltd ... (assign to the plaintiff) his rights, interests and ownerships of Levels 3, 4 and 5 or one-third of his ownership of the property known as Block A, 100 Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay." I emphasize that the document was by deed. The plaintiff gave no consideration.

The plaintiff lodged a caveat on the title. The caveat was defective both in form and substance. This was established in litigation which commenced before
Master McLaughlin then progressed to Mr Justice Hulme and the Court of Appeal, in which it was held that the deed conferred no interest in the property either at law or in equity.

The plaintiff then amended the statement of claim. The statement of claim is still not in the best form, but it pleads, amongst other things, the deed, a breach of the covenant in the deed being anticipatory breach by virtue of a transfer made by the first defendant on 29 April 1993, and damages.

The question before the court is a relatively simple one, that is, if one has promised by deed to give something that one does not have which is unenforceable to confer any interest in that property at law or in equity, can it sound in damages at law? 
The learned Master, in his judgment, merely said this on the present point: "It seems to me to fly in the face not only of principle but also of decided cases that in those circumstances the plaintiff could be entitled to damages for breach of contract expressed to exist in the deed of assignment." 
Mr Grieve QC, who appeared for the first defendant with Miss Coulton, says that the answer is plainly "no" and the learned Master's judgment on the point in unimpeachable.

However, there is a very real distinction between proceedings asserting an interest at law or in equity in property and proceedings for damages at law.
At law an assignment of future property passes no property because the law can only deal with property that is in esse. Equity, however, will treat an assignment of future property as a covenant to convey the property but will only enforce it if the assignee gave consideration. It will take this attitude whether or not the assignment is by deed. Equity does not recognise that at law under a deed consideration is unnecessary and looks for valuable consideration or at least good consideration such as natural love and affection.

However, at law, in actions for damages, there are two completely different and separate streams of liability. There are actions which have grown up under the old action in covenant on specialties and there are actions which are based on the old action of assumpsit. Only in the latter is consideration necessary; in the former the action can be mounted notwithstanding that there is no consideration.

Chitty on Contracts, 27th Ed, para 1-034 says: "Generally speaking, as will be seen in detail hereafter, the law will not enforce a promise to make a gift and requires reciprocity in simple contracts.
But in contracts contained in a deed no such reciprocity is ordinarily required, the rule being that a contract contained in a deed is good even against a party deriving no advantage from it. But equity never favoured voluntary transactions even though contained in a deed, and refused to grant its special remedies in cases where these were without consideration." 
The main authority referred to by Chitty is the decision of the Full Bench of the Common Pleas in Morley versus Boothby <case>; [(1825) 3 Bing 107]; [130 ER 455], where at ER 456 
Best CJ giving the decision said: "The common law protected men against improvident contracts. If they bound themselves by deed, it was considered that they must have determined upon what they were about to do, before they made so solemn an engagement; and therefore it was not necessary to the validity of the instrument, that any consideration should appear on it. In all other cases the contract was invalid ..." 
Similar statements can be found in the standard books of contract such as
Treitel 9th Ed, page 146 and Anson 26th Ed at 23 and 65.

As to this two things can be said: the first is that if one reads the passage from the judgment of Windeyer J in Norman versus Federal Commissioner of
Taxation <case>; [(1963) 109 CLR 9] at 24 which was cited by the learned Master, one might get the view that even at law the present deed could not be enforced in an action for damages. However, it seems to me that the learned Justice was not at all referring to the historical anomaly which exists in actions for damages at law which allows contracts by deed subject to an action for damages where there has been a breach.

The second objection is that, if the first defendant was never in a position to perform the covenant, there can be no damages. The illustration given in argument was of a person who promised to pay a hospital $1,000 a year for seven years. Ordinarily one would think that breach of such a term made by deed would mean that the hospital would be entitled for the present value of that payment if the person who covenanted to pay it reneged on the terms.
However, Mr Grieve QC says if the person never had $1,000 then there should be no damages. It seems to me that analysis falls foul of the way in which such promises have been considered in cases like Fadden versus Federal Commissioner of
Taxation <case>; [(1945) 70 CLR 555] but, in any event, it is a matter fairly arguable at the trial.

Accordingly, I conclude that although the learned Master's judgment is a well- reasoned one supported by authority, he misdirected himself as to the real issue he had to decide. In my view, the plaintiff has a valid claim for damages based on breach of covenant and the order that the learned Master should have made was to dismiss the notice of motion of 31 July 1996 with costs.

Accordingly, I allow the appeal. I dismiss the motion of 31 July 1996 with costs. The first defendant should pay the costs of the appeal, but is to have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act if so qualified. Exhibit PX01 may be returned. I give leave to amend the statement of claim as against the first defendant in accordance with Exhibit PX02. I stand the matter over to the
Registrar's list on 5 August 1997 at 9.30am with liberty to anyone to relist it earlier if they should be so advised.
 o0o * * * 
