

Currabubula Holdings Pty Ltd versus Blackwood Hodge (Australia) Pty Ltd Matter
No 13291/91 [1998] NSWSC 99 (9 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 April 1998 
CURRABUBULA HOLDINGS PTY LIMITED versus BLACKWOOD HODGE (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED /91 April 1998 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings, instituted in 1991, the plaintiff,
Currabubula Holdings Pty Limited, sued the defendant, Blackwood Hodge
Pty Limited, in contract and in tort arising out of the supply by the defendant to the plaintiff of a bulldozer which was alleged to be faulty.
The defendant filed a defence, together with a cross-claim, seeking $10,000, the last instalment for payment of the machine.

The main problem with the operation of the bulldozer was overheating and, in , this question was referred to a referee under Pt 72 of the Supreme Court rules. On 17 January 1997 the referee furnished a report, the effect of which was that the overheating was caused by inappropriate operation of the bulldozer, rather than any fault in the machine itself. On 17 February 1997 I ordered, by consent, that the report be adopted: Pt 72 r 13(1)(a). That order was entered on 10 July 1997.

On 20 October 1997, Murray AJ dismissed an application by the plaintiff to set aside my order adopting the report. The plaintiff had, in the meantime, engaged new solicitors. A brief history of the proceedings and of the correspondence between the parties leading up to the application is set out in the judgment of Murray AJ, and I do not propose to repeat it. By the application the plaintiff sought the opportunity to put further material concerning the operation of the bulldozer before the referee, and to invite him to reconsider his report. Murray AJ noted that this material could have been placed before the referee and that it added little to the evidence in any event. He characterised the application as "simply seeking a second chance to re-agitate matters which were before the referee prior to him making his report." 
His Honour referred to the judgment of Cole J in Chloride Batteries Australia
Ltd versus Glendale Chemical Products Pty Limited [(1988) 17 NSWLR 60] in which, upon the question whether the report of a referee should be adopted, Cole J observed (at p 67): "The Court will have regard to the futility of the process of relitigating an issue determined by the referee in circumstances where parties have had an opportunity to place before the referee such matters as they desire. It will also have regard to cost." 
More importantly for present purposes, Murray AJ acknowledged the inherent jurisdiction to set aside an order such as that which I made on 17 February
However, his Honour emphasised the caution with which a court should approach such an application in the absence of "a material change of circumstances": Brimaud versus Honeyset Instant Print (McLelland J, unreported, September 1988) at p 5, especially where the order was by consent "..
deliberately made, with full knowledge, with the full agreement of the solicitors on both sides": Purcell versus FC Triggell Ltd [[1971] 1 QB 358], per Lord
Denning MR at 363-4.

The Report 
Before me, now, is yet another application to set aside the consent order that the referee's report be adopted, this time on the basis of a denial of procedural fairness. The report records that, in September 1996, the referee had a meeting with a director of the plaintiff, Mr Anthony Paola, among others, at the plaintiff's property when the operation of the bulldozer was demonstrated and the referee drove it himself. From the evidence of Mr Paola before me, it appears that there were other people in the plaintiff's camp as well as representatives of the defendant at that meeting. The report goes on: "On 8 January 1997, the referee discussed the operation of the hydraulic circuits of the machine with Mr Ronald Crosthwaite of Marubeni Construction and Mining Equipment Pty Limited (formerly BHA)." "BHA", of course, is the defendant. There was no representative of the plaintiff present at that discussion. Appendix B of the report refers to part of the purpose of the meeting, but there is otherwise no evidence before me of what passed between the referee and Mr Crosthwaite. It seems that Mr
Crosthwaite has some relevant expertise and a report produced by him was referred to in engineering reports which were in evidence before the referee.
The plaintiff contends that such an informal discussion between the referee and a person who, given his connection to the defendant, could not be described as disinterested in the outcome, taints the report so that it should be rejected as a whole.

Part 72 r 8(2)(b) provides that a referee is not bound by rules of evidence "but may inform himself or herself in relation to any matter in such manner as the referee thinks fit." No doubt that sub-rule does not absolve the referee of the requirement to observe procedural fairness. However, there was little or no argument before me about how evidentiary informality might be reconciled with the dictates of procedural fairness in references under Pt 72 generally, or in this case in particular. More importantly, there is no explanation whatsoever why this matter was not raised in the earlier application before
Murray AJ. His Honour referred to the referee's meeting with representatives of the parties in September 1996 when the operation of the bulldozer was demonstrated (pp 6 and 7 of the judgment). In the report it is immediately after the reference to this meeting that the referee discloses his discussion with Mr Crosthwaite. It is a matter of which the plaintiff, through its legal advisers, must have been aware when the report was received: yet, early in the plaintiff consented to an order adopting the report and, later in that year, made no mention of this matter in its application to set aside that order.

In my view, the plaintiff has had ample opportunity to agitate this matter. As
McLelland J observed in Brimaud (supra) at p 4: "It would be conducive to great injustice and an enormous waste of judicial time and resources if there were no limit on the power of a party to have any interlocutory application or order relitigated at will." 
Accordingly, the application to set aside the order that the referee's report be adopted is refused.

The Statement of Claim 
The plaintiff's alternative application is that it be given leave to file an amended statement of claim. The proposed amendments are framed in contract, tort, and under <case> of the Trade Practices Act, and suggest a duty on the defendant to inform the plaintiff of the cause of overheating and to provide instruction to the plaintiff's employees on how to operate the bulldozer so as to avoid overheating.

The defendant opposes these amendments on the basis that they would be futile.
Indeed, the submission is that the application for leave to amend is not made for a proper purpose and amounts to an abuse of this court's process. As mentioned earlier, overheating was the main problem giving rise to these proceedings, but the original statement of claim also alleged other defects in the machine. The defendant's position is that the plaintiff should be directed to file an amended statement of claim without any reference to overheating.

Counsel for the defendant submitted that there is no basis upon which any such duty on his client could be inferred. He pointed out that the bulldozer was sold with an operations manual, and it appears from the referee's report that part of that manual deals with the possibility of overheating. He relied on a letter to the plaintiff from its former solicitors of May 1997, referred to in the judgment of Murray AJ, setting out the advice of senior counsel following the referee's report. It is sufficient to say that it expresses a most gloomy prognosis for the case and does not suggest any cause of action based upon the duty now propounded.

I was not taken by either party to the whole of the evidence upon which the issue raised by the proposed amendments might be determined. On the face of it the defendant's submissions appear to have some force, but I am not in a position to say that the new cause of action is hopeless. It is true, as counsel for the plaintiff pointed out, that the referee's report does not deal with this matter at all. I am well aware that the case has had a protracted history and that it is very late in the day for the plaintiff to reframe its case. Nevertheless, I consider that leave should be granted to file the amended statement of claim.

That said, I trust that the plaintiff will give very careful consideration to the merit of these proceedings before pursuing them further. Despite its partial success, I consider that in all the circumstances the plaintiff should pay the costs of this motion. The defendant argued for costs on an indemnity basis but, given the plaintiff's partial success, I do not think that is appropriate.

The application that the referee's report be set aside is refused. The application for leave to file the amended statement of claim is granted. The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs of the motion (on a party and party basis).
 * * * 
