

Suzanne Coates versus Government Insurance Office of New South Wales Steven
Coates versus Government Insurance Office of New South Wales Nos. Ca 40367/90; Dc /86; Ca 40368/90; Dc 38/86 Damages - Negligence [1995] NSWSC 160 (14
November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(1), KIRBY P(2) AND CLARKE JA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 30 November #DATE 15:2:1995 #ADD 14:11:1995 
Counsel for the Appellants:   B M J Toomey QC and R H B Wood 
Solicitors for the Appellants:
Walsh and Blair 
Counsel for the Respondent:   H J Mater 
Solicitor for the Respondent:  Government Insurance Office of
New South Wales
ORDER
Appeals dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Clarke JA. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons for those orders.
In particular, I agree that no successful challenge has been made to the conclusion of Judge Urquhart QC to the effect that neither appellant was shown to have suffered a recognisable psychiatric illness or injury (cf Jaensch v
Coffey <case>; [(1983-84) 155 CLR 549] at 559-560 per Brennan J).
In view of the difference of opinion between the other members of the court on this issue I should add some brief observations of my own.
First, it would be erroneous to approach a consideration of the reasons for judgment of the trial judge as though the only relevant evidence on the point were that of Dr Jolly. On the contrary, there was a deal of other expert evidence. Furthermore, Dr Jolly only examined the appellants long after the relevant events and at a time when, as he agreed, they manifested no symptoms of any psychiatric disorder.
Second, the evident reason why particular reference was made in the judgment to Dr Jolly was that his opinions were those relied on by the appellants, and represented the high water mark of the appellants' case.
Clearly, however, the trial judge paid regard to the whole of the evidence.
Third, Dr Jolly's opinions were in a number of respects extremely guarded and tentative. For example, he gave the following evidence concerning the appellant
Steven Coates: "Q. Prior to the inquest and following the accident the emotional trauma Steven suffered was a normal reaction?
A. It could be either. It could be normal, yes".
This evidence was later qualified but the matter was complicated by the suggestion that the inquest into the accident was itself a further significant cause of emotional stress.
Fourth, there is no reason to conclude that the trial judge made the mistake, attributed to him by counsel, of overlooking the fact that one of Dr
Jolly's findings as to the appellant Steven Coates related to the condition he "presently" manifested. When the reasons for judgment are read as a whole, in my view they reveal no such error.
The strongest evidence against the appellants was that of Dr Beesley, who was not cross-examined.
As to Suzanne Coates, Dr Beesley said: "1. There is no evidence to indicate the presence of a recognisable psychiatric injury or disorder ...
... The historical perspective leads me to accept that Mr
Coates' death resulted in deep sorrow and led to grief and mourning followed by some transient reactive depressive symptoms and psychosomatic symptoms for some 18 months to two years regarding Miss Coates. Miss Coates' feelings of sorrow, anger, anxiety, hostility, change in conduct patterns, irritability, insomnia, and abdominal pains, (were) indeed distressing but understandable in the circumstances".
Dr Beesley went on to express the opinion that what Miss Coates manifested was appropriate given the distressing circumstances and that it was something far short of mental or psychiatric injury or illness, or nervous shock.
Both Dr Beesley and Dr Jolly agreed that neither appellant displayed evidence of any demonstrable or significant degree of permanent injury, and their opinions as to the significance of the transient symptoms probably reflected, to a degree, the general uncertainty that exists as to what amounts to "nervous shock". Dr Beesley regarded Suzanne Coates' reaction, including her temporary psychosomatic illness, as within the bounds of a normal reaction to grief, whereas Dr Jolly, in his written report, referred to her reaction as "mildly abnormal".
In the light of the whole of the expert evidence the trial judge's conclusion that he was not persuaded that either appellant had suffered a recognisable psychiatric illness or injury is understandable, and has not been shown to be in error. There is no clear line between severe but natural grief, on the one hand, and "nervous shock" on the other. Many people become physically ill in reaction to grief. Many people grieve for a deceased relative or friend for an extended period. This does not mean that such people are suffering from psychiatric illness or injury. In the present case the experts agreed that there was no permanent psychiatric injury and disagreed as to whether there had been temporary psychiatric injury. The opinions of the expert who favoured the appellants were themselves guarded, and the trial judge was entitled to regard them as unconvincing. The appellants did not discharge the onus of proving that they had suffered from nervous shock.
The respondent, by a Notice of Contention, raised a point of law not argued in the District Court. The appellants learned of the death of their father as a result of information communicated to them by a third party. There was no direct visual or aural perception by them of the accident which resulted in the death of their father, nor did they witness or attend what some authorities have described as the aftermath of the accident. There was no sudden sensory perception, by seeing, hearing, or touching, of a person, thing or event, of the kind referred to by Brennan J in Jaensch versus Coffey (155 CLR at ).
If the Australian law on this subject is the same as the modern English law, as expounded by the House of
Lords in Alcock versus Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire Police <case>; [(1992) 1 AC 310], then the appellants could not succeed in their action, quite apart from their failure to establish nervous shock.
It is, however, not clear that, in relation to this question, the law of
Australia is the same as the law of England. The question that was decided by the House of Lords in Alcock was left open by the majority of the members of the High Court of Australia in Jaensch v Coffey (155 CLR at 555 per Gibbs CJ, at 556 per Murphy J, and at 608-609 per Deane J). Gibbs CJ said, at 555: "The law must continue to proceed in this area step by cautious step".
The matter is complicated further by an additional question that has been adverted to, but left open, by the High Court. Section 4 of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1944](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/) provides as follows: "4(1) The liability of any person in respect of injury caused after the commencement of this Act by an act, neglect or default by which any other person is killed, injured or put in peril, shall extend to include liability for injury arising wholly or in part from mental or nervous shock sustained by - a parent or the husband or wife of the person so killed, injured or put in peril; or any other member of the family of the person so killed, injured or put in peril where such person was killed, injured or put in peril within the sight or hearing of such member of the family.

Where an action is brought by a member of the family of any person so killed, injured Or put in peril in respect of liability for injury arising wholly or in part from mental or nervous shock sustained by the plaintiff as aforesaid and claims have been made against or are apprehended by the defendant at the suit of other members of the family of such person in respect of liability arising by operation of subsection (1) out of the same act, neglect or default the defendant may apply to the Court in which the action is brought and that Court may thereupon stay any proceedings pending at the suit of any such other member of the family arising out of the same act, neglect or default and may proceed in such manner and subject to such regulations as to making members of the family of such person parties to the action as to who is to have the carriage of the action and as to the exclusion of any member of the family who does not Come in within a certain time as the Court thinks just.
 
Where any application under subsection (2) is made the action shall be for the benefit of such members of the family of the person so killed, injured or put in peril as are joined by the Court as plaintiff's pursuant to such application and the Court may give such damages as it may think proportioned to the injury resulting to the persons joined as plaintiffs respectively, and the amounts so recovered after deducting the costs not recovered from the defendant shall be divided amongst the persons joined as plaintiffs in such shares as the Court finds and directs.

Where any case to which subsection (3) applies is tried by a judge sitting with a, jury, the jury shall find the shares of damages and the judge shall direct in accordance with the finding.

Any action in respect of a liability arising by operation of subsection (1) shall be taken in the Supreme Court or the
District Court".
Jaensch versus Coffey concerned events that occurred in South Australia which has no comparable legislation. Murphy J appeared to assume (115 CLR at 556-7) that the New South Wales legislation operated to limit the right of recovery that might otherwise exist at common law. On the other hand, Deane J at least regarded the question as open (155 CLR at 611), and referred to what had been said about it in Scala versus Mammolitti <case>; [(1965) 114 CLR 153] at 408.
The view of the common law that prevailed at the time of the enactment of this legislation explains why the legislature thought that the provision was one which extended liability. What is the effect of the section when the modern view of the common law has significantly altered?
The answer to that question does not turn upon the provisions of s4(1) alone. The remaining subsections also need to be examined in considering whether there was a legislative intention that the provisions of subs. 1 were to be definitive of the liability with which the legislation was concerned.
The consequences of a change in what the legislature has assumed to be the common law were considered in the judgment of Mason CJ and Toohey J in
Environment Protection Authority versus Caltex
Refining Co Pty Ltd <case>; [(1992-93) 178
CLR 477] at 505-6. In that case, the High Court observed that there were numerous State and Federal statutes which assumed that the privilege against self-incrimination was available to corporations. The High Court determined that the common law was otherwise. Their Honours said: "The circumstance that Parliament (or a drafter) assumed that the antecedent law differed from the law as the Court finds it to be is not a Mason for the Court refusing to give effect to its view of the law. Parliament does not change the law 'simply by betraying a mistaken view of it'. However, it is open to
Parliament to amend a common law rule by implication.
Whether a statute evinces such an intention is a matter of statutory interpretation. In that respect, it is one thing to say that the legislature accepted the law as it thought it to be; it is quite another thing to speculate upon whether the legislature would have sought to change the law had it realised what it was. If the legislative provisions were only workable if the law was as the legislature supposed it to be, that might serve to indicate that the legislature intended to change the law".
In the present case, the legislature clearly and (having regard to the date of the legislation) understandably assumed that the common law was as enunciated by the High Court in Chester versus Waverly Municipal Council <case>; [(1939) 62
CLR 1.] Parliament set out to change the law, and, again understandably, it described the change as an extension of the law. Since then the common law has developed, and, if the argument for the appellants is correct, has advanced well past the point to which the law was taken by the Act of Parliament. The question to be asked, as identified by Mason CJ and Toohey J, is whether the statute evinces the intention that the law on the subject of claims for damages for nervous shock is to be as stated in the statute, or whether, as senior counsel for the appellants has submitted, the statute is to be regarded as supplementary to, and not derogating from, the rights of persons at common law.
These are interesting and important questions, but they have been consciously left open by the High Court and their resolution should await a case in which the facts make it necessary to decide them. Since, on the view I take of the facts, the questions do not arise, I do not intend to express an opinion about them by way of obiter dicta which would have no precedential force.
JUDGE2
KIRBY P In these appeals, from judgments entered in the District Court by
Urquhart DCJ, three issues are raised. 
Three issues in children's nervous shock claims
Having regard to the terms of <case>(b) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1944](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/) (the Act), are the appellants. being the children of a person killed in circumstances giving rise to liability of a tortfeasor to the deceased. denied recovery for nervous shock upon the footing that the Act exhausts the circumstances in which members of the family of the person killed may recover damages for nervous shock? 
If not, are they nonetheless denied recovery at common law upon the ground that neither of them actually saw the accident, nor its immediate "aftermath", and each suffered the injury said to constitute nervous shock as a result of hearing of the death of the person killed (their father) from a third person (their mother)? and 
If the appellants can overcome each of the foregoing suggested barriers, have they, nonetheless, failed to establish that they suffered "nervous shock" within the relatively narrow view which has been taken by the common law of that injury? Under that view, damages for nervous shock have been distinguished from "ordinary grief" for which no damages may be provided.
The facts are set out in the reasons of Clarke JA. So are the terms of s (1) of the Act. To raise the first point, the respondent in each appeal required the leave of the Court as the argument was not advanced at the trial.
I would grant that leave. The point raised is purely a question of law. No conceivable additional evidence or line of questioning could affect the facts relevant to its application.
There is, therefore, no applicable procedural unfairness in permitting the respondent to rely upon the point. Cf O'Brien v
Komesaroff <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 310],8
By notice of contention in each appeal, the respondent also relied in defence of the appellants' claims upon the fact that the psychiatric damage alleged did not result from direct visual or aural perception of the accident; (2) neither appellant witnessed nor attended the aftermath of the accident; and (3) the injuries alleged did not result from the perception by either appellant of the accident or its aftermath.
 
The statute does not exhaustively define recovery for nervous shock
In my view, <case>(b) of the Act does not exhaustively define the right of persons to recover for nervous shock. The section is not expressed in a way apt to have that consequence. Anderson versus Liddy and Anor <case>; [(1949) 49 SR 320 ], 323. The phrase "shall extend to include" implies the continued existence of a right which is additional to other rights which remains unaffected. The history of the statute, being designed, in part, to overcome
Chester versus The Council of the Municipality of Waverley <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 1], is not supportive of the suggestion of an exclusive definition of entitlements to damages for nervous shock. The procedural arrangements originally provided by the Act deny the legislative purpose of abolishing common law rights. Those rights remained as they were, and as they were later to develop. It is an established doctrine in the interpretation of statutes that legislation should not be construed to take away common law rights except by clear terms.
There are also important reasons of principle why <case> of the Act would not be construed to be exhaustive of all other legal rights. The range of people who are likely to be so profoundly affected by the death or injury of another so as to suffer nervous shock extends beyond the "parent or the husband or wife ... or other member of the family" specified in the Act. Human relationships do not fit so readily into such neat categories. Grief and nervous shock are not limited, in their toll, to the relationships mentioned in the Act. The statute should therefore be construed, as Taylor J suggested in Scala versus Mammolitti <case>; [(1965) 114 CLR 153] at 159-160, as merely operating: "... to extend the field in which persons standing in a special relationship to a person ... injured ... may recover for nervous or mental shock ... Section 4(1)(b) ... operates to substitute for the test of foreseeability a concrete test. ... But it does not otherwise affect the cause of action of any such member of the family."
To the extent that the respondent advanced the argument resting on s4(1)(b) of the Act, it should be rejected. Cf Mount Isa Mines Limited v Pusey <case>; [(1970) 125 CLR 383], 549; Wilks versus Haines [(1991) Aust Torts Rep -078 (NSWSC)], 68, 652-3.
 
Recovery for nervous shock resulting from later communication
The second point, raised in resistance to the appellants' claim, presents greater difficulties. It concerns the entitlement of persons such as the appellants, who were children of the person killed, to recover damages for nervous shock although they did not witness the relevant wrong and were not within the immediate "aftermath" in such a way as to warrant imposing liability on the respondent as representative of the tortfeasor.
The respondent urged that the common law did not extend an entitlement to sue for nervous shock to family members, such as the deceased victim's children, who were merely told of the peril and the deceased's injury and death as a result of it. A longstanding principle of the common law in England was expressed by Lord Wilberforce in McLoughlin versus O'Brian <case>; [(1983) 1 AC 410 ], 423 in these terms: "... shock must come through sight or hearing of the event or of its immediate aftermath."
The object of the various formulations, designed to restrict recovery for nervous shock at common law, was to give effect to policy concerns.
These included that unless so restricted, the scope of recovery for an often very nebulous medical and psychological condition suffered by unforeseeable people who enjoyed a vast range of relationships with the victim of the tort, would become too broad and the recovery too potentially large and crippling. Cf F
Trindade and P Cane The Law of Torts in Australia (2nd ed) OUP, Oxford, 1993,
Professor
John Fleming expressed the concern about the expansion of recovery for nervous shock as "far from negligible". The fear was that, if extended, the right of recovery might open up "a wide field for imaginary claims". Cf Victorian Railway Commissioners versus Coultas [(1888) 13 App Cas 222 ], 226. It could put an unduly onerous burden on human activity for fear of exposing potential tortfeasors to the risk of perhaps unreasonable, distant and often unforeseeable damages. See J G Fleming, The Law of Torts, 7th ed,
Law Book Co, Sydney, 1987, 145. It could mean that for every wrong - at least with serious (ie shocking) consequences - a penumbra of liability would be cast to afford rights to a wide range of persons in a close relationship with the victim of the wrong. The result of these concerns has been the attempt by judges of the common law to introduce "several limiting devices". Alas, none of these has proved very satisfactory.
In
Jaensch versus Coffey <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 549], the judges of the High Court of
Australia divided concerning the prerequisite of damage being caused by perception. Gibbs CJ (at ) did not commit himself on the issue. Brennan J (at 567) stressed the necessity for perception-produced damage. actually experienced by the plaintiff. Deane J (at 608f) viewed the issue as an open one. Dawson J (at 612) rejected the recovery of damages in the case of socalled "distant shock".
The entitlement of recovery of damages for proved "nervous shock" on the part, at least, of young and loving children of a deceased victim of a tort is therefore open in the current state of legal authority in Australia. I do not consider that any authority of the High Court of Australia, or of this Court, requires a conclusion one way or the other. It is true that the House of Lords has recently rejected liability for communication induced shock and related psychiatric harm. See Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police <case>; [(1992) 1 AC 310 (HL).] However, a number of cases in Australia have shown that the courts of this country have proved resistant to the artificial line-drawing inherent in the former understanding of the common law rule. See eg Andrews versus Williams (1967) VR 831 (VFC, 834); Kohn versus State Government
Insurance Commission [(1976) 15 SASR 255 (FC)]
While it is notable that the plaintiff nervous shock victims in almost all of the foregoing cases were injured in the same accident as the deceased, the fact of involvement, in my opinion, should not provide the rationale for invoking an 'exception' to the rule requiring direct perception of the incident, or its immediate 'aftermath', in order to recover nervous shock damages. Petrie v Dowling is the exception. There, a mother, having been told to expect only concussion and gravel rash when informed of her daughter's bicycle accident, had her nervous question, "She's not dead, is she?" affirmed by the attending nurse. She subsequently recovered damages.
I concede the difficulty of drawing lines on policy grounds to restrict the exposure of tortfeasors to liability for nervous shock caused by a message of injury or death consequential upon the tort. However, provided the requisite factors of foreseeability and proximity are demonstrated, the logic which traditionally prohibits recovery where a plaintiff has been told of the incident and its effects, as opposed to directly perceiving the incident, is unsustainable. See N J Mullany and P R Handford,
Tort Liability for
Psychiatric Damage: The Lau, of 'Nervous Shock' The Law Book Co. Ltd, Sydney, , 160. I accept, with respect, the logic of Deane J's comments on the issue in Jaensch versus Coffey (above), 608 where his Honour said: "It is somewhat difficult to discern an acceptable reason why a rule based on public policy should preclude recovery for psychiatric injury sustained by a wife and mother who is so devastated by being told on the telephone that her husband and children have all just been killed that she is unable to attend at the scene while permitting recovery for the reasonably, but perhaps less readily, foreseeable psychiatric injury sustained by a wife who attends at the scene of the accident or at its aftermath at the hospital when her husband has suffered serious but not fatal injuries."
The facts before the Court in the present case do not present the same policy problems of vastly increasing the categories of possible litigants such as are created by the countless witnesses of disasters portrayed by means of mass telecommunications. See Alcock versus Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police (above) where the English courts were confronted with such a case.
Rather, I suggest, it is clearly foreseeable that, the young, loving children, at least, of a particular person seriously injured or killed will shortly be informed of the injuries or death and may, in certain cases, then suffer such a serious instance of "nervous shock" as to warrant holding the tortfeasor liable. Damage to such persons is certainly foreseeable in the ordinary course of human experience. In some cases that damage may take the form of nervous shock. The artificiality of restricting recovery to perceptions derived directly from active, physical proximity to the happening of the tort, or to its immediate aftermath. has been pointed out in numerous cases and academic commentary. See. eg, Danuta Mendelson, "The Defendant's
Liability for Negligently Caused Nervous Shock in Australia; Quo Vadis?" Monash Uni L R 16 at 45; Jane
Swanton, "Issues in Tort Liability for
Nervous Shock", [(1992) 66 ALJ 495], at 500; F A Trindale, "The Principles
Governing the Recovery of Damages for Negligently Caused Nervous Shock", [(1986) CLJ 476], Paull J, at 441f pointed out: "... once a breach of duty is established the difference between seeing and hearing is immaterial.
Hearing can be just as direct a consequence as seeing."
One could add to this proposition that hearing by telephone, or by later oral message, can, in today's world. be just as foreseeable and just as directly related to the wrong sued upon as if the vulnerable observer had received the shocking perception by his or her own eyes and ears at the moment of the relevant wrong. The rule of actual perception is in part a product of nineteenth century notions of psychology and psychiatry. In part, it was intended as a shield of policy against expanding the liability of wrongdoers for the harm they caused. And in part, it was a reflection of nineteenth century modes of communicating information.
But as Mullany and Handford (above) comment. at 168, "Judicial retreat to the sanctity of public policy arguments to deny the pragmatic and logical expansion of liability in this context is an unimpressive tactic and serves only to stunt the maturation of the common law."
The suggested rule is also hopelessly out of contact with the modem world of telecommunications. If any judge has doubts about this, he or she should wander through the city streets and see the large number of persons linked by mobile telephones to the world about them. Inevitably such telephones may bring, on occasion, shocking news, as immediate to the senses of the recipient as actual sight and sound of catastrophe would be. This is the reality of the world in which the law of nervous shock must now operate.
To draw a line and to expel from recovery all third party claims for nervous shock may be harsh. But it is at least rational and manageable in practice. However, it is neither rational nor manageable to draw the lines of recovery according to: 
The presence of the "victim" or absence from the event "or its immediate aftermath" whatever that may mean. Then there will always be conflict as to what the "immediate aftermath" was and how far it extended in time and medium; 
The direct perception of the shocking news by sight and sound and the
Indirect perception, eg by telecommunications, television, video or oral message; or 
The precise legal relationship of the claimant to the victim of the tort. Human relationships are so infinitely varied that to confine coverage to a parent, lawful spouse or child (who may, in fact, be indifferent) would be to exclude many other persons in close and intimate relationships, where grief and shock are profound and, having regard to the relationship, readily foreseeable.
The law should now recognise that, at least from a medical understanding of the outdated legal denomination of 'nervous shock', it is as much the direct emotional involvement of a plaintiff in an accident or perilous situation, as her or his physical presence at the scene of directly at its aftermath that is pertinent to the level and nature of the injury suffered, and the consequent psychological damage. See eg Mendelson (above) at -44.
The appellants urged that the enactment of the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), s 77 gave an indication of what Parliament took to be the common law in 1988.
It was submitted that the provisions of the Act amounted to a recognition by
Parliament of the advances in medical knowledge which have occurred since the passage of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1944](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/). It was argued that this Court should permit Parliament's understanding to assist in its declaration of the common law. I see force ill this additional argument.
There is no binding Australian authority to control the decision of this
Court on this point.
There is no reason of legal principle or policy to exclude reasonably foreseeable damage to persons such as the appellant children of the deceased person. I would therefore not be prepared to exclude them from recovery for proved "nervous shock" simply because they were not in the sight or hearing of the event which led to their father's death or its "immediate aftermath", whatever that phrase may precisely mean.
 
Did the appellants prove nervous shock or "mere grief"?
That conclusion leaves the third question.
This is whether the appellants have demonstrated that Urquhart DO was wrong in concluding that each of them had failed to prove that they had suffered "nervous shock" within the understanding of that condition as expressed in the cases.
I agree with Clarke
JA that little guidance is to be had, even in the recent cases, to assist in the differentiation of grief (which is natural but gives rise to no recovery of damages) from nervous shock (which is taken to be abnormal and compensable). Samuels JA in Swan versus Williams
Pty
Limited [(1987) 9 NSWLR 172 (CA)] at 184f expressed the rule which is generally applied in this State: "The next question is whether the learned judge was wrong to reject the ... claim for damages for loss ... caused by the nervous shock ... suffered as a result of the deceased's death. Lusher J came to the conclusion that the (plaintiff) had not established that the injury alleged had been sustained, finding that (the victim) had suffered no more than grief in his bereavement. In my view, the judgments in Jaensch versus Coffey <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 549] establish that in order to recover damages for nervous shock, the claimant must show that the condition precipitated satisfies the description of psychiatric illness or psychiatric or psychological disorder. As Brennan J pointed out in Jaensch versus Coffey (at 559-560) Lord Denning MR in Hinz v Berry [(1970) 2 QB 40] at 42 used the description "any recognisable psychiatric illness" which was adopted by
Windeyer J in Mount Isa Mines Limited v Pusey <case>; [(1970) 125 CLR ] at 394. It may very well be that the lawyers' use of a term such as "mental or nervous shock" indicates scant acquaintance with the subtleties of psychiatric medicine.
However, as I have indicated, the evidentiary requirement seems to me quite clear."
One might criticise the scarcely delineated distinction made between grief and suffering following tragic news and psychological or psychiatric injury. Even more open to criticism must be the suggestion, made in some jurisdictions, that illness resulting from grief as opposed to shock caused by sight or sound is not compensable. See Montgomery versus Murphy [(1982) 136 DLR (3d) ] If courts are to maintain that the requirement for damages is proof of a recognisable psychiatric illness, the existence of that condition is what should matter and not the classification of the initial reaction or catalyst as one either of extreme grief, shock or horror. See eg Mullany and Handford at 24.
Nineteenth century notions of psychological illness and an abiding suspicion of such claims (not so susceptible to objective scrutiny and determination) lurk in the cases to forbid recovery where prolonged grief is shown. extending beyond the norm deemed acceptable to our society. The changing composition of the Australian community, and different cultural attitudes to the demonstration of profound grief, afford yet another reason for reconsidering this area of the law. To adhere to stereotypes expressed in terms of "abnormal grief" derived from England, may work an injustice upon
Australian litigants for whom the norms are different and grief reaction more variable than was hitherto expressed to be the case.
The appellants submitted that the opinion of Brennan J in Jaensch, limiting recovery to cases of established psychiatric disorders, were obiter and that this Court should follow its own earlier opinion in Macpherson v
Commissioner for Government Transport [(1959) 76 WN 352 (FC)], 352f. Some support for this view can be found in the reasons of Priestley JA in Swan at 194. For the purposes of this appeal,
I shall assume that the more stringent requirement contemplated by Brennan J is the law. I may make that assumption because, in my view, the evidence in this case which most concerned the primary judge reached that standard.
 
The case of the son - abnormal grief reaction and withdrawal
Turning to the case of Mr Steven Coates, Urquhart DCJ primarily dismissed his claim because he found: "An absence of that which must exist for nervous shock to be found ... (viz) that there was no conspicuous psychiatric illness."
In so concluding, Urquhart DCJ referred to the opinion of Mr Coates' psychiatrist. Dr Hugh Jolly. It is true that there was other evidence.
However, like his Honour I am content to deal with the claim within the opinion expressed by Dr Jolly.
When, however, Dr Jolly's report is examined, what he said was that: "PRESENTLY I cannot diagnose CONSPICUOUS psychiatric illness." (emphasis added)
In evidence, the witness repeated this opinion in cross-examination: "Q: When you say you cannot PRESENTLY diagnose any conspicuous psychiatric illness you say that without doubt?
A: Yes." (emphasis added)
With respect to Urquhart DCJ, his Honour appears to have transposed an opinion expressed at the time of the report (21 March ) or of the trial (10 April 1990) for an evaluation of the condition of Mr Coates in the critical period after he learned of his father's death.
Turning to Dr Jolly's report, this read: "Mr Coates presents as a young man lacking a little in personal confidence and identity, still hurting dreadfully inside on account of losing his father, and the 'I don't want to get too close to anyone ...' bit caused me some concern for his psychological welfare. I didn't have a chance to explore the relationship with the lady friend, and I don't know whether it is of real significance. There is also what I call a 'roots' issue.

Mr Coates has three grandparents alive in England, and I think he looks forward to returning to England, at least to reassess his origins and possibly his way of life. Presently, I think he has a lot of searching and sorting out to do, which would not have happened had his father not been killed.

Presently, the young man is not psychiatrically ill. His grief and unhappiness, described in my narrative speak for themselves.
The problem we have, as so often, is to identify whether the grief reaction I have described falls into the severe normal or mildly abnormal category. Many might say that the reaction is actually 'severe normal', but if Steven Coates is showing the after effects in terms of personal growth, maturation and ability (inability) to form relationships - then one would have to say that he had not properly negotiated adolescence, and, on the balance of probabilities, that flowed on from the accident and its consequences. On this basis, the grief reaction would have to be defined as abnormal, and if the rest of the family - and other important people who know Mr Coates well - still feel he is awkward and unhappy, then that would tip the balance of my diagnostic formulation."
Mr Steven Coates' mother described him as being more withdrawn since the accident, disturbed in sleep for many years and withdrawn in his relationships with his peer group. There had been some improvement in confidence "recently", ie proportionate to the trial which was five years after the accident which led to his father's death.
Acknowledging fully the difficulty of differentiating "mere grief" (if any grief may be described as "mere") and "psychological injury" or "psychiatric injury", it does seem to me that it was open to infer from Dr
Jolly's report that there was, at least to some degree, a psychiatric or psychological impact upon the personality of Mr Steven Coates consequential upon the receipt of the news of his father's traumatic death. The chronic depressive state described by Dr Phillip Greenberg would, in my view, amount to a psychiatric or psychological condition. The fact that depressive symptoms were transient is a reason for confirming recovery. It is not a reason for denying compensation for them altogether. See Swari v
Williams (Demolition)
Pty Limited [(1989) 9 NSWLR 172 (CA)] at 199.
With respect, the mistake which appears to have occurred here is to deny recovery because of Dr Jolly's conclusion as to the "present" absence of psychiatric disturbance, ie at the time of his report and oral evidence. This mistake, easily enough made, deflected Urquhart DCJ from deciding whether a condition had been demonstrated at some time after the subject accident which gave rise to a right of recovery.
The damages payable to Mr Steven Coates may not be large. Clearly, this
Court (which has seen neither him nor his psychiatric witness) cannot assess the damages. But many cases brought in the District Court lead to quite modest verdicts. The issue here is not whether Mr Steven Coates was entitled to a large verdict. He was not. But that leaves the question whether, by the proper application of the principles of the common law, he was to be denied a verdict altogether. In my view of the law, he was not.
 
The case of the daughter- physical symptoms requiring hospitalisation
If this is the conclusion in the case of Mr Steven Coates, it follows even more plainly in the case of Ms Suzanne Coates. She was eleven years of age at the date of the accident involving her father. There was uncontested evidence that she suffered serious stomach pains off and on for a period of eighteen months after the news of her father's death was conveyed to her. On one occasion, the pains were so serious that Ms Coates was admitted to hospital for two weeks. During most of that time she was on a drip. No physical cause was ever determined as the cause of her condition.
Dr Hugh Jolly, in a report of 7 November 1989 described Ms Coates' stomach pains thus: "In my view, the pains were a sort of 'marker' ... an indication that something psycho-pathological was going on, and needed to be fixed. ... Her immediate emotional reaction was one of denial, following which apparent physical problems became established. My opinion, bearing all information I have available in mind, is that the abdominal pain represented a psycho-pathological symptom".
No cross-examination was directed for the respondent to challenge the foregoing opinion.
Urquhart DCJ said of Dr Jolly's views: "During the hearing, Dr Jolly gave oral evidence and it was upon that evidence as well as Dr Jolly's written report that the plaintiffs' counsel submitted nervous shock had been established. I have read and reread both Dr
Jolly's report and the transcript of his oral evidence and have given the most careful consideration to it as I have to all of the evidence.
I am not satisfied that Suzanne suffered from more than a grief reaction to her father's death ... Indeed, as I have already said, Dr Jolly's evidence does not enable me to find as to either plaintiff a recognisable psychiatric illness." 
Conclusion: an entitlement to recovery for nervous shock was shown
With respect, I consider that in coming to this conclusion, Urquhart DCJ must have applied too narrow a view of psychiatric illness. It is hard to see what more a plaintiff could do, to recover in a nervous shock case, than to establish such a disturbance as to occasion physical symptoms which took her to hospital, which had no established physical basis and which was attributed by her psychiatrist to "something psychopathological going on".
With every respect to Urquhart DCJ, whose judgment is otherwise very helpful, the dismissal of the claim for nervous shock portrays too much of the old reluctance of the common law to acknowledge serious mental dislocation as a proper subject matter for compensation in the law of wrongs.
There is no real reason for such reluctance, at least in the present cases. The general understanding of the fragility of human personality, and the very acute reality of mental disturbance, has advanced considerably since the early cases of nervous shock were decided. There is no warrant, in 1994, for a Court such as this to exhibit the same resistance and antipathy to this head of claim as was voiced in the last century and in earlier decades of this. At that time knowledge of psychiatric disorder and its causes was confined. Judicial attitudes to it were hostile. If it be the case that grief alone does not afford a basis for recovery by family members and others deeply distressed by the consequences of the wrong of a tortfeasor to someone in close relationship to them, and if reasons of legal policy restrain the expansion of a remedy to such persons, such policy scarcely operates to deny recovery in the case of the present appellants. The uncontested evidence is that the appellants were the children of the deceased.
Each was very close to him. Each was at a vulnerable age at the time of his death. Each called psychiatric evidence to establish depression and mental dislocation. In each case this went, to some extent, beyond the ordinary expectations of "normal" grieving.
In the case of Ms Suzanne Coates especially, the mental condition exhibited itself for a time in acute physical symptoms requiring hospitalisation. On the preferable view of the evidence, each of the appellants established a case for recovery at trial. Whilst the damages for each would not have been large, it was wrong to deny damages altogether and to reject their claims on supposed legal grounds which when examined, have no convincing merit.
 
Orders
Because this Court cannot reassess damages, not having seen either of the appellants give evidence, nor having seen or heard the psychiatric testimony, the orders which I favour are, in each appeal: 
Appeal allowed; 
Set aside the judgment of Urquhart DCJ; 
Order that the proceedings be returned to the District
Court where a new trial should be had in each matter limited to damages; 
Order that the costs of the first trial be in the discretion of the judge hearing the second trial; and 
Order that the respondent pay the appellants' costs of the appeal but have, in respect thereof, a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
JUDGE3
CLARKE JA: The appellants in these two appeals were the children of Malcolm
Stuart Coates (the deceased) who was killed in a motor vehicle accident which occurred near Coonabarabran on 18 August 1985. The respondent was the insurer of the vehicle whose driver's negligence was the cause of the accident, and therefore, in accordance with the relevant statute, the respondent was liable to pay damages properly due as a consequence of the driver's negligence. Both appellants sued the respondent claiming damages for the nervous shock which each suffered as a result of the death of their father.
The trials of their actions were heard by Judge
Urquhart QC before whom the respondent admitted that the death of the appellants' father was caused by the negligence of the driver of the other motor vehicle involved in the accident. Judge Urquhart said that: "The real issue between the parties in each action is whether or not the plaintiffs suffered nervous shock."
His Honour concluded, in a reserved judgment, that the appellants had failed to establish their claims and entered verdicts and judgment for the respondent. The appellants have both appealed alleging that his Honour was mistaken in his conclusion and have contended that he failed to accord due weight to the opinions of Dr Hugh
Jolly who furnished a report which was tendered in evidence and gave oral evidence in the appellants' case.
The evidence led at the trial established conclusively that neither appellant saw the accident nor was anywhere near the scene of the accident at any relevant time. Neither appellant saw the body of their father, nor did they attend the scene of the accident and witness something which caused them, or either of them, nervous shock, Each claimed that he or she suffered nervous shock as a consequence of being informed of their father's death.
Notwithstanding this evidence there was no submission to the trial judge by counsel for the respondent to the effect that neither appellant had established a factual basis for an award of damages, nor was the trial judge referred to s4 of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1944](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/) ("the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/)").
In summary, the only issue contested was whether the appellants, or either of them, had established that he or she had suffered from compensible nervous shock. I have already pointed out that the appellants assert that his Honour was in error in rejecting their claims but that issue was not the sole one which arose for consideration by this Court.
A short time before the hearing of the appeal the respondent sought to file a Notice of Contention pursuant to which it desired to argue that, whether or not nervous shock was established, neither appellant had proved the existence of a factual basis for the award of damages for that nervous shock.
The argument which underlay this contention was that it was necessary for both plaintiffs to establish either that the deceased sustained his injuries or died in their presence or alternatively that they sustained their injuries as a result of what each saw or heard in the 'aftermath' of the accident in which the deceased died.
The appellants opposed the right of the respondent to rely on the arguments formulated in the Notice of Contention for the reason that the respondent had not complied with the rules and had only sought to raise the matters appearing in the Notice of Contention a short while before the trial.
The court heard argument upon the respondent's application for leave to rely on the Notice of Contention and, because the issues raised under the Notice were legal ones and there was no additional evidence which the appellants would have sought to lead if these issues had been raised at the trial, the court granted the respondent leave to rely upon the notice.
Although in a sense the issues raised by the Notice of Contention arise for consideration prior to the matters relied upon by the appellants it is convenient in the first instance to deal with the
Notice of Appeal.
 
Notice of Appeal
The appellant Steven Coates (Steven) was fourteen and the appellant
Suzanne Coates (Suzanne) was eleven at the time of their father's death. They were both born in England and lived there until the family migrated to
Australia in February 1982. The deceased was a long distance truck driver and although he was away from home regularly he had a close relationship with his two children and in particular with Steven with whom he enjoyed many outdoor activities. Steven also accompanied his father on occasions on long distance trips and had done so on the Friday preceding the accident when the two of them travelled from Melbourne to their home.
On the Saturday evening Steven went to the home of some friends while his father drove to Brisbane and while his mother and sister were in Sydney at a netball carnival. On the Sunday Steven was at home with a friend when police came and informed him of his father's death and took him to the home of friends. Later that day Suzanne and her mother returned home from Sydney and shortly afterwards were informed by police officers of the unfortunate death of Mr Coates.
The reactions of both children are chronicled in the judgment under appeal in a manner to which no exception has been taken. In the circumstances it is sufficient for me to summarise the histories of each of the appellants before turning to consider his Honour's conclusion in the light of the medical evidence. Upon learning of his father's death Steven became very angry and withdrawn and denied to himself that his father had died. On the Sunday evening he required sedatives and he has little memory of the days leading to the funeral. For that occasion his wore his father's shoes and jacket although they were far too big for him. He continued to wear the shoes until they wore out and occasionally still wears the jacket. After some hesitation he returned to school a short while after the funeral. Initially he went to Cootamundra
High School and then transferred to Temora High School where he obtained his
Higher School Certificate. He then enrolled in a college of journalism in
Sydney and as a result of some work experience with a magazine publisher during his course he was eventually offered and accepted a position as a staff writer. He has remained in that employment since and he enjoys his work.
Steven did not enjoy schooling at Cootamundra High School and had little, if any, social life with his peer group. However, the family had not been living in that district for long and Steven had been finding difficulty settling into the school and his new social environment prior to his father's death. When the family moved and he went to Temora High School he was much happier and in Sydney he is able to mix with and relate to people. He has always been shy but he said that after his father's death he went into his shell and either did not want or could not communicate with people.
The position with Suzanne was somewhat different.
After the tragedy she commenced to experience pains in her stomach which came and went and interfered with her sleep and on one occasion were so severe as to have her admitted to hospital where she remained for two weeks. After her discharge the pains abated in duration and intensity and ceased after about 12 months. At the time of trial she was in year 11, was a good student and hoped to become a primary school teacher. She still occasionally suffered from 'teary sessions' when something relating to her father was raised.
His Honour said that he was not satisfied that Suzanne suffered from more than a grief reaction to her father's death and that, whilst he was satisfied that Steven's reaction was an abnormal grief reaction he was not satisfied that it constituted a recognisable psychiatric illness. In his judgment the trial judge made it clear that he had had regard to all of the evidence but as the appellant relied primarily on the opinions expressed by Dr Jolly his
Honour gave those special attention. In the course of discussing that doctor's evidence his Honour said: "... his opinion that there was no conspicuous psychiatric illness I regard oil the whole of his evidence as being the expression of an absence of that which must exist for nervous shock to be found. The word 'conspicuous' on the whole of his evidence does not in my view so qualify his opinion as to result in a finding of a psychiatric illness which though present was not conspicuous."
Counsel for the appellants seized on this portion of his Honour's judgment pointing out that the opinion expressed by Dr Jolly related to
Steven's condition at the time of examination (this flowed from the use of the word 'presently') and that what the doctor had said could not be understood to deny the existence of a conspicuous psychiatric illness at an earlier time. In the course of his submissions counsel referred to the concluding passages in
Dr Jolly's report of March 1990 in which he said: "Presently, the young man is not psychiatrically ill. His grief and unhappiness, described in my narrative, speak for themselves. The problem we have, as so often, is to identify whether the grief reaction I have described falls into the severe normal, or mildly abnormal, category. Many might say that the reaction is actually 'severe normal' but if Steven
Coates is showing the after effects -... - then one would have to say that he had not properly negotiated adolescence, and, on the balance of probabilities, that flowed on from the accident and its consequences. On this basis the grief reaction would have to be defined as abnormal, and if the rest of the family - ... - still feel he is awkward and unhappy, then that would tip the balance of my diagnostic formulation."
In his oral evidence Dr Jolly reiterated the identification of an abnormal grief reaction and said that presently he could not diagnose conspicuous psychiatric illness.
The claim that
Steven made was that he had suffered nervous shock as a result of his father's death. Whether he established that claim depends upon an evaluation of all the evidence in the case. But the question which arises for determination when such a claim is made may not be an easy one for a number of reasons in the light of the inherent vagueness of the phrase 'nervous shock'. This vagueness can be exemplified in a passage from the judgment of the full Supreme Court of New South Wales in MacPherson v
Commissioner for Government
Transport [(1959) 76 WN 352] wherein it was said: "His Honour was at pains to draw the distinction between what he called ordinary, grief the natural result of his wife's death, and grief amounting to an injury resulting from shock."
What is not explained in the judgment in that case is how the line should be drawn between what is described as ordinary grief and grief amounting to an injury. The authorities are at one in asserting that it is incumbent upon a plaintiff to establish the existence of an injury - variously described as psychological (Bradford Kendall Foundaries Pry Ltd versus Ryder, NSW Court of
Appeal, 4 June 1987, unreported) or psychiatric (Hinz versus Berry [(1970) 2 QB 40], at 560) - but there is little guidance to be found in the authorities to aid in determining whether the grief suffered is of such a nature as to constitute psychological or psychiatric injury. This is, perhaps, understandable because the question whether an injury has been suffered is in every sense a factual one depending upon an evaluation of the whole of the evidence in a given case and appellate courts have in the past responded to the factual situations presented.
Further, there are obvious dangers in seeking, in the context of a particular set of circumstances, to define the conditions necessary to exist before it can be said that a particular plaintiff has suffered from an injury. It would seem to me that little assistance is to be gained from the use of expressions such as 'normal grief or 'abnormal grief' and that a court is concerned to determine whether on the evidence presented the grief or suffering of a
particular plaintiff constituted, or formed part of, a psychological or psychiatric injury (see the discussion by Priestley JA in Swan versus Williams
Pty Ltd [(1987) 9 NSWLR 172], at 193-5).
In many cases (Jaensch was one) it will not be difficult to classify the reactions of a particular plaintiff as constituting nervous shock, for example, where the plaintiff has suffered a complete nervous breakdown and has been hospitalised.
In other cases the determination whether the plaintiff has established the psychological injury or illness necessary to sustain the claim will be close to the borderline and in those instances the tribunal of fact will be required to evaluate the evidence in order to ascertain whether it is satisfied that the reaction suffered by the plaintiff went beyond normal, and perhaps abnormal, grief and constituted a psychological injury. In carrying out its task the tribunal will, no doubt, be guided by the medical opinions which it regards as persuasive. The difficulties which can arise in a borderline case are exemplified in the present appeals by the fact that Dr
Jolly, who provided the greatest support for the appellants, expressed his opinions in guarded language.
A part, probably a substantial part, of his diagnostic difficulties resulted from the fact that he had only seen Steven on one occasion and that was at a time when Steven was not suffering from any conspicuous psychiatric illness. It seems to me that the highest that the doctor's evidence could be put is that there were features in Steven's case which could be regarded as a basis for postulating nervous shock.
However, as I have pointed out the doctor was guarded having, in his written report, gone no further than saying that upon the history he was given it would be reasonable to identify an abnormal grief reaction.
The trial judge gave careful consideration to
Dr Jolly's opinion but, as he made quite clear in his judgment, considered those opinions in the context of the evidence as a whole.
Accordingly, it is incumbent upon this Court, in my opinion, to have regard to the other expert evidence given albeit that Dr
Jolly was the only doctor who gave oral evidence. In this context it should be mentioned that there was no report given by any treating medical practitioner.
All the experts who furnished reports tendered in Steven's case were retained by the appellants' solicitors.
Dr Anthony Linford in November 1986 spoke of an extended grieving process but did not, in my view, provide assistance on the question whether a psychological injury had been suffered. Dr Phillip
Greenberg, who reported in March 1987, went further considering that a mild chronic depressive state supervened on a normal grief reaction. Dr M Beesley, who examined Steven on behalf of the respondent in March 1990, expressed an opinion entirely consistent with that of Dr Jolly that as at that time (March ) there was no evidence to indicate the presence of a recognisable psychiatric injury or disorder. He thought that Steven had suffered from transient depressive symptoms in association with a prolonged grief reaction which was appropriate in all the circumstances but did not constitute a mental disorder.
Having read all the opinions expressed by the doctors, and in particular those of Dr Jolly, I am unable to agree with counsel's submission that the trial judge misunderstood the thrust of Dr Jolly's evidence or that one can find error in his evaluation of the evidence as a whole. I, of course, defer to the trial judge's position of advantage in his assessment of Dr Jolly's evidence and having done that I am unable to conclude that any error pervades his Honour's final conclusion. Even if one disregards the advantaged position of the trial judge it is difficult to see in this borderline case in which no evidence was given by a treating practitioner that his Honour fell into any error. I can readily accept that Steven suffered from significant grief which extended over a lengthy period but I have not found any compelling evidence in the opinions of the doctors to support a conclusion different from that arrived at by the trial judge.
The position with Suzanne is somewhat different in that she was treated, and on one occasion hospitalised, for pains in her stomach which on one view could be associated with the grief she suffered at the loss of her father.
Notwithstanding, the medical opinions were expressed in even more qualified language than those which related to Steven.
The highest that Dr Linford, who saw her on more than one occasion, put it was that she suffered from a grief reaction 'greater than would normally be expected'. Dr Jolly said, in his report, that the abdominal pain represented a psychopathological symptom and that
Suzanne exhibited an abnormal grief reaction. He went on to add that there was no evidence of a major depressive illness. In his oral evidence he expressed the opinion that she was not suffering from any conspicuous psychiatric illness when he saw her.
 .
Dr Beesley expressed the opinion that there was no evidence of injury. A psychologist, Mr McKinnon, who examined Suzanne on behalf of the respondent, wrote a report in which there is one paragraph which provides some insight into his Honour's ultimate conclusion that Suzanne had demonstrated nothing more than a grief reaction. The relevant paragraph reads: "Spending time with memorabilia relating to a deceased loved one is regarded as a normal response to grief and appropriate for the effective completion of the grieving process. It is, however, about 4 years since her father's death and this is longer than the normal grieving process. On the other hand, her scholastic effort and her social life do not seem to be affected by grief. She is said to have many friends, and she engages in sports and reading just like any other teenager. It does not seem that Suzanne's concern over her dead father could be regarded as a maladjustment, since, apart from an emotional sensitivity when discussing her father, she seems otherwise unaffected."
Having regard to the whole of that evidence and with particular regard to the evidence that she was a pleasant and friendly person who related well to her peers I can find no basis upon which to conclude that the trial judge erred. Although the grief in both cases appeared intense at times and of relatively long duration I do not think it can be said that the trial judge was wrong to conclude that the appellants had not established the existence of the injury necessary to sustain their claims.
 
Notice of Contention
In view of the conclusions I have expressed it is strictly unnecessary to deal with this notice. However, in deference to the arguments which have been presented it is appropriate that I make some observations about the points debated. Initially counsel for the respondent submitted that the facts provided did not, even assuming that the appellants suffered nervous shock, establish a claim for damages at common law. He did not refer to s4 of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/).
Once this section had been mentioned by the court he widened the ambit of his submissions and sought to rely upon it. The relevant part of that section reads: "4(1) The liability of any person in respect of injury caused after the commencement of this [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/) by an act, neglect or default by which any, other person is killed, injured or put in peril, shall extend to include liability for injury arising wholly or in part from mental or nervous shock sustained by - a parent or the husband or wife of the person so killed, injured or put in peril; or any other member of the family of the person so killed, injured or put in peril WHERE SUCH PERSON WAS KILLED, INJURED
OR PUT IN PERIL WITHIN THE SIGHT OR HEARING OF SUCH MEMBER OF
THE FAMILY."
This section was enacted to overcome the effect of Chester versus Waverley
Corporation <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 1] and at a time when the common law regarding the awarding of damages for nervous shock was far more restricted than it presently is.
In these circumstances an interesting question arises whether the section which was designed, and is so expressed, to extend the liability of a tort feasor operates to limit that liability in New South Wales with the consequence that a child who may recover in respect of the death of a parent under common law principles cannot do so unless the parent was killed, injured or put in peril within the sight or hearing of the child.
There is no authority of an appellate court specifically dealing with this question although there are a number of cases heard during the 1960s which could be thought to convey the suggestion that a plaintiff would not be denied the fight of pursuing a common law remedy by the existence of s4. (See
Thiele versus Batton and Anor [(1963) 80 WN 91] These cases do not, however, provide authority for the proposition that following the enactment of s4 a plaintiff could elect whether to sue under its terms or in accordance with the common law. On the other hand the section is, as I have pointed out, expressed as one which extends the common law jurisdiction and if that be correct I see no reason to construe it in a manner which would have the contrary effect. There is, however, dicta of Murphy J in Jaensch at 558, which may be regarded as supporting the proposition that the statute limited liability. But in my opinion in its context his Honour's statement should not be understood as supporting the proposition that the appellants could not proceed to recover damages for nervous shock according to the principles of the common law. (See also Deane J at 611 who mentioned but did not decide the question.) On the other hand there are two first instance decisions to the effect that the section does not operate to deny plaintiffs the right to rely both on the common law and the section. (Wilks v Haines ((1991) Aust. Torts Reports -078, 68,649) and Hanley and Ors versus Keary and Kearey (Supreme Court of the [ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/), January 1992, unreported).)
It is unnecessary to express a concluded opinion on this interesting question and I content myself with the observation that, as at present advised, I would not construe the section as denying plaintiffs the right to rely on the common law.
Turning then to the alternative right under the common law it is necessary to recall the fact that neither appellant saw the accident. Neither saw the body of the deceased. Neither visited the scene at the time, or shortly after, the accident Both reacted to the information conveyed by police officers. While decisions in England (McLoughlin versus O'Brian, <case>; [(1983) 1 AC 410)] and Australia (Jaensch) support the existence of what might be described as an "aftermath" doctrine, so that it is sufficient if the nervous shock results from events within the immediate aftermath of the relevant event (Lord
Wilberforce in McLoughlin p 423 and Deane J in Jaensch at 607-8) the leading authorities in England do not support the proposition that a plaintiff who is informed of the death of a relative and as a result suffers shock can sue to recover damages for that nervous shock. It is true that Hevican v Ruane [(1991) AER 65], permitted the recovery of damages in instances where the effective cause of the psychiatric illness was the news of the death of a relative but in Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire ((1992) 1 AC 310) the House of Lords expressed serious doubt as to the correctness of those decisions.
On the other hand the courts in Australia have not taken the firm stand of denying recovery where the plaintiff did not see the accident or events within its aftermath but suffered shock as a result of being informed of the death of, for instance, her mother. Indeed there are decisions of Australian courts which permitted recovery where there was no sighting of the accident, or its aftermath (Petrie versus Dowling, [(1992) 1 QdR 284], Hanley and Ors versus Keary and Keary (Supreme Court of the [ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/), January 1992, unreported); Melor versus Morans [(1985) 2 MVR 461]; Andrews versus Williams (1967) VR 831). In Jaensch the question was adverted to by Gibbs CJ (at 355) and Deane J (at 608-9) and left open.
In Alcock, Lord Oliver could not accept that the basis of the English law was some "arbitrary but unenunciated rule of 'policy'". Nor did he think it rested on foreseeability. In his opinion it flowed from the fact that in contemplation of the law persons who simply heard of the death were not in a relationship of sufficient proximity to give rise to a duty of care (p410).
In Australia, as I have pointed out, there is support for the view that a different answer should be given on the proximity question in circumstances where the deceased was a close relative of the plaintiff and, possibly, in other circumstances.

In the present case it is unnecessary to resolve the issue and I do not think it appropriate to proffer a tentative view by way of obiter dictum. The question should be reserved for another day.
The appeals should be dismissed with costs.
Since writing this judgment I have been furnished, belatedly, with additional submissions concerning the notice of contention. In the circumstances, there is no occasion to deal with them.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/160.html  
