

Regina versus Djk Matter No 60354/96 [1998] NSWSC 98 (23 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 April 1998 
REGINA versus DJK /96 March 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Smart J, Dowd J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PRACTICE - CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE - COMPLAINT - adequacy of directions - HELD - directions adequate. 
O R D E R 
Appeal dismissed. 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is a somewhat belated appeal brought by the appellant following his conviction after a trial at Lismore before Judge Rummery and a jury on an offence of indecently assaulting a female complainant aged nine years at a time when she was under the appellant's authority. 
The appellant, who at about the same time was convicted of similar offences in relation to another complainant, appealed successfully against that conviction to this court (See R versus DJK CCA unreported 8 October 1997). The Court was aware of this pending appeal. The court, which was differently constituted from the present court, went out of its way to point out that the directions that were given in the present case were significantly different from the directions that were the subject of the other case and the earlier appeal.

Following his conviction in the present matter the appellant was, on 14 June , sentenced to penal servitude for a fixed term of six months to commence on 14 June 1996. That term has been served.

The essence of the Crown case against the appellant was as follows.

The appellant was the grandfather of the complainant. On an occasion in August the complainant's parents went out for an evening's entertainment and left the complainant and the complainant's brother in the care of the appellant. According to the complainant, the appellant engaged in a series of inappropriate activities involving rubbing and touching, which the complainant described in some detail. As the complainant described these activities they were of an unequivocally sexual nature. This is not a case in which, on the complainant's account of events, there was conduct which might have been misinterpreted.

The particular act which gave rise to the charge involved a touching by the appellant of the complainant's vagina through underpants which she was wearing at the time.

According to the complainant, the appellant told her not to tell anyone what had happened and threatened her. This, she said, made her afraid.

The evidence of the complainant and her mother at the trial was that about two months later, when the complainant's mother told the complainant that she intended to take her once again to her grandfather's place where her grandfather was to look after her, the complainant told her mother of what had occurred on the occasion the subject of the charge.

According to the evidence of both the complainant and the mother, this was the first time that a complaint had been made about the relevant events.

The appellant gave sworn evidence. He said, "some months" after the occasion the subject of the charge, his wife informed him that it had been alleged that he had interfered with the complainant. The appellant's wife told the appellant that the complainant had "made some complaints that you were mucking around with her." The appellant denied this allegation to his wife. He went on to say that he was so affected by the allegation that he decided to go away from home for a while. He left home for several months.

It seems that the matter did not come to the attention of the police until about five years after August 1989. Understandably, perhaps, the circumstances in which that occurred were not explored either by the Crown or by the defence at the appellant's trial. There is nothing unusual in that. There may be good reasons why both sides would not wish to go into the question of how the police came to be involved in what had apparently previously been regarded as a family matter.

The evidence at the trial substantially consisted of the evidence of the complainant and her mother, on the one side, and that of the appellant on the other.

The appellant denied the charge. The jury were obviously satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the truth of the evidence of the complainant, and a conviction followed.

There are two grounds of appeal advanced on behalf of the appellant. Leave is required in relation to both of them. No complaint was made by trial counsel for the appellant about either of the matters the subject of the grounds of appeal.

In my view the appellant should not have leave to raise either of these grounds of appeal but that view, at least in part, relies upon what seems to me to be the lack of merits of the grounds. They have been argued on the merits and I will express my views about them..

The first ground of appeal is that the trial judge gave an incomplete direction on the aspect of complaint. It was a similar ground of appeal which accounted for the success which the appellant had on his earlier appeal in relation to other offences. However, as was mentioned, there was an important difference between the directions given by the trial judge which were the subject of the earlier appeal and the directions the subject of the present case.

In the matter the subject of the earlier appeal, there had been no complaint by the complainant for a long time; a period of many years. In the present case there was unquestionably a complaint about two months after the alleged event.

There was the same trial judge in both cases, but his Honour dealt with the matter the subject of the earlier appeal as though it were a case in which there was, for all relevant purposes, an absence of complaint, whereas he dealt with the present case on the basis that there was a complaint but there was at least a possibility that the jury might think there had been some delay in making the complaint.

In the present case the trial judge gave the jury the following directions. He said: "Consistency of an account given may be an indication of reliability.
Inconsistency of an account may be an indication of unreliability. If a witness has given an account at different times you might perhaps regard some inconsistency or variation of those accounts as being relevant to the reliability of the witness." 
A little later he said: "On the one hand a consistent story might indicate truthfulness, it might possibly be the product of a conscious desire to maintain an untruthfulness.
Some inconsistencies indicate unreliability. On the other hand, some inconsistency might be consistent with overall reliability and be no more than an honest consequential error of recollection." 
Later his Honour said: "Now let me first say that complaint evidence does not corroborate the complainant's evidence. I will be dealing with corroboration shortly. Evidence of the complaint was admitted as an exception to the ordinary rule against hearsay and hearsay of course is something said other than in the presence of the accused but it is admitted as an exception to that rule to assist you in deciding whether her conduct in making the complaint two months later was consistent with what she says happened to her on this day in August and to answer any argument that the absence of a complaint would suggest that the offence did not take place.

So it establishes only that a complaint was made and is allowed only to show consistency. It does not prove the truth of the matter complained about.
Equally, if there was no complaint or if the complaint is, in your estimation, a late one, then the absence of a complaint or a complaint that you would estimate is in the circumstances too late would demonstrate an inconsistency depending on your assessment of it of course in each case, an inconsistency with what it is alleged happened." 
The learned judge then went on to give further directions and warnings, including the standard warning about the fact that delay in making a complaint does not necessarily indicate that the allegation that the offence was committed is false.

The terms of the above directions accord closely with a passage in the judgment in Kilby versus The Queen <case>; <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427] at 448.

It was the failure of the trial judge to give a similar direction that resulted in the success of the appeal in the earlier case to which reference has already been made.

No complaint was made by trial counsel as to the manner in which Rummery DCJ directed the jury on this aspect of the case. I regard that as quite understandable.

There was, in my view, no error in the manner in which his Honour directed the jury on this issue and no relevant incompleteness in his direction.

The second ground of appeal argues that the trial judge should have given a direction to the effect that the appellant was placed at a disadvantage in investigating the allegation because of the delay in bringing the allegation to his notice.

As has earlier been mentioned, there was no substantial delay in bringing the allegation to his notice. The precise time at which the allegation came to his notice is not clear. He said it was "some months" after the alleged occurrence. It is important in this regard to put the timing of the events into context.

The occasion on which the alleged offence was committed was the last occasion on which the complainant ever went to stay overnight with her grandfather. It was the fact that she was taken back for another possible visit to her grandfather that resulted in the making of the complaint which she made to her mother.

It seems that the allegation that the grandfather had engaged in some form of sexual interference with his granddaughter was brought to his attention within a reasonably short period of time. It is obvious that he understood that the allegation was that something untoward of a sexual nature occurred between him and his granddaughter on the last occasion on which she had ever been to stay with him overnight.

He said in his evidence that the allegation had such an impact on him at the time it first came to his notice that he in effect left home for a period of months.

It is true that it only came to his notice that the police were taking an interest in the matter about five years after it occurred. However, it is also important to bear in mind that the nature of the evidence ultimately given at the trial by the complainant was such that the case did not turn upon possible misunderstandings or misinterpretations of conduct that could have been equivalent and innocent. What the complainant described happened was not affectionate behaviour of a grandfather which could have perhaps been misunderstood by an over excited imagination. What the complainant described was overtly sexual behaviour of an obviously inappropriate nature. On the other hand, the defence case was that nothing of that kind occurred between the grandfather and his granddaughter on the last occasion on which she had ever been to stay with him.

This does not appear to me to be a case in which it could plausibly have been argued that the appellant was placed at a disadvantage because of the delay in bringing the allegation to his notice. At all events, as I have said, it does not appear to have occurred to trial counsel that the judge should have been requested to give the jury a direction upon those lines and the appellant should not have leave to raise the matter at this stage for the first time.

For those reasons I would propose that the appeal should be dismissed.

SMART J: I agree. 
DOWD J: I also agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court is as I have proposed. * * * 
