

Handler and Anor versus Handler Matter No 2277/97 [1998] NSWSC 73 (10 March )

Last Updated: 8 April 1998 `GILBERT HANDLER & ANOR versus CHARLES HANDLER` ` 2277/97` `10 March 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs are brother and sister. The defendant is their stepbrother. The late Ernest Handler fathered all of the parties. Ernest Handler died on 19 November 1969 domiciled in New South Wales after first making his last will on 24 June 1968. Probate of that will was duly granted to Mr Leslie Leo Winter, a solicitor of this Court, on 26 May 1971. 
On 2 May 1971 the District Court of Tel Aviv, Israel granted letters of administration, annexing the same will, to a lawyer, Mr Samuel Z Degani. It would appear that Mr Degani acted as Mr Winter's syndic.

Clause 3 of the will gave the whole of the estate both real and personal of whatsoever nature and wheresoever situate to the first plaintiff as to nine twentyfourths, the second plaintiff as to nine twentyfourths and the defendant as to six twentyfourths. The testator's estate consisted of a business carried on partly from real estate owned by the testator or his wife, as well as land in Cooma, New South Wales, and Magdiel in Israel.

The testator's second wife, Magdalena, the mother of the defendant, made an application for provision under the Testator's Family Maintenance and [Guardianship of Infants Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/goia1916231/) .
Those proceedings were settled by an agreement made on 10 November 1978, the parties to the agreement being Magdalena Handler, Mr Winter, the plaintiffs and the defendant. The agreement is pleaded in par 9 of the statement of claim as follows: " 9. On or about 10 November 1978, Magdalena Handler, the Executor, the plaintiffs and the defendant agreed that in consideration of the promises given by each of the parties to the agreement: the plaintiffs and the defendants herein would all be joined as defendants in the Proceedings; 
Magdalena Handler would be paid a legacy of $58,544.00 by the Executor free of all death and estate duties and administration expenses on condition that Magdalena Handler transferred to the Executor certain shares she held in companies in which the Deceased formerly had an interest; the burden of (b) above would be borne by that share of residue passing to the defendant herein which share would be reduced and fully satisfied by the defendant transferring to the Executor certain shares and by the defendant herein being paid the sum of $58,794.00 by the Executor free of all death and estate duties and administration expenses; insofar as the portion of residue which would otherwise have passed under the Will to the defendant herein would not be sufficient to satisfy the order to be made in favour of Magdalena Handler, the burden of the said order would be borne equally by those parts of the residue which would otherwise have passed to the plaintiffs herein; application would be made to the Court for orders giving effect to the agreement." 
Paragraph 9 was admitted in the defence.

In 1978 both the plaintiffs and the defendant were resident and domiciled in
New South Wales. Eva Franco, the second plaintiff, is now resident in Hawaii
USA, though there is no evidence as to her current domicile.

Following the agreement, the proceedings were dealt with by the court. Exactly what happened is not clear as I have some documents but not all the documents from the court file in evidence.

The normal procedure in 1978 would have been that the judge would have satisfied himself that he had "jurisdiction" to make an order, then would have asked the parties what order they had in mind and, if he thought it appropriate, have made that order. It was not really until 1996 that judges in this Division made consent orders in [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) proceedings.
However, it may have been in this particular case, whoever the judge was, did just make an order in accordance with the agreement because it would seem that short minutes were handed up and all parties agreed that the court should make an order in the proceedings in accordance with their agreement.

The order was duly made in accordance with the agreement and later on in
November 1978 almost all the agreement was consummated by the transfer of the relevant shares. It would seem that although the agreement was that the widow and the defendant receive some $58,000 in cash, in actuality they received the testator's real estate on which he was carrying on the Rushcutters Bay branch of his business. In practical terms the settlement meant that the plaintiffs would carry on certain branches of the business on land that would be controlled by them, and the defendant other branches. The Cooma property in due course was acknowledged to be the property of the plaintiffs.

The background facts are that the plaintiffs and the defendant were not on speaking terms in 1978, nor are they on speaking terms now. It is clear that both sets of parties knew of the existence of the Israeli land in 1978, but neither side expressly referred to the Israeli land during the course of negotiations. Furthermore, the Israeli land was not referred to in the statutory affidavit that was then required for both probate and death duty purposes, known in the profession as the Affidavit D. These matters are the factual matrix in which the agreement from November 1978 must be construed.

It would seem that in 1978 the Israeli land was not thought by any party to have any substantial value. The plaintiffs say that they lived on this land when they were very little children and have some sentimental attachment to it. The male plaintiff said that he also could foresee that as the city of Tel
Aviv spread out, the land might one day become valuable.

Mrs Bennett SC, who appears with Mr Hallen SC for the defendant, addressed me in terms of real value and potential value, but really it was advocate's licence as any potential value would be caught up in what is the real and current value. The real and current value in 1978 of the land was very little.
The evidence now suggests that the land might be worth $US1.2 million.

The agreement is conceded by the parties. One of the essential differences between the parties is the construction of the agreement. The plaintiffs say that the true construction of the agreement is that the defendant would not make any claim to any of the land in the estate. The defendant says that the agreement only covered the estate or land in New South Wales, not the Israeli land.

There is some evidence of Israeli law in the affidavit of Miss Segelov.
However, her affidavit is not very expansive and there would be a lot of extra detail that had I been a continental judge I would have interrogated her about. However, what evidence there is suggests that under Israeli law the probate governs the disposition of the land of a deceased person, unless the appropriate Israeli Court otherwise orders, and that there are limited grounds on which an Israeli Court can otherwise order.

The proposition is limited to factors in existence at the time when probate was granted. However, there is an application pending in the appropriate
Israeli Court due for hearing on Thursday of this week, but to date no order has been made and perhaps no order will ever be made.

The parties have agreed that there are seven issues in the case and it seems to me convenient to state these seven issues one by one under a series of paragraphs. Under a paragraph which I will head "8" I will deal with other matters, and then under heading "9" give the result of the litigation.
On the true construction of the agreement admitted on the pleadings: does that agreement extend to the whole of the residue of the estate of the late Ernest Handler; or only to that part of residue situated in New South Wales? 
The agreement is pleaded in haec verba and is admitted on the pleadings. Only its construction is now in issue. The agreement, as stated in par 9 (c) of the statement of claim set out above, focuses on the defendant's "share of residue" being "reduced and fully satisfied" in a certain way.

There is no doubt at all that under the will the defendant's share of residue included the Israeli land. Accordingly, it seems to me that one starts with the concept that that was what the defendant was giving up.

Then Mr Spigelman QC, who appeared with Mr Whittle for the plaintiffs, says that the fact that the parties were not on speaking terms and the words in the paragraph "fully satisfied" indicate that there was to be a complete break between the parties the same way as one seeks to achieve a complete break under <case> of the Family Law Act. Accordingly, the idea that there was to be no property that was continuing to be held in the estate, that each item of property was split one way or the other, is reinforced.

On the other side, the surrounding circumstances that the Israeli land was not referred to in the Affidavit D and was not expressly mentioned in the negotiations are pointed to as significant factors.

Mrs Bennett SC spent a considerable time in her address pointing to what she says her client must have intended and what must have been in his mind when he was negotiating in an atmosphere of no one referring to the Israeli land.
However, the test is an objective test, not a subjective test, and what one must look to see is the contract as it was understood by a disinterested observer looking at the words which the parties had used to express their contract.

It does not seem to me that there are sufficient factors in the factual matrix to go outside what I consider to be the plain meaning of the words "share of residue" and "fully satisfied", and that these words refer to the defendant only receiving the $58,000-odd on the basis that all his other interests under the will would be given up.

There were some submissions put on the part of the plaintiffs that this view was reinforced when one went to some of the correspondence that was generated about this time. In pars 19 and 20 of the first plaintiff's affidavit (PA02) of 5 December 1997, there are recorded conversations where the defendant had had drawn to his attention the fact that the deal was that the Israeli land was now the property of the plaintiffs and that the defendant acknowledged that fact, but said that he could not sign anything because his mother would not let him.

There was no contradiction of this evidence. It does reinforce the view that I have formed. I am not completely satisfied, however, that under the existing rules of evidence it is valid reinforcement, but whether that be so or not, it would seem to me, for the reasons I have already given, question 1 (a) should be answered "Yes" and question 1 (b) "No".
On the true construction of the agreement, did the defendant agree: to accept the sum of $58,794.00 free of all death and estate duties and administrative expenses in full satisfaction of any claim he may have to a share of residue in the estate? that the defendant would not be entitled to make any claim to any share of the Land (as described in the statement of claim) pursuant to the provisions of the will? that the defendant would do all things necessary on his part to enable the plaintiffs to have the benefit of the agreement? and that the defendant would do all acts and execute all documents which it was in his power to execute to assist the plaintiffs to obtain the transfer of an undivided one-half share in the Land to the plaintiffs? 
It follows from what I have said in respect of questions 1 (a) and (b) both must be answered "Yes".

So far as (c) is concerned, on the agreement as pleaded, vide par 9 (e), it is admitted that applications would be made to the court for orders giving effect to the agreement. There was no express agreement that applications would also be made, if need be, to the court in Israel, but the general law implies a term in all such agreements that where parties have proposed to do something, which cannot effectively be done unless both concur in it, then each party impliedly agreed to do all that is necessary to consummate the agreement. I have paraphrased what Lord Blackburn said in the leading case of MacKay v
Dick [(1881) 6 App Cas 251] at 263.

I cannot see why that general rule does not apply in the instant case. It follows that (c) must be answered "Yes", and (d), which is really consequential, must also be answered "Yes".
Did the rule in British South Africa Co versus Companhia Mozambique [[1893]
AC 602] apply to the TFM proceeding number 39 of 1972 and, if so, is this relevant to the agreement sued on in the present proceedings? 
The "TFM proceeding" mentioned referred to the proceedings in which the court made the order that carried out the agreement pleaded in par 9 of the statement of claim.

The first preliminary matter to deal with is what is the "rule in British
South Africa Co versus Companhia Mozambique"? 
I think that it is as well as anywhere set out in Justice Nygh's book on the
Conflict of Law in Australia (5th ed Butterworths Sydney 1991) at p 89, adjusting for Australian conditions, that there are in fact two propositions covered by "the rule in the Mozambique case" viz: (a) an Australian court will not exercise jurisdiction in respect of the title to or possession of land situate abroad; and (b) an Australian court will not entertain an action for trespass to foreign land even if title is not in issue.

The rule in the Mozambique case was abolished in New South Wales in 1989, but the point being made by Mrs Bennett SC and Mr Hallen SC is that in 1978 when these orders were made the court had no jurisdiction in and about the title to the Israeli land.

However, the Mozambique rule was not an all embracing rule. It did not apply, for instance, at common law in a case arising on contracts, such as where one had a personal covenant to pay rent in respect of foreign land, see St Pierre versus South American Stores Ltd [[1936] 1 KB 382], nor did it generally apply in Courts of Equity. Indeed, Mr Spigelman QC and Mr Whittle point out the exclamation of Lord Nottingham in Arglasse versus Muschamp [(1682) 1 Vern 76], 77; <case>; [23
ER 322], that the principle was "surely only a jest put upon the jurisdiction of this Court by the common lawyer".

The decision in Penn versus Lord Baltimore <case>; [(1750) Ves Sen 444]; 27 ER 132; [[1558-1774] All ER Rep 99] by that other father of equity, Hardwicke LC, makes it quite clear that a Court of Equity has jurisdiction to deal with a dispute between parties outside the jurisdiction where there is undoubted in personam jurisdiction over the relevant parties.

In more recent times in Deschamps versus Miller [[1908] 1 Ch 856], 863 Parker J said that there were many exceptions to the "Mozambique rule": "but, without attempting to give an exhaustive statement of those exceptions,
I think it will be found that they all depend on the existence between the parties of the suit of some personal obligation arising out of contract or implied contract, fiduciary relationship or fraud, or other conduct which, in the view of a Court of Equity in this country, would be unconscionable, and do not depend for their existence on the law of the locus of the immovable property." 
Mrs Bennett SC referred me to the decision of a five judge Court of Appeal in
New Zealand in Samarawickrema versus Samarawickrema [[1995] 1 NZLR 14.] That case involved whether the District Court of New Zealand in its matrimonial jurisdiction had jurisdiction to deal in a backdoor way with property in Sri
Lanka. The relevant statute itself said that it only applied to immovables if those immovables were situated in New Zealand. It would seem to me that the decision is really one of that particular statute and has no application to the Mozambique rule in Australia. If I had thought that it did have some application I would have to consider whether the public policy matters discussed in that judgment are applicable to New South Wales.

It was, of course, true that at the relevant time no direct order could be made under what was popularly called the TFM Act over real property outside
New South Wales. However, at that time it was not unusual for people to commence a series of proceedings in each State or Territory in which the testator had real estate and then run the litigation in only one of those places.

A good illustration is Re McLean [1976] PNGLR 360, where the testator, who was domiciled in Papua New Guinea, had real estate in each Australian State.
Williams J at 375 dealt with the matter by taking undertakings from the applicant not to press her suit in various other States if he made an order in
Papua New Guinea, so that the decision was "once and for all". That was not an unusual situation. From my recollection, McLean's case contains the clearest discussion of the way in which these matters were dealt with at that time.

There would have been nothing to prevent the judge in 1978 in New South Wales taking undertakings or giving his imprimatur to any contractual provision which would have the effect of the whole of the dispute between the parties being resolved once and for all, notwithstanding that part of the testator's estate was an immovable situate outside Australia.

It must always be remembered that even if the learned judge in the present case made a consent order and, probably a fortiori, if there was both an agreement and then a court order to implement that agreement, that the agreement still survives as such and is a separate and independent source of obligation. So it is that courts often decline to set aside consent orders because even if the consent orders, as such, were set aside the relevant party would still have an obligation under the underlying contract; see for instance
R D Werner & Co Inc versus Bailey Aluminium Products Pty Ltd (1987) 16 FCR at 495-6.

Accordingly question 3 should be answered "No".
Are the plaintiffs estopped from asserting that:- the Land formed part of the residue of the estate of Ernest Handler for the purposes of the TFM proceedings; and/or the Land formed part of the agreement pleaded by the plaintiffs because the defendant relied on the evidence filed in the said TFM proceedings? 
The estoppel relied on appears to be conventional estoppel, that is, that each of the parties entered into their arrangement on a common though mistaken basis.

However, it is very difficult to see how this can be a case of conventional or any estoppel. It is clear from the evidence that all of the parties understood that there was land in Israel which was part of the testator's estate.
Accordingly, although the land was not actually mentioned in the negotiations there was no common assumption made by the parties.

Furthermore, there is, I think it is correct to say, no evidence, but if there is evidence there is only a scintilla of evidence that the defendant ever relied upon any "representation" made by or on behalf of the plaintiffs.

It should be remembered too that the negotiations that led to the settlement of 1978 were primarily being carried on by the defendant's mother and Mr
Winter, the executor of the estate. The evidence is, and I accept it, that virtually every time the defendant's mother came to see her solicitor the defendant went with her and, it is something that I infer, that he understood what was going on and he would have assisted his mother in reaching the agreement because he was an astute businessman.

It does not seem to me that this case is one where there was any estoppel at all. Both parties negotiated so that they would split up the estate and provide for the defendant's mother. Both parties knew of the existence of the
Israeli land and neither party at that stage seemed to put much significance on it. Accordingly, I can't see the factual basis for any estoppel and I answer all parts of question 4, "No".
If the Land was included in residue or was part of the subject matter of the agreement, did the defendant agree to the terms of the said agreement under a mistake of fact:- on the part of the defendant of which the plaintiffs knew or ought to have known; or by all the parties of these proceedings; or otherwise? 
Question 5 (b) must be answered "No" because as Mrs Bennett SC came close to conceding, this is not a case of common mistake, it is unilateral mistake or nothing.

In Taylor versus Johnson <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 422] three Justices of the High Court said at 432: "A party who has entered into a written contract under a serious mistake about its content in relation to a fundamental term will be entitled in Equity to an order rescinding the contract if the other party is aware that circumstances exist that indicate the first party is entering the contract under some serious mistake or misapprehension about either the content or subject matter of the term and deliberately sets out to ensure that the first party does not become aware of the existence of his mistake or apprehension." 
Merely setting out that proposition shows how inapplicable the rule is in the instant case.

What was the alleged mistake? It would seem that the mistake that is being alleged is that the share of residue referred to was the whole of the testator's immovables and not just his land in New South Wales.

What is the evidence that the plaintiffs somehow or other unconscionably engendered that mistake? I must confess I cannot find any. It was faintly urged by Mrs Bennett SC that there was some obligation on the part of the plaintiffs or the estate to affirmatively satisfy the defendant that the land was included, but no basis for such an obligation was ever put forward.

It was then put that the case was rather akin to a misrepresentation by silence, but again the circumstances are not present in the instant case which would go anywhere near that sort of situation.

Again it must be noted from the passage I have quoted that it is talking about a rescission suit. Rescission suits are only available where there can be substantial restitution made and the parties put back into their pre-existing position. It does not seem to me that this equity is applicable where one has a situation where there is no offer to put parties back into their original position, but the party saying that he was mistaken has in fact received substantial benefit under a contract which has almost been full executed.

Accordingly, I answer 5 (a) "No".
 (c) This submission relies on the rules of Equity that where specific performance is being sought if there is any "ungentlemanly" conduct, even though it falls short of a misrepresentation, that Equity will not lend its support to granting specific performance.

One does get statements of that nature in cases such as Redgrave versus Hurd [(1881) 20 Ch D 1], but the proposition is put more scientifically and much more narrowly in the leading case of Tamplin versus James [(1800) 15 Ch D 215], 221, that it is only if the defendant is going to suffer a hardship amounting to an injustice by holding him to his bargain that the principle applies.

I have discussed this proposition recently in Borg versus Howlett, 24 April , as yet unreported, and there pointed out that because what appears to be a per incuriam decision of the Court of Appeal in Boulos versus Angelopoulos BPR 11477 the rule might apply in a weakened form in New South Wales.
However, whatever form the rule applies in New South Wales the facts in the instant case do not bring the defendant within it.

Accordingly, I answer 5 (c) "No".

I should say that I have really answered each of these questions 5 (a), (b) and (c) as if the word "operable" appeared before the word "mistake".
Are the plaintiffs guilty of such laches, acquiescence and/or delay in commencing the proceedings that they are not entitled to the equitable relief sought in the statement of claim or at all? 
Three preliminary matters must be mentioned.

The defence of laches, acquiescence and delay is an equitable defence. It is only an answer to the court giving equitable relief. It is no answer to a court giving relief at law. Before the Judicature Act it often meant a complete win for the defendant and the plaintiff was left at liberty to commence new proceedings at law, but since 1972 under the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), indeed since the 1957 reforms, all that a successful reliance on laches has meant is that the matter is sent for damages rather than for equitable relief.

Under the structure of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s63.html) requires a judge to put an end to all the disputes between the parties under the relevant subject matter and [Pt (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/index.html#p40) of the rules does not require a person to set out the relief which he or she is seeking in the alternative. So (although the plaintiffs duly did so in this case) it is no longer necessary to set out in the statement of claim that the plaintiffs seek such further or other relief as might be appropriate.

Mrs Bennett SC and Mr Hallen SC, however, say that this sort of approach takes them a bit by surprise because had the plaintiffs made it clear that they were seeking damages the defendant would have pleaded the Statute of Limitations.
Had they pleaded the Statute of Limitations various matters would have had to be considered. One would have been whether under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s54.html) of the [Limitation Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), there had been a confirmation of the cause of action by their sworn acknowledgment in the defence that there had been an agreement, and that the defendant had declined to perform it. Such a pleading probably is a confirmation to the other party in the proceedings; cf Hipworth versus Maher <case>; [(1952) 87 CLR 335.] 
However, Mr Hallen SC says that even if this were so it would not have been within the original six year period. That, however, would have been a matter of fact and one would have had to work out whether the initial statement by the defendant in 1980, that he wouldn't sign any document because his mother wouldn't let him, was an actual refusal of a final nature or a provisional refusal, so that it was only within the recent period that there was a definite final refusal which was a breach. If that was so then either the sworn defence amounts to a confirmation or no confirmation was necessary. All this is extremely interesting and had I had more time I would have pursued it further, but in the result it does not affect my decision.

Equitable defences only succeed if it is equitable to give effect to them. Putting this conversely, when considering an equitable defence a Court of Equity weighs up the competing equities and only gives effect to the defence if the balance of equity lies with the defendant.

As a consequence of principle (ii) where the plaintiff is suing for specific performance of a contract which is partly executed in a situation (as here) where the person relying on the equitable defence does not offer to do equity, then the weight given to the equitable defence is substantially diminished.

The best illustration is Greene versus West Cheshire Railway Co [(1871) LR 13
Eq 44.] In this particular case the plaintiff sought specific performance of the erection of a railway siding. The facts were that he had objected to the railway coming through his lands and there had been an agreement that he would withdraw his objection to the line, and his objection to a private Act of Parliament, in consideration of the railway company putting a railway siding at least one hundred yards in length for the benefit of the plaintiff.

The plaintiff abandoned his opposition to the Bill, which passed, the company built the line but not the siding. It then sought to raise the equitable defence that Equity would not granted specific performance because the contract required some form of supervision and the plaintiff should be left to its remedies in damages. Bacon VC was caustic at p 51 in his rejection of such a submission. He said: "it must never be the case that Equity would allow a person to take the benefit of an agreement and then seek to avoid performing his or her obligation under the agreement claiming that damages were an adequate remedy." 
He went on to say that this would be an injustice too glaring to be endured.
Not only in the instant case do we have a defendant who has had the benefit of this agreement for the last eighteen years saying he will not fulfil it, but he is also saying, as is quite apparent from the submissions made on damages, referred to in (i), that the plaintiffs just cannot get damages at all.

Accordingly, it would seem to me that even if there was an equitable defence available to the defendant the court would hesitate a long while before giving effect to it.

The principle illustrated in Greene's case has been applied by courts recently. Apart from a series of my own decisions, it was applied in Wight v
Haberdan Pty Ltd [[1984] 2 NSWLR 280] at 291 where Kearney J said that Bacon VC comments in Greene's case were quite apt where a party agreed to lend money for a venture and then allowed the borrower, in reliance on the promise to lend money, to go so deeply into a transaction that he could not now extract himself. Kearney J added that to allow such a defence to succeed would be quite unjust and, accordingly, granted specific performance of a contract to lend money.

Returning to the substantive defence of laches and acquiescence, Deane J in
Orr versus Ford <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 316] at 338 analysed the various concepts. I read that judgment as indicating that the laches side of the expression involves delay in prosecuting a right, whereas acquiescence is silence or inaction in the face of unwarranted assertion of adverse rights.

Dr Spry in his 5th ed of Equitable Remedies (LBC 1997) p 231 says that it is clear: "That a defendant must establish, in order to make out laches, that the delay of which he complains has caused him to be prejudiced and that for that or for some other reason it would be unjust that specific performance would be granted. Unreasonable delay alone is not enough." 
He then cited The Lindsay Petroleum Co versus Hurst [(1874) LR 5 PC 221] at -240, that the delay must get to the stage where it would be "practically unjust to give a remedy".

The matter was gone into thoroughly in the written submissions on this point by Mr Spigelman QC and Mr Whittle, who provided some seven pages of written submissions. In those submissions in par 6 they analysed the cases and indicated that there are five main fields of inquiry that a court often makes when considering a defence of laches. I will briefly summarise these.

Are all the witnesses the defendant would wish to call still alive and capable of being called? 
If a witness is deceased, is it shown that the evidence would have been such that it may have cast a different complexion on the matter? 
Has there been a loss of documentary or other evidence, the loss of which is prejudicial to the defendant in that it substantially affects his ability to defend himself? 
Has the defendant acted to his detriment in relying on the laches and acquiescence? 
Has the plaintiff made irrevocable expenditure on the basis of laches or acquiescence? 
Apart from all the above, the only prime thrust of the defendant's submissions is in respect of a possible rectification suit where he says that there is some loss of documents or oral evidence.

As Mr Spigelman QC points out, the evidence did disclose that Magdalena
Handler and one other material witness for the defendant were still alive and living in Sydney, yet they had not been called, and that the defendant himself said that his relative disinterest was because he only had a quarter interest in a property which he did not think was very valuable.

It seems to me the principles that have been relied on by Mr Spigelman QC and
Mr Whittle are correct and the evidence does not amount to a defence of laches.

Accordingly, I answer question 6 "No".
Do the matters set out in issues 4, 5 and 6 above or otherwise make it unconscionable for the Court to grant the relief sought in the statement of claim? 
It follows that this also must be answered "No".
Other matters.

Two matters I might mention. The first is that I have treated, for the purpose of the discussion in question 3, the subject matter as being an immovable in
Israel. There is really insufficient evidence on Israeli law and it may be that one should treat the asset as if it were a chose in action in New South
Wales against Mr Winter because at the time when the agreement of November was made the estate would not appear to have been fully administered. I want to flag this point in case it be relevant if this matter goes on appeal, but I just assume it is an Israeli immovable because even if one makes that assumption one still gets to the answer favourable to the plaintiffs.

The second matter is that as I remarked before there is only weak evidence as to what Israeli law is. It may be that the defendant will take the position in
Israel that there is no jurisdiction for the Israeli Court to order him to transfer his interest in the Israeli land to the plaintiffs. However, there is undoubted jurisdiction here to sequestrate his estate or imprison him until he agrees to purge his conscience by doing so. Which way he plays the game is a matter for him, but this does affect the form of the orders that should be made, though it is probably best just to make orders A and B in the statement of claim and reserve further consideration.
The result of the case.

It follows from what I have said above that the plaintiffs are entitled to orders A and B in the statement of claim. The defendant should pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings to date. I reserve further consideration: the exhibits may be retained pending further order.
 * * * 
