

Remington versus Karakominakis [1996] NSWSC 370 (26 August 1996) 
REMINGTON V KARAKOMINAKIS /91 
Monday 26 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a claim for damages for personal injuries suffered by the plaintiff in a motor vehicle accident which occurred on 31 March 1990 on the Pacific Highway near Port Macquarie. The plaintiff was a front seat passenger in a vehicle being driven by her husband, Mr Kevin Remington, which was stationary. The vehicle being driven by the defendant ran into the rear of the vehicle in which the plaintiff was a passenger and forced that vehicle against the vehicle in front of it. Liability was admitted by the defendant and hence the proceedings before me were limited to the assessment of damages. Having regard to the date of the accident, the assessment of damages is governed by the Motor Accidents Act.

The plaintiff was born on 17 July 1934 and was accordingly fifty-five years old at the time of the accident and sixty-one years old at the time of the hearing. On 17 July 1996 she turned sixty-two.

The plaintiff left school at the age of fifteen. She was married in April 1957 and had three children born in 1959, 1961 and 1962. After leaving school she had had a variety of jobs and she worked until she was eight months pregnant with her first child.

In 1970 the plaintiff began to work at a shop selling hot bread. Within a month or so she was promoted to be manageress of the shop and she held this position until 1975. She then worked for two years in a milk bar. Between 1978 and 1981 she worked in a nut bar shop. She then worked at home for eighteen months knitting garments for sale. In about 1982 she commenced working a manageress at a bread shop at Roselands and she continued to hold this position until the accident happened on 31 March 1990. She described the work as "employ(ing) staff, work(ing) behind the counter, cleaning, banking...slicing bread...the big thing was to keep the customer happy and to make sure the business was running correctly". The plaintiff said in her evidence that at the time of the accident it was her intention to continue working in the bread shop and she denied that she and her husband had discussed retiring.

When the accident occurred the plaintiff and her husband had been returning from a four weeks holiday on the North Coast of New South Wales. The plaintiff was pushed forward by the impact on to the dashboard and then back on to the headrest. She did not lose consciousness. She immediately felt that there was something wrong with her chest. An ambulance arrived at the scene of the accident and the plaintiff was taken by ambulance to the Hastings District
Hospital. At the hospital she complained that she had been hurt in the head, neck and chest. At the hospital x-rays were taken. After the plaintiff had been at the hospital for six hours she was discharged. When asked how she felt at the hospital the plaintiff said:- "I had a very bad headache. The chest was giving me a lot of pain. I couldn't move my arms very well very much, couldn't raise my arms at all. My back felt as if someone had hit it with a hammer. I just felt terrible".

In the accident the plaintiff's husband's vehicle had been written off. The plaintiff and her husband arranged alternative transport and they travelled back to Sydney. The plaintiff saw a local doctor, Dr Roncevich, on 2 April
The plaintiff said in her evidence that when she saw Dr Roncevich she was "still very shaken. Traumatised I felt. A lot of pain, I could barely move. I couldn't turn over in bed. I just felt terrible". For the first couple of weeks after the accident the plaintiff had "aches and pain all over. The headache was incredible". She then asserted, "Dr Roncevich just didn't know where to start with me to ease the pain to be truthful".

Dr Roncevich referred the plaintiff to Dr Grahame Mahony. The plaintiff said in her evidence that when she saw Dr Mahony on 23 May 1990 - "the headaches were right down into the neck...and I had two pressure points below the skull...that were very painful. The right side of my neck was worse than the other side. That was going down into my right arm...right shoulder. I had a pain just above the waist on the right hand side. My chest was paining I just could not work out why that was paining so much. My buttocks were sore".

Dr Mahony suggested physiotherapy and prescribed Valium. The plaintiff said in her evidence that over the period she saw Dr Mahony, that is between May and
August 1990 she did not experience any improvement in the way she was feeling in her neck and back. Months later the difficulty the plaintiff had with her ribs resolved. The plaintiff's headaches did not subside at all.

The plaintiff said in her evidence that it was Dr Mahony who suggested that the plaintiff and her husband have a holiday. The plaintiff's husband had himself been injured in the motor vehicle accident. The plaintiff and her husband told Dr Mahony that they had a daughter living at Casino and Dr Mahony commended the idea of the plaintiff going to live in a warmer climate. In
August or September 1990 the plaintiff's husband retired and the two of them went to the north coast.

After moving to the north coast the plaintiff consulted Dr Castagna, a general practitioner practicing in Casino. The plaintiff first saw Dr Castagna on 28
August 1990. The plaintiff said in her evidence that at that time her whole body ached and "the thing" in her back above her waist was "like a red hot poker". The plaintiff has continued to see Dr Castagna every two or three months. In about December 1995 Dr Castagna prescribed antidepressant medication for the plaintiff, which upsets the plaintiff's stomach.

In about October 1990 a house was bought at Iluka on the north coast. In her evidence the plaintiff attributed responsibility for the decision to buy the house to her husband. She said "he made that decision...that's not my decision to buy".

After the accident the plaintiff never returned to work in the bread shop at
Roselands, although her employment was never formally terminated. She has not worked at all since the accident and has not made any attempt to obtain work.

The plaintiff described the work she did in the bread shop as "heavy work at times and very consistent". When asked to give an example of what was heavy about the work she said:- "Say if I was helping the baker to bring the bread out of the ovens and put it down on the bench, I would put mitt type things made out of sugar bags like a glove on, take the hot bread on to a shelf to cool and then I would slice the bread; look after the counter; answer the 'phone; also a lot of cleaning was involved".

The plaintiff said that there had not been any time since March 1990 that she had felt able to do such work. She said that she would not be able to work as a shop assistant, because it would involve a lot of standing and she did not feel that she could stand for long.

The plaintiff, when asked what her intention had been prior to the accident about continuing to work, said:- "I would have a good look at myself...if I turned sixty and if I turned sixty- two...and if I was losing favour with the customers and I could not keep up the hard work well I would consider coming back from full-time to casual work".

As regards her present condition the plaintiff said the left side of her body had cleared up very well, and the ribs had fixed themselves. However, she said that she gets headaches a couple of times a week in the back of the neck and pain above the waist in one particular spot and she had "a branding sensation" in the buttocks. The plaintiff complained about being a poor sleeper and finding it hard to relax in bed.

In cross-examination the plaintiff said that her job as the manageress involved hiring and firing staff, managing staff, banking, answering the telephone and being at the front of the shop at the counter. She agreed that it was normally the job of a baker to lift trays of bread in a bread shop but she would help, if the second baker was doing another job or if the bakers were running behind. The plaintiff agreed that if she was ill or not physically capable of doing something, she would organise some other member of the staff to do it. She agreed that after the accident she was capable of lifting a loaf of bread, answering the telephone, managing staff and serving bread. However, she did not think that she could stand all day as she had done before the accident. In cross-examination the plaintiff was asked questions about her husband. The plaintiff's husband was born on 14 May 1932. He worked for thirty-three years with the New South Wales Department of Public Works up to his retirement in August or September 1990. For about eleven to twelve years down to his retirement the plaintiff and her husband lived in a house at
Beverly Hills which was rented at a below market rent. The plaintiff said that her husband had become the tenant of the house through a friend of his who worked in the Department of Main Roads. By a letter dated 20 October 1989 the plaintiff and her husband had been notified that as from 24 September 1990 the rent for the house at Beverly Hills would be increased to $155 per week. There was no clear evidence about what the rent had been but I am satisfied that the increase to $155 per week was a substantial increase.

It was put to the plaintiff in cross-examination that before the accident her husband's "imminent" retirement was "on the cards". The plaintiff rejected this suggestion. She said that her husband had not been going to retire that early and that her husband had made a signed statement that he would retire at age sixty-five. She agreed that every year, when she and her husband had a holiday, they would discuss retiring to the north coast. She said that her husband had retired in August 1990 but that that had been because of the accident.

The plaintiff was cross-examined about whether she felt there had been any improvement in her condition since the accident and about what she had told doctors about whether she felt there had been any improvement. She said that she did not believe that her condition had improved while she was having physiotherapy prescribed by Dr Roncevich. It was then put to her by counsel for the defendant that she had told Dr Roncevich that she had had physiotherapy and her condition had improved. The plaintiff replied that she had said that she felt slightly better after the first couple of sessions of physiotherapy but "after the physiotherapy treatment wore off I would be back where I started again". The plaintiff had told Dr Wolfenden that no improvement whatsoever had occurred in her condition over a period of five and half years since the date of the accident. She said in her evidence that there had been "very little" improvement in her condition over that period of five and a half years.

In her evidence the plaintiff claimed that Dr Castagna had told her that "(it) would be very hard to go into work". It was put to her that Dr Castagna had expressed the opinion in a report that by January 1993 the plaintiff was fit for selective duties for thirty to forty hours per week. The plaintiff accepted that Dr Castagna had said that "but I did not feel well enough and I told him".

The plaintiff said that she did not feel fit enough to work.

The plaintiff saw Dr Grady, a psychiatrist, for medico-legal purposes in April
She has never seen a psychiatrist for treatment. Dr Grady did not suggest that the plaintiff take any medication. However, in December 1995 Dr
Castagna prescribed antidepressant medication for the plaintiff.

In cross-examination the plaintiff agreed that she missed living in Sydney and that she missed her friends.

The plaintiff's husband gave evidence in the plaintiff's case. As indicated previously, he was born on 14 May 1932. The plaintiff's husband said that he had retired from his position in the Public Service on 19 September 1990. He himself had suffered injuries in the accident on 31 March 1990 and he had been on sick leave from 1 April 1990 to 19 September 1990. The plaintiff and her husband had actually moved to the north coast before the plaintiff's husband's retirement became effective.

The plaintiff's husband denied in evidence that before the accident he had any plans about retirement. However, he agreed that he had signed a document to say that he would retire on attaining the age of sixty, on 14 May 1992. He was entitled to superannuation and when asked when the superannuation "matured", gave an answer which appears to me to signify that he could retire with superannuation at age sixty or age sixty-five. From August 1990 the plaintiff and her husband had lived with their daughter for about two and a half months and they had then bought the property at Iluka, using the plaintiff's husband's superannuation. One of their daughters who has children lives nearby.

The plaintiff's husband said that his marriage with the plaintiff had been a good marriage but the plaintiff's attitude to things in general had changed "pretty dramatically" since the accident. The plaintiff had become "aggressive". The plaintiff's husband performs more housekeeping tasks than he used to perform before the accident.

In cross-examination the plaintiff's husband said:- "We always thought that we would retire somewhere more pleasant...out of the rat race".

The following questions and answers occurred in the plaintiff's husband's cross examination:- "Q. So both of you were of the view that come retirement you would move out of the Sydney area? 
A. Eventually, yes.

Q. And that was the view you held before March 1990, you would move out of the
Sydney area at retirement? 
A. I wouldn't say exactly when I retired where we were going to go but in the future, yeah".

The plaintiff's husband agreed that the rent of the house he and the plaintiff had being occupying in Sydney was to be increased and that he did not have a great amount of money put aside to buy a house.

The plaintiff's husband said that he had enjoyed his life in Sydney. He and the plaintiff had regularly gone to the races and had had a good social life.
He said "social interaction has diminished quite a lot in the last few years to nothing...it's my wife who has become, I won't say antisocial, but she does not mix like she used to". Iluka was isolated compared to Sydney - "we were living right in the city here".

A Mrs Lollbach, whose husband had been a bookmaker, had seen the plaintiff and her husband regularly at the races while they were living in Sydney. She had also observed the plaintiff when she was working in the bread shop at
Roselands and she had observed that the plaintiff was very energetic and dynamic. When she had seen the plaintiff in March 1995 "I felt that she had lost a lot of the spark that she used to have".

A Mrs Cottier gave evidence that she had worked with the plaintiff in the bread shop from about 1983 to about 1986. She described the plaintiff as having been "energetic" and "enthusiastic". She said that physical work the plaintiff used to perform included lifting racks of bread and moving the sliced bread tray. She had seen the plaintiff in March 1996 and the plaintiff had seemed lethargic, drawn and slow. It was the first time she had seen the plaintiff since 1986.

No oral medical evidence was adduced at the hearing by either party and hence the medical evidence was confined to medical reports.

As the plaintiff said in her evidence, she first saw Dr Roncevich after the accident on 2 April 1990. Dr Roncevich referred the plaintiff to Dr Mahony.
The last time that the plaintiff saw Dr Roncevich was in May 1990. In his report of 15 April 1993 Dr Roncevich described the plaintiff on 2 April 1993 as follows:- "She walked slowly and stiffly. She was in pain, mostly about the neck area and (2) chest. She was sore in the back and could only move her head in a restricted fashion. Palpation of all areas was painful. Movements of head was limited by half in all positions and very painful. Movements of spine were reduced and tender to touch. Examination of arms and lower limbs were normal.
There was no neurological deficit".

Dr Grahame Mahony saw the plaintiff on 23 May 1990, 20 June 1990, 20 July 1990 and 17 August 1990. He did not see the plaintiff after 17 August 1990. In his report of 8 April 1993 Dr Mahony expressed the following opinion about the plaintiff:- "Mrs Remington gave a history of sustaining multiple injuries and it is consistent that these injuries could have occurred in the manner she described.

She gave a history of sustaining a contusion to the back of her head. She has developed symptoms referable to a cervico thoraco lumbar back strain in association with degenerate changes and fractures involving the left lower ribs.

She has required treatment and has been considered unfit for work".

In his report Dr Mahony noted that when the plaintiff was reviewed on 20 June she "had improved in regard to her symptoms". When the plaintiff was reviewed on 17 August 1990 Dr Mahony noted that the plaintiff "had gained improvement in regard to her neck symptoms and she said that she felt a lot better in regard to her back symptoms".

A report by Dr Castagna of 19 April 1993 includes the following passages:- "This patient sustained a whiplash type injury on 31/03/90 and also she states
Fractured lower four ribs of right chest wall. Soon after this injury she was treated in Sydney by her own Doctor.

I first saw this patient on 28/08/90 at that time and on subsequent occasions she complained of tension muscular contraction type headaches in the occipital region with radiation of pain down both shoulders. There was a vascular component to these headaches. The severe headaches occurring two or three times per week.

Prior to this consultation she had tried Valium. Capadex and Fiorinal for relief of her headaches. On this occasion she was commenced on Feldene and also Sandomigran as prophylaxis against the Vascular/migraine component of her headaches. After a few weeks the patient ceased her medications of her own volition.

By October 1990 the patient was depressed about her injury and recommenced her medication from which she derived some relief. At a later stage through 1991 and 1992 she was treated intermittently with Anti-depressants, analgesia and
Physiotherapy. The Physiotherapy was ceased because of transport problems to and from her house and the physiotherapy department.

During her numerous visits Mrs Remington was adamant that she was unable to work. Prolonged standing, walking precipitated her neck and lower and mid thoracic pain.

By mid 1992 the patients symptoms of Neck pain, headaches, Interscapular thoracic pain had subsided significantly. She was more mobile and physically more active and her pain although generally less, still had severe and acute exacerbation.

My impression is that from the time of her accident until the end of December , the patient was not fit for her usual work where she performed for some -12 hours per day. Since January 1993 Mrs Remington would be fit for selected duties of 30-40 hours per week.

In summary this patient sustained Musculo-Ligamentous damage of her spinal cord, from the level of cervical to mid thoracic vertebra. Although she has been unfit for work from the time of the Accident until the end of December because of continuing Cervical vertebral and Thoracic pain, Migraine headache and depression. Mrs Remington has significantly recovered to work in a limited capacity without doing any heavy lifting".

In 1995 Dr Castagna referred the plaintiff to Dr Ian Maxwell of Lismore who saw the plaintiff on 20 January 1995. Dr Maxwell noted that full spinal x-rays of the plaintiff showed evidence of quite widespread degenerative changes. He also noted that the plaintiff's bones were generally osteopenic. In his final report Dr Maxwell commented as follows:- "The symptoms suggest some ligamentous strain in the cervical spine region perhaps some mild cervical root irritation. I would consider these to cause a mild continuing disability in the region of 3-5 percent. She also complains of secondary headaches and one might add additional disability of 3-5 percent of total body function on the basis of these symptoms. (Overall disability of -10 percent of total body function). Symptoms have persisted over quite a prolonged period despite symptomatic treatment and it would seem likely they will continue into the distant future".

The plaintiff was seen for medico-legal purposes by Dr Peter Kendall, consultant physician, in April 1993. In his report Dr Kendall referred to "a nuclear scan which showed increased uptake in L6 - 8 and 9 ribs consistent with fractures". Dr Kendall expressed the following opinions about the plaintiff:- "This patient was quire asymptomatic before an accident in which there would have been considerable mechanical insult to her spine. She received what probably were seatbelt compression fractures to her ribs and there would have been considerable pain for many months, not so much just due to the fracture of the ribs, but due to subluxation at the costochondral junctions.

It is likely that many of the changes reported at such an early stage in Dr
Roncevich's report would have predated the accident. However it is possible that the wedging actually was partly initiated and certainly aggravated by the accident.

Certainly her whole spine would have been vulnerable and it is consistent with that for her to have been disabled for work. This would have applied in her busy job at the hot bread shop as well as in the domestic context.

Because of her vulnerable spine, she now still has symptoms. In many ways her observed stiffness and lack of mobility is worse than she herself described.
It is possible that there is some anticipatory pain but I think she is quite genuine.

Someone who still has to take 10 tablets of Panadol a day must indeed have quite a severe pain and her occipital headache certainly would emanate from her neck. It will be necessary for me to review this patient in the first half of 1994. I fear that she may still be in trouble then".

It would appear that Dr Kendall did not see the plaintiff again.

Dr Grady, a psychiatrist, saw the plaintiff for medico-legal purposes on 20
April 1993. Dr Grady made a diagnosis of "adjustment disorder with variable depressed mood, irritability and feelings of frustration". As regards the relationship of this condition to the accident Dr Grady said:- "This is an adverse emotional reaction to persistent pain and disability and to the negative changes in her health and lifestyle which have resulted from the accident and which she finds hard to accept and adjust to".

Earlier in his report Dr Grady had said:- "Returning to her current emotional state, Mrs Remington says on second thoughts she feels she does get quite depressed. She misses her former lifestyle which she enjoyed before the accident. Then she had a lot of contact with people she enjoyed and she and her husband used to go out socially and particularly they went out to the races which they now can't afford to do".

As regards treatment and diagnosis Dr Grady said:- "I do not think psychiatric treatment is indicated. The depression she feels is variable and reactive and such depressions rarely respond well to antidepressant medications".

Dr Grady has not seen the plaintiff since 1993.

The plaintiff was seen on a number of occasions for medico-legal purposes by
Dr Paul Limbers, orthopaedic surgeon, on behalf of the defendant. In his report of 8 August 1990 Dr Limbers expressed the following opinions:- "Her symptoms are reasonable. She has some chest discomfort from fractured ribs. These are settling and will not cause her any persisting disability.

She has some neck ache caused by the incident due to soft tissue trauma.
Symptoms may persist fro some time.

At the moment she is unsuited to go back to her normal work.

I would think that over a period of three to six months symptoms would probably settle to the extent where she could be suitably employed in her previous job.

Operative treatment is not, nor would it be indicated".

In his report of 8 May 1991 Dr Limbers said that the plaintiff's symptoms were caused by soft tissue trauma to some degenerative changes in the cervical spine. He also expressed the following opinions:- 
The prognosis for complete resolution is not good, I would think that she ought to at present commence working on a restricted basis, perhaps three days a week if this was available, and gradually working up to five days a week.

For the moment I don't think she could do a full day's work and I am not sure at her age that her symptoms are going to rapidly improve".

In a report of 22 July 1992 Dr Limbers expressed the following opinions:- "She probably has some minor symptoms referrable to the cervical spine. I am not of the opinion that headaches twice weekly could be attributable to the minimal to moderate cervical spondylosis which she has. It is reasonable to get headaches but not as constantly as she claims.

All in all, whether that is the case, I cannot really see why she could not be employed in a bread shop as a manageress.

She has some probable symptoms due to early degenerative changes. There is no doubt that some of these symptoms are caused by poor posture".

In a report of 6 April 1993 Dr Limbers stated the plaintiff's complaints as follows:- "There has been no change in her complaint. She states that she gets pain in the thoracic spine indicated at about T8. She gets some neck pain and pain across the shoulders, headaches from the suboccipital to the occipital region and these occur frequently".

In the same report he expressed the following opinions:- "I don't believe that her symptoms, if present, are other than minimal and due to the normal processes of wear and tear.

She is capable of carrying out her previous employment without any restriction".

In a report of 29 November 1995 Dr Limbers expressed the following opinions:- "As before, she had degenerative changes in the cervical and lumbar regions.

I believe her symptoms are not particularly severe. I am unable to determine why she could not be reasonably employed. I believe she is quite capable of carrying out her previous employment.

Any painful restriction would be due to the normal processes of wear and tear.

Further treatment is not really required apart from the osteoporosis. On x-rays this was not particularly marked. It is not reasonable to attribute aggravation of those osteoporotic changes to the motor vehicle accident".

Dr Wolfenden, consultant neurologist, saw the plaintiff on 29 November 1995 for medico/legal purposes on behalf of the defendant. In his report Dr
Wolfenden noted that the plaintiff was "very definite about all details of her symptoms". Dr Wolfenden's conclusions were as follows:- "Undoubtedly she could have sustained some bruising of muscles and ligaments in both the neck and the back in an accident such as that described. It is however quite extraordinary that no improvement whatsoever has occurred over the past 5 and a half years and her manner and the type of sensory loss leads me to believe that there is considerable exaggeration of her symptoms. In the presence of such exaggeration it is of course extremely difficult to assess what underlying element there may be of true organic disorder.

I believe that Mrs Remington would benefit from a slow return to the workforce with graduated increases in working hours".

Dr Revai, a psychiatrist, saw the plaintiff for medico/legal purposes on behalf of the defendant. Dr Revai said that the plaintiff informed him that in the six years since the accident "I don't think I've improved much. I find things very boring:. Dr Revai also records the plaintiff as saying:- "I've been cut off from the life I like. I hate not working. I miss the bread shop like you cut my right arm off. My whole lifestyle has had to change. I've gone from being an active person to nothing. I haven't made many friends where we are. At work I had that many friends, it was incredible. I get very tired if I have to stand for very long".

Dr Revai also recorded the plaintiff as saying:- "I love the races. I've been a few times up here but I have to sit down. I've lost interest. My husband likes to go and I think I should be with him. We still go once every one to two months. There aren't many meetings up here".

Dr Revai concluded inter alia:- "Mrs Billie Remington is a sixty-one year old married woman who was involved in an automobile accident over six years ago, in which she suffered four fractured ribs and soft tissue injuries to her neck. Since that time, she has been troubled by a variety of symptoms related to her soft tissue injuries. I am at a loss to understand medically why she has not recovered and from a psychological point of view, I agree with Dr Grady, that she is frustrated and has had difficulty adjusting to her symptoms. I would have thought that with counselling accompanied by relaxation therapy and an active rehabilitation program, Mrs Remington would be far better off than she is now. I just wonder if there are other factors at play, for example her unhappiness with the house that she lives in. Certainly, as I found Mrs Remington today, her disabling problems are in the realm of your orthopaedic consultants and are not a psychiatric problem".

It is necessary to make an assessment of the plaintiff's reliability as a witness, particularly in describing her own symptoms and complaints. In her evidence the plaintiff described her symptoms in quite florid language. The plaintiff said she had "aches and pains all over". The pain in her back was "like a red hot poker". She asserted "Dr Roncevich just didn't know where to start with me to ease the pain". I do not consider that the plaintiff was a consciously dishonest witness. However, the question remains to what extent I should accept her evidence as being accurate.

Dr Grady, a psychiatrist who saw the plaintiff for medico/legal purposes for the plaintiff, said in his report of 20 April 1993 that he believed that the plaintiff was genuine and did suffer from the symptoms of which she complained. On the other hand, Dr Limbers, the orthopaedic surgeon who saw the plaintiff for medico/legal purposes on behalf of the defendant, expressed the opinion in his reports that the plaintiff's symptoms were "minor", that he did not believe that her symptoms, if present, were other than minimal and that her symptoms were "not particularly severe". Dr Wolfenden, the consultant neurologist who saw the plaintiff in November 1995 for medico/legal purposes on behalf of the defendant, expressed the opinion that "her manner and the type of sensory loss leads me to believe that there is considerable exaggeration of her symptoms".

I have formed the conclusion that the plaintiff is not a fully reliable witness and that there is a substantial degree of exaggeration in her description of her symptoms. I have concluded that the plaintiff is not happy living at Iluka; she misses living in Sydney and at Iluka she has a lot of time in which to brood on and magnify her symptoms.

In some particular respects the plaintiff's evidence was inaccurate. The plaintiff's husband had signed some kind of document at his work, indicating an intention to retire from work at a particular age. In her evidence the plaintiff said that the document was to the effect that her husband would retire at age sixty-five. It could obviously assist the plaintiff's case, if the plaintiff's husband, but for the accident, would have continued working in
Sydney until he attained the age of sixty-five, rather than retiring from work and leaving Sydney at some earlier age. In his evidence the plaintiff's husband said that he had signed a document at work saying that he would retire at age sixty, that is on 14 May 1992. As the matter in contention is the age at which the plaintiff's husband had stated in writing that he would retire from work, I would accept his evidence on the point.

In her evidence the plaintiff attributed sole responsibility to her husband for the decisions to move to the North Coast in 1990 and buy the house at
Iluka. I do not accept that these decisions were decisions made by her husband, in which she did not participate. The plaintiff worked most of her adult life and was for a number of years the manageress of a shop. She presented in the witness box as a person of quite strong personality. I do not accept that decisions on matters which would deeply concern her, such as whether to leave Sydney and go to the North Coast to live and whether to buy a house at Iluka, would have been made by her husband, without her participation and approval. I consider that the plaintiff deeply regrets having left Sydney and having gone to live at Iluka and has persuaded herself that her husband is responsible for the decisions to do those things.

I have already referred to the florid language in which the plaintiff described her symptoms. The plaintiff told Dr Wolfenden in November 1995 that no improvement whatsoever had occurred in her condition over the previous five and a half years. In her evidence she said that there had been "very little improvement" over five and a half years. These statements are inconsistent with a report of her own treating doctor, Dr Castagna, who thought that by mid the plaintiff's symptoms of neck pain, headaches and thoracic pain had subsided significantly.

I find that in the accident the plaintiff suffered soft tissue injuries to her spine. A pre-existing degenerative condition of her spine was rendered symptomatic and the plaintiff has suffered headaches and pain in her neck and back, but not as severely as she claims. I accept that she suffered undisplaced fractures of a number of her left ribs and that she suffered pain from the ribs for several months but that any problem with her ribs then ceased. The plaintiff has been depressed at times since the accident but the depression is mild, variable and reactive, no psychiatric treatment has been sought or is required and, as Dr Revai suggests, her depression largely stems from her lifestyle at Iluka, rather than the accident.

Both counsel made suggestions to the Court as to what percentage of a most extreme case the plaintiff's case should be regarded. Counsel for the plaintiff suggested a range of 25-27 per cent. Counsel for the defendant suggested a range of 18 per cent to 22 per cent. I consider that I should find that the plaintiff's case is 22 per cent of a most extreme case and hence the damages for non economic loss are 22 per cent of $235,000, being $51,700 less a deductible of $19,500, producing a figure of $32,200.

I turn to the plaintiff's claim for damages for loss of earning capacity. I accept that the plaintiff's work as manageress of a shop involved occasional heavy physical tasks such as lifting trays and also involved standing for long periods. However, I find that as manageress she could ask employees to do the occasional heavy lifting.

It was common ground that by reason of the accident the plaintiff was totally incapacitated from working for at least some period. Counsel for the plaintiff, referring particularly to Dr Castagna's report, submitted that I should award damages for loss of earning capacity on the basis that the plaintiff was totally incapacitated from working up to December 1992, but that from the beginning of 1993 until the plaintiff attained the age of sixty-five she was partially incapacitated from working and should be awarded some percentage of the wages of a shop assistant and that some lump sum should be awarded as a cushion or buffer because of the chance that the plaintiff, if she had not been injured, might have continued working after she attained the age of sixty-five. Counsel for the defendant, referring particularly to Dr
Limbers' reports, submitted that I should award damages for loss of earning capacity on the basis that the plaintiff had been totally incapacitated from working for a period of no longer than six months and that she had then been partially incapacitated for a period which was now closed. In his report of 6
April 1993 Dr Limbers had expressed the opinion, which he adhered to in his report of 29 November 1995, that the plaintiff was quite capable of carrying on her previous employment.

I have concluded that I should find that the plaintiff was totally incapacitated from working up to about the middle of 1992 (say 30 June 1992).
In his report Dr Castagna, the plaintiff's treating doctor, said that by mid the plaintiff's symptoms of neck pain, headache and thoracic pain "had subsided significantly". Dr Castagna's opinion that the plaintiff was not fit for work until the end of December 1992 was an opinion that the plaintiff "was not fit for her usual work where she performed for some ten to twelve hours a day". I find that the plaintiff was partially incapacitated from working from mid 1992 to the end of 1992, that she was then partially incapacitated from working to a much lower extent from the beginning of 1993 onwards and that by the end of March 1993 she was capable of carrying out her previous work without restriction (Dr Limbers' report of 6 April 1993). The plaintiff, when informed by Dr Castagna of his opinion that she was capable of working, said that she did not feel that she was capable of working. She has not made any attempt to work.

An important question is whether, if the accident had not happened, the plaintiff's husband would have retired from work and the plaintiff and her husband would have left Sydney and gone to some isolated part of the North
Coast, such as Iluka, to live, where the chances of the plaintiff obtaining employment, particularly any employment of the kind she had had as manageress of the bread shop at Roselands, would be remote. In her evidence the plaintiff denied that before the accident she had discussed retirement with her husband.
She said that after the accident Dr Mahony had suggested that it would be a good idea if the plaintiff and her husband went north, where there was a warmer climate. I am, however, satisfied that, if the accident had not happened, the plaintiff and her husband would, soon after her husband's retirement, have left Sydney and moved to some remote spot on the North Coast.
The plaintiff's husband said in his evidence "we always thought we would retire somewhere more pleasant...out of the rat race". Every year the plaintiff and her husband had spent a holiday on the North or South Coast and they were returning from a four week holiday on the North Coast when the accident happened. The plaintiff's husband had signed a document saying he would retire at sixty and he would become eligible for superannuation on attaining the age of sixty. The plaintiff and her husband did not own their own home in Sydney and had lived for more than ten years in a rented home at a rent which was much less than a market rent. They had been notified that the rent was to be substantially increased. The substantially increased rent would be more of a burden once the plaintiff's husband was no longer working. The plaintiff and her husband had no grandchildren living in Sydney but they had a daughter and grandchildren living near Casino on the North Coast.

Counsel for the defendant submitted that, particularly because of the notified increase in the rent of the house they were occupying, the plaintiff and her husband would, even if the accident had not happened, have moved to the North
Coast at the same time as they actually did. I do not accept this submission.
The plaintiff's husband was himself injured in the accident and was on sick leave from the time of the accident until his retirement. In my opinion, the happening of the accident accelerated his retirement. If the accident had not happened, I consider the plaintiff's husband would have continued working until he reached the age of sixty but that he would then have retired from work and that shortly afterwards the plaintiff's husband and the plaintiff would have gone to live "out of the rat race" on the North Coast, where the plaintiff's chances of obtaining employment would have been slight.

In the light of my findings about the plaintiff's capacity or incapacity for working after the accident and my findings that the plaintiff, even if the accident had not happened, would, soon after her husband had attained the age of sixty years, have gone with her husband to live at some remote spot on the
North Coast where employment opportunities would be very limited, I consider that I should assess damages for loss of earning capacity as follows. I allow damages on the basis of total loss of earning capacity from 31 March 1990 to June 1992. Taking figures from a schedule of economic loss prepared on behalf of the plaintiff, which was "agreed as to the mathematics", these damages are the total of $7,275, $9,025.50, $4,288.20, $4,076.15 and $4,193, being $27,857.

I have already said that the plaintiff was partially incapacitated from working between 1 July 1992 and 31 December 1992 and between 1 January 1993 and 31 March 1993. However, during this period the plaintiff and her husband would probably have left Sydney and gone to the North Coast. I have decided to award a further lump sum of $5,000 in relation to the period between 1 July and 31 March 1993. I accordingly assess total damages for past loss of earning capacity at $32,857.

Past out of pocket expenses were agreed at $3,593.82. There will be no future out of pocket expenses and no future loss of earning capacity. I accordingly award damages as follows:- 
Past out of Pocket Expenses $3,593.82 
Non Economic Loss $32,200.00 
Past Loss of Earning Capacity $32,857.00 
Total $68,651.00 
If no application is made for any different order as to costs there will be an order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
