

Redden and Redden versus Regina Matter Nos Cca 60183/97; Cca 60184/97 [1997]
NSWSC 264 (18 July 1997) 
John Allyn Redden versus Regina /97 
Lorna Carmel Redden versus Regina /97 July 1997 
Newman J, James J, Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 JOHN ALLYN REDDEN versus REGINA /97 LORNA CARMEL REDDEN versus REGINA 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: These are two Crown appeals brought by the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act against sentences imposed by her Honour Judge Karpin in the District Court on the respondents, John Allyn Redden and his wife Lorna Carmel Redden. Each of the respondents had pleaded guilty in the Local Court to one charge under <case> of the Commonwealth Crimes Act of imposing on the Commonwealth and had been committed to the District Court for sentence. Each of the respondents adhered to the plea of guilty before Judge Karpin. 
In the case of each respondent, her Honour, after convicting the respondent of the offence, made an order under <case>(a) of the Crimes Act releasing the respondent without passing sentence, conditionally upon the respondent entering into a recognisance to be of good behaviour for a period of four years. Each respondent was fined $12,000.00 and payment of the fine within twenty-one days of the settlement of the sale of a property known as 46 Bridge
Road Hornsby was made a condition of each recognisance. A reparation order was also made against each respondent under <case> of the Crimes Act that the respondent make reparation to the Commonwealth in the sum of $45,580.00.

Section 29B of the Crimes Act provides, so far as is relevant, that any person who imposes upon the Commonwealth by any untrue representation with a view to obtain a benefit is guilty of an offence. The maximum penalty is imprisonment for two years and/or a fine of $12,000.00. The charge against each respondent was that between 14 March 1985 and 17 January 1996 the respondent had imposed on the Department of Veterans Affairs by an untrue representation with a view to obtain a service pension. It was alleged that Mrs Redden had falsely stated that she did not have any interest in real estate and that Mr Redden had falsely stated that he and his spouse did not have any interest in real estate, whereas throughout the period Mrs Redden was the sole owner of the property at 46 Bridge Road Hornsby.

The statement of the objective facts of the offences in the sentencing judge's remarks on sentence was taken from the statement of facts of the offences prepared by the prosecution. At all relevant times the respondents lived together in the matrimonial home at 34 Northcote Street Hornsby. From 1979 onwards Mrs Redden was the sole owner of the property 46 Bridge Road Hornsby.
On 10 May 1984 the respondents applied to the Department of Veterans Affairs for service pensions. Mr Redden had served in the Australian Armed Forces in
New Guinea in World War 2. Service pensions were subsequently granted to both
Mr Redden and Mrs Redden as his spouse, with effect from 28 July 1984.

As from 14 March 1985 entitlement to a service pension became subject to a means test, a pensioner's own home being disregarded but ownership by the pensioner or his spouse of any other real estate being taken into account.

In advance of the change, the Department of Veterans Affairs forwarded a statement of assets form to be completed by Mr Redden and Mrs Redden as his wife. Mr and Mrs Redden completed the form, signed it, dated it 24 October and forwarded it to the Department which received it the following day.
Question 15 in the statement of assets form asked: "Do you and/or your spouse own, partly own, lease, or have a life interest in any real estate or farms?"
In answer to this question the respondents ticked the box marked "no".

On 19 October 1988 Mr and Mrs Redden completed, signed, and returned to the
Department a Department form headed 'Income Statement', which the Department received on 25 October 1988. Question 17 in this form asked: "Do you own or partly own any real estate other than your own home?" In answer to this question the respondents ticked the box marked "no".

The Department of Veterans Affairs was advised of Mrs Redden's interest in the property at Bridge Road Hornsby by an anonymous informer. Mrs Redden's ownership of the property was confirmed by a search at the Land Titles Office.
On 9 January 1996 the Department wrote to the respondents stating that it had come to the Department's notice that Mrs Redden was the sole owner of the
Bridge Road property, notifying the respondents that their service pensions would be suspended as from 18 January 1996 and enclosing an income and assets statement form to be completed and returned by the respondents.

On 31 January 1996 solicitors acting for the respondents wrote to the
Department enclosing the completed income and assets statement in which ownership by Mrs Redden of the Bridge Road property was disclosed. It was asserted by the solicitors that Mrs Redden's mother had resided in the property until some time in 1985 when Mrs Redden's mother had moved to a nursing home. It was further asserted that in case Mrs Redden's mother might subsequently return to live in the property, the property was let between mid and mid 1994 to three successive tenants who were tenants at will and who virtually acted as caretakers of the property and who paid only $60.00 per week rent. The assertions by the solicitors about the letting of the property were supported by short statements from the tenants. It was further asserted that Mrs Redden's mother had died in 1994 and that in September 1995 Mrs
Redden had actually consulted the solicitors because of her concern that her interest in the Bridge Road property had not been disclosed to the Department.
Some preliminary advice had been given by the solicitors and a further interview with the solicitors was to have taken place in January 1996.

On 11 April 1996 the respondents made a lump sum payment of $21,000.00 by way of partial reparation. This payment was apportioned to them equally. On 2 July Mrs Redden granted an option to purchase the Bridge Road property, which was exercised on 13 January 1997. The resulting contract for sale had not been completed by the time the respondents were sentenced. On 8 July 1996 the
Department wrote to the respondents inviting them to agree to be interviewed but on legal advice the respondents declined to be interviewed.

The prosecutions of the two respondents were commenced on 25 November 1996.
The period during which it was alleged that each respondent had imposed on the
Commonwealth was the period between 14 March 1985, when the means test for a service pension came into force, and 17 January 1996, when the service pensions were suspended. Each of the respondents had received by way of a service pension a total amount of $56,080.00 to which the respondent was not entitled. After the part payment on 11 April 1996 was taken into account an amount of $45,580.00 was still outstanding, for which the Commonwealth sought restitution.

The proceedings on sentence took place and the sentences were pronounced on 20
March 1997. The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions appealed against the sentences by notices of appeal dated 9 April 1997. We were informed on the hearing of the appeal that the Director had given notice of intention to appeal on the day the sentences were pronounced. By 9 April 1997 the fines and the amounts of the reparation orders had been paid in full.

In her remarks on sentence the sentencing judge noted, as circumstances of aggravation, the length of time over which each imposition had taken place, the total amount of the benefit obtained, that the respondents were not naive or poorly educated people unfamiliar with filling in forms, that they could not have been unaware of the existence of the Bridge Road property as a weekly rental was being received from it and that the offences were committed out of greed and not out of need.

Her Honour noted in favour of the respondents that they had pleaded guilty, that the pleas of guilty could be taken to indicate remorse, that their conduct had shown a level of cooperation with the authorities even though they had not agreed to be interviewed, that the respondents were elderly - Mrs
Redden was 77 years old and Mr Redden 73 years old at the time of sentencing - that neither had any previous criminal history, that full reparation for the benefits obtained would soon be made out of the proceeds of the sale of the
Bridge Road property and that it was unlikely that either respondent would re- offend.

Her Honour noted the importance of general deterrence in sentencing for this kind of offence and referred to the principle stated by this Court in R v
Winchester [(1992) 58 ACrimR 345] and in other cases, that in a case of fraud on the social security system a custodial sentence should be imposed unless there exist very special circumstances justifying some lesser punishment. Her Honour then observed: "It is difficult to see what there might be in the background and circumstances of these two prisoners other than their now somewhat advanced years which would militate against the imposition of a custodial sentence." 
There was evidence before the sentencing judge about the health of Mrs Redden in the form of brief reports by Dr Fotheringhame, a consulting psychiatrist, and Dr Wilfred Millin, a general practitioner. Dr Millin's report also referred to the health of Mr Redden.

In her remarks on sentence the sentencing judge said, in relation to Dr
Fotheringhame's report: "Dr Fotheringhame's report suggests that the prisoner (that is Mrs Redden) is presently under her care and is taking a certain amount of medication on a daily basis for her nervous disorder." 
However, Dr Fotheringhame's report is dated 22 May 1990, that is almost seven years before the date of sentencing, and could not be relied on as evidence that Mrs Redden was currently under the care of Dr Fotheringhame. The report simply stated that as at the date of the report, 22 May 1990, Mrs Redden was under the care of Dr Fotheringhame and was taking doses of Valium and Sinequan each day for her nervous problems.

The report from Dr Millin was a current report, dated 14 March 1997. In her remarks on sentencing, Judge Karpin accurately stated that Dr Millin's report suggested that Mrs Redden had a long history of acute anxiety and severe depression for which she had had various forms of treatment with only limited success and that she had other medical problems including osteoporosis and insomnia. Dr Millin's report also disclosed that Mrs Redden had been treated by a psychiatrist, Dr Pasfield, for many years, that she had had an admission to Ryde Hospital and that she had seen a psychiatrist in 1995. Dr Millin also said that Mr Redden had been a patient of his practice and had exhibited extreme anxiety over a number of years.

Towards the end of her remarks on sentence the sentencing judge returned to the subject of the respondents' ages. Her Honour said that the weight which should be given to age in sentencing the elderly is not great if, as in the present case, the offender had avoided detection over a number of years while continuing to commit the offence and if the offence was a fraud on the social security system, a type of offence not infrequently committed by the elderly.
Nevertheless, notwithstanding her earlier statements that it was difficult to see any circumstance other than the advanced ages of the respondents which could amount to "very special circumstances" so as to justify the imposition of a lesser punishment than a custodial sentence, and that the weight which should be given in a case such as the present to the advanced age of an offender was not great, her Honour said that she had, albeit with considerable hesitation, "determined to deal with each of the prisoners by means other than a term of full-time imprisonment." She then proceeded to make the various orders which I have already summarised.

On this appeal it was submitted by counsel for the appellant that, as the sentencing judge herself acknowledged in her remarks on sentence, she was obliged to impose a custodial sentence unless there were very special circumstances justifying some lesser punishment. The only circumstances suggested in her Honour's remarks on sentence as possibly amounting to such very special circumstances were the respondents' ages and state of health.
However, it was submitted, the advanced age and ill health of a social security offender would not of themselves amount to very special circumstances. Reference was made to a decision of this Court, R versus Sopher [(1993) 70 ACrimR 570], where the court said at 573: "Health and age are relevant to the length of any sentence but usually of themselves would not lead to a gaol sentence not being imposed, if it were otherwise warranted. Much depends on the circumstances." 
In the present case it was submitted the medical evidence was meagre and did not disclose any really serious ill health. There was no evidence that imprisonment would cause a deterioration in the health of either respondent and no evidence that any necessary treatment could not be obtained within the prison system.

It was submitted that the sentencing judge had misstated Dr Fotheringhame's evidence, in saying that Mrs Redden was currently under the care of Dr
Fotheringhame. It was submitted that her Honour's judgment was internally inconsistent in that after holding that the weight which should be given to the offenders' ages in sentencing for an offence of this sort was not great, her Honour must have then proceeded implicitly to hold that it was a very special circumstance in the present case, in order to arrive at her conclusion that she was not bound to impose a custodial sentence. In explicitly stating in her remarks on sentence that she had decided to deal with the respondents otherwise than by imposing "a term of full time imprisonment", her Honour had not given consideration to imposing a sentence of periodic detention, which would have been an available sentencing option (see R versus Winchester).
However, in fairness to her Honour, there was no evidence before her Honour that either respondent had been assessed as suitable for periodic detention.

The principles which this Court should apply in the determination of Crown appeals against sentence have been stated by this Court on numerous occasions, including R versus Warfield [(1994) 34 NSWLR 200] at 209,
R versus Allpass (unreported) 5 May 1993. It is unnecessary to repeat these principles here. Reference should also be made to the decisions of the High
Court in Griffiths versus The Queen (1987) 137 CLR 293, Everett versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295.] We were also referred by counsel for the appellant to the decision of this Court in
R versus Burnett & Ors [(1996) 85 ACrimR 76.] 
In my opinion, the appellant has established that the sentencing judge did make material errors in holding that there were very special circumstances which justified the imposition of a lesser punishment than a custodial sentence, particularly in the light of her own assessment of the limited weight which could be given to the respondents' ages, and in misstating the effect of Dr Fotheringhame's evidence about the health of Mrs Redden.

However, as was stated by this Court in Warfield and in other cases, the
Court of Criminal Appeal has an overriding discretion which may lead it to decline to intervene even if it comes to the conclusion that error has been shown in the original sentencing process. Furthermore, the court has to take into account the principle that if it were to resentence the sentence the court would impose would be somewhat less than the sentence which the court considers should properly have been imposed at first instance.

In the present case I have come to the conclusion, not without hesitation, that the court should decline to intervene. My conclusion is based on a combination of a number of circumstances, including the following: ) the objective criminality of each of the respondents consisting of a single offence under <case> of the Crimes Act involving the non disclosure of an asset was serious but was undoubtedly less serious than the criminality which has been exhibited in many other cases, which have involved multiple offences some under other sections of the Act carrying longer maximum sentences and involving conduct such as the adoption of one or more false identities. In saying what I have just said, I am not to be taken as suggesting the objective criminality in the present case was not such as to warrant the imposition of a custodial sentence at first instance.
 ) the pleas of guilty; ) the imposition by the sentencing judge, and the payment by the respondents, of the maximum fines; ) the fact that full restitution has been made by the respondents; ) the making of the orders under <case>(a) of the Act; ) the ages of the respondents, that is 77 years old and 73 years old, at the time of the sentencing; ) the ill health of Mrs Redden; ) the absence of any previous criminal history whatever.

Because of this combination of factors, I have come to the conclusion that although error has been established the court should not intervene and I would propose that the appeals against sentence be dismissed.
 
NEWMAN J: I agree. I wish to add, because of the nature of the discretionary matters which have led Mr Justice James to conclude that this Court should not intervene, the result should not be taken as having any precedental value for other cases of like offence. 
DUNFORD J: I also agree with the judgment that has been delivered and endorse the further remarks added by the learned presiding judge.
 
NEWMAN J: Order of the court will be the order proposed by Justice James that the appeal be dismissed.
 * * * 
