

De Martino versus Denezin Pty Ltd (In Liquidation) Matter No 11812/92 [1998]
NSWSC 320 (12 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
GIUSEPPE JOSEPH DE MARTINO versus DENEZIN PTY LIMITED (IN LIQUIDATION) /92 June 1998 
Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Giuseppe Joseph De Martino was injured in a fall at work on 18 September 1988 and sues his employer, Denezin Pty Limited (in liquidation), for damages. The plaintiff was a third-year apprentice carpenter whose duty on the day of his injury was to remove wooden formwork from the riser faces of a flight of concrete stairs that had been poured on the previous day as part of an office building that was being constructed at St Leonards. 
The defendant's assertion of the plaintiff's negligence.

As the hearing began, it was announced that the defendant admitted the breach of its duty of care towards the plaintiff. However, it is necessary to determine why the plaintiff fell, because the defendant asserts that the plaintiff's injuries were caused or contributed to by his own negligence, in particular - failing to take adequate care for his own safety; failing to follow normal safety procedures; failing to comply with the normal recommended and accepted system of doing his work; and failing to keep a proper lookout.

A double flight of stairs had been poured with a landing and a 180ยบ turn half way up, so that the top step was vertically above the bottom step. The drop from top to bottom of the double flight was about 20 feet. The plaintiff began at the top and worked his way downwards, prising off the facing boards with a crowbar. The evidence does not show precisely where the plaintiff was when he fell, but he landed about three or four steps from the bottom and must have fallen at least ten feet.

The formwork that was constructed for the formation of the stairs incorporated handrails to prevent workers falling in the manner of the plaintiff. However, those handrails were removed as the formwork was removed. The order of things was that side boards and handrails were removed first and then whatever remained. The riser boards were removed last. The plaintiff was removing these when he fell.

As I accept from the evidence of Mr Krivacic, there would have been no difficulty in bolting the handrails back onto the newly formed concrete steps.
However, that was not done, and the plaintiff was expected to go about his work without the protection that such a measure would have given him. That was one reason why it was appropriate for the defendant to admit its breach of duty.

In order to remove the riser boards the plaintiff was required to insert a crowbar between each board and the front of its step and exert whatever force was necessary to lever off the board. If he wanted to face the job he was doing, of course, he had to stand on a lower step or steps. Although the matter is not entirely clear, I think that that is what he must have been doing. The lower steps would still have had some formwork attached to them, of course. The force required to remove the board varied according to the condition of each step and was unpredictable. Sometimes concrete would run and set in front of the board, making it more difficult to prise loose. The higher up the board the concrete set, the more force would be required to remove the board. Normally, it would be possible to see by the superficial appearance of the step and the board whether the board would be difficult to remove, but that might not always be so. Sometimes a board might come into contact with other woodwork. Sometimes the concrete would set around exposed nails that had been driven through the formwork. This summary shows what a hazardous procedure the plaintiff was required to engage in.

The plaintiff gave evidence. He said that his recollection was that he was working on the stairs, using a crowbar to remove the risers. He lost his balance because he was holding a crowbar and pulling it too hard, because there were a lot of nails in the board.

Fellow workers heard the plaintiff fall and saw him near the foot of the stairs, but nobody who gave evidence saw precisely what made him fall.

The only contemporary account of what happened appears in a workers' compensation claim form which the plaintiff signed on 28 November 1988. The narrative was written by the defendant's manager, Mr Cresswell, who visited the plaintiff in hospital. It is as follows - 
I was stripping stair risers on a set of stairs that were poured the day before. I jammed the crowbar between the timber and concrete and pulled the crowbar towards me with the majority of my strength. The crowbar spang (sic) back away from me and I was still holding on to it. The force threw me over the side of the stair and I landed on my feet on the stairs 3 metes (sic) below but was thrown into a column and hit my head, eye & mouth on it.
Immediately after that I fell down onto the adjacent slab and hit the left side of my head. ...

The same form records that Mr Irfan Mehacevic was a witness.

Neither Mr Cresswell nor Mr Mehacevic gave evidence. In a letter written on 30
November 1988 Mr Cresswell recorded that he was not allowed an opportunity to interview the plaintiff until 28 November 1988. The account which the plaintiff signed may have been framed by Mr Cresswell solely from what the plaintiff told him. Anything that Mr Mehacevic told Mr Cresswell, if they spoke to each other, may also have influenced the statement.

The description in the statement of the crowbar springing back, away from the plaintiff, and throwing him over the side of the stair is one which could only have come from someone who saw what happened. So is the statement that the plaintiff landed on his feet. I find these descriptions impressive, written as they were by a responsible person who must have tried to give as accurate an account as it was possible to obtain.

By contrast, what the plaintiff said in evidence did not strike me as a description born of accurate recollection. I think that his memory of the events is vague and that his account now is no more than what he thinks must have happened, relying on his memory of the way he generally went about his work. This is not surprising in view of the speed and manner of his fall and of the effects that the resulting injuries have had upon him.

My impression comes from my observation of the plaintiff and is supported by impressions gained by others. In his report of 21 December 1989 Dr Tedder, a medical practitioner, noted the plaintiff's statement that he could not remember a great deal about what happened. Dr Tedder stated that on examination the plaintiff was exhibiting some apparent loss of memory "for all the events which occurred". Ms Jeanne Pollock, a clinical psychologist, in her report dated 22 September 1995, received a similar impression. When he interviewed the plaintiff on 16 December 1996, Dr Grant, a neurological consultant, found it difficult to obtain a clear history of the events which gave rise to the plaintiff's injuries because he had no recollection at all of the actual fall.

I think that the plaintiff fell, not because he pulled too hard on a board, which gave way, but because the crowbar he was holding failed to move the board and sprang back away from the plaintiff, catapulting him over the side of the staircase.

It is for the defendant to show that the plaintiff, having been required to undertake such a hazardous operation, negligently caused or contributed to the cause of his fall.

Mr Tom Jovic was the defendant's foreman on the site. He did not see what caused the plaintiff to fall. He telephoned the defendant's office after the fall and said what he knew. The note taken is that "it appears that (the plaintiff) was stripping stair risers with a crowbar and the momentum of the stripping action caused him to fall over the side ...". It does not appear whether that account derived in any way from anything the plaintiff said to Mr
Jovic. I doubt it. I think that it must come from assumptions made by Mr Jovic about why the plaintiff fell.

Mr Jovic was called to give evidence, and said that the riser which the plaintiff had been trying to remove was embedded in concrete. However, that was all that he said about it. His evidence was in the main of a more general kind. He spoke of the system of removing risers and of the unpredictability of the behaviour of individual risers. He said that there was nothing unusual about that job on that day. It was normal for the handrail to be absent as the risers were being stripped. The plaintiff was a competent apprentice who knew those things and the unpredictable nature of the risers. Mr Jovic was present and available to help or advise the plaintiff if anything of an unusual nature should occur.

Mr Krivacic's evidence was to much the same effect.

Relying on this evidence, counsel for the defendant submitted that the plaintiff was primarily liable for his injuries, because he knew that if he used too much force to try to remove a riser, he would not be taking care for his own safety. That was in the circumstances that he knew the procedure, that he knew that the rails had been removed and needed to bear that in mind, that he knew that not infrequently riser boards would stick, that if they did he knew how much force might be required to remove them and that if he ran into trouble he knew that he could ask Mr Jovic for help or advice. It was submitted also that the plaintiff had conceded that he had used too much force.

I do not accept those submissions. I do not accept that the plaintiff's evidence amounted to a concession that he had used too much force, at least in any way that assists me to resolve this issue. Neither do I accept the evidence of Mr Jovic that nothing unusual happened on the occasion of the fall. It seems to me that it must have been quite unusual for a riser to be stuck so fast that it caused the crowbar to spring back again in the manner described in Mr Cresswell's statement.

Accepting that that is what happened and that the plaintiff failed to provide a safe system of work and exposed him to unnecessary risk of injury, I must assess the plaintiff's conduct accordingly. The plaintiff was required to work in a system of work which exposed him to a clear risk of injury. It was not for him to devise the system, being an apprentice. He went about his work as he had been instructed.

The plaintiff used "the majority" of his strength, not all his strength, when he pulled on the crowbar. That shows to my mind that he was taking care for his own safety in dealing with this board that was stuck unusually fast. I infer that he did not exert the whole of his strength because he had in mind that he might fall backwards if he did so and the board suddenly gave way.

I think in all the circumstances that the plaintiff was taking proper care for his own safety but fell because the crowbar sprang back in a quite unexpected manner. I do not think that the plaintiff even exercised a mere misjudgment short of negligence. I reject the submission that in the circumstances the plaintiff ought to have sought advice from Mr Jovic. The occasion did not allow it. The defendant has not satisfied me that the plaintiff was negligent.

The plaintiff's injuries and disabilities 
According to the account in the workers' compensation claim form to which I have already referred, after the plaintiff landed on his feet he was thrown into a column and hit his head, eye and mouth, then fell onto an adjacent slab and cut the left side of his head. That was at 10.15am. The building he was working on was opposite the Royal North Shore Hospital and he was taken there by ambulance. He has no memory of these events, but a laceration to the left forehead was cleaned and sutured there and he was kept under observation until the same night, when he was allowed to go home with his family, with whom he was then living. An x-ray was taken of the skull, but failed to reveal the presence of the fracture which subsequent events showed must have been present.

The plaintiff remained at home on the following day and began to exhibit signs of distress, alternately waking and sleeping and developing an increasing headache and fever. His left eye was swollen. His mother called the family's general practitioner, Dr Marinucci, who visited him on the following day, and then his mother took him back to the Royal North Shore Hospital where he was readmitted on the same night. The first two of his eight weeks in hospital was spent in intensive care. A CT scan of the brain showed generalised prominence of the meningeal surfaces of the brain and an extraaxial collection of pus. A left temporal craniectomy was done under general anaesthetic, the dura was opened and the pus evacuated. On examination the brain appeared quite swollen with an inflamed meningeal surface.

On the following day a left sided sinus trephine, a left intranasal antrostomy and a right partial ethmoidectomy were carried out. The only complications which followed were nausea and skin rashes and a reaction to antibiotics, and those problems were solved by a change of drugs. On 29 September a left orbital abscess was drained. The fever gradually settled and a repeat brain scan on 20 October showed that there was no further collection of pus.

The meningitis was associated with swelling of the left frontal, parietal and temporal regions of the brain. As the swelling resolved, those parts underwent mild atrophy, as demonstrated by a CT scan done in October the following year.

During his stay at Royal North Shore Hospital, the plaintiff's principal lasting symptom was an obvious disturbance in speech. He could not remember the names of simple things, but said "tree" constantly. On 10 November 1988 he was transferred to Coorabel Rehabilitation Centre and underwent intensive speech therapy, occupational therapy and physiotherapy. He remained on antibiotics. On discharge on 16 December his nominal dysphasia had improved but had not left him.

The plaintiff was referred to the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service, where assessments in January and February 1989 indicated left frontal lobe damage, resulting in difficulty in verbal responses, reduced capacity for verbal reasoning and slowness in processing information, as well as a decrease in physical strength and fitness. It was considered that all those difficulties were consistent with the injury he received in the fall. Programs of neuropsychology, occupational therapy, physiotherapy, speech pathology, social work and rehabilitation counselling were put into effect.

In its report of 2 May 1989 the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service recorded that the plaintiff's general fitness had improved and that he was continuing with a program in the gymnasium to strengthen his upper limbs, that he had been found to have adequate skill in word finding, but that a speech pathologist would monitor his ability to understand complex instructions and explain himself clearly. A four day work assessment which had been carried out in May, however, showed that he had verbal memory problems, word finding difficulties, difficulties with problem solving in more complex tasks and difficulty in initiating tasks. Although the plaintiff completed the assessment, he was fatigued by it. It was considered that a more comprehensive work assessment should be arranged.

The final report of the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service, written on 16
June 1989, recorded that that assessment had been completed and that no major cognitive deficits had been noted. The plaintiff was able to undertake basic carpentry tasks and complete a full day's work. He was considered able to undertake a TAFE course. On 13 June 1989 he took up the offer of a job for six months at 30 hours per week at the Auburn-Parramatta Home Maintenance Service.
He enrolled at the Granville TAFE, intending to take a number of outstanding first year subjects and resume progress with his apprenticeship.

He started the part-time job as arranged. It consisted of light handyman work, repairing broken toilet seats, handrails and things of that kind. No power tools were used. At the time of hearing he had no recollection of restarting the TAFE course, and it appears that he did not do so. He could do the job but left it during the following month.

In August 1989 he started working at the Auburn Fruit Barn, doing menial work cleaning floors, carrying boxes of fruit to people's cars and the like. He earned more money than in the handyman job. He worked every day of the week, following the directions that he was given, and felt very tired at the end of each day. Even so, he was keen to do the job and intended to continue.

However, in October he suffered the first of a number of epileptic seizures.
Dr Yiannikas considered that he had scarring secondary to the subdural empyema which had led to the development of partial and generalised seizures. He thought that the most recent of them had been precipitated by sleep deprivation and alcohol and thought that he should remain for the next one or two years on the anti-convulsants which had been prescribed for him before his discharge from hospital. He had advised the plaintiff not to drive. It was Dr
Yiannikas who ordered the CT scan which showed overall atrophy and gliosis in the left frontal, temporal and parietal regions. In addition, an EEG showed generalised slowing and intermittent left mid temporal slowing.

The plaintiff suffered six seizures between October 1989 and August 1990. They were not brought under control until his drugs had been changed and doses adjusted. The seizures caused him to give up his job at the fruit barn.

Notwithstanding the high hopes which had gone before, the plaintiff did not get back to work, and in 1993 the family general practitioner, Mr Marinucci, referred him to a speech pathologist, Carmen Fernando, for help and to Dr
Spira, a consultant neurologist, for advice.

Dr Spira noted that the plaintiff still had hesitancy of speech and word finding problems when he was fatigued. As a result, he had become self- conscious. He was suffering a bifrontal headache with photophobia about once a month, with nausea when the attacks were more severe. These symptoms occurred more if he was under stress. The headache was resolved with Panadol and a short sleep. The plaintiff had lost about 20 kilograms in weight during his stay in hospital and had regained all but four kilograms of that loss, but had lost interest in eating. He had a tremor in both hands. When he was stressed, he could not carry a cup of coffee without spilling it. He was lethargic, whereas before his fall he had been notably active, and had a constant sense of fatigue. His arithmetic had deteriorated since the accident. He was forgetful. He was suffering from gingival hypertrophy as a result of the
Dilantin he was taking for his epilepsy. The plaintiff's principal complaint was the hand tremor, which Dr Spira thought resulted from Epilim, the other anti-convulsant drug the plaintiff was taking. However, a change to yet another drug would have produced even more undesirable side effects, and no change was made to the plaintiff's regime.

It does not appear that the plaintiff received the assistance of a speech therapist contemplated by the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service in its final report. By the time the plaintiff was referred to Ms Carmen Fernando in
January 1993 he had, as Ms Fernando put it, "virtually missed out on" his best chance of recovery, which would have been during the period of three or four years immediately following his injury. Ms Fernando's initial tests showed significant limitation of receptive and expressive language. For example, the plaintiff could read single words but not sentences and could understand simple conversation but became confused by rapid utterances. In casual conversation the plaintiff could often respond adequately but where there was little opportunity for flexibility he found it difficult to answer questions and to give or receive information. He had corresponding difficulties reading and completing forms. Typically of dysphasics, he could respond appropriately at one attempt but be quite unable to do so at another.

The plaintiff received therapy from Ms Fernando each week during the ensuing eight months, and considerably improved his spoken communication, with less circumlocution and the fewer errors of word substitution. His reading and writing improved little, however.

During 1994 the plaintiff spent four months visiting Italy with his parents.
When he returned, the shakiness in his hands and the uncertainty of his speech had increased and he was unable to find words easily. He had abandoned some of the techniques Ms Fernando had taught him. It took a month or more to counteract this regression.

The plaintiff was married in December 1995 to a young woman his parents had arranged for him to meet during the Italian holiday. Since their marriage, he and his wife have lived in the house of his parents.

In June 1996 the plaintiff took up the offer of a job trial, arranged by the
Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service, at a large hardware shop in Ashfield.
After a three-month trial, during which time his pay was subsidised, he was offered the job and took it up. He is still doing that job. His description in evidence of the duties he was required to perform gives some idea of his difficulty expressing himself in words.

Q. What sort of work did you commence doing when you started there? 
A. Homeware.

Q. What does that mean, is it knives and forks and dishes and things like that? 
A. No. Rubbish bins and little boxes of stuff I had to put up, like jacks -
I'm trying to get the name of them. Liquid stuff, just put things up.

Q. Like detergents and things like that? 
A. Detergents, yes.

Q. Is that what you were trying to think of then? 
A. Yes, I was trying to get it.

He found it hard to talk to people at first. When he was handling stock and replacing it on the shelves there was always somebody with him to tell him what to do. He is now used to working with and talking to people, but still has difficulties. If someone comes and asks for some item and he does not know what it is, he has to ask the person to draw a picture of it. If he still does not know what is wanted, he has to go and get help from one of the staff. The work involves speaking on the telephone and he has difficulty when callers speak quickly. He is not good at writing down numbers and makes mistakes, with unsatisfactory consequences. He tries to get other people to do the telephone work.

In his early days in the job he was required to attend Saturdays. Saturdays in the hardware business are very busy and he found it impossible to meet the demands of the job. After discussing the matter with the manager, Mr
Leembruggen, he stopped working on Saturdays.

The plaintiff now works between 10 am and 2 pm on four days per week. I think that he has a tenuous grasp on his job and will never be able to compete as an equal with other employees. Fortunately, he has a benevolent employer who is prepared to go to unusual lengths to make allowances for his disabilities. The plaintiff is so tired after work each day that he has to sleep for a while. Ms
Fernando has found it impossible to administer therapy at such times, and sessions have to be arranged early in the day.

The plaintiff develops headaches when under stress, but these are controllable and his hand tremors are worse when he becomes nervous.

He is very keen on his job and will do everything he can to ensure that he keeps it.

An issue was raised about the degree of loss of the plaintiff's intellectual functioning. Mr Rawling, a clinical neuropsychologist, who gave evidence for the plaintiff, and Dr Langeluddecke, a clinical psychologist whose reports the defendant tendered, agreed that the plaintiff's performance IQ was within a normal range but that his verbal IQ was very low. In their respective tests the plaintiff scored 67 and 71. Those results show an intellect on the border of or within the intellectually handicapped range. However, Mr Rawling considered that the plaintiff's pre-morbid verbal intellect must have been within normal range, whereas Dr Langeluddecke considered that inconsistencies across test results suggested that the plaintiff might be exaggerating his symptoms and that that and the plaintiff's results on two of the tests suggested that his pre-morbid verbal abilities had been well below average.

Mr Rawling came to grips with these differences of opinion. Unfortunately, Dr
Langeluddecke did not.

I found Mr Rawling's evidence impressive. He pointed out that Dr Langeluddecke relied, in her suggestion that the plaintiff's pre-morbid intelligence was "exceptionally low", on the results of a test called the National Adult
Reading Test. I accept his evidence that the validity of the results of that test depends upon an assumed absence of cerebral pathology likely to disrupt reading. In view of the demonstrated atrophy of extensive portions of the left hemisphere of the plaintiff's brain, that assumption is unjustified.

Mr Rawling relied for his conclusion on two objective bodies of evidence. The first was reports of the plaintiff's progress in high school, which gave rise to available conclusions about his level of intellectual functioning during his teenage years. Dr Langeluddecke apparently lacked access to that material.
The plaintiff attended Concord High School and Mr Rawling used reports for
Years 7 and 10. In Year 7 the plaintiff's class position in English and maths was around the 33rd percentile. He did much better in more practical subjects like science, geography and art, falling within the top third of those classes. In Year 10 he performed poorly in English (137th out of 149 pupils) and achieved a mid-range score for general mathematics. He showed a particular aptitude for wood technics, being 6th out of 44 pupils. In his school certificate he obtained a Grade 5 pass in general maths and a Grade 8 pass in
English.

Mr Rawling gained assistance from records of the Granville College of TAFE, where the plaintiff studied for the first full two years of his apprenticeship. In those first two years he passed all subjects attempted.

Mr Rawling concluded that there was a pre-existing weakness in language related skills as assessed in English. However, the plaintiff was always able to survive in the normal school stream and had sufficient language skills to allow him to pass the TAFE subjects he attempted in the two years prior to the accident.

The second body of evidence from which Mr Rawling derived support was the level of intellectual functioning of the plaintiff's sister, Mrs Curtis, who gave evidence. She is five and a half years older than the plaintiff. After leaving high school she entered a business college and qualified for secretarial work. She considered the plaintiff to have been more intelligent than herself. She is obviously an intelligent woman who functions at least in the normal intellectual verbal range despite the fact that she had difficulties during her school years, which stemmed at least in part from her home background, where English was not the primary language. Mr Rawling considered that if permitted, the plaintiff would have developed in a similar way.

Finally, Dr Langeluddecke relied to some extent for her opinion upon the variable results achieved by the plaintiff from time to time in repeated tests. I accept the evidence of Mr Rawling that variation in receptive and expressive language performance is to be expected in candidates like the plaintiff, because a dysphasia affects both the understanding of the instruction given for test purposes and the ability of the candidate to find the words to express his knowledge. Mr Rawling pointed to instances where on one occasion the plaintiff was able to name the relevant noun but on another was unable to do so, instead having to describe the thing without naming it.

I accept the opinion of Mr Rawling and conclude that as a result of his injuries the plaintiff has been turned from a young man who was functioning within a normal verbal intelligence range to one who functions on the border of the mentally defective range.

Although the plaintiff has made some improvement since the accident he remains seriously affected by his injuries and the subsequent infection. I do not agree with the remark of his treating neurologist, Dr Spira, that his speech problems do not limit him significantly. They have severe effects on him at work and will whenever he tries to have any complex communications with anybody.

His condition is permanent. Because of the stress placed on him by the need to try and cope with his job, he becomes severely tired. That stress and tiredness will continue. They combine to constitute a substantial disruption to his life.

He will be unable to follow a normal career path or participate in the sporting activities he would have uninjured.

He will have to continue taking anti-convulsant drugs, and there seems no prospect of a change of regime to relieve him of the troublesome side effects of the tremors in the hands, when he is anxious, and bleeding gums. He will continue to get headaches. He will continue to be forgetful and suffer consequent embarrassment and inconvenience. Others will have to remind him of the things he must do.

I accept the evidence of Dr Grant that the plaintiff runs the risk of the premature onset of dementia.

Non-economic loss 
The maximum available award for a most extreme case is $180,000. The plaintiff is to be awarded a sum based on that sum, calculated according to the proportion that this case bears to a most extreme case. I think that the plaintiff's loss of intellectual function and the consequent tension, tiredness and continuous or continual ill effects, all of which he is aware of, constitute a serious case. I assess this case as two-thirds of a most extreme case and award damages for non-economic loss of $120,000.

Past economic loss 
Mr Stjepan Krivecic is a carpenter who began his apprenticeship with the defendant a few days after the plaintiff. I am satisfied that it is appropriate to consider his earnings in calculating the plaintiff's economic loss up to the present because the plaintiff would probably have earned at about the same rate as Mr Krivecic.

I have set out in a table the amounts I have allowed the plaintiff from time to time by comparison with Mr Krivecic's earnings. Between the date of the accident and 12 June 1989 the plaintiff was totally incapacitated. From 13
June 1989 until 6 July 1989 his wage earning capacity was equivalent to the pay he received from the handyman job. He left that job because he was not being paid enough, and I have assessed his capacity between then and his commencing the job at the fruit barn as equivalent to what he would have earned as a handyman. He ceased the fruit barn job on 12 November 1989 as a result of the first of the seizures and I think that he was totally incapacitated from then until about the middle of 1992. Dr Selby, who had been seeing him for about two years, stated in his report of 25 May 1992 that the plaintiff was fit for simple work. I have therefore attributed to the plaintiff a wage earning capacity on and after 1 July 1992 based upon the earnings he would have received from the fruit barn job.

However, I have not taken the whole of the fruit barn wage, because that job was not a permanent job but a subsidised introductory job through the
Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service. Such jobs do not always lead to offers of permanent employment. Even if that had happened, the plaintiff would because of his disabilities have been at a severe disadvantage in competing with other employees and potential employees for work and for the continuation of work.
Those circumstances reduced his capacity to earn.

In calculating the plaintiff's loss between 1 July 1992 and 30 June 1997 I have taken his capacity to have been one-half of what he would have earned at the fruit barn or, where they have exceeded that amount, his actual net earnings.

Period 
Comparable $
 
Plaintiff's Capacity $
 
Loss $
 
Weeks 
Total $
 ---|---|---|---  .9.88-12.6.89 .52 -
 .52 .24 .6.89-6.7.89 .52 .60 .92 .68 .7.89-12.8.89 .20 .60 .60 .00 .8.89-12.11.89 .20 .26 .94 .16 .11.89-30.6.90 .20 -
 .20 .40 .7.90-30.6.91 .43 -
 .43 .36 .7.91-30.6.92 .75 -
 .75 .00 .7.92-30.6.93 .20 .00 .20 .40 .7.93-30.6.94 .21 .00 .21 .92 .7.94-30.6.95 .33 .00 .33 .16 .7.95-30.6.96 .44 .50 .94 .88 .7.96-10.9.96 .17 .00 .17 .70 .9.96-30.6.97 .17 .00 .17 .14 .7.97-12.6.98 .00 .00 .00 .00 
Total $158415.04 
Fox versus Wood component, agreed at $ 13456.16 
Total $171871.20 
Future economic loss 
Until recently Mr Krivecic was earning $680 net per week as a carpenter. Mr
Jovic's evidence was that at the present time some carpenters are taking home as much as $720 to $900 per week. It is obvious from Mr Krivecic's experience, as demonstrated in the table, that carpenters' wages fluctuate markedly according to the state of the building industry from time to time. I accept Mr
Jovic's evidence that the industry has been booming for the last four or five years, due at least in part to preparations being made for the Olympic Games.
I accept that work will become scarce again from time to time, with a consequent depression in actual and average wages. Mr Jovic may well be correct in his prediction that the present boom will end in 2001.

It is not possible on the evidence to be certain as to a representative comparable wage for what would have been the remainder of the plaintiff's working life. The average net comparable wage over the period since the plaintiff's accident has been $450. In view of present wage rates and the matters to which I have referred I will adopt $550 net per week for the future. Although there is factored into that figure some allowance for temporary loss of work, I intended to deduct 15% for vicissitudes.

Assessing the plaintiff's residual wage earning capacity is as difficult. He earns $234 net per week at present. He is keen to keep his job and his employer will continue to employ him if economic circumstances permit. They may not, however. Although conditions in the hardware industry may be more stable than in the building industry, there is a link between the industries.
If the plaintiff's employer were to run into bad times and had to put off staff, the plaintiff would be first. If that were to happen, he would be so seriously disadvantaged in competing with others for work that in my opinion his chances of getting employment again would be negligible unless he could find an employer as enlightened and sympathetic as his present one. To give effect to the substantial risk of his loss of job and the greater risk of his remaining unemployed thereafter I intend to discount his wage earning capacity from $234 to $100 net per week. A similar figure would be produced if it were assumed that the plaintiff would continue to work at his present job for a little over 15 years, and then permanently lose employment. I think that in all the circumstances that is a reasonable way to look at the matter.

The plaintiff would have worked until he was 65 years old. The multiplier is .6. The calculation is 893.6 x (550-100) - 15%.

I allow $341802 
Past superannuation loss 
I allow the following amounts for past loss of employer contributions to superannuation.

Period 
Net Loss $
 
Gross Equivalent $
 
Rate % $

Per 
Week 
No. of Weeks 
Allowed ---|---|---|---|---  .7.92-30.12.92 .20 .20 .89 .14 .1.93-30.6.93 .20 .20 .11 .86 .7.93-30.6.94 .21 .00 .80 .60 .7.94-30.6.95 .33 .00 .15 .80 .7.95-30.6.96 .94 .00 .92 .84 .7.96-10.9.96 .17 .00 .40 .00 .9.96-30.6.97 .17 .00 .40 .80 .7.97-13.6.98 .00 .00 .72 .28 
Total .32 
Future superannuation loss 
I have based my allowance for lost future employers' superannuation contributions on the approximate gross wage equivalent of the assumed net future economic loss, assuming that the tax paid would be one-third. Thus the plaintiff's net loss of $450 per week is equivalent to a gross wage of $675 per week. The multipliers are as shown. I have deducted 15% for vicissitudes.
 .6.98-30.6.98. The contribution rate is 6% = $40.50 per week for 2 weeks - $ 81 .7.98-30.6.00 (7%): $47.25 x 99.4 x 0.83 3992 .7.00-30.6.02 (8%): $54 x 99.4 x .907 x .85 4138 .7.02-4.1.35 (9%): $60.75 x 855.7 x .823 x .85 36365 
Total $ 44576 
Past domestic assistance 
The plaintiff was fully cared for by hospital staff between the times of his readmission to Royal North Shore Hospital and his discharge from Coorabel except for a period of one week in November 1988 when he was discharged home so that he could attend his sister's wedding. During that week his mother had to do everything for him, washing and dressing him, preparing and serving his meals and helping him in and out of bed and about the house. Much the same level of help was necessary for the four weeks immediately after his discharge home from Coorabel in January 1989. I shall allow 30 hours per week for those five weeks.

After that, the plaintiff became able to do more and more for himself until he suffered the first of his epileptic seizures. I shall allow ten hours per week for that period.

The need for help intensified between October 1989 and September 1990 as the plaintiff suffered successive seizures and his medical advisers tried to select the drugs and doses that best suited him. Sometimes he had to be helped during the night. I shall allow 30 hours per week for that period.

Once the epilepsy was brought under control, there was much less need for domestic assistance. I think that ten hours per week is a reasonable amount to allow. However, after the plaintiff began speech therapy with Ms Fernando in
January 1993, it became necessary for his mother or his wife to help him with his reading. I shall allow 15 hours per week from February 1993 to the present.

The amounts I allow are - 
Nov 1988-Jan 1989: 5 x 30 hours x $11.07 $1660 
Feb-Oct 1989: 34 x 10 hours x $11.07 $3764 
Oct 1989-Sept 1990: 52 x 30 hours x $12.10 $18876 
Oct 1990-Jan 1993: 121 weeks x 10 hours x $13.10 $15851 
Feb 1993-12 June 1998: 279 weeks x 15 hours x $13.53 $56623 
Total $96774 
Future domestic assistance 
The plaintiff is entitled to an allowance for continuing domestic assistance.
His wife will have to continue to read to him if he is to make the best of things. I think that he will probably never need more reading assistance than he does at present and it seems reasonable to suppose that he will use the services of a speech therapist less as the years go by. I accept the evidence of Dr Grant that the plaintiff has a greater chance of suffering dementia late in life than an ordinary person and I allow for that chance. I will allow him hours assistance per week. The plaintiff has a life expectancy of 48.49 years. The multiplier is 968 and I allow 15% for vicissitudes. The calculation is as follows - x 10 x $14.43 x .85 $118730 
Past out-of-pocket expenses 
These were agreed at $64480.13 
Future medical expenses and the like 
The plaintiff needs to continue speech therapy, but I think that before long he and Ms Fernando will find it acceptable for him to attend fortnightly instead of weekly and eventually, perhaps, monthly. I allow for the chance that he may not extend therapy long past the end of his working life. I will allow him 30 hours per annum at $37 per hour, which produces a total of $1100 pa 
I allow the following items - 
Medicines $520 pa 
Neurologist $190 pa 
General practitioner $140 pa 
Total $1960 pa, which is the equivalent of $38 per week.

The calculation is - x $38 x .85 $31266 
Defence 
The defendant has a defence for amounts paid totalling $180859.89.

Fund management costs 
The total of the amounts that I have allowed the plaintiff, less the allowance
I have made to the defendant for amounts paid, produces a total amount due to the plaintiff of $815,193.76.

I accept the evidence of Dr Grant that the plaintiff will need assistance in managing so great a fund of money. I think it not to the point, as submitted by the defendant, that if the plaintiff had earned a tradesman's wages for a normal working life his mother or his wife or someone else might have handled the whole or part of his money. The fact is that the defendant has put the plaintiff into a position of having to arrange for the management of a far greater sum than he might ordinarily have had the responsibility for.

The management rates are as follows - 
The first $100000: 4% $4000 
The next $100000: 3% $3000 
The next $100000: 2 % $2000 
The next $500000: 1 % $5000 
Total $14000 
I allow that sum.

Verdict 
That allowance produces a total sum to which the plaintiff is entitled of $829193.76. There will be a verdict and judgment for the plaintiff in that amount, together with any interest to which he may be entitled. Counsel may agree or make further submissions about the orders I should make to give effect to this judgment and to provide for interest and costs.
 * * * 
