

Regina versus Paul Maharaj Nos. Cca 60358/95; Dc 93/21/0794 Criminal Law and
Procedure [1996] NSWSC 18 (31 January 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(1), KIRBY P(2) AND DOWD(3) J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 10 November #DATE 14:12:1995 #ADD 31:1:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant         P M Skinner 
Solicitor for the Appellant 
Ramrakha Jenkins 
Counsel for the Crown           G S Hosking 
Solicitor for the Crown      
S E O'Connor (Solicitor for
Public
Prosecutions)
ORDER
Appeal allowed;
Conviction quashed; and
Order a new trial of the appellant.
JUDGE1
GLEESON CJ
At the conclusion of argument on this appeal, the court ordered that the appeal should be allowed and the conviction quashed and that there should be a new trial, for reasons to be given at a later date. My reasons for that decision are set out below.

Following a trial before his Honour Judge Patten and a jury, in the
District Court, the appellant was convicted on the following charge: "For that he between 1 February 1992 and 15 July 1992 at Moorebank in the State of New South Wales, having received a valuable security, namely a cheque in the sum of fifty thousand dollars on terms requiring him, the said Paul Maharaj to account to
Anthony John Merlino, for the whole of the proceeds of the said valuable security fraudulently did omit to account to the said Anthony John Merlino for the whole of the proceeds of the said valuable security so received by him the said
Paul Maharaj in violation of the terms on which the said
Paul Maharaj so received the said valuable security".
The charge was laid under s178A of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) , which provides: "1 78A. Whosoever having collected or received any money or valuable security upon terms requiring him to deliver or account for or pay to any person the whole or any Part of - such money or valuable security or the proceeds thereof; or any balance of such money, valuable security, or proceeds thereof after any authorised deductions or payments have been made thereout, fraudulently misappropriates to his own use or the use of any other person, or fraudulently omits to account for or pay the whole or any part of such money, valuable security, or proceeds, or the whole or any part of such balance in violation of the terms on which he collected or received such money or valuable security, shall be liable to penal servitude for seven years.

For the purposes of this section any such money, valuable security, or proceeds thereof, or any balance thereout shall be deemed to be the property of the person who authorised the collection or receipt of the money or valuable security or from whom the money or valuable security was received notwithstanding that the accused may have been authorised to make any deduction thereout on his own behalf, or any payment thereout to another person, or to mix such money, valuable security, or proceeds thereof, or such balance with his own moneys".
The section creates a number of different offences. Its history was referred to in R versus McQueeny [(1989) 39 A Crim R 56.] The meaning of some of the concepts, and distinctions, referred to in the section, such as the difference between omitting to account for money, and omitting to pay money, would not be readily apparent to a jury. It was fraudulent omission to account for money which was the essence of the charge against the appellant.
Following his conviction, the appellant was sentenced to penal servitude for a term of 16 months, involving a minimum term of 12 months, and an additional term of 4 months.
The principal witness in the Crown case was Mr Merlino, the person alleged to have been the victim of the fraud. The appellant made an unsworn statement.
The evidence supporting the charge was in some respects unclear. Mr Merlino is obviously a person of little sophistication in commercial matters. The appellant's account of the relevant transaction, given in a record of interview with a police officer, and subsequently in his unsworn statement at the trial, was garbled and implausible. A document which the appellant procured Mr Merlino to sign, purporting to record the terms of the transaction, was, to say the least, curiously expressed.
The Crown case was that, in February 1991, the appellant represented to Mr
Merlino that he could obtain for him, from overseas sources, a loan of $5 million. In order to secure the loan, Mr Merlino was required to pay an "up front fee", or "deposit]', of $50,000, which was to be refunded in the event that the loan did not come to fruition. At the appellant's direction, Mr
Merlino paid the sum of $50,000 to a company controlled by the appellant. The appellant withdrew the money from the company's bank account, and paid it to meet his own personal expenses.
 .
No loan was ever arranged. From 1992 to 1994 Mr Merlino attempted unsuccessfully to get his $50,000 back. The most he got was $5,000.
In his interview with the police, and in his unsworn statement at the trial, the appellant advanced some reasons, which the jury were entitled to find unconvincing, as to why Mr Merlino was not entitled to the return of, or any accounting for, his money.
However, even if the jury rejected the appellant's version of the facts, as they obviously did, there still remained, on Mr
Merlino's version, a number of important issues in respect of which the jury required careful direction.
A threshold question that required consideration was whether, for the purposes of s178A, it was the appellant who relevantly received the valuable security, and was required to account for the proceeds, or whether, on the other hand, it was the corporation. The valuable security referred to in the charge was a bank cheque for $50,000, made payable to Mahasun Finance
Corporation Pty Limited. The appellant was described as the Chairman of that company. The cheque was dated 26 February 1991. The evidence showed that it was paid directly into the company's bank account. Immediately before such payment, the amount standing to the credit of the bank account was approximately $51. Within a few weeks following receipt of the cheque, virtually the whole of the monies standing to the credit of the account were withdrawn by cheques signed by the appellant. The jury were entitled to infer, from the identity of the payees of those cheques, some of which were payable to cash, that the monies were used for the appellant's personal purposes.
A letter on the letterhead of Mahasun
Finance Corporation Pty Limited, signed by the appellant as Chairman of that company, dated 26 February 1991, was handed to Mr Merlino as a receipt for the cheque. The letter was in the following terms: "This is to confirm the receipt of Fifty Thousand Dollars, being fully refundable deposit for the procuration of Five Million
Dollars soft loan as per loan application.

We further irrevocably guarantee, that the full Fifty Thousand
Dollars shall be refunded at the draw down of the loan proceeds, or if the loan is not successful".
Further observations will be made below as to the meaning of that letter.
Next, even assuming the conditions entitling Mr Merlino to a refund of the $50,000 had been fulfilled, and assuming the appellant personally was legally obliged to account for the money, there was a question as to whether what was involved was a criminal offence within s178A or, on the other hand, merely a failure to pay a debt. This, in turn, depended upon the two issues next mentioned.
There was an issue as to the terms upon which the appellant received the bank cheque, and whether those terms included an obligation to account to Mr
Merlino for the proceeds of the cheque.
There was also an issue as to whether there had been a failure to account in accordance with the obligations mentioned above.
Finally, there was an issue as to whether, assuming there to have been such a failure, it was fraudulent.
The resolution of those issues involved questions both of fact and of law. Insofar as they raised questions of law, it was for the judge to decide those questions or, where the determination depended upon findings of fact made by the jury, to instruct the jury upon the legal consequences of the findings that were open to them. (R versus Mainwaring [(1982) 74 Cr App R 99];
Mumford versus The Queen (1989) 95 FLR 358.)
It was also for the trial judge to resolve any questions that arose as to the meaning of written documents, where such questions had to be decided for the purpose of resolving the issues mentioned above. This meant that, insofar as the meaning of the letter of 26 February 1991 acknowledging receipt of the $50,000 was in doubt, and the resolution of such doubt was material to an issue in the case, then it was for the trial judge to resolve that doubt, and to instruct the jury upon the meaning of the letter.
The fact that the letter was written on the letterhead of the company, and signed by the appellant in his capacity as Chairman of the company, was obviously relevant to the first of the issues mentioned above, and that should have been pointed out to the jury.
The fact that the "deposit" referred to in the letter was described as being "fully refundable" was plain enough, and it was for the jury to relate that to the evidence of what was said between Mr Merlino and the appellant before the payment of $50,000.
However, the meaning of the second paragraph of the letter is far from clear. Assuming that the word "at" means "if" or "when" what is guaranteed is that the full $50,000 will be refunded if the draw down of the loan proceeds, or if the loan is not successful. The letter makes no reference to any deduction from the $50,000 of expenses that might be incurred by the appellant or his company in seeking to procure the loan, although that is a matter that was apparently discussed between Mr
Merlino and the appellant. Putting that problem to one side, the circumstances in which the $50,000 had to be refunded appear to cover the only two possible eventualities. The expression "if the drawn down of the loan proceeds" means "if the loan is made". The expression "if the loan is not successful" means "if the loan is not made". The letter, therefore, says that the $50,000 will be refunded if the loan is made, or if the loan is not made. The letter says nothing as to the time when the money is to be refunded, but the law would imply that the money was to be refunded within a reasonable time after it became clear that the event occasioning the obligation to repay the money had occurred.
Once it was explained to them that this is what the letter meant, the significance which the jury might attach to it, in resolving the issues in the case, would depend upon the view they took of the facts of the case and, in particular, of the accounts given respectively by Mr Merlino and the appellant of their dealings with one another. Since it was common ground that no loan of the kind referred to in the letter was ever made, the jury could safely ignore the former of the two alternatives referred to in it, puzzling as it may have been. On the true construction of the letter, the second alternative applied, if the jury were satisfied that the appellant or his company were unable to arrange the loan referred to in the letter.
From the dates mentioned in the indictment, it can be seen that the Crown case was that by some time between 1 February 1992 and 15 July 1992, it had become clear that the loan could not be arranged, and the time to refund the $50,000 had arrived.
 .
Mr Merlino said that, in a conversation he had with the appellant in early February 1991, the appellant originally told him that he could arrange, from overseas sources, a "soft loan" of $10 million if Mr Merlino "came up with" $100,000.
It will be noted that the expression "soft loan" is also used in the letter of 26 February 1991. The evidence in the case left its meaning quite unclear.
It is certainly not a legal term of art, and there was no coherent evidence as to its commercial meaning. Mr Merlino was unable to give any convincing explanation of the term, although, as he understood it, it appeared to have something to do with a loan arrangement which would involve the participation of a major insurance company. Mr Merlino said that the appellant represented to him that the original source of the funds was the CIA. This colourful piece of information did not assist to explain what a soft loan is.
 .
Mr Merlino was only marginally clearer in his account of what was said about the "up front fee". However, he gave the following important evidence: "I said, 'What happens if you don't come up with the money?'. He said, "Your hundred thousand dollars is fully refundable if we don't come up with the loan"'.
Somewhat inconsistently, in cross-examination Mr Merlino said that he considered the up front fee to be an "expenses account" for the loan, and to be available to meet the appellant's expenses in obtaining the loan. Whether the fee was to be "fully refundable", or whether it was to be refundable less expenses appropriately incurred by the appellant or his company in attempting to arrange the loan, is difficult to understand. That may be why the charge in the indictment was based on an omission to account, rather than an omission to pay. However, the jury were entitled to regard that, in the events that occurred, as something that did not need to be decided. If the appellant were obliged to account for the $50,000, it may be that in doing so, he could have properly deducted legitimate expenses, but he never attempted any such accounting.
Mr Merlino said that he was unable to raise $100,000, and could only raise $50,000. He had a further conversation with the appellant, and asked whether he could obtain a loan of $5 million for an up front fee of $50,000.
The respondent said that could be arranged. According to Mr Merlino, he asked the respondent what would happen if the loan did not come, and the respondent told him that the $50,000 would be fully refunded. The respondent then said he required a bank cheque made in favour of a nominated company, and Mr Merlino complied with that requirement.
No loan for $5 million, or any other amount, was arranged, and by 1994,
Mr
Merlino had still not received his money back, or obtained anything by way of an accounting.
In his interview with the police, and in his unsworn statement, the respondent maintained that he had only ever discussed with Mr Merlino a $10 million loan. (This appears to be inconsistent with the letter of 26
February.) He made an assertion, which the jury were entitled to regard as unconvincing, that he had used the proceeds of the cheque for $50,000 to buy travellers' cheques which had in turn been expended in attempting to obtain a loan for $10 million. It was because Mr Merlino never produced the additional $50,000 that the loan did not go ahead.
There was evidence upon which a jury, properly instructed, could have convicted the appellant. However, there were substantial issues to be addressed, and the appellant complains that the summing-up of the learned trial judge did not give the jury adequate instruction as to the manner in which they were to set about resolving those issues.
In relation to the first issue identified above, that is to say, whether the requirement to account, assuming one existed, fell upon the appellant personally, or upon his company, Patten DCJ told the jury the question for them to decide was whether the cheque for $50,000 was "in reality" received by the appellant personally, even though the company was the payee of the cheque, and may technically have received the benefit of the cheque. His Honour directed the jury in the following terms: "The Crown says that even though the company was the payee of the cheque and may technically have received the benefit of the cheque, the proper conclusion to be drawn from the facts is that it was the accused who received the cheque and the proceeds. The Crown asks you to draw this conclusion upon which you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt from the evidence, that the accused was in control of the company and also personally controlled the receipt and disposition of cheques. The Crown relies upon the evidence of Mr Merlino and the banking documents and cheques produced by Ms Bossini. If you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt on the evidence that it was the accused who personally received the cheque, even though it was paid into the company's bank account, you proceed to consider the next element of the charge. If you are not satisfied that the cheque was in reality received by the accused personally then he is entitled to be acquitted".
His Honour, having given the above direction in relation to the issue as to who received the cheque, went on to give a direction about the obligation to account, but in a manner which did not add anything to what had previously been said as to the distinction between an obligation resting on the appellant, and one resting on the appellant's company. It was, of course, nothing to the point that the appellant had physical possession of the cheque for a time, unless the Crown could establish that, within the meaning of s178A,,,he received the cheque, and was obliged to account for its proceeds, personally.
It is not likely that the jury would have been greatly assisted by being told that the test to be applied was one of "reality". That statement is correct, but it is not very enlightening. What needed to be explained to the jury was that the question was whether, when he handed over the cheque, Mr
Merlino was dealing with the appellant personally, or whether in such dealings the appellant was simply acting as the agent for the appellant's company. The
Crown case was that the appellant and Mr Merlino were dealing with one another personally.
In support of that contention, the Crown was entitled to rely upon the fact that Mr Merlino had his conversations with the appellant personally, and that the transaction had been agreed between the two of them before the appellant ever made mention of any company.
The Crown was also entitled to rely upon the control of the company in effect shown to have been exercised by the appellant, and upon the evidence that the proceeds of the cheque, having gone into the company's account, soon afterwards were withdrawn from the account, and applied in payment of personal liabilities of the appellant.
In R versus J [(1987) 9 NSWLR 615] Lee J, at 623-4, said: "... where the evidence shows that a director of a company is not only in a position of control but in fact personally controls the receipt and disposition of cheques paid to the company upon terms requiring the company to account for or pay the whole or any part of the proceeds, it will be a question of fact for the jury whether his receipt and disposition of those moneys is to be regarded only as a receipt and disposition by the company or whether the conclusion is open that it is he personally, apart altogether from the company, who has received the cheques on terms".
In R v Grubb (1915)2 KB 683, Lord Reading CJ said: "If the company was used by (the director's) directions as the instrument to enable him in the name of the company to become possessed of the property and by means of the company to convert it fraudulently to his own use or benefit, he would be guilty of an offence under the statute".
There was evidence upon which it was open to the jury to conclude, as urged by the Crown, that Mr Merlino only ever intended to deal with the appellant personally, and that the appellant, for his part, made use of the company as an instrument to enable him to obtain the proceeds of the cheque for $50,000 and apply them for his own benefit.
On the other hand, the appellant was entitled to point to the fact that the cheque was drawn in favour of the company, and that the receipt was issued on the company's letterhead.
According to Mr Merlino's evidence, which in this respect does not appear to have been disputed, all the discussions prior to 26 February were between him and the appellant personally. It was open to the jury to find that the oral agreement between the parties was between Mr Merlino and the appellant, that Mr Merlino never intended that the company would be substituted for the appellant as a party to the agreement, that the appellant controlled the company and applied the proceeds of the bank cheque to his own personal use, and in those circumstances it was open to the jury to conclude as a fact that the appellant had received the cheque on terms.
The principal vice in the learned judge's direction was that it could well have left the jury with the impression that, once they found that the proceeds of the cheque went to the appellant personally, that was an end of this first issue. That was not correct.
The next challenge is to what was said, or not said, to the jury about the other issues identified above.
Putting to one side the factual disputes between Mr
Merlino and the appellant, and accepting that it was open to the jury to resolve those in favour of Mr Merlino, nevertheless, from the moment the appellant was first arrested in relation to this charge, his case was that, at the worst, what was here involved was a civil failure to repay a debt, and not a criminal failure to account. The directions given in relation to the elements of an offence against <case> were not such as would enable a jury to come to grips with that issue, or to address the questions which were bound up with it.
In dealing with the question whether the cheque was received on terms requiring the recipient to account for the proceeds of it, his Honour simply said that this was a question of fact, and that the Crown relied on the evidence of Mr Merlino and the letter of 26 February 1991. The Crown case was that the proceeds of the cheque were to be refunded or accounted for to Mr
Merlino, either upon the making of the loan, or the failure of the loan application. The jury were to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the cheque was received "on those terms".
In relation to the alleged fraudulent omission to account, his Honour told the jury that there had to be dishonesty involved, and that they needed to be satisfied first, that the money had not been refunded to Mr Merlino, and second, that the occasion for the refunding had arisen.
Nothing that was said to the jury would have enabled them to distinguish between a conclusion that the appellant was merely a defaulting debtor, and a conclusion that the appellant had been guilty of a criminal offence against s178A.
In Andrews versus The Queen <case>; [(1968) 126 CLR 198] at 205, the High Court, dealing with a charge similar to that in the present case said: "To make out the counts of the indictment, it was necessary to establish that the applicant received the moneys there particularised upon terms requiring him to account to Payne or to him and his wife as the case may be. It had then to be established that at a time when he was bound to account according to those terms, he fraudulently omitted to do so.
Because of the precise concepts involved in this particular statutory offence, great care is called for on the part of the trial judge to ensure that the ingredients of the offence are lucidly and accurately explained to the Jury".
In that case, the court held that the jury were given so little guidance that the applicant had not been tried according to law, and was entitled to have his conviction quashed. Their Honours observed, for example, that no distinction had been drawn between the concepts of fraudulent misappropriation and fraudulent omission to account, and that the jury would have been given the impression that the time for considering whether the applicant acted fraudulently was when he received the property, rather than when, in accordance with his obligations, he should have accounted.
If one person pays money to another, the fact that the payment is made under an arrangement pursuant to which, in certain circumstances, the payee will be obliged to repay the same or some lesser amount, does not of itself mean that the money has been paid on terms which require the payee to account to the payer. Similarly, the fact that a person, who is obliged to pay a sum of money to another, fails to make the payment, does not of itself mean that there has been an omission to account, whether fraudulent or otherwise.
As was pointed out by the High Court in Stephens versus The Queen <case>; [(1978) 139
CLR 315], when dealing with a cognate offence of fraudulent conversion by a person entrusted with property, the facts and circumstances of the case, including the existence of any fiduciary relationship, need to be analysed.
The key to the proper understanding of the obligations owed by the appellant to Mr Merlino lay in the agency relationship between them. On the evidence of Mr Merlino, which in this respect was not disputed by the appellant (save for the question of whether it was the company that was the agent)
Mr Merlino engaged the services of the appellant, as his agent, to arrange, or endeavour to arrange, a loan of money.
The payment of $50,000 was described in conversation as an "up front fee", and in the letter of 26 February 1991 as a "deposit". It was also said to be refundable, or fully, refundable, in the event that no loan was arranged, although the evidence is unclear as to whether, in making such refund, the agent would have been entitled to take expenses legitimately incurred. In the events that happened, unless the jury were prepared to accept to the level of possibility the respondent's unsworn assertion about spending the $50,000 in attempting to procure the loan, (which seems highly unlikely), that last mentioned qualification was immaterial.
On the issue whether the cheque was received on terms that required the respondent to account for the proceeds of it, the defence case was that, assuming everything else against the appellant, what was here involved was a fee for services, payable in advance, which the agent was entitled to deal with as he (or it) pleased, subject only to an obligation that might arise at a future time to pay to
Mr Merlino a like, or perhaps a lesser, amount.
The Crown on the other hand contended, and was obliged to establish, to the requisite standard of proof, that the position went beyond that. On the
Crown case, the "up front fee" or "deposit", which was "fully refundable", was a payment to a person in a fiduciary position. Where a principal pays money to an agent, for the purposes of a particular transaction, on the basis that the money is being provided either to be held by the agent pending a particular event, or to be used by him in a specified way, then the payment will ordinarily be subject to a trust, and the agent will be obliged to account to the principal for the money. (P.D. Finn, Fiduciary Obligations, Law Book Co , p107; Bowstead on Agency, 15th Ed p162.) If the jury accepted the evidence of Mr Merlino, and in the light of the letter of 26 February, it was open to the jury to find that the money was paid on that basis.
An agent in such a position may, when obliged to do so, account for the money either by repaying it, or by demonstrating that it has been used in one of the specified ways.
On the issue of fraudulent omission to account, his
Honour should have pointed out to the jury that the relevant time to evaluate the conduct of the appellant was the time when the omission to account occurred. On the Crown case, this was when the time arrived at which it was clear that no loan was going to be arranged. In other words, it was the time when, pursuant to the agreement of the parties, the $50,000 (or the $50,000 less expenses) was to be refunded.
The appellant was not being charged with fraudulently misappropriating the monies which were paid out of his company's bank account in February and
March 1991. On the other hand, the fact that such payments had been made was something the jury were entitled to regard as of evidentiary significance in determining whether his conduct in failing to account to his principal, when the time came to refund the money, was fraudulent. According to the evidence, which does not appear to have been disputed, the appellant never did account to Mr Merlino for the $50,000. He certainly did not tell him that he had used the proceeds of the bank cheque for his own purposes, and he neither repaid the money, nor rendered any account purporting to show how the money had been legitimately expended on the principal's behalf. If the jury were satisfied that the terms on which the appellant received the $50,000 required him to account for it to Mr Merlino when the contemplated loan transaction failed to materialise, then he could have accounted for it either by repaying it, or by explaining how it had been expended legitimately in accordance with the agreement between the parties. There was no suggestion in the evidence that he did either of those two things, and it was undoubtedly open to the jury to conclude that, if he were required to account, he omitted to do so.
As to whether the omission was fraudulent, the question depended upon the subjective state of mind of the appellant at the time of his omission to account. Fraud in this context involves deliberately dishonest conduct. It would not suffice for a conviction if the jury considered, for example, that the appellant's conduct was merely careless or mistaken.
There was ample evidence upon which the jury, properly instructed, could have convicted the appellant. On the other hand, the requirement of a trial according to law carried with it the necessity to explain to the jury the precise nature of the offence with which the appellant was charged and, in particular, to distinguish between a fraudulent omission to account when required to do so, and a mere failure to pay a debt. The summing-up in the present case was not adequate to that purpose.
For these reasons, I considered that the orders announced on 10 November should be made.
JUDGE2
KIRBY P I agree with Gleeson CJ.
JUDGE3
DOWD J I have had the advantage of reading the judgment in draft form of
Gleeson CJ. I agree with his Honour's reasons and the orders proposed.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/18.html  
