

Regina versus Bruce Davies [1998] NSWSC 1042 (16 September 1998) 
REGINA v. Bruce DAVIES /96 
Monday 12 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Bruce Davies has applied for leave to appeal against the severity of these sentences: March 1995, supply 100.4 gm of methylamphetamine for $5200 at
Queanbeyan. A police agent had prevailed upon Ashley Langdon to arrange the sale with Davies. Langdon, and the agent, travelled from the Central Coast to
Queanbeyan to consummate the sale. A concurrent fixed term of four years was imposed.
 March 1995, supply 40 gm of methylamphetamine for $4200 at Queanbeyan.
The money was paid to the applicant's de facto in similar circumstances. A concurrent fixed term of four years was imposed.
 April 1995, supply 59.5 gm of methylamphetamine for $2000 at
Queanbeyan. The money was paid to the applicant's de facto in similar circumstances. A concurrent fixed term of four years was imposed.
 April 1995, supply 173 gm of methylamphetamine for $6500 at Queanbeyan.
The money was paid to the applicant's de facto in similar circumstances. A concurrent fixed term of four years was imposed.
 April 1995, supply 411.6 gm of methylamphetamine, being not less than a commercial quantity, for $11,850 at Dolls Point. The police agent met the applicant and his de facto. A minimum term of four years six months and an additional term of two years were imposed.
 May 1995, supply 452 gm of methylamphetamine, being not less than a commercial quantity, for $13,500 at Burwood. A meeting was arranged and attended by the applicant, a police agent and an undercover police officer.
The transaction took place in the applicant's car between the police agent and the applicant. A concurrent fixed term of four years was imposed.
 May 1995, supply 437.8 gm of methylamphetamine, being not less than a commercial quantity, for $13,500 at Brighton-le-Sands. There was a meeting between the applicant and an undercover police officer. A concurrent fixed term of four years was imposed.
 May 1995, supply 13.2 gm of cocaine for $2150. A concurrent fixed term of four years was imposed.

The Judge applied the principle of totality and held, correctly, that there was significant criminality over a period of time.

The applicant relied principally on the point that, as a matter of parity, the subject sentences when compared with those imposed upon Ashley Lindsay Robert
Lloyd Langdon led to the applicant having a justifiable sense of grievance.
There was a subsidiary point, that the Judge had not allowed sufficiently for the applicant's assistance to the authorities.

Langdon was sentenced by the same judge on 7 March 1996 and the sentences imposed were upheld by the Court of Criminal Appeal. Langdon pleaded guilty to four counts of supply methylamphetamines on 22 and 31 March 1995 and 11 and April 1995. He was a co-offender with Davies on these charges.

On each count Langdon was sentenced concurrently to a minimum term of two years and an additional term of twelve months. On a second indictment, Langdon was sentenced as follows: May 1995, supply of 103.3 gm of methylamphetamine for $4000 at Lake
Munmorah by Langdon to a police agent. This was closely related to the earlier matters. Langdon was sentenced concurrently to a minimum term of two years with an additional term of one year.
 June 1995, supply of one pound of amphetamine, being not less than a commercial quantity, for $12,500 at Lake Munmorah by Langdon to a police undercover officer at the latter's request. This involved Langdon contacting a supplier. Langdon was sentenced cumulatively to a minimum term of one year and an additional term of two years.
 June 1995, supply of one pound of amphetamine, being not less than a commercial quantity, for $12,000 by Langdon to the police undercover officer at the latter's request. Langdon arranged for his supplier to attend. Langdon received the same concurrent cumulative sentence as for the offence on 5 June .

It will be seen that there were four identical charges involving co-offenders.
Each had an additional two charges which, although separate, involved almost the same quantities and moneys of the same general order being paid, $13,500 and $12,000.

Each had a further supply charge. Davies had an additional charge of supplying not less than a commercial quantity of the prohibited drug. Davies' offences and Langdon's offences were committed as a result of requests from police agents or police undercover officers.

In broad terms, Langdon received a minimum term totalling three years and an additional term totalling two years. Langdon's criminal record was slightly worse than that of Davies. Davies had not been to gaol previously. Langdon had, although a long time ago.

There is sufficient commonality between the offences for parity considerations to apply. It is ironic that the number and extent of the offences committed depended upon how often the police sought supplies of methylamphetamine and the method which they chose. Langdon was apparently contacted once less than
Davies.

Both Davies and Langdon were drug addicts. Their personal and criminal histories are not attractive.

Davies was on a good behaviour bond for three years at the time of the offences and Langdon was serving periodic detention. Both men had pleaded guilty.

While the subjective features of both men differed, the differences were not such as to destroy the parity contention.

The question of assistance rendered by Davies to the authorities is a difficult one. The police were interested in using the applicant but they put an embargo on any activities until they told him to proceed. However, Davies proceeded without the clearance or authorisation from the police.

The relevant police officer has written that the applicant did give assistance on other matters and that part of the information provided on 4 October 1995 confirmed the basis of an operation which led to the arrest of three persons in connection with a number of serious drug-related charges. The other parts of the information provided assisted in ongoing police operations.

Langdon had not done likewise. It is better to take the assistance into account on the parity argument than deal with the assistance separately.

Giving assistance also bears on the severity of the custodial conditions. The additional serious offence of the applicant cannot be ignored but my earlier observations indicate the importance of the role played by the police. If the sentences remain as they are the applicant would have a legitimate sense of grievance.

The appropriate minimum term is one of three years and three months on the fifth count with an additional term of two years. There are special circumstances and, in this regard, I agree with the Judge.

Accordingly, I propose that leave to appeal be granted, that the appeal be allowed and that all sentences be quashed.

On the fifth count, the applicant is sentenced to a minimum term of three years and three months to commence on 16 June 1995 and to expire on 15
September 1998. The additional term of two years is to commence on 16
September 1998.

In respect of all the remaining counts, I would propose that there be a fixed term of imprisonment of two years and six months to be served concurrently, to commence on 16 June 1995 and to expire on 15 December 1997.

All sentences are to be served concurrently.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders are as proposed.
 * * * 
