

Masadabanc International Group Pty Limited versus Michael Sfar and Ors [2005]
NSWSC 500 (26 May 2005) 
Last Updated: 27 May 2005 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Masadabanc International Group Pty Limited versus Michael Sfar & Ors <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 13122/04  
HEARING DATE{S): 26 May 2005  
JUDGMENT DATE: 26/05/2005  
PARTIES: 
Masadabanc International Group Pty Limited (Plaintiff) 
Michael Sfar (First Defendant) 
Hassy Sfar (Second Defendant) 
Justin Zappacosts aka Guistino Zappacosta (Third Defendant) 
United Industries International Pty Limited (Fourth Defendant) 
Maria Ugov (Fifth Defendant) 
Maurizia Zappacosta (Sixth Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Master Malpass  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr J Laucis (Plaintiff) 
Mr B Pluznyk (Fourth & Fifth Defendants) 
Mr Macrae (Sixth Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Roderick Storie (Plaintiff) 
Joseph G Capogreco & Assoc (Fourth & Fifth Defendants) 
Lee & Lyons (Sixth Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
No question of principle  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
The claims made against the fourth, fifth and sixth defendants are struck out  the plaintiff is to pay the costs of the fourth, fifth and sixth defendants to date  the statement of claim be amended so that the name of the plaintiff is now "Masadabanc International Group Pty Limited"  the fourth, fifth and sixth defendants are to have their costs paid on an indemnity basis.  
JUDGMENT:  - 2 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION  
Master Malpass  May 2005  of 2004 Masadabanc International Group Pty Limited versus Michael Sfar & Ors  
JUDGMENT - on fourth, fifth, and sixth defendants' notices of motion  Master: These proceedings were commenced by a statement of claim filed on 23 September 2004. The fourth, fifth and six defendants now move to have the claims made against their clients struck out. A reading of the statement of claim reveals that no cause of action whatsoever is advanced in that document against those defendants.  It is conceded by counsel for the plaintiff that the statement of claim insofar as it seeks to bring claims against those defendants requires amendment. As I understand the submissions, his client is not presently in a position to formulate any amended claim against the fourth, fifth and six defendants. This continues to be the position, despite the plaintiff having had more than ample opportunity to amend the statement of claim.  It seems to me that it is in the best interests of all parties that the fourth, fifth and sixth defendants be removed from the proceedings so that the parties will not be placed in the position of needlessly incurring costs in relation to a claim that at the moment is admittedly hopeless.  It remains open to the plaintiff to make further inquiries, and should those inquiries reveal that there is a reasonable cause of action against any of the fourth, fifth or sixth defendants to make application to the court for leave to amend the statement of claim so as to enable such cause of action to be litigated against any of the fourth, fifth and six defendants.  I strike out the claims that are made against the fourth, fifth and sixth defendants. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the fourth, fifth and sixth defendants to date.  By way of clarification, I have been asked to comment on the erroneous description of the plaintiff in the process. The named plaintiff is not an entity at law.  It is common ground that at all times instructions to bring these proceedings came from Masadabanc International Group Pty Limited and that until today the real plaintiff has been erroneously described in the statement of claim.  An application is made that the costs be payable on an indemnity basis. The asserted claim is, and at all times has been, manifestly hopeless. The statement of claim should never have been filed in its present form.  In the circumstances the fourth, fifth and sixth defendants are entitled to have their costs on an indemnity basis and I so order.  
LAST UPDATED: 27/05/2005 * * * 
