

Salad Fresh Pty Limited versus P&M Quality Smallgoods Pty Limited [2015]
NSWSC 1717 (24 November 2015) 
Last Updated: 24 November 2015 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Orders that the proceedings be dismissed with costs.  
Catchwords: 
COMMERCIAL CONTRACT - Construction - No general principle  
Cases Cited: 
Coface Australia versus Sims Group Australia Holdings Ltd <case> 
Perri versus Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 537] 
Re Distributors and Warehousing Ltd [[1986] 1 EGLR 90]  
Texts Cited: 
Kim Lewison, The Interpretation of Contracts (3rd ed 2004, Sweet &
Maxwell) 
Nicholas Seddon, Seddon on Deeds (2015, Federation Press) 
Sir Kim Lewison and David Hughes, The Interpretation of Contracts in Australia (2012, Lawbook Co)  
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
Salad Fresh Pty Limited (ACN 010 618 434) (first Plaintiff) 
Moraitis Family Investments Pty Limited (second Plaintiff) 
P&M Quality Smallgoods Pty Limited (ACN 002 781 142) (first Defendant) 
JBS Smallgoods Holdco Australia Pty Limited ( ACN 602 974 818) (second
Defendant) 
SPM Fresh Holdings Pty Limited (ACN 161 701 337) (third Defendant)  
Representation: 
Counsel: 
Mr B W Walker SC; Mr T D Castle (Plaintiffs) 
Mr I Pike SC; Mr J Burnett (Defendants)  
Solicitors: 
Atanaskovic Hartnell (Plaintiffs) 
Minter Ellison (first Defendant) 
Allens (second Defendant) 
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers (third Defendant)  
File Number(s): /29613  
JUDGMENT
HIS HONOUR: This dispute concerns the proper interpretation of a shareholders agreement made by the three shareholders and the third defendant SPM Fresh Holdings Pty Ltd (SPM). The first plaintiff, Salad Fresh Pty Limited (Salad Fresh), holds 50% of the shares in SPM; the second plaintiff, Moraitis Family Investments Pty Limited (MFI), owns 25%; and the first defendant, P&M Quality Smallgoods Pty Limited (Primo), owns the remaining 25%.
On 1 March 2013 Salad Fresh, MFI, Primo and SPM entered into a shareholders agreement. That agreement contained provisions intended to ensure that, without consent, no shareholder could dispose of its shares or effectively introduce new shareholders. It also included pre-emption provisions. Another "safeguard" was provided in clause 8.2, dealing with what might happen if there was a change in control of any of the shareholders. clauses 8.2 and 12 are at the heart of the current dispute and I will deal with them in some detail very shortly. Primo has a business of packaging and selling processed meats. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of Australian Consolidated Food Holdings Pty Ltd (ACFH). That means, for the purposes of the discussion that follows, that ACFH was Primo's "Ultimate Controlling Entity" as defined in the shareholders agreement.
On or about 20 November 2014, ACFH entered into a transaction with a Brazilian based company, JBS Smallgoods Holdco Australia Pty Limited (JBS), the effect of which would be to change the identity of Primo's ultimate controlling entity. The plaintiffs say that Primo had to give the other shareholders a transaction notice within the meaning of clause 12.2 of the shareholders agreement. Although Primo purported to give such a notice on the 28 November 2014, the document that was in fact given did not qualify as a notice within the meaning of clause 12.2.
Thus by the plaintiffs' further amended statement of claim of 14 May 2015, they seek a declaration that the document issued on 28 November 2014 was not a valid transaction notice under clause 12.2 of the shareholders agreement. They seek an additional declaration that in the events which have occurred Primo has committed an event of default under clause 13.1 of the shareholder agreement, and that the plaintiffs had served a valid notice under clause 13.2 of the agreement on 1 April 2015.
The statement of claim also claimed damages. However, by an order made at a directions hearing, I am to deal with all issues except damages. In argument, this was refined by the parties who agreed that if I considered that because in all probability, no damages arose, I should not make a finding to that effect but still allow a final hearing on the issue of damages. The reason for this point arising will hopefully become clear later in these reasons.
I heard the proceedings on Monday 9 November 2015. Mr B W Walker SC and Mr T D Castle of counsel appeared for the plaintiff, and Mr I Pike SC and Mr J Burnett of counsel appeared for the defendants.
I should commence by setting out the key provisions of the shareholders agreement.
 "8. Restrictions on disposals of shares by a shareholder  .1 No Disposal except in certain circumstances: 
A Shareholder must not dispose of any Shares except: as permitted or envisaged by clause 8.5 and clauses 9 to 13 ;  to another Entity which has the same Ultimate Controlling Entity as the
Shareholder and is not Controlled by any other Entity; or  with the consent of the other Shareholders.
 .2 Change in control 
If a Shareholder is an Entity: a change must not occur in the identity of its Ultimate Controlling entity ... 
Except:  as permitted or envisaged by clause 12; or  with the consent of the other Shareholders ...
 . Permitted Change of Control Transaction  .1 Purpose 
The Shareholders acknowledge that: 
A Controlling Entity of each of them may wish to initiate or participate in a transaction by which Control of that Controlling Entity ("Relevant Entity") is altered including, for example, an initial public offering relating to that Controlling Entity or another Entity or a trade sale relating to some or all of the shares or assets of the Controlling Entity, or of another Entity ("Corporate Transaction");  it is likely that a Corporate Transaction would, but for this clause, give rise to a contravention of clause 8.2 at that time that it is carried out;  in order to conduct and give effect to a Corporate Transaction, the
Relevant Entity will need to know whether the Corporate Transaction is to include or not include the Group;  a Corporate Transaction may afford each Shareholder the greatest opportunity to maximise the value of the Shares; and  this clause 12 is designed to allow a Relevant Entity, instead of causing a contravention of clause 8.2, to offer the opportunity to the other
Shareholders either to: indirectly participate in a proposed Corporate Transaction at a price calculated by applying the same earnings multiple to the EBITDA of the
Group as the earnings multiple at which the Corporate Transaction ultimately takes place in accordance with clause 12.6; or  acquire all of the Shares of the Shareholder whose Controlling Entity is proposed to be the subject of the Corporate Transaction, so that the Group does not participate in the Corporate Transaction.
 .2 Transaction Notice 
Subject to clause 12.3 and subject to clause 15.4 (confidentiality), a
Shareholder ("Moving Shareholder") may give notice ("Transaction Notice") to
Holdings and each other Shareholder ("Other Shareholders") that: it, or its Ultimate Controlling Entity, or other Controlling Entity wishes to conduct and give effect to a Corporate Transaction;  sets out a general description of the proposed Corporate Transaction, including: a summary of the valuation method which is to be applied in relation to determining the price at which the Corporate Transaction occurs (if that in fact takes place); and  an indicative timetable for the Corporate Transaction.
 .3 Other Shareholders right to tag (indirectly participate in the
Corporate Transaction) 
The Other Shareholders will be entitled, provided that each of them does so, by the date that is 5 Business Days after the date of the Transaction
Notice ("Tag Expiry Date") to serve notice in writing on the Moving
Shareholder of their intention to tag ("Tag Notice"). Specifically, this right will be a right for all of them (and not some only) to sell all of their
Shares to the Moving Shareholder, on the same day as that on which the
Corporation Transaction is completed, for a purchase price calculated by applying the same valuation methodology as that used in the Corporate
Transaction and applying the same earnings multiple to the EBITDA of the Group as is ultimately achieved on completion of the Corporate Transaction. A Tag
Notice is irrevocable once a Tag Notice has been given by all of the Other
Shareholders.  .4 Right to buy 
If all the Other Shareholders do not give a Tag Notice by the Tag Expiry
Date, but all of them do give a notice in writing to Holdings by the Tag
Expiry Date that they may be interested in purchasing all of the Shares of the
Moving Shareholder, then: the Board must commission a valuation report, at the cost of Holdings, by a firm of accountants (being a firm which satisfies the criteria in clause .4(b)) to report that firm's determination of the fair value per Share calculated in accordance with the principles set out in clause 11.4(c). The
Board must instruct the accountants to complete their report as soon as reasonably practicable and, in any event, by no later than 10 Business Days after they are instructed; and  the Moving Shareholder must give a notice ("Offer Notice") to Holdings and the Other Shareholders offering to sell all of its Shares to the Other
Shareholders at the fair value per Share as set out in the valuation report.
 .5 Acceptance of offer 
Unless, by the date that is 3 Business Days after the date of the Offer
Notice ("Offer Expiration Date"), the Other Shareholders have all given notice to the Moving Shareholder (copied to Holdings) accepting the offer made by the
Moving Shareholder under clause 12.4, all the Other Shareholders are treated as not having accepted the offer made by the Moving Shareholder under clause .4, and 12.7 will then apply.  .5A Consequence of procedure 
The parties acknowledge and agree that by the Offer Expiration Date, in accordance with the objective stated in clause 12.1(c), the consequence of procedure set out in clauses 12.2 to 12.5 (inclusive) is that the Moving
Shareholder will know whether the Corporate Transaction may proceed on the basis that, where Primo is the Moving Shareholder, the non-Primo party under the Corporate Transaction will indirectly acquire: % shareholding in Holdings (where both Competitive and Moraitis have elected to buy); or  a 25% shareholding in Holdings (where neither Competitive nor Moraitis have elected to tag nor to buy); or  a 100% shareholding in Holdings (where both Competitive and Moraitis have elected to tag).
 .5B Further right of moving party 
The parties further acknowledge and agree that, if the consequence of the procedure set out in clauses 12.2 to 12.5 (inclusive) is that set out in clause 12.5A(b), the Moving Party may, but is not obliged to, then exercise its power to give a notice under clause 11.1 in respect of its Shares.  .6 Completion of sale to Other Shareholders 
If all of the Other Shareholders accept the offer made to them in the Offer
Notice, then the sale and purchase of the Shares arising from the acceptance of the offer constituted by the Offer Notice is to take place at the offices of Holdings at 12 noon on the same day as that on which the Corporate
Transaction is completed, or at such other time and place as the Shareholders may agree in writing before that time. The provisions of clause 11.3(d) apply to completion of such sale and purchase with any necessary amendments.  .7 Standstill Period 
Except if the Moving Shareholder exercises its power to give a notice under clause 11.1 as described in clause 12.5B, during the period of 6 months commencing on the Offer Expiration Date (or such longer period as may be provided under clause 12.8) (Standstill Period) the Other Shareholders: must not, and must procure that each relevant Controlling Entity does not, directly or indirectly: participate in any discussions or negotiations in relation to a proposal for the sale and purchase of their Shares or any Corporate
Transaction; or  invoke any of their rights to sell their Shares, or offer their Shares for sale, in accordance with this document;  without limiting paragraph (ii) above, are not entitled to, and must not, serve a notice under any of clauses 9, 10, 11 or this clause 12; and must immediately cease, and must procure that each relevant
Controlling Entity, and each associate, officer, employee, agent, representative or adviser (to any of them), immediately ceases, any existing negotiations or discussions with any person in connection with or with a view to any sale and purchase of their Shares, or any Corporate Transaction.

The Moving Shareholder will be entitled at any time to serve a fresh
Transaction Notice on the Other Shareholders, and restart the process of this clause 12.  .8 Extension of Standstill Period 
The Standstill Period is extended by two months to 8 months commencing on the Offer Expiration Date if: after 4 months from, and before the end of 5 months after, the Offer
Expiration Date the Moving Shareholder gives notice to each of the Other
Shareholders (copied to Holdings); and  the notice under paragraph (a): reports on the progress to the date of the notice of the Corporate
Transaction; and  states that it is the belief, held on reasonable grounds, of the
Moving Shareholder that the Corporate Transaction will occur within 8 months commencing on the Offer Expiration Date.
 .9 Effect of Corporate Transaction 
If the Moving Shareholder has given a Transaction Notice, and subject always to performance by the Moving Shareholder of its obligations under clause 12.5, the conduct of, giving effect to and completion of, the Corporate
Transaction specified in the Transaction Notice during the Standstill Period does not constitute engaging breach of clause 8.2 in relation to the Moving
Shareholder.  . Events of Default  .1 Events of Default 
Each of the following is an "Event of Default" in relation to a Shareholder for the purposes of clause 13.2, whether or not it is within the control of the relevant Shareholder: a receiver, receiver and manager, trustee, administrator or similar officer is appointed over, or a mortgagee or chargee takes possession of, all or a substantial part of the assets or undertaking of the Shareholder;  if the Shareholder is a natural person in bankruptcy, a trustee is appointed over the assets or undertaking of the Shareholder;  the Shareholder enters into or resolves to enter into any arrangement, composition or compromise with, or assignment for the benefit of, its creditors or any of them;  an application (other than a frivolous or vexatious application) or an order is made for the dissolution or winding up of a Shareholder or an effective resolution is passed for the winding up of a Shareholder other than for the purposes of a solvent reconstruction or amalgamation on terms approved by the Board;  a Shareholder enters into or resolves to enter into any scheme or arrangement or composition with its creditors generally or any class of its creditors other than for the purposes of a solvent reconstruction or amalgamation on terms approved by the Board;  the Shareholder breaches any material obligation under this document and another Shareholder gives written notice of the breach, whether it considers that the breach is capable of remedy or not, to the Shareholder in default, to Holdings and: the breach is not capable of remedy; or  where the breach is capable of remedy, the Shareholder in default does not remedy the breach within 20 Business Days of the date of the notice; and the Shareholder breaches clause 8.2 or disposes or purports to dispose of any of its Shares in breach of this document.
 .2 Notice of Default 
Upon the occurrence of any event of default in respect of a Shareholder ("Defaulting Shareholder"), another Shareholder ("Aggrieved Shareholder") may serve upon the Defaulting Shareholder a notice requiring the Defaulting
Shareholder to remedy such event of default within a period of 20 Business
Days following service of the notice ("Notice of Default") or if such default is not capable of being remedied within such period of 20 Business Days then within such further period as the Aggrieved Shareholder shall deem reasonable.  .3 Non Satisfaction 
If the Defaulting Shareholder fails to comply with the Notice of Default under clause 13.2 and the Defaulting Shareholder cannot adequately compensate the other Shareholders by the payment of damages in respect of such default, then the Aggrieved Shareholder may serve a further notice in writing ("Non
Satisfaction Notice") on the Defaulting Shareholder and thereupon the following provisions of this clause 13 shall have effect.  .4 Purchase Option 
From the date of service of a Non Satisfaction Notice the other
Shareholders shall have an option to purchase any or all of the Shares of the
Defaulting Shareholder on the following terms: 
The purchase price per Shares at which the option shall be exercisable ("Option Price") shall be an amount mutually agreed between the Shareholders and in default of agreement an amount determined by Holdings then auditor acting as an expert and not as an arbitrator in accordance with the following formula: 
P = (4 x EBITDA) + C - ED 
NOS 
Where; 
P is Option Price per Share; 
EBITDA of the Group as a consolidated entity for the 12 month period ending on the last day of the month before the occurrence of the applicable Event of
Default ("Calculation Date"); 
C is the Group's cash as at the Calculation Date (whether it is cash on hand or cash at bank); 
ED is the Group's debt as at the Calculation Date; and 
NOS is the total number of Shares in Holdings on a fully diluted basis on the Calculation Date. 
The auditor shall be instructed to perform these calculations in accordance with then applicable Australian Accounting Standards and Australian generally accepted accounting principles and using the same principles of accounting as applied when in the preparation of the last set of audited financial statements of Holdings on a consolidated basis adopted before the Calculation
Date (except if the Calculation Date is the end of a financial period, in which case in the audited financial statements adopted for that period). 
The auditor must present a written report setting out the Option Price and the calculations and reasoning by which the auditor determined the Option
Price to Holdings and, once Holdings has reviewed the report to correct any errors that may have been contained in it and received any corrected report,
Holdings must send copies of the report (or corrected report) to all
Shareholders. 
The auditor's determination of the Option Price is, in the absence of manifest error, conclusive and binding on the parties.

The option shall be exercisable for a period of 20 Business Days after determination of the Option Price pursuant to clause 13.4(a). 
Upon exercise of the option there shall be a binding contract for the sale of Shares between the other Shareholders as purchasers and the Defaulting
Shareholder as vendor on the same terms and conditions (mutatis mutandis) as are applicable under clause 8. The number of the Shares which each of the other Shareholders is to purchase from the Defaulting Shareholder is determined as if the Defaulting Shareholder had given a Transfer Notice under clause 8, and other Shareholders who exercised the option had given an acceptance under clause 8 as a consequence so that clause 8.3(f) applied."
The parties agree on a series of factual propositions. The transaction between ACFH and its bidder, JBS, was initiated by Rothschild, the merchant bank. The initial contact was made with Mr Johnson, a partner in the Affinity Equity Partners Group who are private equity fund managers. Mr Johnson was acting for Primo and ACFH.
On 29 October 2014, a heads of agreement executed as a deed was entered into by the Primo Group shareholders and JBS recording the parties' intention to proceed with the sale of 100% of the shares in ACFH subject to due diligence and negotiations between the Primo Group shareholders and JBS, and ultimately the execution of a long form agreement.
On 20 November 2014, JBS released an announcement to the market that it had that day entered into a conditional agreement to purchase 100% of the share capital in the Primo Group.
On 28 November 2014 a notice was given to Salad Fresh, MFI, and SPM, the body of which, so far as relevant, is as follows: "Purpose  . This letter constitutes a Transaction Notice for the purposes of clause .2 of the Shareholders Agreement.  . On 21 November 2014, the shareholders of the Australian Consolidated
Food Holdings Pty Limited (ACFH), the Australian parent company of P&M, entered into a share sale deed relating to the sale of all of the issued share capital of ACFH to JBS Smallgoods Holdco Australia Pty Limited, a subsidiary of JBS S.A (together JBS) (the Corporate Transaction).  . The Corporate Transaction is subject to customary regulatory approvals and, therefore, the precise completion date is not yet known. However, the earliest date that completion could occur would be 27 January 2015.  . As required under clause 12.2(b) of the Shareholders Agreement, we note that ACFH and the Primo Smallgoods Group has been valued for the purpose of the Corporate Transaction at an enterprise value of $1.45 billion. In relation to clause 12.2(b)(i) of the Shareholders Agreement, P&M is not aware of the valuation methodology applied by JBS in determining the valuation of ACFH and the Primo Smallgoods Group, although we note that JBS has announced to the market a post-synergies multiple of 8 x EBITDA (as per the Attachment to this letter). However, we note that in relation to clause 12.3 of the Shareholders
Agreement, the enterprise value for the Corporate Transaction of $1.45 billion represents a multiple of approximately 10.7 x the LTM adjusted EBITDA of the
Primo Smallgoods Group.  . We note that under clauses 12.3 and 12.4 (and the following provisions of clause 12) of the Shareholders Agreement you have certain rights available to you.  . Please note that the contents of this letter are strictly confidential, and we request that you please keep the contents of this letter confidential, as required by clauses 12.2 and 15.4 of the Shareholders Agreement."
The price at which the transaction was confirmed was approximately 1.45 billion Australian dollars. That price was reached by means of a commercial negotiation between JBS and the owners of the ACFH shares. Mr Johnson's evidence was that "Affinity did not use a valuation methodology in determining what place, what price, Claris (ie the owner of the shares in ACFH) should accept for Primo, and that he did not know what valuation methodology JBS used". His evidence is that Claris focused on the return that would be achieved on its initial investment in ACFH which he described as "times money return and internal rate of return".
Mr Alvaraz, as the principal of JBS involved in the negotiations, gave evidence that JBS valued the Primo Group by a EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxation, depreciation and amortisation, excluding any abnormal items) multiple and the purchase price of 1.45 billion Australian dollars represented a multiple of 10.7 times the adjusted 30 June 2014 EBITDA of the Primo Group which was $135.7 million. This information was advised to Mr Parker on behalf of Salad Fresh by Mr Johnson in an email of 13 January 2015, and by JBS at a meeting on 14 January 2015.
JBS had available to it, at the time of negotiating the price of the JBS transaction and entering into that transaction, the Primo Group's EBITDA for the financial year ending 30 June 2014 at approximately $130 million.
JBS excluded the negative contribution from a loss-making chicken business from Primo Group's 30 June 2014 EBITDA for the purpose of the JBS transaction. The Primo Group agreed to close that business down after 30 June 2014 but prior to completion of the JBS transaction and, as such, the chicken business was not included and did not form part of the business purchased. This matter was also advised to Mr Parker of Salad Fresh at the meeting of 14 January 2015.
Following the delivery of the document of 28 November 2014, Salad Fresh sought an extension of two weeks in which to respond. This extension was agreed and documented by a deed of variation executed on 4 December 2014 which extended the time for response until 19 December 2014. The deed of variation is unremarkable, but it is necessary to set out some of the recitals: "D On 28 November 2014, Primo gave Holdings, Competitive and Moraitis a notice under clause 12.2 of the Shareholders Agreement. 
E. The parties wish to amend the Shareholders Agreement to change the date by which Competitive and Moraitis may respond to the 28 November Notice."
There were meetings between the representatives of the shareholders in January, but the first indication that there was any dispute as to the status of the document of 28 November 2014 occurred on 19 January 2015, when Salad Fresh and MFI sent a letter to Primo alleging that the document was not a valid transaction notice along with their reasons for holding that view. Primo responded on 23 January 2015 asserting otherwise. The plaintiffs commenced the current proceedings on 30 January 2015.
The JBS transaction was completed on 30 March 2015. JBS became the owner of the shares in the Primo company on 1 April 2015. Salad Fresh and MFI served a default notice under clause 13.2. Primo contested the validity of that notice and denies that there has been any default.
Counsel posed the issue for me to determine was threefold:
Does clause 12.2 of the Shareholders Agreement require the transaction notice to be given prior to entry into the corporate transaction?
Does the document of 28 November satisfy the requirements of clause .2(b) of the Shareholders Agreement?
Do the recitals in the deed of variation estop the plaintiffs denying that the document of 28 November 2014 was a valid transaction notice?
I will deal with these matters in turn. However, before I do I should make some general observations.
The Shareholders Agreement is a very complex document. However, it was an almost impossible task for the drafter completely to protect the shareholders from having their close connection disturbed without the ultimate controlling entities being parties to some sort of contract. Accordingly, one should not be surprised if something falls between the cracks.
Secondly, clause 8.2 is odd. In view of the fact that the parties have agreed to postpone the question as to whether any damages at all were suffered for the next tranche of these proceedings, I do not need to decide the matter. However, there is a very real difference between a promissory condition, a contingent condition, and a non-specific condition. Clause 8.2(a) provides that a change must not occur. It does not, as such, impose any obligation on Primo to ensure that the change did not occur. As to the distinction between promissory conditions and other conditions, see Perri versus Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd <case>; (1982)149 CLR 537. I have some doubts as to whether any claims can follow from clause 8.2(a) however, those doubts are affected by the fact that clause 12.1(b) speaks of a contravention of clause 8.2, and clause 13.1(g) refers to a shareholder breaching clause 8.2. I merely refer to these matters to make sure that people realise that they did have my attention, but in light of the fact that they are to be dealt with in the second tranche, I need take them no further.
I now deal with the three issues.

Issue 1
There is little doubt, as Mr Walker SC points out that there are some indications in the text of clause 12 that the notice must be given before the corporate transaction is entered into. I was a little unclear as to when it could be said that the transaction was entered into. However, it would seem clear now that when the deal was signed off on 20 November 2014, there became a binding transaction, albeit that completion was subject to various regulatory enquiries, consent, due diligence, etc. Thus, as a matter of fact I must take it as established that a legally binding transaction was entered into on 20 November 2014, eight days before the alleged transaction notice.
The principal provisions of clauses 12.1 and 12.2 which indicate futurity are: that clause 12.1(e)(i) refers to a proposed corporate transaction and then distinguishes between entering into the transaction and completion by speaking in terms of what will ultimately take place; the same words in 12.2(b) about a proposed transaction.
Then there are, in clause 12.2(a), the words "wishes to conduct and give effect to". However, it seems to me that these words have a continuous effect, and at all times after the shaking of hands, up until the final consummation of the transaction, the relevant party wishes to conduct and give effect to the corporate transaction so I do not consider that these words assist at all.
Mr Walker SC puts that when one reads the document as a whole (particularly clause 12 as a whole), one can see that the commercial parties took the view that this notice needed to be given between (what Mr Walker SC calls) the time of shaking hands and the time of the lawyers finishing their work on the deal that had been agreed, but before the transaction was actually entered into in a binding way. He looks at the whole of clause 12 and points to the fact that there are very strict time limits given in respect of most of the steps. The purpose of clause 12 is set out in 12.1(b), that is; "it is likely that a Corporate Transaction would, but for this clause, give rise to a contravention of clause 8.2 at that time it is carried out". I have expressed my doubts about that but the significant matter is that the parties have acknowledged that that is the situation. Accordingly, once there is the proposed change in the ultimate controlling entity in respect of one of the shareholders, the other shareholders have three options:
To do nothing and perhaps sue if a default notice is issued under clause ;
to issue a TAG notice under clause 12.3; or to exercise their right to buy the third member's share under clause 12.4.
The second and third of these rights needs to be exercised within a relatively limited time. Thus, under clause 12.3, there is five business days, after the date of the transaction notice, to serve notice in writing of intention to TAG.
Obviously if the time for completion of the head agreement is relatively short, this is going to be awkward so that one would tend to favour the construction which gives more time for the process to take place. Likewise, under clause 12.4, there is a requirement which might, to an outside observer, seem almost impossible to meet that a valuation be obtained within 10 business days. Then under clause 12.5 there is a further three business days to give notice to other shareholders if certain things happen, and then under clause 12.6, the completion of any side transaction is to take place at 12:00 noon on the same day as that on which the corporate transaction is completed.
In argument it was, I think, conceded that this causes problems depending on what time of day the head transaction was completed. The parties agreed upon the potential difficulties that might arise.
Mr Walker SC says all these matters of timing disclose that the notice should be given before the transaction is documented, not merely before it is completed.
On the other hand Mr Pike SC says that there is no real reason for taking that attitude. He says further that the document in other places, such as clause 10, demonstrates that it is clear that there are strict time limits, yet this is not reflected in clause 12.
Mr Pike SC submits that the commercial purpose of clause 12 is not advanced by imposing any requirement that the transaction notice be issued before entry into the corporate transaction. The "other shareholder" only needs to determine whether to participate in the corporate transaction before completion of the corporate transaction. This commercial purpose is not advanced by requiring the transaction notice be issued before any entry into the corporate transaction. Again he puts that there is only a breach of clause 8.2 when there is an actual change in identity of the ultimate controlling entity, and that, again, is on completion not on entry into the transaction.
Another line of attack by Mr Pike SC is to say that the word "may" in clause 12.2 is permissive because there is no mandatory requirement that the relevant party issue a transaction notice. (For instance if the other relevant shareholders consent to what is happening). To impose a mandatory obligation to issue a transaction notice by a certain time in the absence of any objective commercial reason for doing so, is not a conclusion that should be reached in a commercial document.
It is very difficult to draw clauses, such as clause 12, and anticipate in advance all the possibilities. Technically the onus is on the plaintiff to show the Court that it is more likely than not that its construction is correct. I do not decide the case on onus because it does seem to me that whilst both positions are arguable, the arguments for the first defendant's position, as I have set out by quoting Mr Pike SC, are more persuasive than those put forward by the plaintiff.
Accordingly, in my view there is no necessity to issue a transaction notice before the actual corporate transaction is signed, sealed and delivered. It may be that the transaction notice needs to be given at least within a time that would allow all the steps in sub-paragraphs of clause 12 to take place, before the completion date in the head transaction, but that of course is a different matter and one that was not actually canvassed in argument.

Issue 2
It is quite clear that the reason for the transaction notice is to allow the other shareholders to work out which of the three options that I have noted earlier will best suit their commercial interests. Mr Walker SC says for that purpose, it is necessary for the other shareholders to have proper information, and because of the relatively short time limits involved, that proper information must be contained in the transaction notice and if it is not contained in the document which purports to be a transaction notice, it is not a transaction notice at all. The argument then goes on to say that if there was no transaction notice given then there has been a default under clause 8.2 and this then leads to a default notice being given.
A lot has been written about the construction of commercial contracts and mercifully I was spared being referred to most of the cases that are referred to in almost every piece of litigation. As Lewison & Hughes put it in the Interpretation of Contracts in Australia (2012, Lawbook Co) at [2.06], the Court may be assisted by consideration of the commercial purpose of the contract. However, what tends to happen is that each party has a different slant on the commercial purpose; a slant which favours it. In the instant case we have clause 12.1(b) which shows that the purpose is to provide an escape route against the contravention of clause 8.2 if the ultimate controlling entity is entering into a transaction which may change who that entity is. However, outside that main purpose, the plaintiffs still argue that for its commercial convenience it needs to have all the details to make an assessment; whereas the first defendant says that if it cannot, because it does not know the details, why should it be obliged to suffer the consequences of a default (because it is not a term of the contract that it must supply sufficient details for the other shareholders to be able to make up their minds as to what to do). It says that in the instant case it has done the best it can.
The plaintiff denies that what the first defendant did do in the document of 28 November is the best it could; for instance, it says that there are so many ambiguities in the statement, such as the possibility of certain post-synergies put in place after acquisition, a multiple of 8 x EBITDA would appear to be appropriate, but, otherwise, 10.7 x LTM adjusted EBITDA would be appropriate. People assume that LTM stands for last twelve months, but it does not indicate which period of twelve months is relevant.
There are good arguments put both ways, but again I favour that of the first defendant. The document should not be construed, in my view, as requiring the defendant to do anything more than it is practical for it to do. If the head transaction is not put together by any particular methodology, much rather than by instinct of the head buyer then it is hard to imagine that the parties who have then directed their mind to this situation would have said "well if that happens, the relevant shareholder who has no control over what his controlling entity did will have to pay a penalty for breach of clause 8.2". That, to me, does not make commercial common sense. The other shareholders have been given as much information as is in the hands of the affected shareholder, and, it seems to me, that even though it might not be sufficient for the other shareholders to be absolutely sure of what is the best deal they can get and which is the best option to choose, the transaction is valid.
I should note that I was not taken into the area which often is relevant of this sort of case which is the difference between an irregular notice and a void notice. All Mr Walker SC put on in that matter was that the valuation was such an important matter that it could not possibly be anything other than a mandatory requirement which would invalidate the notice if not complied with. However, I do agree with Mr Walker SC that it is not within the term "methodology" merely to say that there is a lump sum price of $1.45 billion.

Issue 3
Because of what I have decided in 1 and 2 above, it is not necessary to deal with the allegation that there is an estoppel by deed. However, in case this matter goes further and I am held to be wrong I need to deal with it briefly.
The plaintiff says that the rule that there is an estoppel by deed only applies in proceedings arising from the deed. This rule is constantly stated (see, eg Seddon on Deeds (2015, Federation Press) at page 184 where the authorities are noted). Because this is not an action on the variation deed, the principle of estoppel by deed cannot apply. (See Coface Australia versus Sims Group Australia Holdings Ltd <case>, at [93] - [97]).
But even on the "merits", the argument must fail. Lewison on the Interpretation of Contracts (3rd ed 2004, Sweet & Maxwell) at 10.15, page 330, gives the illustration of Re Distributors and Warehousing Ltd [[1986] 1 EGLR 90], where a deed of variation between the assignee of the reversion to a lease and two guarantors of the original tenant contained an acknowledgement by the guarantors that their obligations under the guarantee extended to the varied obligations to the tenant. It was held that this was insufficient to estop the guarantors from contending that the benefit of their guarantee had not been assigned to the assignee. That is very similar to the present case.
Finally, the statement in the recitals when fairly read does not seem to me to be more than a mere indication that a piece of paper called a notice was actually given on the 28 November rather than an assertion that the same was valid for all purposes.
Accordingly, if necessary, the estoppel point fails.
Thus, it is not necessary for me to examine at all the fact that a notice of default was given under clause 13 and what might be its consequences. Had this been relevant I would have had some difficulty because of the paucity of information as to what happened after the default notice was served.
In the event I merely dismiss the present proceedings with costs.
 * * * 
