

Regina versus Botero Matter No Cca 60126/98 [1998] NSWSC 231 (24 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 
REGINA versus RUBEN BOTERO 
CCA 60126/98 June 1998 
Grove J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
BARR J: The applicant, Ruben Botero, applies for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on him by Acting Judge Ford of Queen's Counsel in the District Court of New South Wales on 12 February 1998. For the offence of supplying not less than the commercial quantity of a prohibited drug, namely cocaine, his Honour sentenced the applicant to imprisonment for seven years, comprising a minimum term of five years and an additional term of two years. For supplying not less than the commercial quantity of a prohibited drug, namely heroin, his Honour sentenced the applicant to a concurrent fixed term of three years' imprisonment. 
Between February and May 1997 officers of the Drug Enforcement Agency investigated an arrangement in which illegal drugs were being distributed in
Sydney. They had the assistance of an informant, who was registered with the
New South Wales Crime Commission. On the evening of 1 May the informant went to the applicant's home by arrangement and the two men travelled together in the informant's car to another place where the applicant handed over one ounce of cocaine in exchange for $4000.

On 30 May 1997 an undercover police operative went to the applicant's house and the two men and a third man, Luis Diez, spoke about the supply by the applicant of eleven ounces of heroin at $6000 per ounce. After that discussion the applicant and Diez offered the undercover operative one kilogram of cocaine for $120,000, delivery to be effected within ten days. The commercial quantity of cocaine is 250 grams.

Discussions resumed about the supply of heroin and on the same evening the same undercover operative returned to the applicant's house. The man Diez was there as well. The applicant produced about eleven ounces of heroin. Eleven ounces equals about 308 grams. The commercial quantity of heroin is 250 grams.

A substantial amount of evidence was adduced before the sentencing judge to explain the circumstances in which the applicant had come to be a drug dealer.
He began experimenting with cannabis at fourteen or fifteen years old, then graduated to LSD and amphetamines. He began taking substantial amounts of amphetamines. When he was twenty-eight he began experimenting with cocaine and began to take that drug between three and five times a week. He suffered symptoms which a clinical psychologist, Mrs Petrenas, described as cocaine- induced psychosis. The symptoms comprised paranoia and auditory and visual hallucinations. Mrs Petrenas suggested treatment for the applicant and by the time he came for sentence he was no longer suffering from those symptoms.

The applicant's wife gave evidence of the difficulty the applicant had with his health and his addiction to drugs. During 1994 and 1995 he was seeing a doctor for depression and was prescribed Prozac. He was suffering insomnia and was unable to work. The family financial problems were serious. The applicant borrowed a large sum of money to buy a taxi cab plate, but eventually had to sell the taxi because he could not work. The applicant's wife suffered ill health as well.

By the time of sentence the applicant was acknowledging to an alcohol and drug worker, Mr Aleidzans, that he had a continuing problem with the use of drugs.
He was remorseful and wished to continue receiving treatment and to solve the problem of his drug addiction.

His Honour accepted the evidence and observed that general deterrence should often be given little weight where an offender suffers from a mental disorder or abnormality, because such an offender is not an appropriate medium for making an example to others. However, his Honour went on to say that where an offender acts with knowledge of what he is doing and with knowledge of the gravity of his actions, the moderation in sentence need not be great.

In sentencing the applicant his Honour took into account the principle of totality. His Honour regarded the first count as the more serious, since it involved supply of an ounce of cocaine and the offer of a further kilogram. In imposing sentence his Honour took into account the offence of possessing a small amount of cannabis leaf.

His Honour considered that the need to assist the applicant not to relapse into drug dependence required a period of parole of not less than two years, and so found a special circumstance justifying an additional term which exceeded one-third of the minimum term of the sentence to be imposed.

The nub of his Honour's findings, and the one which to his Honour's mind justified a sentence of the length of the one imposed, was the applicant's position in the drug trade. He described the applicant as a go-between, an intermediary between the drug suppliers and the customers. His Honour inferred that the applicant would have been supplying to an intermediate supplier who may or may not have engaged street dealers for further distribution.

Two submissions were made in this application. The first was that his Honour had paid insufficient regard to the fact of the applicant's addiction to drugs as explaining why he became a drug dealer.

It was submitted that that circumstance reduced the objective criminality of the applicant's conduct.

The second submission was that his Honour, having determined that there were special circumstances justifying the imposition of an additional term which exceeded one-third of the minimum term of the effective sentence, failed to give adequate weight to those circumstances.

Sentencing statistics were relied on in order to support those submissions.

Reliance was placed upon a judgment of the Court of Appeal of the Supreme
Court of Victoria, Regina versus Bernath [[1997] 1 VR 271.] That case concerned itself with the sentencing of drug dealers who are themselves demonstrated to be addicted to the drugs in which they deal. A passage from the judgment of Justice Callaway at pages 275 and 276 draws attention to the need to establish a link between the addiction and the commission of the offences. It can be stated that such a link was well and truly established in the present case.

At page 275 his Honour said this: "Mr. Gyorffy, who appeared for the Crown before us, did not contest that it is sometimes a very significant factor in sentencing that an offender engaged in trafficking, especially at street level, in order to gain the wherewithal to satisfy his own craving, rather than purely for reasons of greed in callous disregard of the grave harm that offence does to its victims. But, as McGarvie
J. said in R. versus Nagy <case>; [[1992] 1 V.R. 637] at 640, the regard to be paid to this factor depends on the circumstances of each case. The weight to be attributed to it is greatly diminished, often to vanishing point, when one is considering operations above street level." 
It is common ground that this applicant was not trading at street level and I will not repeat the observations of the learned sentencing judge about that.
During his remarks on sentence his Honour made these observations about the compulsion of the drugs upon the applicant as explaining his actions in committing these offences: "In this case, it seems to me that I should take into account the overpowering compulsion of the sort of drug to which you were addicted and treat you as being a person who did not have the appreciation of the seriousness of your offence that might otherwise be attributed to you, but then of course it is a matter of balancing factors and that is pointed out in the case of R v
Engert by the Chief Justice where he refers, with approval, to the remarks of
Mr Justice Badgery-Parker. This is at page 71. He said in citing a judgment of
Mr Justice Badgery-Parker in every case it is a matter of balancing the relevant factors in a manner no different from that which is involved in every sentencing exercise." 
Against the favourable circumstance to which I have adverted, his Honour then had to balance the objective seriousness of the offences for which he was sentencing the applicant. They were that two drugs, not one, had been supplied, and each in the commercial quantity and that the applicant was engaging in the drug trade not only to solve any problems arising immediately out of his addiction to drugs but to make substantial amounts of money.

As his Honour observed, the applicant and his family had substantial debts, and there can be no doubt that the applicant's engagement in the drug industry was to make substantial amounts of money in order to repay those debts. In my opinion, to make substantial amounts of money for that purpose, from trading in drugs, is no less criminal than to make the same amounts of money for pure profit.

No inappropriate process of reasoning is suggested on his Honour's part and the thrust of the submissions is that when one looks at the total sentence arrived at one is driven to the conclusion that his Honour went wrong.

Reference to sentencing statistics does not bear out that submission. The
Court was provided with statistics taken between January 1990 and December setting out the full terms of sentence for what I take to be single offences of the supply of a commercial quantity of heroin. They show, for cases in which accused persons were sent to prisoner, that sentences ranged from eighteen months to ten years.

It has to be borne in mind in using those statistics in the present case that his Honour was also sentencing the applicant for another discrete offence, that of supplying cocaine.

Even bearing in mind the principle of totality, to which his Honour referred, the fact that there were here two offences involving two different drugs required a substantially higher sentence. That requirement had to be set off against the favourable features to which I have referred.

Regard to what his Honour said and to the sentencing statistics does not persuade me his Honour, in selecting a total effective term of seven years, went outside the range of his proper sentencing discretion.

The remaining argument is that his Honour failed to provide a period of time long enough during which the applicant should be released on parole under supervision.

His Honour paid proper regard to the need of the applicant to receive assistance so that he would not relapse into the use of drugs. For my part I think that an assessment of two years for that purpose is sufficient. I think the selection of the additional term was within his Honour's discretion.

I would grant leave to appeal but I would dismiss the appeal.

GROVE J: I agree. The orders of the Court, therefore, are as proposed by Mr Justice Barr. * * * 
