

David Dickerson versus John Vouris and 1 OR [1997] NSWSC 87 (24 March 1997) `DAVID DICKERSON versus JOHN VOURIS & 1 OR` ``4534/96 
MONDAY 24 MARCH 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff is a director and shareholder of Cadima Express Pty Ltd. Cadima Express Pty Ltd was wound up on 19 December 1996. There are some very questionable aspects to the circumstances in which it was wound up. The winding up has already been stayed up to today, and the plaintiff seeks a further six weeks to enter into commercial transactions to sell the company's business as a going concern. This application is opposed by the solicitor for the liquidator.

I am informed that there is also a receiver recently appointed to protect the interests of the secured creditor, but the receiver does not appear this morning.

The present is a very unsatisfactory situation which was brought about mainly because it would appear that this company was wound up after an undertaking had been given that there would be an adjournment. That seems to be the position. I have not fully gone into it, but it is that fact that has caused so much complication in this case. A Judge has got to be mindful that in this class of case, running parallel with legal rights and liabilities there is a stream of what happens from day to day in commerce.

In commerce, people do trade with companies of marginal solvency, they do accept commercial risks and they do make commercial deals, and one would have thought that in the present situation had not a winding up order been made, some commercial deal would have been done which would have avoided a lot of administration.

The company is at marginal solvency, but again that factor is influenced by the commercial reality that when a company goes into liquidation all the vultures come in to feed, whereas, if a company is in life, they do not.

In some respects I have sympathy for the position that there is no-one there to protect the unsecured creditors, and the directors can in the six week period for which they wish an adjournment alter rights and give de facto preferences in the course of putting the business in a shape where it can be sold. That factor is muted by the secured creditor having put in a receiver, and the unlikelihood of a receiver being able to realise real estate within six weeks.

In whole, I think I probably should grant the six week adjournment that the company seeks. It is put on the basis that this a final period of time being sought to see if the business can be sold as a going concern to a competitor.
By that, of course, I am not precluding what may happen on 12 May, I am acting on the basis that this is a one-off application for a final period of time to adjust the rights.

Accordingly then, the stay of the winding up is continued up until 12 May , and the proceedings are stood over to that date before the Company
Judge.

Costs of today reserved.
 * * * 
