

Gregory versus Hudson and Ors Matter No Ca 40736/97 [1998] NSWSC 582 (11
November 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 December 1998 
GREGORY versus HUDSON & ORS 
CA 40736/97; ED 2493/96 November 1998 
Handley JA, Sheller JA, Sheppard AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Equity Division - Young J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40736/97; ED 2493/96 
DELIVERED: 11 November 1998 
HEARING DATE: 16 October 1998 
PARTIES: GREGORY versus HUDSON & ORS 
JUDGMENT OF: HANDLEY, SHELLER JJA, SHEPPARD AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: M D Broun QC/EA Cohen 
Respondents: J D Heydon QC/P Hallen SC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Neil J O'Connor & Associates 
Respondents : Tress Cocks & Maddox 
CATCHWORDS: PROBATE - rule against delegation of testamentary powers 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO OF PAGES: 26 
GREGORY versus HUDSON & ORS 
The appellant appealed against the decision of the trial Judge that the will of her deceased husband was valid.

The appellant and deceased were married on 21 January 1994. The deceased died on 9 December 1995 and the grant of probate for the estate, which was valued $11 million net, was made on 23 May 1995. The contentious clause of the will was cl 6, which devised to the Trustee of the Royce Gregory Family Trust the residue of the estate. The Trustee, under that trust, effectively had power to distribute trust funds to the world at large, excluding himself, his legal personal representative and his family.

The appellant began proceedings against the respondent executors for a declaration that cl 6 of the will was an invalid disposition on the basis that it delegated the testamentary power of the testator and thereby breached the rule against such delegation.

The trial Judge held that cl 6 was a valid testamentary disposition because it was not a breach of the rule against delegation of testamentary power to give property by will to a pre-existing trust or to constitute a trust which was sufficiently constituted according to the rules of certainty in trust law.

The appellant relied on the decision in Horan versus James [[1982] 2 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1982%5d%202%20NSWLR%20376 "View LawCiteRecord" ). It was argued that cl 6 was invalid because it delegated testamentary power and did not fall within the general power exception to the rule, that is, where the donee might exercise the power for his or her own benefit. The appellant argued that cl 6 did not create a general power because it devised the residue of the estate to the Trustee of the Royce Gregory Family Trust who, by virtue of that trust, had power to distribute trust funds to the world at large except the Trustee and his family.

Held:
It was for the High Court and not this Court to speculate on the correctness of the decision of Tatham versus Huxtable <case>; <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 1243] applied.
The language of cl 6 was clear, the vesting of estate monies to the
Trustee of the Royce Gregory Family Trust was no different to a gift by will to the Trustee of any other trust. Therefore, the language of cl 6 did not give rise to any delegation of testamentary power and the trial Judge was correct in so holding. Tatham versus Huxtable applied.

Authorities: 
Chichester Diocesan Fund and Board of Finance Inc versus Simpson <case>; <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 1243] 
Greig versus McGregor [[1982] 1 WLR 202] 
Horan versus James [[1982] 2 NSWLR 376] 
In re Baden's Deed Trusts <case>; [[1971] AC ]

In re Beatty (Deceased) [[1990] 1 WLR 1503] 
In re Byron's Settlement; Williams versus Mitchell [[1891] 3 Ch 474] 
In re Gulbenkians Settlements [1970] AC 508 
In re Jones [[1945] Ch 105] 
In re Manisty's Settlement [[1974] Ch 17] 
In re Park [[1932] 1 Ch 580] 
Lutheran Church of Australia South Australia District Incorporated versus Farmers'
Co-Operative Executors and Trustees Limited <case>; [(1970) 121 CLR 628] 
National Trustees Executors & Agency Co of Australasia Limited versus Trainor <case>; <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 639] 
In re Penrose [[1933] Ch 793] 
In re Lawrence's Will Trusts <case>; [(1976) 135 CLR 268] 
ORDERS
So much of the appeal against the decision of Young J of 4 April 1997 as concerns the validity of cl 6 of the will is dismissed;
Stand over the balance of the appeal to be mentioned before the Registrar on 3 February 1999;
Appellant to pay the respondent's costs of this part of the appeal;
To the extent that the first respondent's costs on an indemnity basis exceed the amount of costs payable under order 3 by the appellant, the first respondents be paid the difference out of the estate.

GREGORY versus HUDSON & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Sheller JA. 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
Royce Gregory died on 9 December 1995 aged 76. On 2 April 1996 probate of his will made on 23 May 1995 was granted to the executors named therein, John
Charles Hudson and Ronald Kenneth Heinrich, the first respondents. The deceased was survived by his wife, the appellant, Akiko Gregory, who was aged at the date of his death. She and the deceased were married on 21 January
The value of the deceased's estate was in the order of $11 million net.

By his will, after giving pecuniary legacies to his two sons by a previous marriage, the deceased gave Mrs Gregory a motor vehicle registered in his name, provided for Mrs Gregory to have the use, occupation and enjoyment of a unit in a building at 171 Walker Street, North Sydney, during her lifetime, or until she remarried or entered into a de facto relationship and directed that a sufficient amount of capital be set aside to allow her to be paid an amount of $50,000 per annum during her lifetime, or until she remarried or entered into a de facto relationship, with a further provision for the annual increase of that amount by reference to the Consumer Price Index. Clause 6 of the will provided as follows: "6. I GIVE DEVISE AND BEQUEATH to my Trustees the rest and residue of my real and personal estate of whatsoever nature and wheresoever situate UPON TRUST to pay my funeral and testamentary expenses and debts and all death probate estate succession and other like duties payable in respect of my estate and to hold the residue then remaining UPON TRUST to pay distribute or transfer such residue to the Trustee for the time being of the Royce Gregory Family Trust created by a certain Deed of Trust made the 3rd day of June 1994 between
Ronald Kenneth Heinrich as Settlor and Datpie Pty Limited (now known as Royce
Gregory Investments Pty Limited) (ACN 064 336 232) as Trustee to hold such residue upon the trusts of the aforesaid Deed of Trust dated the 3rd day of
June 1994 and as varied from time to time before or after my death." 
The Deed of Trust recited the establishment of a Trust Fund and set out the trusts and powers pursuant to which the Trustee, the second respondent, was to stand possessed of the Trust Fund and the income thereof. Subject to cl 2.1 which enabled the whole or part of the income of the Trust Fund in any
Financial Year to be accumulated and added to capital, cl 2.2 enabled the
Trustee until the "Distribution Date" to pay, apply or set aside the income of the Trust Fund from Financial Year to Financial Year to or for all, or such one or more, of "the Beneficiaries" exclusive of the other, or others of them, in such shares and proportions as the Trustee might, prior to the end of the last day of that Financial Year, in its absolute discretion determine. The "Distribution Date" meant the "Vesting Date" or such earlier date as the
Trustee might determine. The "Vesting Date" meant the date 70 years from the date on which the Deed took effect or such other earlier date prescribed by law as being the last day of the perpetuity period for the purposes of the rule against perpetuities; compare [s7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984172/s7.html) (1) of the [Perpetuities Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984172/). "The
Beneficiaries" were defined in the Deed to mean and include, amongst persons and objects set out in nine lettered paragraphs, (b) Mrs Gregory and "(i) such other persons, trustees of trusts (but excluding any trusts which would result in a breach of the rule against perpetuities or the rule against accumulations) companies or charities as the Trustee shall before the
Distribution Date appoint in writing to be Beneficiaries for the purposes of this Deed." 
Clause 3 of the Deed provided that the Trustee should stand possessed of the capital of the Trust Fund on the Distribution Date for all, or such one or more, of the Beneficiaries in being on the Distribution Date exclusive of the other, or others, in such shares or proportions as the Trustee in its absolute discretion should determine. Clause 6 conferred upon the Trustee wide powers for the investment, application, management and administration of the Trust
Fund. Clause 11 dealt with the exercise by that Trustee of discretions, authorities and powers conferred upon it "PROVIDED THAT notwithstanding any other provision of this Deed nothing in this Deed shall operate so as to cause any part of the income or capital of the Trust Fund to become payable to or applicable for the benefit of any of the Ineligible Beneficiaries." The
Ineligible Beneficiaries were defined to mean the Settlor, Mr Heinrich, his legal personal representative and children.

PROCEEDINGS 
Mrs Gregory brought these proceedings against the respondents for a declaration that cl 6 of the will was an invalid disposition in that it purported to delegate the testamentary power of the testator to the Trustee of the Royce Gregory Family Trust or, in the alternative, for an order for provision under the [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/). The consequences of making the declaration would be a partial intestacy under which Mrs Gregory would benefit; ss61F and 61B of the Wills [Probate and
Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/). Young
J heard the proceedings and dealt with the validity of the cl 6 disposition as a separate issue first. For reasons given on 4 April 1997 ((1997) [41 NSWLR )], his Honour declared that cl 6 was a valid testamentary disposition. His Honour then heard the application for provision under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) and, for reasons given on 18 September 1997, made orders in favour of Mrs Gregory.

APPEAL 
Mrs Gregory has appealed from the declaration that the cl 6 disposition was valid and from the order made under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) on the basis that it was inadequate. Unfortunately, for reasons which were not the fault of the parties, the appeal books the appellant had filed containing the evidence in the proceedings were lost and not available to the Court when the matter came on for hearing on 16 October 1998. For that reason, the Court heard only that part of the appeal which related to the declaration made by
Young J on 4 April 1997.

THE RULE FORBIDDING THE DELEGATION OF TESTAMENTARY POWER 
In Tatham versus Huxtable <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 639], in a judgment with which Fullagar J said he agreed, Kitto J at 653, quoting from the speech of Lord Simonds in Chichester Diocesan Fund and Board of Finance Inc versus Simpson <case>; [[1944] AC ] at 371, described it as "a cardinal rule", to which a power of selection among charitable objects was the sole exception, that a man may not delegate his testamentary power. To him the law gives the right to dispose of his estate in favour of ascertained or ascertainable persons. Latham CJ, who was the third member of the Court, dissented but did not in his judgment suggest any departure from or qualification of the rule, although his Honour set out at further exceptions including that whereby the creation by the testator of a general power of appointment, which the donee might exercise for his or her own benefit, was treated as the equivalent to property and hence as his Honour thought, in that case, not caught by the rule.

In Lutheran Church of Australia South Australia District Incorporated v
Farmers' Co-Operative Executors and Trustees Limited <case>; [(1970) 121 CLR 628], each of the four members of the High Court who sat, though divided in the result, recognized the existence of the rule; see 632-6, 643, and 653.

In Horan versus James [[1982] 2 NSWLR 376], this
Court, citing the High Court cases, applied the rule to hold invalid a residuary gift to trustees "with power to pay and/or transfer the same to whomsoever they shall mutually decide and in the absence of mutual agreement then as to one half thereof as each of my said Trustees shall decide and nominate in writing to the Solicitors for my estate". At 381 Hutley JA remarked that the intellectual confusion involved in simultaneously accepting the existence of testamentary powers and the anti-delegation rule had been convincingly exposed in an article by D M Gordon "Delegation of Will Making
Power" [(1953) 69 LQR 334] and that the historical basis for the rule was more than dubious; Hardingham, Neave & Ford "The Law of Wills" (1977) 99. However, there is no point in this Court flirting with these suggestions. We can do no more and should do no less than apply the law as it has been stated up to this point of time by the High Court. It is for that Court alone to determine whether one of its previous decisions is to be departed from or overruled;
Garcia versus National Australia Bank <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 1243] at 1246. It is for us to examine the ambit of the rule and decide if it operates to invalidate cl 6 of the deceased's will.

In his reasons for judgment of 4 April 1997, Young J proceeded on the basis that the definition of Beneficiaries in clause 1.1 of the Deed meant that the
Trustee could add as Beneficiaries "almost the whole world with the exception of the Ineligible Beneficiaries", though his Honour was not convinced that this was so. Having acknowledged authority binding on him that the rule of non delegation of testamentary power applied in New South Wales, his Honour examined the exceptions to the rule.

In Tatham versus Huxtable at 649 Fullagar J said: "It seems quite consistent with legal principle to say that the creation by will of a general power of appointment (which has been said to confer the equivalent of ownership) is a testamentary disposition of property. It also seems consistent with legal principle to say the same of the creation of a special power of appointment among a class, where the class is described with certainty and (as in the normal case) there is, unless and until the power is exercised, a trust for the class or for persons who are to take in default of appointment. Where there is, as a matter of construction, no such trust, there does seem to be a departure from principle if we say that the creation by will of a special power to appoint among a class is a testamentary disposition of property, but to say so represents a natural enough `latitude' of view, which is perhaps characteristic of a system which has never regarded strict logic as its sole inspiration. Unless, however, there is a class designated with certainty, to say that the creation of a power to select beneficiaries amounts to a testamentary disposition of property is not merely to relax the principle to meet an exceptional case but to deny the principle absolutely." 
Fullagar J thought that the decisions of Clauson J in In re Park [[1932] 1
Ch 580] and Vaisey J in In re Jones [[1945] Ch 105] were unsound.
Clauson J upheld a testator's gift of his residuary estate to his trustee to pay the income thereof to any person "other than herself" or persons or charitable institution or institutions and in such shares and proportions as his sister should from time to time during her lifetime direct and then after her death in trust as to both capital and income for a named charitable fund, and Vaisey J upheld a gift by a testator of a trust fund to be held in trust "for such person or persons living at the death of my said son ..... as my said son shall by will or codicil appoint".

Kitto J emphasised the significance of the persons or objects to benefit being described with sufficient certainty to enable them to be ascertained; compare
In re Beatty (Deceased) [[1990] 1 WLR 1503] at 1509E.
At 653 after the quotation already referred to Kitto J said: "It is therefore necessary in all cases (other than charity cases) that the persons or objects to benefit under the will shall be, by the will itself, ascertained or made ascertainable. They may be made ascertainable by reference to a specified future event, including an act to be done by another person provided that that act does not amount to the making by one man of another man's will: Stubbs versus Sargon <case>; [(1838) 3 My & Cr 507] at -12; <case>; [40 ER 1022] at 1024. Thus a testator may, consistently with the `cardinal rule', confer upon another person a power of appointment in respect of all or any of his property, provided that its creation does not amount to a delegation by the testator of his right of testamentary disposition. The principle upon which the present case should be decided is to be found, I think, by a consideration of the grounds upon which validity is conceded to the creation by will of a general or special power of appointment as not amounting to such a delegation.

The creation of a general power of appointment, that is to say a gift by will to such person or persons as X shall appoint, the power being exercisable in favour of X himself or his legal personal representatives, is regarded as involving no infringement of the general rule, because X is thereby placed for all practicable purposes in the position of beneficial owner of the property.
The power, by reason of its complete generality, confers on him `a right of disposition which is in many respects the equivalent of property', since it enables him `to devise or bequeath the property subject to the power as freely and effectually as if it were his own': Grey versus Federal Commissioner of
Taxation <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 49], per Dixon J, at 63; In re Hughes, Hughes versus Footner [[1921] Ch 208](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1921%5d%202%20Ch%20208 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 212; In the Will of Lewis, Gollan versus Pyle [(1907) ArgLR 431] at 433. `He is virtually the owner of that property. If and when he exercises the power the interests of his appointees come to them by virtue of and are created by the appointment': Muir versus Williams or Williams versus Muir [[1943] AC 468] per Lord Romer at
Thus an exercise of the power amounts in substance to the appointors disposition, and not to a testamentary act done by him on behalf of the testator. In a real sense, the testator has `passed the beneficial interest to (the donee) to dispose of as his own': Houston versus Burns [[1918] AC 337] at 342." 
At 655 Kitto J identified what he described as a special class of cases in which a power was given by will to appoint to anyone the donee might select except a specified person or certain specified persons. His Honour said that such a power was "plainly not general" and could not be upheld on the reasoning applicable to general powers and quoted from In re Byron's
Settlement; Williams versus Mitchell [[1891] 3 Ch 474] at 479: "Anything less than a power to appoint as he thinks fit is not equivalent to ownership. A power so to appoint, but with an exception, is something less than proprietorship".

Dealing with the special class of case which he had identified, at 655-6 Kitto
J said: "A provision conferring such a power must therefore be conceded to be one which, if valid, will operate, when the power is exercised, as the testator's disposition; and it follows that its validity must depend upon the latitude in the general rule, of which Lord Macmillan spoke in the Chichester case <case>; [[1944] AC 341.] But certainty in the description of the class or group of persons from which the selection may be made is the essential qualification for the benefit of that latitude; and the validity of the power to appoint to anyone except specified persons must therefore be rested, it seems to me, upon the view that certainty may be achieved as well by an exclusive as by an inclusive description. It is on this basis, I think, that the cases of In re
Park; and In re Jones; if correctly decided, must be explained. See also
Re Harvey; Bannister versus Thirtle [[1950] 1 All ER 491.] 
On the view I have stated, the question whether a power is or is not exercisable in favour of the donee himself or his legal personal representatives does not provide the test of validity. It is true that a power cannot be upheld for the reason applicable to general powers unless it is exerciseable in favour of the donee or his legal personal representatives as well as of the rest of the world; but if it is created in favour of a limited class or group, and therefore must be upheld, if at all, by reference to the latitude in the general rule, the question whether the donee and his legal personal representative are within that limited class or group is not the question which has to be considered. The relevant question in the latter case is whether the class or group is defined with certainty." 
Young J used the words "general power of appointment" as equivalent to a right to appoint property to all the world including oneself, that is, virtually the equivalent of ownership. Mr Heydon QC, who appeared for the respondents, submitted that "general power of appointment" should be treated as referring to a power whereunder the donee could appoint to him or herself even though the class or group to whom appointment could be made was otherwise quite limited. The equivalence of ownership flowed from the ability of the donee of the power to appoint to him or herself.

In further written submissions, counsel referred us to In re Penrose [[1933]
Ch 793] and
In re Lawrence's Will Trusts [[1972] Ch 418.] In the first, at Luxmoore J, in the context of a statutory definition of "competent to dispose" (as to which compare Equity Trustees Executors and Agency Co Limited v The Commissioner of Probate Duties (Victoria) <case>; [(1976) 135 CLR 268)] said that it made no difference that the donee could only dispose of the fund by two steps instead of by one. In the second, at 427
Megarry J (as he then was) said that a classification of powers as general or special or hybrid for one purpose was by no means necessarily decisive or even a guide to the classification for another purpose.

Megarry J referred, as did Mr Heydon, to proceedings, concerned with a power given by the will of John Ramsden to his daughter and its exercise by her will, which were heard by the Court of Exchequer, on a case stated for its opinion by order of the Master of the Rolls, Platt versus Routh <case>; [(1840) M & W 756] at 789, 790; <case>; [151 ER ] at 631 and then by the Master of the Rolls, Lord Langdale Platt versus Routh <case>; [(1841) 3 Beav 257] at 280; <case>; <case>; [(1843) 10 Cl & F 257] at ; <case>; [8 ER 739] at 751. Of these proceedings, Megarry J at 427 remarked: "There the gift was to such persons (other than three specified persons and their relations) as X should appoint; and Lord Langdale MR and the House of
Lords held that for the purpose of legacy duty such a power was a general power, and not a special power. Thus stated, the decision appears to provide considerable support for the third defendant. However, it is important to observe that this part of the case turned upon the construction of s18 of the
Legacy Duty Act 1796. That section dealt separately with two classes of power, and two only: one class was a power to appoint to `any person or persons specially named or described as objects of such power,' and the other class was `a general and absolute power of appointment.' In those circumstances, it is not surprising that it was held that the power in question could more readily be brought within the second head than the first." 
His Lordship observed that this clearly appeared from the judgment of Lord
Abinger CB in the Court of Exchequer.

At 428 Megarry J also referred, as did counsel, to Edie versus Babington [(1854) Ir Ch 568] at 576 and said that the Judge in that case seemed to have treated Platt versus Routh as providing authority for the view that a testamentary power for A to appoint to anyone except B was a general power.
His Lordship clearly did not regard the case as authority for so broad a proposition.

In Morris & Leach, The Rule Against Perpetuities, 2nd ed (1962) 137, the authors said of a power to appoint to any person except X (who was not the donee), by reference, amongst others, to these cases but before Megarry J had commented on them: "It seems clear that such a power should be treated as a general power for the purposes of the Rule against Perpetuities because the donee's choice is still so wide that his interest practically amounts to absolute ownership; moreover (and this is really the test) he can always appoint to himself; and if he can appoint to himself, he will then be free, as owner rather than as to any of the power, to dispose of the property in favour of X".

However, I do not think that Mr Heydon's submission is consistent with Kitto
J's reasoning in Tatham versus Huxtable, with which Fullagar J agreed.

In National Trustees Executors & Agency Co of Australasia Limited v
Trainor <case>; [(1974) VR 49](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281974%29%20VR%2049 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 56-57 Pape J said: "A general power of appointment is one which confers on the donee of the power the right to appoint to whomsoever he pleases, and a special power (referred to by Sugden as a `particular power') is one whereby the donee is restricted to some objects designated in the deed creating the power: see Sugden, 8th ed, ; Farwell, 3rd ed, 8; Jarman, 8th ed vol 2, 788 and Halsbury, 3rd ed vol , 208 para 368. To be a general power the power must be exercisable not only in favour of the donee of the power or his legal personal representatives but also in favour of the rest of the world; see Tatham versus Huxtable per Kitto J at 656." 
What Kitto J and Pape J said is contrary to Mr Heydon's submission, which must be rejected, and makes appropriate the way in which Young J used the words "general power of appointment" in his reasons for judgment.

In the Lutheran Church case, which concerned a "discretionary power" given by the will to a trustee to transfer property to a named charity, McTiernan and Menzies JJ whose decision, affirming the decision of the Supreme Court, prevailed by virtue of [s23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/s23.html) of the [Judiciary Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/), concluded that there was no gift by the will in question but simply a discretionary power given to the trustees to transfer property to a named object. Their Honours said, at 645, that the testatrix had purported to authorise her trustees, if they should think fit, to constitute a trust in favour of a named charity. "As such an authority it must fail." 
At 632 Barwick CJ said that the creation by will of a general or special power of appointment constitutes, relevantly, a disposition of the property the subject of a power.
 "Such powers, unless they be powers in the nature of a trust - being powers, necessarily involve a discretion whether or not to exercise the power. Some powers, in addition, may involve a discretion in the choice of the appointees.
But to be validly created, the subject matter which can be appointed must be certain, even though there may be room for the donee of the power to choose which property within the certainly described properties he will appoint.
Further, except in the case of charity, the possible appointees must be nominated by the testator with sufficient certainty. It is with respect to the last requisite that most of the decided cases have dealt. No such case turned upon, what in my opinion is radical to the nature of a power of appointment not in the nature of a trust, namely the inherent discretion of the donee of the power to appoint or not to appoint." 
At 637 his Honour said: "Thus a discretionary power to appoint amongst an identified or identifiable class the whole or any part of a residuary estate, in my opinion, would be validly created where the will itself created no beneficial interest in any part of the residuary estate in the class. Indeed, as I have indicated, except in the case of a power in the nature of the trust, it is of the essence of the power of appointment that it is discretionary.

I am unable to find any reason why a discretionary power to appoint to a named person should be in any worse case than such a discretionary power to appoint amongst a named class to whom no gift is made by the will. It does not involve, in my opinion, any uncertainty which could lead to the conclusion that for that reason it is void." 
What the Chief Justice said supports the conclusion, that, except in the case where the power is to appoint for a charitable purpose, the validity of the gift is determined by the certainty or otherwise of the description of the persons or objects who may be appointed; compare In re Gulbenkian's
Settlements [1970] AC 508 at 521, citing with approval In re Park; In re
Baden's Deed Trusts <case>; [[1971] AC ] at 456;
In re Manisty's Settlement [[1974] Ch 17] at 24; In re
Beatty (Deceased) at 1508.

Windeyer J was the fourth member of the Court. At 653 his Honour said that he did not question the rule that a person could not by his will delegate to another person the choice of those who are to take his estate. "However, it is a rule the strictness of which must be accommodated to, and qualified by, the well established power of a testator of giving a dispositive power of appointment to, or among, specified objects of his bounty." His Honour went on to remark at 653 that the case was not like the one in which a testator gives, to someone who cannot himself take beneficially, a power to dispose of the estate, or of some specified part of it, as he, the purported donee of the power wishes.
 "Provisions of that sort fail. They have sometimes been said to fail for lack of certainty - see eg Yeap Cheah Neo versus Ong Cheng Neo [[1875] LR 6 PC ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1875%5d%20LR%206%20PC%20381 "View LawCiteRecord" ) - although the meaning of the words used seemed certain enough. Whatever be the explanation of invalidity in cases of that sort, the trustee in this case is not given a power to select whomsoever it wishes to enjoy the testator's estate." 
His Honour did not refer to Tatham versus Huxtable. From the passage to which I have referred, it might be said that Windeyer J was not persuaded that certainty was the criterion and that he regarded the ability of the donee him or herself to benefit from the exercise of the power as significant. However,
I do not think that the Lutheran Church case should be treated as qualifying the principles stated by Fullagar and Kitto JJ in Tatham versus Huxtable.

The respondent put to Young J that the case was not about powers at all but about trusts. In particular, it was submitted that the rule against delegation did not apply where the testator left property to a trust. Young J said: "The Royce Gregory Family Trust is unarguably a valid trust (subject to what I say in my concluding remarks), there is no room for any argument that there is insufficient certainty as to the beneficiaries under the trust. If this is so, then we have the situation where the testator has set up a trust, the trust has appropriate content, and the trust must be enforced. There is no uncertainty as to what they are to do, and if the Royce Gregory Family Trust is a valid trust (and there has been no argument to the contrary), then there is no argument that the testator has exercised his testamentary power. Indeed,
Mr Officer QC put that the matter was just that simple. Although I have spent a long time discussing the authorities because of the arguments Mr Broun QC and the large amount of money involved, in the ultimate I must agree with Mr
Officer QC's submission." 
His Honour later summarised this by saying that it was not a breach of the rule to give property by will to a pre-existing trust or to constitute a trust which was sufficiently constituted according to the rules of certainty in trust law.

When this appeal came on for hearing, Mr Broun indicated that he wished to argue that the Royce Gregory Family Trust was wholly or partly invalid. This submission raised serious questions about whether, in light of the terms of the summons and of the notice of appeal, the Court should on this appeal allow argument about the validity of the Trust Deed and, in any event, whether this would require re-pleading and the joining of further parties. Mr Broun pointed to passages in the written submissions in the court below to suggest that this argument had been put to Young J. An adjournment was granted for Mr Broun to obtain instructions after which he announced that he did not propose to pursue the argument.

APPELLANT'S SUBMISSIONS 
In the forefront of his submissions Mr Broun relied upon Horan versus James. In that case, the testator, by his will, left the residue of his estate to his trustees "with power to pay and or transfer the same to whomsoever they shall mutually decide and in the absence of mutual agreement then as to one half thereof as each of my said trustees shall decide and nominate in writing to the solicitor of my estate." The testator directed that the power should not be exercised in a way which would result in his wife obtaining any benefit from the estate and expressed the hope and expectation that no part of the estate would be appointed to either of his two sons.

Hutley JA held, "by implication of law", that the power was not a general power in that it could not be exercised in favour of the executors themselves;
E and 379F. However, his Honour concluded that the disposition of property was "perfectly clear"; 379D. Accordingly, the Court could not retreat into reliance upon uncertainty; 380C. Even so, the gift failed because of the "substantive rule" that a testator could not delegate his testamentary power.
Hutley JA said at 381F that he could not see his way to break out of the mould into which the decisions in Tatham versus Huxtable and the Lutheran Church case had put the law.

I am not persuaded that those decisions dictated this result unless it be for the reason Fullagar J gave in Tatham versus Huxtable at 648-9 that, while certainty may be achieved by an exclusive definition, the mere exclusion of one person or some persons in a class would not, generally speaking, be enough to achieve the requisite certainty. Hutley JA quoted the dictum of Windeyer J in the Lutheran Church case at 653, set out above, to the effect that a provision in which a testator gives to someone, who cannot himself take beneficially, a power to dispose of the estate or some part of it as the purported donee wishes, fails. However, at 381B Hutley JA said that Windeyer J was not explicit as to why it failed.

Glass JA stated his reasons at 382 by a series of propositions. The trust power was not a general power of appointment but an intermediate or hybrid power of appointment. A trust power of appointment of an intermediate kind was not void for uncertainty. Assuming there was a rule which forbad the delegation of the exercise of testamentary power, the exception favouring general powers of appointment could not apply to an intermediate power. His
Honour said: "I share the reservations expressed by Hutley JA as to the historical justification of the rule prohibiting delegation. I respect the reasoning of the trial judge that, assuming the existence of the rule, it is not infringed by an intermediate power of appointment and the courts in 
England have so held: Re Park; Re Jones.

However the adoption of those reservations and that reasoning is foreclosed to us, I believe, by the clearly expressed opinions of justices of the High Court who have held that the rule exists, Lutheran Church case and that an intermediate power of appointment infringes it; Tatham versus Huxtable." 
Again, with respect, I have the same difficulty in accepting that this result flows, except in the way I have suggested, from the decision in Tatham v
Huxtable.

Mahoney JA at 383-3 posed two distinct questions to be determined: first, whether the residuary clause was invalid under the law of trusts because it attempted to constitute a trust but had failed validly to do so; and, secondly, whether it was invalid because it was an unacceptable delegation of testamentary power. His Honour applied the English decisions in re Baden's
Deed Trusts; Re Manisty's Settlement; and Re Hayes Settlement Trusts,
Greig versus McGregor [[1982] 1 WLR 202] to conclude that the clause was valid under the law of trusts; 385E.

Mahoney JA accepted as well established the rule that a person must exercise and not delegate his testamentary power but that there were limits to or qualifications of this principle. At 386A his Honour said: "It does not prevent the grant of a general power of appointment. And there are limits to the extent to which it operates in relation to special powers of appointment." 
He did not regard the power in question as "for this purpose" a general power of appointment but acknowledged that views had differed as to what constituted a general power of appointment. Dealing with special powers of appointment, his Honour referred to the judgment of Kitto J in Tatham versus Huxtable and pointed out that that decision was distinguishable because "considered simply according to the language used, the description of the class of possible appointees in the present case is clear and certain"; 387E. His Honour quoted the passage from Kitto J's judgment dealing with the special class of case
Kitto J identified and the reservation about the correctness of the decisions in In re Park and In re Jones and said at 388C: "Kitto J therefore was of the view that the principles which he had formulated applied to such a case as the present and, by the words `correctly decided', he questioned whether hybrid powers of the kind considered in the Park and
Jones cases satisfied it." 
Mahoney JA quoted that part of Fullagar J's judgment dealing with those decisions and the question of requisite certainty and said at 388-9: "In the light of these observations, what course should be followed by this
Court? In my opinion, the Court should hold the present is an unacceptable delegation of testamentary powers. This accords with a conclusion, albeit obiter, expressed by Fullagar J and the `doubt' expressed by Kitto J. I am conscious that in the Gulbenkian case, in the passage to which I have referred, the Park case was cited without disapproval. I am conscious also that the Park case has been followed in the Manisty and the Hayes cases, although in relation to the law of wills obiter: as to the Manisty case, see [1974] Ch at 21-22. I think that, if a view is to be taken of the hybrid power, at least in the present form, which is different from that suggested by
Fullagar J it should be left to the High Court so to indicate." 
Thus it can be said that the decision in Horan versus James depended principally upon the opinion Fullagar J expressed (see at 390B) as to what was sufficiently certain in terms of the description of the object of a power and in particular the conclusion that requisite certainty was not achieved where the power was given to appoint to anyone the donee might select, except a specific person or certain specified persons.

Mr Broun argued that the Royce Gregory Family Trust exemplified this sort of uncertainty and that, accordingly, this Court was driven by authority to conclude that the disposition in cl 6 was invalid. In particular, he pointed to the exclusion of the Ineligible Beneficiaries and the inclusion within the paragraph (i) of the definition of Beneficiaries of "such other persons, trustees of trusts (but excluding any trusts which would result in breach of the rule against perpetuities or the rule against accumulations) companies or charities as the Trustee shall before the Distribution Date appoint in writing to be Beneficiaries for the purposes of this Deed." 
CONCLUSION 
While I remain unpersuaded that the decision in Horan versus James correctly applied the rule as explained in Tatham versus Huxtable, I am satisfied that
Young J's decision should be upheld for the reason his Honour gave.

Clause 6 provided for the Trustee under the will to hold the residue upon trust to pay distribute or transfer such residue to the Trustee for the time being of the Royce Gregory Family Trust "as Trustee". Had this language stood alone, it is clear and involves no delegation of testamentary power. It is no different from a gift by will to the Trustee of any other trust. The testator fully exercised his testamentary power. Mr Broun submitted, however, that the language did not stand alone but continued "to hold such residue upon the trusts of the aforesaid Deed of Trust dated 3rd day of June 1994 and as varied from time to time before or after my death.". He submitted that there was thereby created another, though parallel, trust. I am unable so to read the language. In my opinion, on the language of cl 6 no question of delegation of testamentary power arose and so much of the appeal as concerns cl 6 of the will is an invalid disposition should, accordingly, be dismissed with costs.

NOTICE OF CONTENTION 
The respondent filed a notice of contention, the effect of which was to invite this Court to permit the correctness of Horan versus James to be re-argued and to conclude by applying what had been said in the English cases notably In re
Beatty (Deceased) that there was no rule prohibiting the delegation of testamentary power and no binding authority of the High Court in support of it. During the course of argument, the Court pointed out that if the existence of the rule was to be challenged it should, as Mahoney JA said in Horan v
James at 389, be left to the High Court to decide that question. Having reserved his position, Mr Heydon did not pursue the point.

ORDERS
So much of the appeal against the decision of Young J of 4 April 1997 as concerned the validity of cl 6 of the will is dismissed;
Stand over the balance of the appeal to be mentioned before the Registrar on 3 February 1999;
Appellant to pay the respondent's costs of this part of the appeal;
To the extent that the first respondent's costs on an indemnity basis exceed the amount of costs payable under order 3 by the appellant, the first respondents be paid the difference out of the estate.

SHEPPARD AJA: In this matter I have had the advantage of reading the judgment to be delivered by Sheller JA. I am in agreement with his Honour's reasons and conclusions, and with the orders which he proposes. * * * 
