

Regina versus Zi Ming Yi Matter No Cca 60194/97 [1998] NSWSC 39 (27 February )

Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
REGINA versus ZI MING YI /97 February 1998 
Smart J, Simpson J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal Against Conviction and Sentence 
FILE NO/S: 60194/97 
DELIVERED: Friday, 27 February 1998 
HEARING DATE: Wednesday, 3 September 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Zi Ming YI 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART J, SIMPSON J, SPERLING J 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: PM Strickland * Respondent: LMB Lamprati 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: TA Murphy * Respondent: SE O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: LEAVE TO CROSS EXAMINE ON INCORRECT ASSUMPTIONS; EVIDENCE INADMISSABLE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO. OF PAGES: 27 
REGINA versus Zi Ming YI 
HEADNOTE 
M was tried on a charge of unlawful sexual intercourse. The Crown had no case after examination in chief of the complainant. Upon the assumption that the
Crown could prove that she had made prior inconsistent statements incriminating the accused leave was given to cross examine her. The Crown could not prove the statements which she had made in a foreign language. The alleged interpreter had no recollection of interpreting them.

A charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm was also preferred. M pleaded guilty and received a fixed term of penal servitude for one year and for breach of an apprehended domestic violence order a fixed term of imprisonment of six months.

Held per Sperling J (with whom Smart J agreed):
There was no proper ground for the grant of leave and the evidence adduced was inadmissible. Without it a conviction could not be sustained and a verdict of acquittal should be entered.
The assault was in response to a severe and unjustified injury inflicted by the complainant. The sentence was excessive and must be set aside.
Sufficient time has already been served.

Held per Simpson J (in dissent): 
The statements having been admitted without objection the trial judge was entitled to take them at face value. The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.
The injury was inflicted in retaliation for or defence against the sexual offence and was not a mitigating factor. Leave to appeal the sentence should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.

Observations of Simpson J on effect of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) .

ORDERS:
Appeal against conviction on the first count in the indictment (sexual intercourse without consent) allowed; conviction quashed.
Judgment and verdict of acquittal entered in favour of the appellant on that count.
Leave to appeal against sentence on the second count in the indictment (assault occasioning actual bodily harm).
Appeal against that sentence allowed; sentence quashed.
The appellant be sentenced on that count to a fixed term of imprisonment of six months and ten days commencing on 25 February 1997 and expiring on 3
September 1997, on which date the appellant was entitled to be released from prison.
Leave to appeal against the sentence imposed on the third count (knowingly contravene a domestic violence order) refused. It is noted that this sentence expired on 24 August 1997.

REGINA versus Zi Ming YI 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: I agree with Sperling J. 
REGINA versus Zi Ming YI 
JUDGMENT 
SIMPSON J: On 19 February 1997 in the District Court the appellant entered a plea of not guilty to a charge that, on or about 10 March 1996, he had unlawful sexual intercourse with the complainant, DMS. He entered a plea of guilty to a second charge on the same indictment that, on the same day and at the same place, he assaulted DMS occasioning to her actual bodily harm. 
The trial on the first charge proceeded before Nield DCJ and a jury, who returned a verdict of guilty. Judge Nield sentenced the appellant on the first count to a minimum term of penal servitude for one year and an additional term of three years; on the second count to a fixed term of penal servitude for one year to be served concurrently with the sentence imposed in respect of the first charge.

The appellant appeals the conviction and seeks leave to appeal the sentence imposed with respect to the assault charge.

The complainant was the estranged wife of the appellant. The Crown case was that, on the evening of 9 March 1996, by arrangement with the complainant, the appellant came to the complainant's home for the purpose of collecting three of their children who lived with her, but who customarily spent alternate weekends with the appellant. This arrangement was a departure from that usually implemented for access purposes, and was made notwithstanding the existence of an Apprehended Domestic Violence Order, the precise terms of which were not in evidence, but which, it seems plain, restrained the appellant from visiting the complainant at her home.

Prior to the appellant's arrival the complainant had consumed some alcohol and together they drank some more. The appellant then, using a degree of force, dragged or pulled the complainant into the bedroom where, without her consent, he committed an act of fellatio upon her. This was the act of unlawful intercourse alleged in the first count in the indictment to which the appellant pleaded not guilty. The complainant bit the appellant's penis, breaking and tearing the skin, and inflicting a considerable degree of damage and pain. The appellant obtained a broom and with it struck the complainant a number of times, with sufficient force to break the handle and to inflict upon her, in turn, considerable injury. This was the assault the subject of the second count in the indictment to which the appellant pleaded guilty.

Both the complainant and the appellant are Mandarin speakers and neither had any real command of the English language. An ambulance was called to the house and the ambulance officer contacted police who also attended. Senior Constable
Simmons had a short conversation with the complainant who was then in bed, and a short conversation with the appellant. He arranged for the complainant to be taken to the Mount Druitt Hospital. The appellant initially refused treatment and was taken to Mount Druitt Police Station and later to the hospital.

Later on the same day at the hospital Senior Constable Simmons again attempted to speak to the complainant. On this occasion he had the assistance of a member of the hospital staff acting as interpreter. He recorded in his official notebook the information conveyed to him through the interpreter. At the conclusion of the conversation the interpreter read back to the complainant, apparently in Mandarin, what Constable Simmons had written in his notebook in English. The complainant signed the notebook. Of course, Constable
Simmons had no way of verifying the accuracy of the translation. He was completely dependent upon the interpreter to convey to him in English what the complainant said in Mandarin, and to convey to the complainant in Mandarin both his questions to her, and what appeared in English in the notebook.

The contents of the notebook were transcribed into a typewritten statement.
Neither document bears any notation to the effect that its contents were obtained with the assistance of an interpreter, of the identity or qualifications of the interpreter, or of the accuracy of the interpretation.

The trial began during the afternoon of 19 February. The complainant was the first witness. She gave her evidence through a Mandarin interpreter. He evidence had not proceeded very far when the Crown Prosecutor made an application pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) for leave to question her as though cross-examining. The basis for the application was said to be "the unfavourable tenor" of the evidence she had given thus far.
The complainant had professed no or faulty recollection of the events the subject of the charges, and intoxication on the evening in question. His
Honour observed (in the absence of the jury) that the complainant seemed reluctant to give evidence that might incriminate her husband, and expressed the opinion that, on the evidence as it then stood, a conviction was unlikely to result.

In support of the application four documents were tendered. Each was admitted without objection. They were the relevant pages of the Constable's notebook signed by the complainant and a typescript thereof both dated 9 March 1996 (exhibits A1 and A2); a typewritten statement, purportedly made by the complainant at the Mount Druitt Police Station on 10 March (exhibit A3); and a further one page statement dated 13 March (exhibit A4). In this statement the complainant expressed her wish not to proceed or to give evidence. At the time of the [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) application there was no direct evidence as to the provenance of any of the documents. Later evidence disclosed the circumstances in which exhibit A1 had come into existence; it was a reasonable inference that exhibit A3 was a supplementary statement taken from the complainant at the police station, although the evidence did not disclose to whom the statement was made, nor what interpreting facilities were available.

Exhibits A1 and 2 and A3 attributed to the complainant an account of an assault upon her by the appellant consistent with the case the Crown sought to make. There are substantial discrepancies between the contents of these statements and the sworn evidence given by her in her evidence in chief.
Exhibit A4 purports to be a statement made by the complainant expressing a wish not to proceed with the complaint against the appellant and not to give evidence in any proceedings against him.

Objection to the grant of the leave sought was taken only on discretionary grounds. Having considered the material before him, including his observations of the complainant in giving her evidence in chief, his Honour granted leave and the Crown Prosecutor cross-examined her using as his basis the contents of the documents A1 and 2 and A3.

The grant of leave is the foundation of several of the grounds of appeal as argued. However, the complaint that is made concerns not the manner nor the basis on which the decision was made when it was made, but information which emerged subsequently.

After the complainant's evidence (including cross-examination by the Crown
Prosecutor) concluded, Constable Simmons gave evidence in the presence of the jury. He gave an account of his conversation with the complainant at the hospital, and the use of the hospital interpreter. Ms Anna Yi Brown then gave evidence. She had been employed as a registered nurse at the Mount Druitt
Hospital on 10 March 1996 and was able to speak and understand Mandarin. She said that she had no recollection of ever having assisted as interpreter at the hospital or of having used her facility in the language as part of her work. She said that although she had, in about March 1996, been working in the
Emergency Department of the hospital, she could not recall ever seeing the complainant.

There was no other evidence of the taking of the statements. The Crown was unable to prove that the complainant had said what was there attributed to her. The trial judge was, therefore, it was argued, in error in permitting the complainant to be cross-examined on the basis of these statements.

Generally speaking, where leave to cross-examine a party's own witness pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) is sought on the basis of a prior inconsistent statement said to have been made by the witness it is essential for the party seeking leave to prove (in the absence of the jury) that the statement was made by the witness. Where the allegedly inconsistent statement is said to have been made originally in a language other than English, it will be necessary for that party to prove that the English version upon which reliance is placed accurately reflects what the witness said in the other language. If that cannot be done, then ordinarily the statement would not be admitted on the [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) question, and there would be no foundation laid for the leave sought: see generally R versus Velevski (No 2), unreported, Dunford J, 12 June 1997; R v Lars [(1994) 73 A Crim R 91] at -121.

The simple and complete answer to all grounds of appeal concerning the grant of leave under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) is that each of the statements was admitted without objection. Once they were before his Honour he was entitled to take them at face value. The divergence between their contents and the content of the complainant's evidence up to the point at which leave was granted was more than adequate to justify the course he took in permitting cross-examination. Added to that was the complainant's expressed wish not to proceed with the complaint or to give evidence, and his
Honour's own observations of her behaviour. The material amply supported his decision. There was no miscarriage of justice occasioned by the leave granted.
I would reject these grounds of appeal.

That, however, is not the end of the matters concerning the use of the allegations said to have been made by the complainant to the police officers.
Two further grounds of appeal are that the trial judge was in error in failing to withdraw "certain parts" of the complainant's evidence from the jury, and in failing to discharge the jury when it became apparent that the Crown could not prove that she had made the allegations contained in the English versions of her statements.

At the close of the Crown case, the appellant's counsel made three applications. The first was that a verdict of not guilty be entered by direction; the second was for the exclusion of that evidence of the complainant that derived from her statements to police; and the third, for discharge of the jury. Each was refused.

The application for exclusion of evidence was made in reliance upon [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) . His
Honour considered that that section was not a source of power for the course proposed, that is, the retrospective rejection of evidence, or withdrawal of evidence after it has been given in the presence of the jury. He determined instead to use the power conferred by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s136.html) to limit the use that could be made by the jury of the complainant's answers and to direct them accordingly. It will be necessary to return to these directions.
 [S 137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) is in the following terms: "In a criminal proceeding, the court must refuse to admit evidence adduced by the prosecution if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant." 
That the course proposed by the appellant was available at common law is confirmed by the decisions of the High Court in R versus Doney <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 207] at 212 and the Court of Criminal Appeal in R versus R [(1989) 18 NSWLR 75] at 76 and R versus Lars (supra).

I do not consider that the enactment of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) has altered the principles stated in those cases. Withdrawal of the evidence was, in my view, an available option, although, taking into account all the difficulties attendant upon such a course, it is not one to be undertaken lightly. I am of the view that, had his Honour considered it appropriate to do so, [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) permitted him to direct the jury to disregard all or any identified parts of the complainant's evidence.

It is then necessary to consider whether the circumstances called for such a course to be adopted. When the complainant was cross-examined, the substance of the allegations attributed to her in the statements was put to her.
Contrary to the argument put in this court, proper analysis of her answers demonstrates that, although reluctantly, she largely agreed that she had made these allegations. On occasions she sought to explain or add a rider to her answers. An illustration of the evidence given by her in response to cross- examination by the Crown Prosecutor may be found in the following passages: "Q. I would like to take you back again to some of the things that you told
Constable Simmons, you said to Constable Simmons, referring to your husband 'he then wanted to make love to me'? 
A. That matter happened on that night while I was having a lot of drink.

Q. Madam do you remember saying that to Constable Simmons? 
A. It is hard for me to recall now.

Q. Did you say to Constable Simmons that you said 'I don't want to'? 
A. My mind was very confused on that night, I remember him asking me to go to sleep.

Q. Madam, I suggest to you that you said to Constable Simmons that your husband said he wanted to make love to you and you said 'I don't want to'? 
A. I think that's what I said because when he asked me to go to the bedroom and I thought this is what he meant.

Q. Madam, it was the case that you didn't want to go to the bedroom? 
A. That's why I was very reluctant to go to the bedroom.

Q. Because you thought your husband wanted to make love to you? 
A. That's what I thought.

Q. Madam, your husband pulled [you] to the bedroom? 
A. Because I was so drunk I think he either pull or drag me and he asked me to go to sleep.

Q. Do you agree that your husband pulled you to the bedroom? 
A. Well he didn't drag me in by force, he was sort of accompanying me to the bedroom.

Q. Madam did you say to Constable Simmons, referring to your husband, 'He then pulled me to the bedroom'? 
A. I might have said that, as I said that incident happening that afternoon my mind was very confused.

Q. When you got into the bedroom your husband pushed you down onto the bed? 
A. That's right, I was quite drunk.

Q. Madam, you struggled with your husband is that right? 
A. That's correct.

Q. You said to Constable Simmons 'I started to kick him'? 
A. That's right.

Q. Madam, I suggest to you that at that point you were being held down on the bed? 
A. Yes I was in the bed, yes I was trying to get up but he said that I should have a sleep.

Q. He held you down on the bed is that right? 
A. Yeah he got hold of me and he said 'Calm down, calm down.' 
Q. Madam, do you remember saying this to Constable Simmons 'He then put his penis in my mouth'? 
A. Well that's what I said to that Constable. The room was dark and I felt there was something in my mouth and I wasn't sure whether it was his arm or some other part of his body." 
The argument put on behalf of the appellant was that, as many of the answers given were equivocal, the danger of unfair prejudice to the appellant outweighed the probative value by the evidence so given. I am unpersuaded that this is so, or that his Honour ought to have withdrawn it from the jury's consideration. This ground of appeal should be rejected. It follows that the ground of appeal in which it is contended that, for the same reasons, his
Honour should have discharged the jury, must also be rejected. The trial judge was correct, in my view, in determining to direct the jury in relation to the use that could be made of the complainant's evidence. It is in this respect that the appellant is on his strongest ground. The judge directed the jury in the following terms: "...the only part of the Crown's examination of the complainant that you can rely upon is that where she says this happened, whatever it might be, or where she said 'Yes, I told Constable Simmons that.' If she said 'I might have told
Constable Simmons that' or 'I think I told Constable Simmons that' then you would not be satisfied that she had said it. If she said 'Yes I told Constable
Simmons that' then you would be satisfied that she said it." 
There were other directions in similar vein.

These directions, in my opinion, were, in one sense, unduly favourable to the appellant. The jury were entitled to assess the complainant as they would any other witness and to form a view about whether her plain equivocation represented true uncertainty about what she was being asked, or grudging acceptance of the propositions being put to her. I do not think it was correct, as the jury were directed, that in any case where the complainant less than wholeheartedly accepted the proposition contained in the question put to her by the Crown Prosecutor, that it was not open nevertheless to them to be satisfied that she had made that statement.

Nevertheless, the directions, with respect, lacked clarity. They called upon the jury to recall with a degree of particularity not only the substance of the complainant's evidence, but the extent to which she "unequivocally" accepted those propositions contained in the questions. It would have been more helpful to the jury had they been referred specifically to those passages in her evidence which the judge identified as "unequivocally" confirming what she was recorded as having said to the police officer. That the jury needed this additional help was demonstrated by a request made by them after they retired, seeking a copy of the complainant's original statement and: "also those parts of this statement she agreed to in court." 
Following this request his Honour gave further directions, referring the jury specifically to a series of questions and answers which he told them represented the questions to which the complainant had unequivocally agreed.
These directions, regrettably, did little to clarify those earlier given. They fell short of the level of assistance to which a jury is entitled. It is necessary, then, to consider whether any miscarriage of justice has occurred.
It is relevant to consider this in the light of the true issues that emerged.

The appellant gave sworn evidence in the trial. He denied having had any intention to have sexual intercourse with the complainant, referring to the
Apprehended Domestic Violence Order, and asking rhetorically how, in those circumstances, he would think of having sex with her. He denied that he had deliberately placed his penis in her mouth or in any other part of her body.
He said that he had been wearing both shorts and underpants, that neither had been removed, that it was not possible that his penis had somehow escaped his clothing and that the complainant had bitten it through both garments although the fabric of both was undamaged. He raised no defence that the complainant had consented to any sexual overtures, or that he had believed she had done so, and denied have made any sexual advances. He was at a loss to explain how his penis came to be in a position to be bitten.

The only issue for the jury therefore was whether the appellant had deliberately placed his penis in the complainant's mouth. If the jury considered he had done so, conviction was inevitable.

In the absence of any contention by the appellant that the complainant consented, or that he believed that she consented, to his sexual advances, there was really only one conclusion open. One incontrovertible fact was that the penis found its way into the complainant's mouth. The question was how it did so. Accidental encounter was never a realistic possibility. If the jury believed that the appellant had removed his clothing, they disbelieved his evidence that he had not, and must have drawn the conclusion that he did so for a purpose concerned with his sexual intentions. They could not have accepted that the injury suffered by the appellant was inflicted through two layers of clothing. Medical evidence concerning the injury to the penis established that the tears to the skin were located transversely well up the shaft, eliminating the last vestiges of any possibility that the appellant might have fallen in such a way as accidentally to place himself in a position to be bitten by the complainant. Had there been any real factual issues for determination, such as consent or belief in consent, the absence of clear direction to the jury about the complainant's evidence would have been a matter for real concern. As it was, the true issue was perfectly clear to the jury, and they returned the only realistic verdict.

There was another complaint made about the course the trial took. At the beginning of the second day, part way through the complainant's evidence, a question was raised about the accuracy of the translation of what she had said. A second interpreter, Mr Abakimoff, was called. He compared the sound recording of the evidence with the transcript and identified two specific errors of translation. Neither of them is of significance to any of the grounds of appeal.

The final ground of appeal is that the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory.
No additional argument was addressed to this ground. Reliance was placed upon the matters argued in support of the preceding grounds. I am satisfied that there is no merit in any of the grounds of appeal argued and I would dismiss the appeal against conviction.

The appellant seeks leave to appeal the severity of the sentence imposed in relation to the second count. This was the charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm in respect of which he was sentenced to a fixed term of penal servitude for one year to commence on 25 February 1997 and expire on 24
February 1998. This sentence is to be served concurrently with the sentence imposed in relation to the conviction on the first count.

The only argument put in support of the application was that the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive, especially so when the fact that the assault was committed after the appellant's penis had been bitten is taken into account.

Exhibit C consisted of three photographs showing the complainant's injuries that were inflicted on the complainant by the appellant with the broom. They demonstrate the savagery with which he attacked her. It is, in my opinion, not a mitigating factor that this assault occurred after she had bitten the appellant's penis. That was done only in retaliation for or defence against the sexual assault committed upon her. I would grant leave to appeal the sentence imposed in respect of the second count but dismiss the appeal.

The orders I propose are:
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
Leave granted to appeal against the sentence in relation to the second count, but that appeal be dismissed.

REGINA versus Zi Ming YI 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of Simpson J. She sets out the course of the trial in relevant respects which I need not repeat. 
On the hearing of the appeal grounds of appeal were added to those previously notified. No objection was taken to this course. The new grounds included.
 "There was a miscarriage of justice in that the cross-examination was allowed in circumstances where the Crown was unable to prove that the prior statements had been made." [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) provides as follows: "The court on any appeal ... against conviction shall allow the appeal if it is of the opinion ... that on any ... ground whatsoever there was a miscarriage of justice." 
In my opinion, the appeal against conviction for sexual intercourse without consent should be allowed on this ground. It is unnecessary to consider other grounds of appeal. The consequence is that the conviction should be quashed.
In the circumstances of the case, there should, in my opinion, be no new trial. Judgment and a verdict for acquittal should be entered in favour of the appellant. My reasons are as follows.

Without the evidence adduced in cross-examination of the complainant, the evidence would not have sustained a conviction. That was the consensus at the trial. The following is an extract from what passed between the Crown
Prosecutor and the trial judge in the course of the Crown Prosecutor's application for leave to cross-examine the complainant.
 "Crown Prosecutor: ... Without her evidence of what occurred in its detail, the Crown has no case.

His Honour: Well that's true. It's fairly obvious that you're not getting to first base upon the evidence that she's given so far.

Crown Prosecutor: No. I accept that totally your Honour and her evidence thus far is that nothing else happened, and nothing of a - that could be said to be anything of a sexual nature took place." 
The objective evidence of the injury received by the appellant did not establish that he had intentionally placed his penis in the complainant's mouth, let alone that he had done so without consent. The laceration to the shaft of the penis was (in technically anatomical terms) on the dorsal aspect.
(That is the front of the organ when flaccid.) It was a severe laceration.
There was no sign of injury to the anterior aspect of the organ. (That is the opposite aspect, the underside of the penis.) 
The juxtaposition of the appellant's penis with the plaintiff's mouth could have occurred accidentally in the course of the scuffle which it was common ground had occurred. Both actors had been drinking. The appellant could have fallen across the complainant, as he said occurred. The lower part of his body could have fallen across her face. She could have bitten the dorsal aspect of the appellant's penis through his clothing, as he said occurred, causing a laceration by tearing the skin. A tearing laceration by a bite through the clothing is not implausible. That would also be consistent with the absence of any discernible injury to the opposite side of the penis. Indeed, it is difficult to see how a biting action could cause a laceration to one aspect of the penis with no apparent injury to the opposite aspect if the penis was in the mouth end on, and particularly so if the penis was unprotected by clothing.

It was the complainant's evidence in cross-examination which, accordingly, provided the only basis on which the jury could be satisfied that the offence of sexual intercourse without consent had been committed.

How that evidence came to be given is related in Simpson J's judgment. I would like to emphasise some of the detail in that regard. The application for leave to cross-examine the complainant was made by the Crown Prosecutor in the absence of the jury. In the course of the application and to provide the basis for the application, the Crown Prosecutor tendered the statements ostensibly made by the complainant to the police and, in particular, the record in the police notebook of an account of the episode ostensibly given by the complainant through an interpreter, ostensibly read over to her through the interpreter and ostensibly adopted by her through the interpreter. His Honour granted the application. The complainant was then cross-examined by the Crown
Prosecutor in the presence of the jury.

As appears from the high watermark of the cross-examination quoted by Simpson
J, little of significance was obtained from the complainant by way of direct evidence of what had occurred. On the other hand, some answers conceded or could be construed as conceding that she had said some of the things which were recorded in the police notebook as having been said by her through the interpreter when interviewed by the police. These concessions stood as prior representations and were to be treated as evidence of the fact pursuant to [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s64.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) .

The person believed by the Crown to have been the interpreter at the police interview, Ms Anna Yi Brown, was later called as a witness in the Crown case.
She said that, although she did interpret for Mandarin speakers at the hospital from time to time, she had no recollection of doing so on this occasion.

The order giving leave to the Crown Prosecutor to cross-examine the complainant was made by mistake, albeit an innocent and understandable mistake on the part of all concerned. Unless the statements attributed to the complainant were made through a competent interpreter who conscientiously performed that task, by translating from English to Mandarin and vice versa in the course of the relevant interview, the complainant could not be fixed with the representations ostensibly made by her, and there was no proper ground for leave to cross examine: Velevski (No. 2) (Dunford J, 12 June 1997, unreported); Lars [(1994) 73 A Crim R 91], -121.

The Crown Prosecutor must have believed he could prove the statements ostensibly made by the complainant and, in particular, the statement which was recorded in English in the police notebook (but which was the product of a dialogue with the interpreter) and which had ostensibly been adopted by the complainant in the course of a further dialogue with the interpreter. The application for leave to cross-examine the complainant would not have been made if the Crown Prosecutor had realised he could not do so.

Counsel for the appellant obviously assumed that the Crown Prosecutor could prove the statements Trials are conducted on trust between counsel. Counsel for the appellant would have assumed, without conscious thought, that the statements could be proved because, absent something said to the contrary, the contrary would not have been contemplated.

An affidavit by counsel who appeared for the appellant at the trial was read on the hearing of the appeal. He said: "At the time the Crown Prosecutor made the application, I assumed that the
Crown Prosecutor intended to call evidence from an interpreter that the statements alleged to have been made by the complainant to the police had been accurately interpreted. I had not been briefed at any stage with a statement from Anna Brown." 
The affidavit supports what I have said. Counsel for the appellant anticipated that the Crown Prosecutor would in due course prove the statements in the
Crown case, and would call the interpreter to provide the basis for the tender. That appears to have been the Crown Prosecutor's intention. The intention was frustrated by Ms Brown's inability to give the necessary evidence. The affidavit confirms that counsel for the appellant assumed, at the time of the application, that the Crown Prosecutor was in a position to prove the statements by calling the interpreter. But for that assumption, counsel for the appellant would have objected to the tender of the statements on the voir dire and leave to cross-examine would not have been granted.

The trial judge was not required to turn his mind to whether the statements could be proved. They were tendered on the voir dire without objection. From the trial judge's standpoint, the statements stood for what they ostensibly were, that is, statements which the complainant had made. Nonetheless, the order giving leave to cross-examine would not have been made but for the incorrect belief by the Crown Prosecutor and the incorrect assumption by counsel for the appellant that the statements could be proved.

This was a miscarriage of justice. What happened was not a mere procedural mistake which fortuitously allowed evidence to be given which would otherwise not have been adduced. This was a mistake which allowed fundamental concepts of the criminal law to be subverted, namely, the presumption of innocence and the rigour of the rules which control the way in which the presumption may be displaced.

The underlying rationale of the usual prohibition against cross-examination in chief is that, generally speaking, a witness' unaided recollection, conveyed in the witness' own words, is the most reliable form of oral evidence. The witness may then be cross-examined by counsel for the opposite party. Leading questions may then be asked and the witness' evidence in chief may be vigorously challenged. If a different version of events is given under cross- examination, it is for the tribunal of fact to decide which (if either) version to accept.

An exception is made when there is reason to believe evidence given in chief in answer to non-leading questions is not reliable. The usual basis for such a conclusion is that the witness has given a prior inconsistent account of events. Leave may then be given to counsel who called the witness to cross- examine: [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) 
In the present case, the consequence of the mistake that the statements could be proved was that the complainant was cross-examined in circumstances where there was no entitlement to do so, evidence was obtained by cross-examination which the Crown could not otherwise adduce, and a basis was provided for a verdict against the appellant which otherwise could not have been secured.

This was a miscarriage of justice because, in the end result, the presumption of innocence was displaced by evidence which should not have been admitted and which came to be admitted only by mistake. It was a mistake for which the trial judge was not responsible, for which the Crown prosecutor is to be excused and which counsel for the appellant could not reasonably have been expected to avoid. But mistake it was, with the consequence I have mentioned.
It would be an affront to the administration of justice to allow the conviction to stand in these circumstance.

There should be no new trial and judgment and a verdict of acquittal should be entered because, without the inadmissible evidence, the appellant was entitled to be acquitted.

As to the conviction for assault, the only appeal is against severity of sentence. The appellant was in fact sentenced for three offences. He was charged at the trial with sexual intercourse without consent and with assault occasioning actual bodily harm. He pleaded not guilty to the first charge and guilty to the second. He was found guilty of the first charge by the jury. The trial judge sentenced the appellant for those two offences and for the offence of breach of an apprehend violence order in relation to the same episode.

The sentence for the offence of sexual intercourse without consent was imprisonment for a minimum term of one year and for an additional term of three years. The sentence for the offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm was for a fixed term of imprisonment of one year to be served concurrently with the minimum term for the first offence. The sentence for the breach of the apprehend violence order was a fixed term of imprisonment of six months to be served concurrently.

In determining these sentences, the principle of totality applied. The minimum term and additional term of three years - subsuming, as it did, the concurrent terms of imprisonment for the other two offences - was, in the trial judge's opinion, appropriate as a reflection of the overall criminality involved. The complainant had inflicted a severe injury on the appellant. The assault was in retaliation. As the situation stood at the conclusion of the trial, the injury suffered by the appellant was one which he had brought on himself, having been inflicted on him by the complainant in resistance to enforced fellatio. The assault was part and parcel of a course of violent conduct on the part of the appellant. There was little that could be said in mitigation concerning the assault by the appellant in these circumstances.

That is no longer so. The assault is now to be seen as the appellant's response to a severe injury inflicted on him by the complainant, without the component that she did that in order to resist his violent and criminal behaviour. Absent the inadmissible evidence, the reasons for her conduct are left in the mist of doubt which hangs over the earlier part of the episode.
The sentence of a fixed term of imprisonment of one year is excessive in the new context and must be set aside.

The sentences imposed at first instance commenced on 25 February 1997 On 3
September 1997, this Court heard argument on the appeal and reserved its decision. The appellant was released on conditional bail.

As at 3 September 1997, the appellant had been imprisoned for 6 months and 10 days under the sentences imposed at first instance. I regard that period of imprisonment as sufficient for the offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and for the breach of the apprehend violence order. In so deciding
I have regard to the objective seriousness of the assault offence, the principles relating to totality which pick up the breach of the order, and to relevant subjective considerations, including that the appellant did not dispute his guilt in relation to the assault charge or in relation to breach of the order.

The effect of this judgment would be that the appellant would cease to be subject to the bail conditions which were imposed.

Orders 
I would propose the following orders.
Appeal against conviction on the first count in the indictment (sexual intercourse without consent) allowed; conviction quashed.
Judgment and verdict of acquittal to be entered in favour of the appellant on that count.
Leave to appeal against sentence on the second count in the indictment (assault occasioning actual bodily harm).
Appeal against that sentence allowed; sentence quashed.
The appellant be sentenced on that count to a fixed term of imprisonment of six months and ten days commencing on 25 February 1997 and expiring on 3
September 1997, on which date the appellant was entitled to be released from prison.
Leave to appeal against the sentence imposed on the third count (knowingly contravene a domestic violence order) refused. It is noted that this sentence expired on 24 August 1997.
The appellant be discharged from further compliance with bail conditions imposed on 3 September 1997. Declare that the applicant no longer requires bail in respect of any of the subject offences.
 * * * 
