

Regina versus Allen Matter No 60011/97 [1997] NSWSC 386 (8 September 1997) 
Regina versus Shannon Allen /97 September 1997 
Smart J, Sully J 
The Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Shannon ALLEN 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Shannon Allen has appealed against the severity of fixed term sentences totalling 5 years 3 months imposed in respect of two counts of armed robbery and one count of being in possession of a sawn-off shotgun. 
On 5 November 1996 Allen entered the Gorokan Post Office wearing a balaclava and gloves. He was armed with a toy pistol, although that was not clear to those who were held up. He jumped the counter and made the post office licensee and his wife, a postal assistant, lie on the floor. He demanded that the licensee fill up a bag with cash, later insisting that he empty all tills.
A lady entered the post office and she was told to lie on the floor despite the stated circumstance that she had young children in a car outside.

The period of the armed robbery was considerable in that Allen waited for a time-delay safe to open. However, it did not operate as expected and Allen left after taking the bag with the cash and emptying the contents of the man's wallet. Allen spoke in menacing and frightening terms. The licensee said that he could not see the handgun very well. In his statement of 5 November 1996 the licensee said it only looked to be about 10 cms long and that it may have been a replica or toy. The visiting lady also thought this at the time but could not be sure.

There was a dispute as to how much was taken. The licensee said it was $1,923 and Allen just over $700. The robbery occurred at Melbourne Cup time when there were unlikely to be any people around. The licensee, his wife and the lady were forced to lie on the floor and indeed to crawl around at one stage on the floor. Allen was unmoved by the visiting lady's pleas about the young children in her vehicle.

On 7 and 8 November 1996 Allen was staying at a motel in Cundletown with his wife and children. About 9.55 am on 8 November 1996 Allen entered the
Cundletown Post Office and stated that it was a hold-up. He pointed a small calibre pistol at the licensee's wife. He demanded that the licensee fill a bag which he had thrown on to the counter with cash. He insisted that they put all their money in the bag. The licensee put some further money in the bag.

Allen ran off, got into his motor vehicle, drove to the motel where he picked up his children and de facto wife and left hurriedly. That aroused the suspicion of some people at the motel.

The judge accepted that Allen again used a toy pistol. The Taree police alerted the Coffs Harbour police who circulated the motels. Allen was arrested in Coffs Harbour.

In searching his motel unit, the police found a shortened 12 gauge pump action shotgun. Allen told the police that a friend had given it to him to dispose of it but he had kept it. He had also been given two boxes of shells. Allen said that he had fired the shotgun about two weeks previously "shooting 'roos". He was aware that, by law, he was not allowed to possess it. He said that he had no intention of using it in the robberies. Allen's responses in the police interviews were frank. He made full admissions. He pleaded guilty at the earliest possible date. He was charged early on 9 November 1996. There was a <case> committal on November 1996 and the sentence hearing commenced on 27 November 1996 and concluded on 28 November 1996.

Despite the strong requests of the judge, Allen declined to have the matter dealt with later in the sittings so that a pre-sentence report could be obtained. Allen was unrepresented. The Legal Aid Officer was away ill so Allen could not be advised at that stage and he did not want a deferment. Allen insisted on proceeding as he wished to be sentenced as early as possible.
During the hearing on the first day the judge warned Allen that he was facing a minimum term of 4 to 5 years and possibly more. The judge went to considerable lengths to be fair.

Allen was born on 11 January 1970 and has a de facto wife and children. Little else is known about him. The material suggests that he was committing these armed robberies to repay gambling debts. There were also fleeting references to taking and purchasing heroin. It is by no means clear what, if any, part drugs played in these armed robberies.

Unfortunately Allen has a bad record. It began in 1984 when he was 14. There were many break, enter and steal offences from 1984 to 1988. Since 1988 he has committed many dishonesty offences and assaults. He received gaol sentences in , 1991 and April 1994. There were non parole or minimum terms of six and nine months and periodic detention. He committed many offences between 1988 and 1994 for which he was fined or given a bond. In September 1994 he received concurrent minimum terms of 9 months for break, enter and steal and robbery whilst armed and an additional term of nine months.

The judge, in addition to noting the plea of guilty, stated that the plea arose from genuine contrition. The judge thought that the Crown case as to the subject offences was irresistible. Perhaps it would not have been so strong if it had not been for the frank admissions which Allen made upon his arrest.

The judge thought that the armed robbery on 8 November 1996 was marginally worse than that on 5 November 1996. Accordingly, he imposed a fixed term of four years six months for the offence of 8 November 1996, a cumulative fixed term of six months for the armed robbery of 5 November 1996 and a further cumulative period of 3 months for possessing the shortened shotgun. Both the armed robberies were serious and there is no point in discussing which is the more serious. It sufficiently emerges from the judge's reasons that he was concerned with the totality of the criminality.

The judge thought that there was no point, based upon Allen's record, in fixing an additional term and a minimum term, so he set fixed terms in relation to the offences. The judge was conscious of those matters which could be urged in Allen's favour and it is clear that he took them into account.

Counsel submitted that there was no warrant for the approach taken by the judge and that the applicant would benefit by being released under supervision so that he could rectify his gambling and drug habits. Counsel submitted that, although there was no pre-sentence report or other material which would help the judge, the need for supervision was reasonably obvious. Counsel stressed that Allen had not used a shortened shotgun. As I read the judge's reasons, he treated the possession of the shortened shotgun as a separate offence and rather assessed the two armed robberies on the facts which I have earlier related.

Counsel submitted that as these two armed robberies were only three days apart and were part of the same pattern of conduct, concurrent sentences would have been appropriate. Perhaps concurrent sentences would have been more usual but it is hard to say that the judge was wrong when he fixed, effectively, minimum terms totalling five years in respect of two armed robberies which terrified two separate groups of people going about their lawful business. While it is usually desirable to fix minimum and additional terms, the fixed terms imposed in this case fell well within the range of appropriate minimum terms. If the judge had adopted a conventional approach, he would have fixed an overall sentence amounting to seven years and minimum terms totalling five years three months.

The offences were grave. I am unable to say that the judge was wrong in the approach which he took. Even if he were, it would make no difference. A minimum term of five years and three months would have been unexceptional in the circumstances of this case. Lesser minimum terms would have been inappropriate. An additional term would only extend the sentence and that is not a course which I would favour.

As there was an arguable point, leave to appeal against the sentence should be granted. The appeal should be dismissed.

SULLY J: I agree. 
SMART J: The orders will be as I have proposed. * * * 
