

National Union of Workers, NSW Branch versus Industrial Court of NSW and Ors [1996] NSWSC 459 (1 October 1996) 
NATIONAL UNION OF WORKERS, NSW BRANCH versus INDUSTRIAL COURT OF NSW & ORS /96, CT 1056/96, 1060/96, 1074/96 & 1200/96 
TUESDAY 1 OCTOBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, CLARKE JA, SIMOS AJA 
CATCHWORDS:Industrial relations - injunctions in respect of industrial action concerning industrial matters - industrial action over settled rights - ss 193, 194 Industrial Relations Act 1991 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:DISMISSED 
On 25 February 1996, the opponents sought an interlocutory order pursuant to s (1) of the Industrial Relations Act 1991 requiring the claimant, the
National Union of Workers, NSW Branch, "to take all steps necessary to ensure that its members employed at certain distribution centres will work and continue to work in accordance with their contracts of employment and the lawful instructions of their employer until further order of the court". The order was initially made by Hill J and then continued the next day by Cahill
Dep CJ. An appeal by the claimant to the Full Industrial Court was dismissed.
The order of Hill J having been subsumed into the order of Cahill Dep CJ, the claimant's fundamental complaint to the Court of Appeal was that Cahill Dep CJ acted without or in excess of jurisdiction in making the order.

Held: 
The claimant has failed to demonstrate that the order could not conceivably be considered to be within the range of permissible orders in the circumstances of the case: Brown versus Rezitis <case>; [(1971) 127 CLR 157] 
It is not necessary for an applicant to satisfy the two suggested pre- requisites, namely, that there must be industrial action threatened and that the action concern an industrial matter, in order to secure an injunction pursuant to <case>. In any event, "industrial matters" are widely defined in the Act and the relief which the opponents were seeking clearly related to industrial action concerning industrial matters.

The critical question which must be answered before a party can take advantage of <case> is whether Division 3 applies - that is, is <case> satisfied - not whether the industrial action was concerned with settled rights or with awards or agreements.

Orders 
Summons dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT  
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Clarke JA.
 
CLARKE JA: On Sunday 25 February 1996 lawyers for the second to tenth opponents (the opponents) sought an interlocutory order pursuant to <case> of the Industrial Relations Act 1991 (the Act) from Hill J "requiring the National Union of Workers', New South Wales Branch (the claimant) to take all steps necessary to ensure that its members employed at certain distribution centres will work and continue to work in accordance with their contracts of employment and the lawful instructions of their employer until further order of the court". The ground of the application, shortly stated, was that the claimant's Secretary had announced an intention to incite members of the claimant to breach their contracts of employment and the relevant industrial instruments prescribing the terms and conditions of their employment by engaging in a 24 hour stoppage to commence at 6am on Monday 26 February 1996. The opponents claimed that any such strike action would cause them substantial loss and damage.

His Honour made the order sought and stood over the proceedings until 11.30am the next day, giving appropriate directions as to service of the order and originating process.

On the following day Hill J was ill and the matter came before Cahill Dep CJ.
The claimant did not appear. His Honour was informed that employees were on strike at some of the establishments referred to in Hill J's order but at others employees were working normally. Counsel for the opponents applied to the Deputy Chief Justice for the order made by Hill J to be continued until further order of the court. This application was granted.

Following this hearing there were applications made to set aside and terminate the orders made by Hill J and Cahill Dep CJ and the claimant appealed to the
Full Industrial Court from those orders. In circumstances which it is unnecessary to recount, the applications were not dealt with but the appeal was dismissed. One of the complaints made before this Court by the claimant was that the Full Industrial Court had constructively failed to deal with its appeal from the orders to which I have referred, but during the course of the hearing Senior Counsel for the claimant recognised that the success of his application depended upon his challenge to the order made by Cahill Dep CJ.
Although he maintained his claim that the order of Hill J could not be supported, he accepted that the force of that order was spent, having been subsumed into the order of Cahill Dep CJ. (In these circumstances it is unnecessary to deal with the complaint that the Full Industrial Court had failed properly to deal with the appeal.) The claimant's fundamental complaint to this Court, and the reason for its summons, is that Cahill Dep CJ acted without or in excess of jurisdiction in making the order to which I have referred.

The claimant fashioned his claim in this way in recognition of the fact that the privative provision of the Act (s 301) renders orders of the Industrial
Court immune from challenge in this Court for non jurisdictional error (Walker versus Industrial Court of New South Wales & Anor, [(1994) 53 IR ], esp per Sheller JA at 149). Mr M Einfeld QC, Senior Counsel for the claimant, advanced three grounds in support of the proposition that Cahill DCJ had acted in excess of jurisdiction: . The order made was so widely expressed as, in the circumstances of the case, to be outside the power granted to the court by <case> to grant injunctions.
 
Although Mr Einfeld submitted that the order took effect as a final order it is clear that in form it was interlocutory, and that the opponents had sought only an interlocutory order from Hill J and Cahill Dep CJ. What, however, Mr Einfeld was seeking to convey was that, in substance, the order was a final one. His reason for this claim was that the evidence brought forward by the opponents established only the threat of a 24 hour strike and the orders made effectively prohibited such an action permanently. This submission does not seem to me to advance the claimant's case the real thrust of which was that in circumstances where the evidence disclosed only a threat of a 24 hour strike the court had no jurisdiction to make an order in the wide terms of the order made by Cahill Dep CJ. 
Mr Einfeld drew support for his submission from the statement by Barwick CJ in
Brown versus Rezitis <case>; [(1971) 127 CLR 157], at 166: "The propriety as distinct from the validity of the order made by the
Commission cannot be examined in these proceedings nor can an order which is in excess of jurisdiction be reduced to confine it within jurisdiction. The motion is for a prerogative writ. But an order which is of a kind which at best could not conceivably be thought to be in connection with the contractual arrangement varied or avoided is not merely erroneous: it would, in my opinion, be invalid. Being beyond what could conceivably be thought to be within the range of permissible orders it is in excess of any power which the section purports to give to the Commission." 
In my opinion it cannot be said that the order made `could not conceivably be thought to be in connection with the threatened action'. The highest the argument can be put from the claimant's point of view is that the order could not conceivably be thought to be within the range of permissible orders. This is a very demanding test. It goes without saying that the circumstance that the Industrial Court made an order in terms much wider than this Court might have thought proper in the circumstances would not provide grounds for granting the claimant its relief. The claimant must go much further and demonstrate that the order could not conceivably be considered to be within the range of permissible orders in the circumstances of the case. The claimant has failed, in my opinion, to demonstrate that this is so.

In their originating process the opponents sought both an interlocutory order, in the terms I have mentioned, and a final order requiring the claimant "to refrain from engaging in any industrial action ... until the expiry of the industrial instruments prescribing the terms and conditions of employment of the claimant's members". Although the evidence put before Hill J referred specifically to the threatened 24 hour strike the opponents asserted that the interlocutory injunction was necessary to maintain the status quo until the hearing of their claim for final relief, during which further evidence would be led. In these circumstances the Industrial Court clearly had jurisdiction to make such interlocutory order as it thought fit to maintain that status quo. The claimant has failed to establish that the order made could not conceivably have been made to achieve that purpose and I would dismiss the first ground advanced by the claimant.
 . Section 194 did not empower the court to grant injunctive relief in the circumstances of the case 
Section 194 authorises the Industrial Court to grant an injunction, inter alia, to prevent industrial action to which Division 3 of Part 1 of Ch 3 of the Act applies. By virtue of <case>: "This Division applies to industrial action concerning an industrial matter which is not a matter that may be dealt with by the Commission by conciliation or arbitration under Part 2." 
Accordingly, the argument went, an injunction could be granted only where two prerequisites are satisfied. First, there must be industrial action threatened and secondly that action must concern an industrial matter. In the present case the first prerequisite had been established but not the second and, accordingly, the court lacked jurisdiction to grant the injunction. The factual basis for the submission was the evidence, to be found in a copy of a newspaper article which was before the Industrial Court at relevant times, in which it was said that the strike was in protest against alleged harassment of picketing workers and the Carr Government's workers' compensation reforms.
These subject matters were not, according to Mr Einfeld, industrial matters as that expression is defined in the Act and the second prerequisite to the granting of an injunction was therefore not satisfied.

I would reject the submission for the following reasons. First, I do not accept that it is necessary for an applicant to satisfy the two requisites, in the manner suggested by the submission, in order to secure an injunction pursuant to <case>. Part 1 of Chapter 3 is concerned with disputes and industrial action concerning settled rights under awards and agreements. Part deals with disputes not concerning settled rights. The object of <case> is to restrict the ambit of the empowering provisions in Division 3 in a manner which excludes those disputes which fall properly to be dealt with under Part
What a court, which is invited to exercise powers under Division 3, is required to determine before exercising those powers is whether industrial action was threatened and whether it concerned a matter properly to be dealt with under Division 3 rather than Part 2. In this case it was expressly accepted by the claimant that industrial action was threatened and it is clear that that action did not concern a matter to be dealt with under Part 2.
Indeed counsel did not suggest that the matter was to be dealt with under Part
In these circumstances, Division 3 applied and the powers under <case> were available to the Industrial Court.

Secondly, and on the assumption that what I have said so far is not correct, the evidence demonstrated that the opponents sought an injunction to maintain the status quo until the hearing of their claim for a final order enjoining the claimant from engaging in any industrial action until the expiry of specified industrial instruments. The dispute accordingly related to matters affecting "work done or to be done or the privileges rights or duties of employers or employees ...". I have taken those words from the definition in the Act of `industrial matters'. Accordingly the relief sought by the opponents sought to enjoin the claimant from engaging in industrial action concerning industrial matters. The fact that the immediate threat, which led to the interlocutory relief, involved a strike based, or said to be based, on grounds which may not be thought directly to affect terms of employment is beside the point. Industrial matters are widely defined in the Act and the relief which the opponents were seeking from the Industrial Court clearly related to industrial action concerning industrial matters. The argument placed before the court focused almost entirely upon the terms of the interlocutory order and overlooked the fact that this was made to maintain the status quo in the context of what was claimed by the opponents to be a much wider dispute which related to the observance of the terms of the relevant industrial instruments.

I would reject the second ground.
 . The injunction granted was not in respect of industrial action over settled rights.
 
The heading in the Act to Part 1 of Chapter 3 includes the words "concerning settled rights...". Similarly the heading to Division 3 reads "Injunctions in respect of industrial action over settled rights". The submission is that it must follow that injunctions can be granted to restrain industrial action only when it is in respect of settled rights. That expression is not defined in the
Act but it is reasonably plain that it relates to rights settled by awards or agreements. Hence the court is empowered to grant an injunction to restrain industrial action which, speaking generally, threatens rights under awards or agreements. Here, the argument ran, the industrial action was not concerned with settled rights or with awards or agreements. It was concerned only with the harassment of workers at pickets and the workers compensation reforms to which I earlier referred. Accordingly, the court had no jurisdiction to grant the injunction.

I have already pointed out that <case> expressly excludes from the operation of Division 3 industrial matters which may be dealt with under Part 2. In that part there are provisions for conciliation and arbitration of disputes which, according to the heading, do not concern settled rights. By virtue of <case> it is possible to discern, for the purposes of that part, the meaning of settled rights. It is reasonably clear from that provision that if at the time of a dispute the rights of the parties are not settled by a current award or agreement which specifically deals with the matter the subject of the dispute or which is the only, or main, award or agreement that deals generally with the conditions of employment, the dispute does not concern settled rights.
What is more <case> provides that Part 2 applies both to industrial matters not settled by a current award or agreement and those which, while settled by a current award or agreement, have one or other of the particular characteristics appearing in s201(b). It follows that Part 2 applies both to industrial matters that do not concern settled rights and some which do concern those rights.

Division 3 of Part 1 is available only in respect of industrial matters not covered by Part 2. Although, as the heading would indicate, the dichotomy is broadly between disputes on industrial matters concerning settled rights and those which do not concern settled rights, the precise ambits of Division 3 and Part 2 are to be found in the terms of the relevant sections. I accept that the headings form part of the Act (s 35 [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/)) but in this case they do so by providing, in broad terms, the subject matters of the respective division or part. They do not operate, however, to qualify the clear words of ss 193, 194 and 201. Where it is found that Division 3 applies - that is, <case> is satisfied - the court is empowered to grant an injunction under <case> in respect of industrial action which is taking place or which is threatened. The critical question which must be answered before a party can seek to take advantage of <case> is whether Division 3 applies. This
Division will apply if the terms of <case> are satisfied, which they are.
Accordingly, I reject the third ground. I would add the observation that, having regard to the terms of the permanent order sought by the opponents, the industrial matter was in fact "over settled rights".

For these reasons the summons should be dismissed with costs.

SIMOS AJA: I agree with Clarke JA.
 * * * 
