

Constance June Fletcher versus Russel Burns and Anor [1997] NSWSC 83 (19 March )

CONSTANCE JUNE FLETCHER versus RUSSELL BURNS & ANOR /94; ED 2153/91 
Wednesday 19 March 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Handley JA, Cole JA, Dunford AJA 
CATCHWORDS: EXECUTORS - whether memorandum signed by one of several executors sufficient 
STATUTE OF FRAUDS - whether will a sufficient memorandum - whether memorandum signed by one of several executors sufficient - whether memorandum coming into existence after proceedings sufficient 
STATUTE OF FRAUDS - part performance 
SUCCESSION - contract to leave property by will 
WILL - contract to leave property by will 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:Dismissed 
The appellant entered into a contract that if she looked after an elderly friend for the remainder of her life the friend would leave the appellant her house and some land in her will. The friend executed a codicil containing an unconditional devise of house and land to the appellant. She later made a will in similar terms. This however was revoked by a later will containing a pecuniary legacy of $40,000 in favour of the appellant.

The appellant sued for specific performance of the oral contract. The Master found that neither the codicil nor the first will was a sufficient memorandum of the contract, and that there had been no part performance. He also held that admissions of the oral contract contained in an affidavit sworn by one of the two executors of the deceased was not a sufficient memorandum.

HELD: (1) Neither the codicil nor the first will was a sufficient memorandum because the dispositions in those instruments were unconditional. Schaefer versus Schumann [[1972] AC 572] at 469 applied. 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: These proceedings were tried by Master Macready pursuant to SCR Sch D Pt 3 r 4, and hence the appeal lies direct to this Court. The appellant, Constance Fletcher, sued the executors of the late Alice O'Connor for specific performance of a contract made with the deceased in June 1989, by which she promised to leave the appellant in her will a house and 2 acres of land if the appellant would look after her for the rest of her life. On 22 June the deceased made a codicil leaving the house and the 2 acres to the appellant, and she made a will on 9 December containing a gift in similar terms. However, by a later will of 9 February 1990, she gave the appellant a legacy of $40,000, but made no further provision for her benefit. The deceased died on 4 May that year, without having altered or revoked this will.

The Master found that the deceased had made an oral contract with the appellant as alleged, and that the appellant had performed her part of the bargain. The merits therefore are with the appellant. The oral agreement fell within <case> A of the Conveyancing Act, and the executors pleaded that there was no note or memorandum of that contract and relied on the section. The appellant in her reply relied upon part performance of the contract and contended that an affidavit of the first defendant, sworn on 23 September , which contained admissions was a sufficient memorandum.

The Master held that neither the codicil nor the first will was a sufficient memorandum, that the affidavit of the first defendant filed after the commencement of the proceedings could not be relied upon as a memorandum in these proceedings, and that there had been no part performance. Accordingly he dismissed the action.

The codicil executed by the deceased on 22 June 1989 provided, so far as relevant: "2. I GIVE AND DEVISE to CONSTANCE JUNE FLETCHER of Chinderah my house property situated on the corner of Pacific Highway and Waugh Street Chinderah together with a house block of land to be subdivided (at the expense of the said Constance June Fletcher) from my land comprising the whole of Certificate of Title Volume 112400 Folio 19 containing Lot 1 in Deposited Plan Number and having an area of about 18.08 hectares.

I DIRECT that the said house block shall have a frontage of about 70 metres to
Pacific Highway and a depth of about 116 metres and an area of about 8,100 square metres".

The will executed by the deceased on 1 December 1989 provided so far as relevant: "7. I GIVE AND DEVISE UNTO CONSTANCE JUNE FLETCHER a corner block of land one (1) hectare in area situated at the junction of Waugh Street and Pacific
Highway at Chinderah in the State of New South Wales having a frontage of seventy (70) metres to the Pacific Highway. Such land to be sub divided out of the land contained in Certificate of Title Volume 12400 Folio 19 and being Lot in Deposited Plan Number 564414, together with the house built thereon and the contents contained therein.
IN THE EVENT that the sub division area referred to in the preceding clause does not satisfy the zoning requirements of the Tweed Shire Council I
THEN HEREBY give and bequeath UNTO the said CONSTANCE JUNE FLETCHER such sum of money as shall be determined by my trustees as being equivalent to the market value as at the date of my death of the aforesaid devised land and house built thereon".

Neither document referred to the contract and the dispositions in favour of the appellant were unconditional. The appellant might have repudiated her contract but still taken the benefits in her favour under these testamentary instruments. In Re Hoyle [(1893) 1 Ch 84], a will was held to be a sufficient memorandum but only because as Lindley LJ said, at 98: "The object of the statute being merely to exclude parol evidence, any writing embodying the terms of the agreement and signed by the person to be charged is sufficient".

The codicil and will relied on in this case do not embody the terms of the agreement, and neither is a sufficient memorandum. The decision in Schaefer v
Schuhmann [[1972] AC 572] at 585 is clearly distinguishable.

The affidavit of the first defendant filed after the commencement of the proceedings cannot be a sufficient memorandum because it was not in existence when the proceedings were commenced. See Dudgeon versus Chie [(1954) 55 SR ] at 469, Farr Smith & Co Ltd versus Messers Ltd [(1928) 1 KB ] at -8, Williams, "The Statute of Frauds : Section 4", 1932, at 76-9.

There is a further difficulty in that the affidavit was signed by only one of the executors. In this State one of several executors cannot bind the estate to a contract to sell land of the deceased. See Neill versus Hewens <case>; [(1953) 89 CLR 1], Colyton Investments Pty Ltd versus McSorley <case>; [(1962) 107 CLR 177.] However those cases do not decide that a memorandum signed by one of several executors cannot be a sufficient memorandum of an oral contract made by the deceased.

The point does not appear to be covered by authority. See Williams above, and
Williams, Mortimer and Sunnucks "Executors, Administrators and Probate", 1982.
The general principle recognised in Union Bank of Australia versus Harrison Jones & Devlin Ltd <case>; [(1910) 11 CLR 492] is that each executor completely represents the testator, and all executors do not have to concur in acts done in their executorial capacity. However, an acknowledgment of a debt by one of several executors did not bind the others, or the estate, at common law, although as a result of
Lord Tenterden's Act, such an acknowledgment bound the executor making it and judgment de bonis testatoris could be obtained against that executor. See
In re MacDonald [(1897) 2 Ch 181.] 
Section 54 A requires the memorandum to be signed by the party to be charged, or some other person by him lawfully authorised. All surviving legal personal representatives must be joined as defendants in proceedings for specific performance. They are therefore the parties to be charged in such proceedings.
It appears therefore that a post mortem memorandum relied upon to support an action for specific performance against executors must have been either signed or authorised by all of them.

The remaining issue is whether the appellant can rely on the doctrine of part performance. Shortly after her husband was admitted to hospital in May 1989, the deceased asked the appellant to move into her house and stay with her. The appellant did so. On 14 June the husband died, and the oral contract was made a few days later. The appellant continued to live in the deceased's home and perform her part of the bargain until the death of the deceased.

The principles governing the sufficiency of acts of part performance to displace the operation of <case> A (1), which this Court must apply, are those stated by the High Court. In J C Williamson Ltd versus Lukey <case>; [(1931) 45 CLR 282] at 297, Dixon J said: "Equitable relief is obtainable, notwithstanding the Statute of Frauds, by a party who in pursuance of his contract has done acts of performance consistent only with some such contract subsisting ... ".

In Regent versus Millett <case>; [(1976) 133 CLR 679] Gibbs J, whose judgment was approved by the other members of the Court, said at 683: "It is enough that the acts are unequivocally and in their own nature referable to some contract of the general nature of that alleged".

The continued occupation of the deceased's home by the appellant, and her domestic services for the deceased, were not, in my judgment, "unequivocally and in their own nature referable to some contract of the general nature of that alleged". The appellant did not move in with the deceased pursuant to the contract which was made some weeks later. Accordingly, the decision in
Wakeham versus Mackenzie [(1968) 1 WLR 1175], even if good law in this State, does not assist the appellant. Cf Ogilvie versus Ryan [(1976) 2 NSWLR 504.] 
The continued provision, by the appellant, of domestic services for the deceased did not constitute part performance either. The appellant provided such services for some time before the contract was made. Her services rendered afterwards were no more unequivocally referable to a contract of the general nature of that alleged than her services rendered before there was a contract.

Mr Hodgekiss, counsel for the appellant, made a formal submission that this
Court should follow Steadman versus Steadman [[1976] AC 536] but, as he recognised, we are bound by the High Court decisions referred to in Regent v
Millett, which apply a stricter test. The appellant's claim based on part performance must therefore fail.

The appellant sought leave to adduce further evidence in support of her appeal limited to establishing that specific performance, if otherwise available, might properly be ordered, notwithstanding legal restrictions on the subdivision of the deceased's land. The Court intimated that if specific performance was otherwise available, the relief granted in the first instance would have to be in the qualified form recognised in Brown versus Heffer <case>; [(1967) 116 CLR 344.] Counsel for the respondents acknowledged that the legal restrictions on subdivision would not prevent the Court making a decree in that form. In the light of this concession, which was properly made, it was not necessary for the Court to deal with the application to adduce further evidence. The appellant made no claim for a quantum meruit or in restitution for the value of the services rendered by her under the ineffective oral contract, perhaps because in such a claim she would have had to give credit for her $40,000 legacy.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

COLE JA: I agree with Handley JA.

DUNFORD AJA: I agree with Handley JA.
 * * * 
