

Regina versus Fordham Matter No 60697/97 [1997] NSWSC 600 (2 December 1997) 
Regina versus Stephen Fordham /97 December 1997 
Hunt CJ at CL, Smart J, Howie AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Ducker DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 60697 of 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 10 October 1997 
DELIVERED: 2 December 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Stephen FORDHAM 
JUDGMENT OF: HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, HOWIE AJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - T A Game SC 
RESPONDENT - P G Berman 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - T A Murphy, NSW Legal Aid Commission 
RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: Appeal against conviction - dismissed; Leave to appeal against sentence - refused 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - Sexual assault offences - Evidence - relationship of complainant and appellant - admissibility of acts of violence and injuries inflicted on complainant after the offences charged - Practice and procedure - adequacy of directions to the jury - Appeal - whether verdicts unsafe and unsatisfactory. 
No. of pages: 38 
REGINA versus Stephen FORDHAM 
CRIMINAL LAW - The appellant was convicted of three charges of sexual intercourse without consent occurring on different occasions during the period when the appellant was living with the complainant. The complainant gave evidence, without objection, that throughout the period of their relationship, both before and after the offence charged, the appellant had continually assaulted and intimidated her. Evidence was given by a doctor of injuries sustained by the complainant about three weeks after the last offence charged. The appellant gave evidence that the injuries were accidentally caused by the complainant herself. The trial judge directed the jury that the evidence of assaults by the appellant upon the complainant was evidence which they could consider both as to whether the complainant was consenting to the acts of intercourse alleged and whether the appellant knew that she was not consenting. 
On appeal it was contended that the evidence of assaults and injuries inflicted upon the complainant after the last act of intercourse charged was inadmissible under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). The Crown submitted the evidence was admissible as evidence of relationship relying upon
R versus Beserick [(1930) 30 NSWLR 503.] It was also submitted that the trial judge failed adequately to direct the jury in relation to this evidence and that the verdicts of the jury were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Held: The evidence was admissible as to the state of mind of both the complainant and the appellant on each of the offences, whether or not [s 97](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) applied. There was no error or inadequacy in the directions given by the trial judge; BRS versus R <case>; [(1997) 148 ALR 101] considered. The verdicts were not unsafe and unsatisfactory. 
On the appeal against sentence new evidence was sought to be introduced being a psychological report as to the appellant's mental disabilities.

Held: The material contained in the report did not affect any finding of fact made by the sentencing judge or any principle of sentencing to be applied. There was no error in the sentence imposed. 
O R D E R S . Appeal against conviction dismissed. 
Leave to appeal against sentence refused.

JUDGMENT 
HOWIE AJ: This is an appeal against conviction and an application that the appellant be granted leave to go behind a notice of abandonment of an application for leave to appeal against sentence. The appellant was convicted by a jury on three counts of having sexual intercourse without consent contrary to [s 61I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61i.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). He was sentenced by his Honour Judge Ducker to concurrent sentences each comprising a minimum term of 4 years and 6 months to date from 6 May 1996 and to expire on 5 November 2000 and an additional term of 1 year and 6 months commencing on 6 November 2000. 
Each of the three offences in the indictment related to an allegation that he forced the complainant to perform fellatio upon him. This conduct, if proved, amounted to "sexual intercourse" as that term is defined for the purposes of sexual assault offences under the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), see [Crimes
Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) [s
H(1)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61h.html)
The offences charged were alleged to have been part of a history of sexual assaults committed by the appellant against the complainant over the period during which the appellant lived with the complainant and her daughter. The first offence charged was alleged to have occurred between 1 June 1994 and 30
September 1994, the second between 25 December 1995 and 31 January 1996 and the third between 1 April 1996 and 30 April 1996. The appellant in evidence before the jury denied that the acts, upon which the first two charges were based, occurred at all in the circumstances as alleged by the complainant.
Although he accepted that the incident which gave rise to the third charge did occur generally as the complainant said it did, he maintained that it was an act of consensual intercourse.

The complainant was aged 55 at the time of the trial in October 1996 and was described by her treating doctor, Dr Roche, in his evidence before the jury as being mildly intellectually impaired. At the time of the incidents which gave rise to the charges, she lived with her daughter, who was aged 22 at the time of the trial, in a Housing Commission home in Moss Vale and she was in receipt of an invalid pension. The appellant had come to live with the complainant and her daughter in their home after the three of them had met at a social gathering. The appellant became engaged to the complainant's daughter on 14
June 1994.

The complainant in giving evidence proved to be a poor historian, no doubt by reason of her mental disabilities, and it was not clear from her evidence when it was that the appellant had moved in to live with her. She said that he had been living with them for about 18 months before the incidents which gave rise to the appellant leaving her home on 30 April 1996. However, the appellant gave evidence that he first met the complainant and her daughter in February and moved into their house on 24 April that year. If the appellant were correct as to those dates, then the first offence was alleged to have taken place early in the relationship between the appellant and the complainant while the third was said to have occurred shortly before that relationship came to an end.

The complainant gave evidence that once the appellant moved into her home he commenced to physically abuse her. She said that he used to "choke me and bash me and have sex with me". The effect of her evidence was that the appellant commenced to have sexual intercourse with her on a regular basis shortly after he came to stay with her and that he frequently required her to fellate him.
Her evidence is somewhat confusing as to the order in which particular acts of intercourse occurred and it seems that the first charge contained in the indictment was not the first act of sexual intercourse which took place between the complainant and the appellant.

The first charge related to an incident when the complainant's daughter was outside either doing the washing or feeding the dog. The complainant said that it occurred about a week or a month after the appellant came to the house. She described the circumstances giving rise to the offence as follows: "I was in the bedroom and he came in and clicked his fingers and said ` Do this, suck my penis'".

She said that the appellant pulled his trousers down and "just brought it out". During this incident she did not say anything to the appellant because "he might have bashed me". She said that this act of fellatio occurred for "about an hour, half an hour" and the appellant then "just put it away" and went into the lounge room.

The second count related to an occasion when the complainant was in the toilet and the appellant entered, stood in front of her and said, "Suck my penis".
She said the appellant then pulled down his pants and exposed himself to her.
She told the jury that she had to suck his penis although she did not want to because he made her. She said that the appellant then told her not to tell
Ellen (her daughter) or anyone else.

The incident giving rise to the third count occurred when her daughter was outside of the house farewelling a friend and the complainant and the appellant were seated in the lounge room. The complainant's evidence was that the appellant closed the blinds, sat on the lounge, pull down his pants, pulled out his penis and told her to suck it. She said that when he heard her daughter approaching the lounge room, the appellant sat up, adjusted his clothing and commenced to watch television.

Although the complainant accepted that in none of the incidents giving rise to the charges had she given any indication that she was objecting to having intercourse with the appellant, she said that she complied with his demands because she was scared that he would inflict physical violence upon her if she refused. It was the Crown's case that from the time that the appellant came to live with the complainant he had overborne her will by repeated acts of physical violence to her such that she complied with his demands through fear.
The Crown also alleged that, because of his continual physical abuse of the complainant, the appellant knew that she was not consenting to these acts of sexual intercourse. On the other hand it was put to the complainant by counsel appearing for the accused that she was lying to the jury because she was jealous of the appellant's relationship with her daughter.

The appellant's version, which he gave in evidence before the jury, was that he had been involved in a sexual relationship with both the complainant and her daughter which commenced shortly after he had moved in to live with them.
He told the jury that he first had sexual intercourse with the complainant before coming to live with her "to see if I could get Helen in a way that
I sort of liked Helen in the first place". The reference to "Helen" was a reference to the complainant's daughter who was named "Ellen". He further explained his motivation to be intimate with the complainant in this way: "Sort of thing is at first I wanted to have sex with Brenda (the complainant) to get to Helen and that and to see if Ellen (sic) would come with me" 
The appellant, who was 42 years of age when he moved in to live with the complainant, maintained that she consented to sexual intercourse with him at all times throughout their relationship and that they participated in sexual intimacy about once a fortnight or once a month when the complainant's daughter was absent from the house. He denied that he had ever physically assaulted the complainant or threatened her. He said that he had never clicked his fingers at the complainant nor had he ever asked her to fellate him in the toilet. He told the jury that when he wanted to have sex with the complainant he would beckon to her with his crooked finger or, if she were in the bedroom, he would put his hand on her shoulder and ask if she would like to "suck me off".

The Crown's case was based almost entirely on the evidence of the complainant.
However, the Crown also relied in a substantial way upon the evidence of Dr
Roche as supporting the complainant's evidence. He was a local practitioner who examined the complainant on 30 April 1996 and who observed that she was suffering from a number of injuries. Shortly after the doctor completed this examination, the police attended his surgery and spoke to the complainant and her daughter. Later that day the police took a statement from the complainant in which she alleged sexual assaults upon her by the appellant. It appears that the complainant and her daughter went to a refuge and the appellant was arrested on 6 May.

The first ground of appeal is that the trial judge erred in admitting the evidence of Dr Roche. There was no objection to this evidence at the trial but it was submitted on appeal that the evidence ought to have been rejected by the trial judge and that a miscarriage of justice had arisen by reason of this evidence being left to the jury for their consideration. Mr Game SC, on behalf of the appellant, submitted to the Court that, because the injuries observed by Dr Roche must have occurred after the last of the offences charged in the indictment, his evidence was irrelevant to any issue at the trial. His alternative submission was that, even if the evidence was relevant, it was tendency evidence and was inadmissible as being in breach of the tendency rule contained in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

As I have already indicated, the effect of the complainant's evidence was that the appellant commenced to physically assault her from the time he came to live with her and that those assaults continued throughout the period that he resided in her home. Although at one stage she indicated some uncertainty as to whether the first time that she had been either choked or punched by the appellant occurred before the incident giving rise to the first count on the indictment, she later stated unequivocally that the assaults started soon after the appellant arrived at the house and before any act of sexual intercourse occurred. She repeatedly asserted during her evidence that if she had not complied with his demands upon her she believed she would have been bashed.

The complaint gave little evidence of the particular injuries that she had received in the course of the physical violence which she alleged had been inflicted upon her by the appellant. However, she did say that the appellant kicked her with "steel boots" and that she received four broken ribs. She said that this happened about a week before she saw Dr Roche. This evidence was not objected to by experienced counsel who appeared at he trial.

In cross-examination the complainant referred to the fact that neighbours had seen her black eyes, and when asked by them what had happened, she had told them that she had ran into a tree or other object. However she said that this was not the truth. In particular she denied a proposition that just before she had seen Dr Roche she had run into a tree at the front of her house when having a game with the appellant. It was also put to her that she fell off a ladder while cleaning the house just before she visited Dr Roche, but she denied this and asserted that the appellant had kicked her with his "iron boot".

Dr Roche's evidence was that the complainant and her daughter had been patients of his since 1986 but he had only seen the complainant twice between
September 1992 and 30 April 1996, the date upon which the police became involved. The first occasion he had seen the complainant during this time was in February 1996. On that occasion he did not perform a full physical examination of her and did not ask her to undress. He observed no signs of injury but noted that she had lost a great deal of weight.

The next occasion he saw her was on 30 April 1996 when the complainant and her daughter attended his surgery in the company of the appellant. The circumstances in which she came to see Dr Roche on that day are not clear but the doctor said he received a phone call from a neighbour of the complainant and, as a result of that call, he made arrangements for her to attend at his surgery. He said that the complainant, her daughter and the appellant all came into his consulting room and that he had considerable difficulty in having the appellant leave him in privacy with the complainant.

Dr Roche gave evidence that even before he examined the complainant he noticed that she was emaciated and he formed the view she had lost at least 10 kilograms from her normal weight. She had, what the doctor described as, very lurid blue make up around both eyes. When the make up was removed the doctor found that around her left eye she had sustained bruising which was about 5 or days old. He found that she weighed 41 kilograms whereas she normally weighed above 50 kilograms. She was tender over the rib area on the left side and just behind her left armpit she had a bruise which was also about 5 or 6 days old. An x ray confirmed that she had sustained fractures of four ribs on the left side in the area where the bruising was. The complainant also had abrasions to each of her hands.

The doctor was cross-examined about these injuries and the possible ways in which they may have been sustained by the complainant. He indicated that it was possible that her ribs had been fractured in a fall although he believed it would have been unusual. He stated that he had very rarely seen a bruise to the eye caused by walking into an object although he conceded that the bruising around her eye might possibly have been caused by the complainant bumping against the end of a branch. In re-examination he stated that the injury to the ribs was consistent with the complainant being kicked repeatedly to that area.

As I have already observed, the complainant was vague and confused about dates and periods of time. But she said that the last act of intercourse alleged in this indictment occurred about a month before she went to see Dr Roche. The appellant accepted that this act of intercourse occurred, and it was never put to the complainant that it took place at some other time than she indicated.
Therefore, it appears that the last act of intercourse charged (it is unclear whether this was in fact the last act of intercourse between the complainant and the appellant) occurred about three weeks before the injuries, which Dr
Roche observed, were inflicted.

It was the Crown's case that the acts of sexual intercourse, which occurred between the complainant and the appellant, were part of a continual course of physical and sexual abuse inflicted upon the complainant by the appellant from the time that he moved in to live with her. Apart from the nature of the acts involved, there was, on the Crown's case, little or no difference between the appellant physically assaulting the complainant and his having sexual intercourse with her. That was clearly the impression which the complainant was seeking to give. Early in her evidence she was asked what the appellant did to her once he moved into the house and she answered, "he used to choke me and bash me and have sex with me". It was the Crown case that in respect of each of the acts alleged in the indictment the complainant was not consenting and the appellant knew that she was not because those acts were part of the history of violence and intimidation suffered by the complainant at the hands of the appellant from the time he entered her home until she went to see Dr Roche in April 1996.

During the course of the complainant's evidence-in-chief, and just before the luncheon adjournment on the first day of the trial, the judge told the jury that the evidence of physical assaults upon the complainant was admitted only on the issue of consent. He directed them that the evidence of assaults: `[it] is relevant only insofar as it took place before the particular incident that you are considering as being part of the surrounding circumstances in which the alleged act took place.

But that is the only relevance of that evidence and you must not use it in any other way that might be adverse to the accused. That would be quite unjust. But that evidence is led simply to show you the nature of the relationship between the two parties, that evidence so far as the alleged assaults are concerned." 
As I have already indicated, no objection was taken at the trial to any evidence of the complainant in relation to the physical assaults which she said had been inflicted upon her by the appellant. It was conceded on the hearing of the appeal by Mr Game that this evidence, in so far as it related to assaults occurring before the last act of intercourse alleged, was relevant and admissible both as to whether the complainant was consenting to the acts of intercourse alleged and as to the state of mind of the accused concerning her consent or lack of it.

In my opinion that concession was well-founded. Of course in many cases the fact that an accused was on occasions physically violent to a particular complainant may have little or no relevance to the issue of whether the complainant consented to a particular act of intercourse or whether the accused knew she was not consenting. But in this particular case the alleged history of physical violence by the appellant toward the complainant was an integral part of their relationship and indispensable to a proper consideration of the atmosphere in which the particular acts of intercourse alleged in the indictment took place. The complainant's evidence of the appellant's physical violence toward her from the time he commenced to live in her home gave context to her allegations of non-consensual sexual intercourse.
Without that evidence the jury would have been left without a full appreciation of the complainant's allegations. A similar approach has been taken in relation to a history of sexual association between a complainant and an accused (sometimes called "guilty passion") in child sexual assault cases, both at common law (see R versus Wickham (CCA, 17 December 1991, unreported) at 7; R versus Beserick [(1993) 30 NSWLR 510] at 515) and under the provisions of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) (see R v
AH (CCA, 27 November 1997, unreported).

Although nice questions might arise as to the nature of relationship evidence and whether or not in any particular case the evidence should be considered as tendency evidence under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), because of the attitude of defence counsel at the trial and the concession made on the hearing of this appeal, it is unnecessary to consider that matter in relation to the evidence given by the complainant of assaults occurring before the last act of intercourse alleged. In the present case, whether or not the evidence given by the complainant of the assaults upon her before the last act of intercourse is considered as relationship or tendency evidence and whether or not there is any difference between the principles governing the admission of such evidence, her evidence was clearly admissible and there was no occasion for the trial judge to have excluded it in the exercise of any discretion under the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

Although there is no ground of appeal relating to the evidence of the complainant as to the assaults upon her by the accused after the last act of intercourse charged, counsel at the hearing of the appeal maintained that this evidence was inadmissible because it was in breach of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), notwithstanding that no objection was made by counsel at the trial and there has been no suggestion that counsel at the trial was incompetent. In effect counsel for the appellant before us sought to attack this evidence by way of the ground of appeal asserting that Dr Roche's evidence was inadmissible. But if the evidence given by the complainant, in evidence in chief and in answer to questions in cross-examination, as to the assaults upon her by the appellant that occurred after the third offence charged was admissible, then the evidence of Dr Roche was in substance merely corroborative of the evidence of the complainant and not independent evidence of the appellant's guilt.

Because no objection was taken in relation to any evidence of the complainant as to the assaults upon her by the appellant, and because there is no ground of appeal asserting that the evidence given by the complainant was inadmissible, it is strictly unnecessary for us to determine whether her evidence of the assaults which resulted in the injuries seen by Dr Roche was rightly before the jury. However, I am in no doubt that the evidence of the complainant as to the whole of the history of attacks upon her by the appellant was admissible however the evidence is described and by whatever test its admissibility is determined.

In so far as it was submitted that the assaults upon the complainant which resulted in the injuries observed by Dr Roche were irrelevant, there is, in my opinion, no substance in that submission. The evidence of the assaults and injuries inflicted upon the complainant were relevant to the jury's determination of both the issue of consent and the appellant's knowledge of lack of consent in respect of each of the acts of intercourse charged in the indictment. If the jury were satisfied that those injuries were caused by the appellant, and the evidence to support that finding was very strong, then those injuries were corroborative of the complainant's account of the relationship between her and the appellant notwithstanding that these injuries were inflicted after the last act of sexual intercourse charged in the indictment.

In this case, where the complainant was alleging that physical violence by the appellant upon her was an integral part of their relationship during which the offences alleged in the indictment took place, the evidence of assaults and injuries suffered by the complainant during the course of that relationship was relevant and it did not matter, so far as the question of relevance was concerned, whether those injuries occurred before or after the offences alleged. This approach is consistent with the decision of this Court in R v
Beserick [(1993) 30 NSWLR 510] at 521.
That case was concerned with evidence of sexual activity between the complainant and the appellant which occurred both before and after the offences charged in the indictment. It was held that all activity which proved the relationship between the complainant and the accused was relevant regardless of whether it occurred before or after the offences charged. The fact that the activity occurred subsequent to the offence alleged in the indictment was held to be a matter which would only affect the weight to be accorded to the evidence and may be sufficiently prejudicial to warrant the exercise of discretion to exclude it because of its reduced probative value. I see no difference in principle between evidence which suggests that an accused displayed an attitude of sexual interest in the complainant and that which suggests that an accused displayed an attitude of physical violence and aggression to the complainant. I am of the opinion that the evidence of the complainant as to assaults by the accused after the offences alleged was relevant and, therefore, prima facie admissible under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s56.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

It was also submitted by counsel for the appellant that the evidence of Dr
Roche, even if relevant, was inadmissible under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). The argument was that the evidence was tendency evidence and did not have sufficient probative value to fulfil the requirements of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html)
However, what counsel was really submitting was that the evidence given by the complainant of assaults which occurred after the last offence charged was tendency evidence and inadmissible. The Crown in response in effect submitted that her evidence was merely part of the relationship and not within the ambit of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) 
It does not seem to me to be overly helpful, when considering the admissibility of evidence, to classify the evidence by using terminology which is not found in the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) or by considering what the position would have been at common law. In my view questions of admissibility under the Act will generally be determined by asking three questions; firstly, is the evidence relevant under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html) of the Act, secondly what is the purpose or purposes for which the evidence is being adduced, and thirdly is there any reason to reject the evidence in the exercise of discretion?. The answer to the second question will generally indicate whether there is any rule applicable which would prohibit the evidence being used for the purpose, or any of the purposes, for which it is being tendered.

As I have indicated the evidence of the complainant as to assaults upon her after the acts of intercourse charged was relevant and, therefore, it is necessary to consider the purpose for which the evidence was admitted. The jury were told that the evidence of the assaults by the appellant upon the complainant was admissible for three reasons. Firstly they were told during the complainant's examination in chief that the evidence of assaults by the appellant was admissible as "being part of the surrounding circumstances in which the alleged act took place" and to show "the nature of the relationship between the two parties". In so far as the evidence of assaults by the appellant, whether they occurred before or after the offences alleged, were admitted to show the surrounding circumstances, the evidence was clearly admissible. There was no rule in the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) which would prohibit or restrict the evidence if used only for that purpose; R versus AH (CCA, 27 November 1997, unreported) at 12.

The second purpose for which the jury were told they could use the evidence of assaults upon the complainant was "to establish intimidation of the complainant to the extent that she submitted to acts to which she would not otherwise have submitted". They were further directed that "the evidence is admitted as to the issue of the state of mind induced in the complainant by the acts of the accused insofar as her consent is concerned in these matters". So far as the evidence of the relationship between the accused and the complainant was admitted for this purpose, there was no rule which prohibited the evidence being used for that purpose. In so far as the evidence of the later assaults was relevant to the relationship and the relationship was admitted to prove the complainant's state of mind, [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) had no application. The section says nothing about evidence of the character, reputation or conduct of one person being admitted to prove the state of mind of another person.

The trial judge said that third purpose for which the evidence of the accused's assaults upon the complainant could be used by the jury was to show "if the accused terrorised this woman in the way that it is suggested he did, that he must have known that she was not doing these things of her own free will and, therefore, not consenting to them". It is in only in regard to this purpose that the issue of whether [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) applied may have had any relevance. But, in my view, it does not matter how the different views which were expressed by the Crown and counsel for the appellant before us are to be resolved. On analysis, the only point of distinction between these two positions seems to me to be whether the evidence of the conduct of the appellant (whenever it occurred) is direct evidence of the relevant state of mind of the appellant (the view taken by the Crown) or whether that evidence proves that state of mind indirectly through tendency reasoning (the view taken by counsel for the appellant). If it is direct evidence, then [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) does not apply and the evidence is only subject to the discretion in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) or [137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the Act; see R versus Beserick, above, at 524. If proof of the state of mind of the accused on the occasions of the sexual conduct in the charges relies upon reasoning from a tendency of the accused to act in a particular way or to have a particular state of mind, then the evidence must have "significant probative value" to be admissible under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) and is subject to the discretion in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s101.html) of the Act.

In my view the complainant's evidence of assaults upon her by the accused was admissible on whatever basis it is considered and it is unnecessary for this court to resolve the different approaches. Unlike the situation in R v
Beserick there was no basis upon which the judge should have rejected the evidence under his general discretions to refuse to admit unfairly prejudicial evidence, even had he been asked to do so. The later assaults occurred shortly after the last acts of intercourse charged (about three weeks) and were of a similar nature to those which the complainant said occurred prior to the acts of intercourse alleged. There is nothing to suggest that there was any change in the relationship over the period in which the appellant lived with the complainant. These later acts were highly probative because they were corroborated by the evidence of Dr Roche.

Even if the evidence were considered under the more stringent tests of admissibility imposed by [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) and [s 101](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s101.html), it was admissible. The evidence had in my view significant probative value - that is its probative value in proof of the accused's state of mind was important or of consequence, see R versus Lock (Hunt CJ at CL, 25 March 1997, unreported); R versus Lockeyer [(1996) 89 A Crim R 547];
R versus AH (CCA, 27 November 1997, unreported) at 13. Further, there was no rational view of the evidence consistent with the innocence of the appellant and so the evidence ought not to have been rejected under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s101.html), see R versus Lock, above, at 13-14 and R versus NJF (CCA, 5 June 1997, unreported). This result is the same in my view whether the evidence of the appellant's assaults upon the complainant is viewed as a whole or whether the evidence of the later assaults is considered separately. The assessment of tendency evidence under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) is to be made against all of the evidence adduced, or to be adduced, by the party relying on it, [s (1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) - in this case that was the evidence of the other assaults given by the complainant prior to the last act of intercourse and the evidence of Dr Roche.
Further in applying the decision in Pfennig versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 461] to the exercise of the discretion under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s101.html), the particular evidence has to be viewed in the context of the prosecution case as a whole: see <case>; [182
CLR 461] at 485.

In my view, therefore, the evidence of the complainant as to the assaults which occurred after the offences alleged was admissible and there was no basis upon which it ought to have been rejected. As I have indicated Dr
Roche's evidence was largely corroborative of the evidence given by the complainant and was clearly admissible on any basis. Although there was some evidence from Dr Roche of an injury to which the complainant had not referred in her evidence, that is scrapes to her knuckles, that evidence was of such little significance that it can be clearly disregarded. The substantial objection taken to the doctor's evidence on appeal was as to the injuries he observed, but in my view the doctor's evidence was clearly admissible in all respects. No objection was taken to the evidence of the injuries observed by
Dr Roche and there was no reason why the trial judge should have rejected it.

A second and alternative leg of the first ground of appeal is that directions given by the trial judge in relation to Dr Roche's evidence were inadequate.
In the written submissions filed on behalf of the appellant the complaint was that, as the evidence was inadmissible, his Honour ought to have directed the jury to disregard the evidence. It was further submitted that a miscarriage of justice had occurred because, rather than telling the jury to disregard the evidence, his Honour indicated to the jury that they could use it when assessing the credibility of the complainant and the appellant. As in my opinion the evidence of Dr Roche was admissible, there is no substance to the complaints raised in the written submissions. If it is accepted that the evidence was properly before the jury, they were entitled to use it in their assessment of the credibility of both the complainant and the appellant depending on what view they came to about how the injuries were inflicted.

However, on the hearing of the appeal, Mr Game extended the challenge to encompass a complaint that the trial judge had failed to direct the jury as to the use to be made of Dr Roche's evidence. In substance the complaint was as to the evidence of the assaults that occurred after the last offence charged.
There was no complaint about this aspect of the summing up at the trial and, therefore, the appellant needs leave under [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) to rely upon the complaint with the summing up. Leave will be granted if the appellant shows that the failure to give such a direction resulted in a miscarriage of justice: R versus Abusafiah <case>; [(1997) 148 ALR 101] it was held that a trial judge has a duty to explain to the jury the way in which it could use evidence of the bad character of an accused where that evidence had legitimately been placed before it, and that the failure of counsel to request a direction on that matter did not relieve the trial judge of that duty. The charges in that case were offences of homosexual intercourse alleged to have been committed by the accused, a teacher, against one of his former pupils. Evidence was led by the Crown of improper conduct by the accused with another student where the conduct had some similarities with the evidence given by the complainant about the circumstances surrounding the offences charged and his relationship with the accused.

In that case the evidence of alleged misbehaviour by the accused had been led by the Crown principally to rebut an assertion by the accused that he was of good character. However, all the judges of the High Court held that the evidence was, in at least one respect, corroborative of the evidence of the complainant. The jury had been told that they could not use the evidence as corroboration. Other than this direction, the trial judge gave no directions at all on the manner in which the jury were to use the evidence of the accused's alleged misbehaviour with the other student. A majority of the High
Court held that a miscarriage of justice had resulted from that failure. It was held by all members of the Court that, as the evidence had not been led for any propensity purpose, the trial judge should have directed the jury that they could not use the evidence to suggest that the accused was the type of person who might commit the conduct alleged in the charges and that the evidence was not to be used by them as positive proof of the offences charged.

As I indicated earlier, the trial judge in the present case directed the jury as to the significance of the complainant's evidence about assaults upon her by the appellant during the course of her evidence just before the court adjourned for lunch. The jury were told that the evidence was led simply to show the relationship between the complainant and the appellant and they were directed that it would be unjust for them to use it in any other way adverse to the appellant. That direction related in its terms only to the evidence given by the complainant as to injuries before the last act of intercourse, but before that direction was given she had told the jury that the appellant kicked her with `steel boots" and that she had received four broken ribs.
Directly after the luncheon adjournment the complainant gave evidence about visiting Dr Roche and having x rays taken of her ribs and other parts of her body.

The trial judge did not repeat the direction he had given about the use to be made of the appellant's alleged violent conduct to the complainant immediately after the evidence of Dr Roche or after the further evidence of the complainant. Nor in the summing up did he specifically direct the jury as to the use to be made of the doctors evidence or the evidence of the later assaults in proof of the charges. But as I have already indicated the summing up contained a direction as to the use to be made of the evidence of assaults by the appellant upon the complainant generally. I will set those directions out again in full. After explaining to the jury the use to be made of evidence of sexual assaults other than those charged, his Honour said: "There was also some evidence of acts of assault over a period relied upon by the Crown to establish intimidation of the complainant to the extent that she submitted to acts to which she would not otherwise have submitted. Likewise that is the only purpose for which that evidence can be used and if you found it did occur - you may find completely differently - but if you were to find that, yes he was bashing her around, you cannot say I am satisfied of that, that is good enough, I will find him guilty. You must not use the evidence in that way.

That evidence is admitted as to the issue of the state of mind induced in the complainant by the acts of the accused insofar as her consent is concerned in these three matters. It is also admitted to show if the accused terrorised this woman in the way that it is suggested he did, that he must have known that she was not doing these things of her free will and therefore not consenting to them. But that is the only way you can use that evidence" 
I have no doubt that the jury would have understood this direction to relate to all the evidence which had been led to show that the appellant had been violent to the complainant over the period of their relationship. The evidence of the later assaults and that of Dr Roche was relevant and admitted to prove that relationship, and the jury could not have thought that it had any other purpose. Just as this direction would have ensured that the jury would not misuse the evidence given by the complainant that the appellant used to assault her, so it would have prevented the jury misusing the evidence of the later assaults or of Dr Roche.

Although nowhere in the course of the summing up did the trial judge explain to the jury the way in which the evidence of the later assaults or that of Dr
Roche operated to prove that relationship, he was not asked to give such a direction and I do not believe that it was necessary for him to do so in the circumstances of this case. Once it is accepted that the evidence was admissible to prove the nature of the relationship between the complainant and the appellant on whatever test of admissibility is applied, then there was no necessity for the trial judge to give any further explanation to the jury as to the manner in which they were to use the evidence of the later assaults or that of Dr Roche. As I have already indicated, they were clearly directed on two occasions as to the limited basis upon which they could use the evidence of the accused's assaults upon the complainant if they found that they occurred.

Although a technical analysis of the admissibility of the evidence of the evidence of the later assaults or of Dr Roche appears not to have been undertaken by anyone at the trial, the general purpose for which the evidence was before the jury was clearly understood and the directions to the jury were given in terms of that general understanding. This is why, in my opinion, there was no further direction sought by experienced trial counsel. Unlike the position in BRS versus The Queen, the evidence of other misconduct engaged in by the appellant was tendered in positive proof of the commission of the offence. I accept that, in many cases where evidence of other offences than those charged is admitted, the trial judge will be required to carefully explain how the particular piece of evidence was to be used by the jury, see
BRS versus The Queen, above, per Kirby J at 141. But in my opinion the nature of the evidence given as to the later assaults upon the complainant and its relevance to the facts of this particular case did not require any specific direction to be given by the trial judge in relation to that evidence.

In all the circumstances of this case, the trial judge was only required to direct the jury that they could not reason from the mere fact that the appellant had assaulted the complainant that he must have been guilty of the offences charged; BRS versus The Queen, above, per Kirby J at 142. This is exactly what the trial judge did in the passage I have quoted above. In my opinion leave should be refused to the appellant to complain about the directions given in relation to the evidence of Dr Roche and, therefore, the first ground of appeal fails.

The second ground of appeal is: "That the trial judge erred in failing to direct, or adequately direct, the jury as to the reasonable competing conclusions that were open on the evidence." 
A perusal of the written submissions filed on behalf of the appellant in support of this ground identifies the particular complaint made about the summing up as a failure by the trial judge to sufficiently make it clear to the jury, that a rejection of the appellant's account of the complainant's injuries did not necessarily lead to a conclusion that he must have known that the complainant was not consenting to the acts of intercourse alleged in the indictment. No further direction or amplification of the directions given by the trial judge was sought at the trial and, therefore, leave is required to rely upon this ground of appeal.

When summing up the respective cases for the Crown and the defence, the trial judge told the jury: "So, in short, the accused says that he had an ongoing, long standing, frequent, consensual sexual relationship with [the complainant] and she says that she was subject to an ongoing reign of fear and beatings which took such a toll on her that her resistance was totally overcome and she just submitted.
Those are, in a nutshell, the competing contentions." 
The complaint is that the trial judge generally, and in the passage quoted above in particular, over-simplified the issue which the jury had to resolve even if they held against the appellant on the question of how the injuries to the complainant were inflicted. It was submitted that, in effect, the trial judge left the guilt of the appellant to be resolved by a determination of who was to be believed as to the manner in which the injuries were inflicted upon the complaint. As Mr Game conceded in his written submissions it was clearly open for the jury to disbelieve the account given by the appellant of the way that the complainant obtained the injuries observed by Dr Roche.

However this passage has to be seen in the context of the summing up as a whole. The jury were told by the trial judge that it was not a question of which version they preferred, but that, before they could convict the appellant, they had to be satisfied of the version relied upon by the Crown, that is that the version given by the complainant. In one particular passage in the summing up, his Honour pointed out to the jury that although they may be satisfied that the complainant's evidence was truthful as to two matters, being that the acts of sexual intercourse occurred and that they were without her consent, there was a third matter and that was whether the accused knew she was not consenting. Although what his Honour said directly after that passage is somewhat confusing because the trial judge refers to the complainant's state of mind rather than that of the appellant, there were numerous directions in the summing up as to the elements of the offences to be proved by the Crown and each included a reference to the need for the prosecution to satisfy the jury that the accused knew that the complainant was not consenting or was at least reckless as to that fact. As I have already pointed out in relation to the first ground of appeal, the trial judge twice directed the jury that the evidence of assaults was relied upon by the Crown to prove the true relationship between the complainant and the appellant and went to both the issue of consent and the appellant's state of mind.

In my view the complaint that the jury may have been misled as to the findings they had to make before they could convict the jury is not made out on a fair reading of the summing up. The absence of any complaint at the trial indicates that my impression of the summing up as a whole accords with the impression that it had upon those who heard it at the trial.

It was also submitted by Mr Game that, as the jury could have found that the appellant had been violent to the complainant but still not have been aware that she was not consenting to the acts of intercourse, the jury should have been specifically directed upon this matter. He submits that the trial judge was obliged to give such a direction even though the defence case was that there had been no violence by the appellant to the complainant at all, see
Pemble versus The Queen <case>; , [(1971) 124 CLR 107] at 117-118, 130. No such direction was requested by defence counsel appearing at the trial. I am satisfied that the jury must have understood that a finding that the appellant was on occasions violent to the complainant, did not mean that he was aware of her lack of consent to the sexual acts. The Crown case as presented to the jury was that knowledge or recklessness as to lack of consent could be inferred only if the jury were satisfied that there existed a relationship in which the appellant had subjected to the complainant to "a campaign of intimidation by the accused, that he completely overbore her will and had his way with her in circumstances where she was clearly not consenting and he could not have believed in consent". These were the words used by the trial judge to summarise the Crown case toward the end of the summing up.

I am satisfied that the jury were adequately directed as to the nature of the
Crown case and that there was no possibility that the jury misunderstood the relevance of the issue of the appellant's assaults upon the complainant and what facts they were required to find in order to convict the accused on any of the three charges before them. Again the lack of complaint by defence counsel fortifies me in the conclusion I have reached simply on reading the summing up. Therefore, I am of the view that leave should not be granted to the accused to rely upon this ground of appeal.

The third ground of appeal is that the verdicts of guilty are unsafe and unsatisfactory. The principles which govern this Court's review of the evidence at a trial in order to determine whether the jury ought to have entertained a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused are clear: see
M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at -495, 508; R versus McKnoulty [(1995) 77 A Crim R 33] at -339. The fact that the fundamental issue before the jury was an assessment of the complainant's evidence does not relieve this Court of reviewing her evidence and assessing for itself her credibility. The court must conduct this assessment notwithstanding that the Court has not had the opportunity of observing the witnesses, although the lack of that opportunity imposes restraints on this Court's power: Chidiac versus The Queen <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 432] at 443-444, 452-453, 459.

It was not submitted by Mr Game that a reasonable jury ought to have had a doubt about the evidence of the complainant or that, as a general proposition, any conviction based upon her evidence must be considered as unsafe and unsatisfactory. This relieves me of the need to closely analyse the evidence of the complainant or indeed to review the evidence at the trial more than I have already done in this judgement. However, I should indicate that, having reviewed the evidence at the trial myself from the viewpoint of whether it was open to the jury to accept the Crown case beyond reasonable doubt, I have no doubt that they were entitled to do so.

The submissions made by Mr Game under this ground are more particular and concern the sufficiency of the evidence to prove the accused's knowledge of her lack of consent even if it is accepted that the jury could have found that she was not consenting to the acts of intercourse charged in the indictment.
The general submission made was that there was an underlying difficulty in the
Crown case in showing any relationship between the acts of violence and the particular acts of intercourse relied upon.

In relation to the first charge it was submitted there was insufficient evidence to prove the existence of the relationship relied upon by the Crown prior to the first charge. In my view that submission cannot be accepted. I have already indicated that, although at one stage the complainant seemed to express some doubt as to whether any physical violence occurred before the first count, the clear effect of her evidence, considered as a whole, was that the physical violence occurred immediately the appellant entered her home and continued throughout their relationship. There were clear and unequivocal assertions by the complainant that the violence commenced before any acts of intercourse.

It was further submitted that the jury ought not to have convicted on the other two counts because of the paucity of evidence to prove the appellant's knowledge of the complainant's lack of consent. Although there was no evidence of any particular act of violence occurring at the time of any of the acts of intercourse identified in the charges and even though the complainant conceded that she showed no outward signs of objecting to the acts of intercourse, it was, in my view, open to the jury to conclude that her subservience to the demands of the appellant was not an indication of consent on her part and that the appellant knew this. Again the jury were entitled to view this issue of the appellant's state of mind in light of the circumstances of the offences as the complainant described them.

Although in relation to the second count the complaint did indicate that she feared that the appellant would bash her if she told anyone, that statement has to be considered in light of her evidence as a whole which as I have indicated on more than one occasion was that she participated in sexual conduct with the appellant because of her fear of him. Some specific answers in the evidence she gave have to be considered in the light of her mental disability. This doesn't mean, of course, that some lesser standard of proof is justified in relying upon her evidence by reason of her mental impairment, but it does mean that particular care has to be given in considering some parts of her evidence out of its general context and disregarding the clear import of her evidence as a whole.

Her account of the second act of intercourse occurring while she was seated on the toilet was, if accepted by the jury, totally consistent with the complainant merely submitting to the appellant's demands through fear of him, and totally consistent with the appellant taking advantage of the complainant's fear of rejecting his demands upon her, no matter when and where those demands were made and regardless of any indignity to which she might be subjected. The jury clearly accepted her account and in my view they were entitled to make that finding of fact.

In relation to the third count it is conceded that there was clear evidence of acts of violence by the appellant against the complainant by the time this offence was alleged to have been committed. But it is submitted that, in the absence of any relationship between a specific act of violence and that particular act of intercourse, the inference that the appellant knew the complainant was not consenting could not be drawn. In my view this submission cannot be accepted either as a general proposition or on a consideration of the particular evidence in this case. If the jury found that the complainant as a result of the history of violence inflicted upon her was not consenting but simply submitting to the appellant's demands they can clearly infer that the accused must have known from his infliction of violence upon her that she was not consenting or at least was reckless as to whether she was consenting or not.

Apart from the history of violence, the jury was entitled to look at the circumstances in which sexual encounters generally took place between the complainant and the appellant as she described them and the factual basis of this particular offence which was not denied by the appellant. The facts were that when the appellant and the complainant were sitting on the lounge, the appellant got up, closed the blinds, pulled down his pants, exposed his penis and told her "to suck it". The jury were clearly entitled to find that this conduct was consistent at least with a state of mind of the appellant that he was reckless as to whether she was consenting or not.

Having reviewed the evidence at the trial, I am satisfied that there was ample evidence upon which the jury could reach the verdicts which it did. This ground of appeal should be rejected. This means that, in my opinion, none of the grounds of appeal against conviction have been made out and, therefore, the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

The appellant lodged a notice of abandonment on 26 May 1997 in respect of his appeal against sentence. It was received by the Supreme Court on 23 June 1997.
However, the appellant has sought to go behind that notice and an affidavit has been filed explaining how it was that the appeal against sentence was abandoned. It is unnecessary to detail the circumstances surrounding the filing of the notice of abandonment or the reasons put forward as to why the
Court should permit the appellant to go behind it. No objection was taken by the Crown to the Court considering permitting the appellant to go behind the notice, and the affidavit provides material which justifies the Court in hearing argument as to the merits of the application for leave to appeal: R v Bell [(1987) 8 NSWLR 311] at 314; 
R versus Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243] at 246.

The appeal against sentence is based principally upon the Court receiving into evidence a report by a psychologist Dr Hayes. That report is dated 6 August and was based upon an assessment of the appellant the day before the report was prepared. It is obvious that the report was made after the appellant had been sentenced by the trial judge. The report is, therefore, either fresh or new evidence and it is admissible only if proper grounds have been established: R versus Lanham [[1970] 2 NSWLR 218]; R v
Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243] at 257.
Absent sentencing error which requires the Court to resentence an appellant, this Court should, in my view, resist attempts to place before it material which was not before the sentencing judge. Simply because the legal representatives of an appellant (very often not the particular solicitor and barrister who acted for the appellant at the hearing on sentence) feel that some aspect of the personal circumstances of the appellant was not properly investigated and, therefore, not placed before the sentencing judge, or because they consider that more attention should have been given to some subjective factor than was paid to it by the legal representatives of the appellant at the sentencing hearing, it should not generally follow that a proper basis has been made out for this Court to receive such material. Those representing an accused person before the trial court have a wide discretion to conduct the defence as they see fit and this Court should not generally interfere in the exercise of that discretion: R versus Birks [(1990) 19 NSWLR ]
at 683-685. I see no reason why that principle should not apply, at least to the same extent, to sentencing proceedings as it does to the actual trial.

Generally before fresh or new evidence will be received by this Court, it must be shown that the sentencing of the appellant in the absence of that evidence resulted in a miscarriage of justice. As a general rule, where that evidence was available to the defence at the time of sentencing, a miscarriage of justice would rarely result simply from the fact that the evidence was not before the sentencing judge, even if the evidence may possibly have had an impact upon the sentence passed.

However, fresh evidence has been received by this Court where a miscarriage of justice may have occurred because there has been incompetent legal representation at the hearing before the sentencing court: R versus Abbott [(1984) 17 A Crim R 355] or where there has been negligence or carelessness in the presentation of the defence: R versus McKenna (CCA, 16 October 1992,unreported). It has been held that new evidence may be admitted where the evidence has real significance to the sentencing proceedings, and where the significance of the evidence was unknown to the appellant and the existence of that evidence was not made known to the legal representatives at the time of sentencing: R versus Goodwin [(1990) 51 A Crim R 328], cf R versus De Marco (CCA, 20 November 1995, unreported). There is also a general power in the Court to receive fresh or new evidence where the interests of justice require that course: R versus Many [(1990) 51 A Crim R .] 
It was not suggested that there was any miscarriage of the general discretion of the sentencing judge in this case, nor was any specific sentencing error identified which would require this Court to resentence the appellant. There has been no material tendered which would justify the Court receiving the psychologist's report according to the principles to which I have referred above. For reasons which have not been made clear, it appears that the solicitor now acting for the appellant on the hearing of the appeal asked Dr
Hayes to furnish the report on 3 June 1997. There is no material which would indicate why such a report was not sought at the time of the sentencing hearing. From the remarks of the sentencing judge, and a reading of the transcript of the appellant's evidence, it seems that it should have been apparent to persons representing the appellant at the trial that he had at least some minor intellectual disability which may have been worth investigating.

His Honour remarked during the course of his reasons for sentence: "The prisoner is a man of limited intellectual attainments. The impression I have is that he is not entirely unintelligent but rather more uneducated.........It was quite noticeable in his evidence before the jury that whilst he was fairly fluent in the sense that he could keep the words coming, his speech was marked by poor grammar, bad syntax, and many malapropisms.........I don't think, however, that he is a man without quite a high degree of cunning. My experience over the years has shown that a person does not have to be of high intelligence to possess a certain degree of cunning and I am satisfied that this prisoner is such a person." 
The only basis suggested for receiving the report is an assertion in the written submissions filed on behalf of the appellant that the report shows that the appellant himself suffers from "a significant intellectual disability" together with an assertion that this fact is of considerable significance given the judge's expressed view that the appellant was "a cunning and not unintelligent (but uneducated) man praying on two intellectually disabled women".

I do not see any proper basis upon which the Court should receive the report into evidence and, initially, I was of the view that the evidence should simply be rejected. However, as I have read the report, which was included in the appeal book, and as no objection was taken by the Crown to our considering its contents, it seems to me that I should deal with the matters raised in it on their merits.

The report of Dr Hayes suggests that the appellant has a disability in relation to his verbal reasoning. His communication skills were found by the doctor to be very low. Her opinion, in summary, was that the appellant in verbal tasks is in the range of mild intellectual disability, and that there is a significant difference between his ability in verbal reasoning and his ability in non-verbal reasoning. As to the latter the doctor formed the view that he was functioning in the low average to average range. No testing had been undertaken of the appellant in an attempt to determine the cause of his poor verbal skills and verbal reasoning.

There is nothing in the report which in my view either requires this Court to set aside any of the findings of the trial judge or would justify it in doing so: R versus Coombe (CCA, 24 April 1997, unreported). Although Judge Ducker may not have appreciated the full extent of the appellant's disabilities in verbal skills and verbal reasoning, I cannot see that this had any impact upon the way his Honour found the facts he did, upon the relevant sentencing principles to be applied or upon the final determination of the appropriate sentence.
There is nothing in the report to indicate that his Honour's findings that the appellant was not unintelligent or that he possessed quite a high degree of cunning were not open to him or that those findings were based on a false assumption as to the appellant's mental condition.

Nor, in my opinion, is there anything in Dr Hayes's findings and opinions to contradict the judge's assessment of the appellant as a person who "possibly as a result of his own limited education and his own modest intellectual attainments, singles out women of this type, highly vulnerable women, as the objects of his attention." In addition to the facts of the present matter, there was material before the sentencing judge that the appellant had previously been convicted of assaulting a woman with whom he was living and who was at the time suffering from cerebral palsy.

Although Dr Hayes found that the appellant suffered from a disability in his interpersonal relationships and estimated that the appellant's interpersonal relationships were at the level of eight years and eight months, this finding has to be considered in light of the facts which the jury undoubtedly found in reaching its verdicts. One fact must have been that shortly after he moved into the complainant's home, the appellant by physical assaults upon the complainant terrorised and intimidated her to such extent that he could force her to comply with his demands for sexual gratification however, and whenever, he wanted. Whatever the results of the tests administered by Dr Hayes may signify about the appellant's general social skills, the facts of the present matter do not seem to me to have anything to do with the appellant's disability in verbal skills or how that disability might impact upon his interpersonal relationships in general.

During the course of the hearing before this Court Mr Game referred to the principle of sentencing which may, in an appropriate case, require a court to place less importance upon the need for general deterrence when sentencing a person who suffers from some mental disorder or disability. This principle has been considered by this Court on a number of occasions and most recently in
R versus Wright (CCA, 28 February 1997, unreported) and R versus Channells (CCA, September 1997, unreported). In my view, the mental disability from which the appellant was suffering is not of a kind or of such significance as to attract that principle in sentencing him for these offences. Nor, as I have already indicated, did the mental disability from which he suffered have any real part to play in the commission of the offences for which he was being sentenced. Although that matter is not decisive on the question of whether the principle should be applied in a particular case, see R versus Engert, [(1995) A Crim R 67], and R versus Heather (CCA, 1 August 1995, unreported), it is not a totally irrelevant matter. Further the appellant acted in full knowledge of what he was doing and that what he was doing was wrong: see R versus Wright, above at 4-5; R versus Channells, above, at 14. In any event, there is nothing in his Honour's remarks on sentence regarding general deterrence to indicate that he gave that matter significant weight when sentencing the appellant.

Although it was stated in the written submissions that it would be submitted that the judge erred when he found no special circumstances, no such submission was made on the hearing of the appeal. In any event, I believe that the trial judge was correct in that finding and that there was no basis for him to vary the statutory ratio between the minimum and additional terms contained in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).

I propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed and that leave to appeal against sentence be refused.

REGINA versus Stephen FORDHAM 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Howie AJ, and for the reasons which he has given. I propose to add some general comments of my own. 
The circumstances in which this appeal has been argued are unfortunately not unusual, but the profession should be reminded that, where no point or objection was taken at the trial, it should not be taken for granted that this
Court will readily entertain grounds of appeal relating to the admissibility of evidence and to directions which have been or which should have been given, unless the error which has been demonstrated has led to a miscarriage of justice.[1] It is productive of both unfairness to the Crown witnesses and an unwarranted expenditure of the taxpayers' funds (particularly by the Legal Aid
Commission) when a new trial has to be ordered where an error has been made at the trial which could easily have been cured if attention had been drawn to it at that time. Counsel appearing at the trial have a duty to draw the attention of the trial judge to any such error which has occurred.[2] 
In some cases the absence of objection at the trial can be explained by the incompetence of counsel and, in the particular case, that fact may be recognised as having caused a miscarriage of justice.[3] That was not the present case, and no suggestion was made to the contrary. The fact that counsel other than that appearing at the trial - briefed to advise whether there is an appeal point available, any appeal point - may argue that the trial should have been conducted differently does not by itself demonstrate that a miscarriage of justice has occurred. This "armchair" approach to appeals[4] has proliferated over the last few years. It does little to assist in the production of just results in criminal trials or in the proper administration of the criminal justice system.

It is very rare where a trial judge has a duty to reject evidence to which objection has not been taken where the accused is represented by an apparently competent legal practitioner.[5] Often an objection is not taken by counsel for the party against whose interest it may operate for sound (and quite proper) tactical reasons or because formal proof has been waived.[6] An appellant who complains that the judge should have rejected evidence to which objection has not been taken has a heavy burden in establishing that the admission of the evidence has led to a miscarriage of justice. Similarly, unless a direction is one required under the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) or the obligation to give it is otherwise well established at common law, an appellant who complains that the judge should have given a direction when no request was made for it has too a heavy burden in establishing that its absence led to a miscarriage of justice. An accused who has been convicted under one set of issues left to a jury is not automatically entitled to have a new trial under a new set of issues which he could and should have raised at the first trial.[7] 
There is, in my respectful view, nothing in the recent decision of the High
Court in BRS versus The Queen[8] which makes it any easier for an appellant to succeed when his legal representatives have stood by at the trial and complained for the first time on appeal. That was a very special case, one which depended very much upon its own facts. The accused (a school master) was charged with homosexual intercourse with a pupil, and the judge had wrongly directed the jury that evidence of similar conduct by the accused with another pupil could not be used as corroboration of the complainant's evidence. That was an error in favour of the appellant. Nevertheless, the judge gave the jury no assistance as to how the evidence should otherwise be used, and it may well have been understood by the jury as demonstrating a propensity on the part of the appellant - or a tendency, as the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) now calls it. It had been led by the Crown only in rebuttal of the appellant's claim of good character, and it was no part of the Crown case that the evidence should be used as propensity (or tendency) evidence. The miscarriage of justice seen by the majority of justices was that the jury did not receive a specific direction - even though never sought - that the evidence could not be used for that purpose.[9] The minority justices and this Court had concluded that a proper direction as to the uses to which the evidence could and could not put would only have ensured the appellant's conviction. That decision is not authority for the proposition that a new trial will be given in every case where error has been established by the failure to give a direction which was never sought.

REGINA v. Stephen FORDHAM 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: I agree with Howie AJ. [1] [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), r 4;
Chamberlain versus The Queen <case>; [(1986) 46 ALR 493] at 501-502; De Jesus versus The Queen <case>; [(1986) 68 ALR 1] at 5, 10-11; Kural versus The Queen <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 502] at 512-513; Regina versus Abusafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR ]
at 536.
 [2] Regina versus Cameron John Knight (CCA, 18 December 1990, unreported) at ; Regina versus Abusafiah (at 536).
 [3] Regina versus Birks [(1990) 19 NSWLR 677] at 685;
Regina versus Ignjatic [(1993) 68 A Crim R 333] at -337.
 [4] Regina versus Heuston [(1995) 81 A Crim R 387] at -396.
 [5] Regina versus Visser [[1983] 3 NSWLR 240] at -242; Regina versus Heuston (at 389).
 [6] Regina versus Visser (at 242) - the word "not" in the sixteenth line of p (at letter "C") had been incorrectly inserted by the reporter, and was deleted by a corrigendum: [1984] 1 NSWLR at (ix); Regina versus Hsing [(1984) A Crim R 196] at 199-200; Regina versus Mercer [(1993) 67 A Crim R ] at 94-95; Regina versus Lars [(1994) 73 A Crim R 91] at -126; Regina versus Heuston (at 392).
 <case>; [(1997) 148 ALR 101.] [9] See now [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s101.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).
 * * * 
