

Assaf and Anor versus Skalkos and Anor No. 18374 of 1993 Defamation [1995]
NSWSC 56 (6 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMON LAW DIVISION
DAVID HUNT CJ at CL
HRNG
SYDNEY 9 August 1995 #DATE 9:8:1995 #ADD :10:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs    B R McClintock 
Solicitors for the Plaintiffs   Mallesons Stephen Jaques 
Counsel for the Defendants    J C Gibson 
Solicitors for the Defendants   Bush Burke and Company
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
DAVID HUNT CJ at CL The Plaintiffs (Joseph Assaf and Ethnic Communications
Pty Ltd) have sued the defendants (Theodore Skalkos and
Foreign Language
Publications Pty Ltd) claiming damages for defamation. The first plaintiff is the managing director of the second plaintiff, which is in turn (according to the matter complained of) a company which translates Commonwealth Government communications and sets them up in print for subsequent publication by the appropriate foreign language members of the media. The first defendant is a director of the second defendant, which in turn is the publisher of a Serbian language newspaper "Novosti".
The action is based upon two publications. The first is a letter written in English by Mr Skalkos to the Prime Minister in which the plaintiff company is identified by name. Copies of this letter are said to have been distributed widely throughout the Commonwealth Government departments, authorities and instrumentalities. Mr Assaf is not identified by name, but no doubt puts his case upon the basis that those persons who read the letter with knowledge of his position with the second plaintiff would have identified him as being responsible for the conduct ascribed to the second plaintiff. The second publication is a copy of that letter published in the "Novosti" newspaper in the Serbian language. The defendants have put identification in issue. Damages are in issue in accordance with SCR Pt 15 r 20(3).
The first plaintiff is entitled in the action to call evidence of what persons have said to him which indicate that he was so identified by them as the managing director of the plaintiff company, and also which indicate their reaction to him as a result of reading the letter or otherwise learning of its contents. The latter is relevant to the issue of damages, as going to his hurt feelings. The plaintiff company, although named in the letter, would nevertheless be entitled to call evidence as to such statements in order to show the extent of the publication of the letter (either in English or in
Serbian). The authorities establishing those propositions are collected in
Robert Jones Investments Ltd versus Australian Stock Exchange Ltd (Hunt J, 5
October 1990, unreported) at -16 (the relevant passage has been added as a
Schedule to this judgment). However, the second plaintiff, being a corporation, cannot call evidence as to its hurt feelings: RSPCA versus 2KY
Broadcasters Ltd (1988) A Def R par. 50,030 at 40,161.
It was held in the
Robert Jones Investments Case that interrogatories may be administered in a defamation action in relation to those issues, upon the ground that the defendant is entitled to know in advance the nature of the evidence which is to be given at the trial concerning those issues. Again, appropriate authorities are cited for that ruling. Insofar as the decision of
Master Hogan in Packer versus ABC (ACT
Supreme Court, 31 March 1993, unreported) suggests that the law is different, I do not (with respect) agree with that decision. I believe that the nature of this type of evidence is such that it is appropriate to be the subject of interrogatories, rather than merely of particulars: cf Conde versus 2KY Broadcasters Pty Ltd [(1982) 2 NSWLR 221] at 222.
The defendants in the present case have interrogated each of the plaintiffs purportedly for this purpose, and the plaintiffs have refused to answer the interrogatories upon the ground that they are, it said, "vexatious and oppressive". The first and second of the interrogatories seek to ascertain whether anyone has spoken to the plaintiff or behaved in a way which indicated that that person had interpreted the letter as conveying the imputations pleaded. No evidence may be given by a witness as to his or her interpretation of the matter complained of (the authorities are collected in Toomey versus John
Fairfax and Sons Ltd [(1985) 1 NSWLR 291] at 293-294); although evidence by a plaintiff of a person's reaction to him (being admissible upon the issues of identification or damages) may accidentally disclose the interpretation which that person put on the matter complained of, and the evidence is not excluded for that reason: Hughes versus Mirror Newspapers Ltd [(1985) 3 NSWLR 504] at 512.
I do not see how an interrogatory which nakedly seeks to elucidate from the plaintiffs material which cannot be led in evidence except by way of an accidental side wind could be allowed. I have been referred to Butterworths' "Court Forms, Precedents and Pleadings", Volume 2 ("Specific Titles"), precedent 260.120. The interrogatories in that precedent are in the form used in this case. With all due respect to the learned author of that section of the text book, the particular interrogatories in question are clearly inadmissible. No authority is cited for them. There is nothing in Herald and
Weekly Times Ltd versus Hawke <case>; [(1984) VR 587] to support them. They are disallowed.
Each of the third and fourth interrogatories administered by the defendants are dependent upon affirmative answers to the first and second.
Those four interrogatories related to the first of the publications.
Interrogatories -9 are in identical terms, and relate to the second of the publications. They too are disallowed. It has been unnecessary to consider whether any interrogatories of this kind are appropriately administered to a plaintiff which is a corporation, and I express no view upon that issue.
In the Robert Jones Investments Case, the specific interrogatories allowed were directed to ascertaining whether anyone had asked the plaintiff whether what had been published by the defendant was true and, if so, the details of such conversations.
A more general type of interrogatory which I would envisage being allowed, so far as a personal plaintiff is concerned, would be: whether any person has spoken to the plaintiff, or behaved towards the plaintiff, in a way which indicated to the plaintiff: that that person had read the matter complained of (or otherwise learnt of its contents), and that, as a result of having done so, that person had either - identified the plaintiff as having been referred to in the matter complained of, or thought the less of the plaintiff; and whether any such person, having so indicated to the plaintiff that that person had read the matter complained of (or otherwise learnt of its contents), had said or done anything whereby the plaintiff's feelings were otherwise injured.

Such interrogatories do require the plaintiff to interpret the behaviour of those persons, but it is the consequence of his interpretation which makes his evidence of these matters relevant in the case. The interrogatories are not, therefore, impermissible because they require him to make such an interpretation: cf Herald and Weekly Times
Ltd versus Hawke (at 590).
In each case, in the event of an affirmative answer, the plaintiff would then be required to identify the nature of the evidence to be led by reference to the date, the person involved and the substance of what was said or done.
(I have not by that formulation intended to suggest that interrogatories in those precise terms would be appropriately drafted; I leave that task of drafting to someone who is paid to perform it.)
In the result the defendants' application for an order that the plaintiffs answer the interrogatories numbered 14 and 6-9 (inclusive) is refused. As the plaintiffs never identified the basis of their objection to answering the interrogatories administered as their irrelevance (as Pt 24 r 6 requires), each party is to pay his and its own costs of this application. I grant leave to the defendants to administer fresh interrogatories.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/56.html  
