

Regina versus Ed [2006] NSWSC 1512 (5 June 2006) 
REGINA versus ED /96 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
MAHONEY ACJ: PRIESTLEY JA: SULLY J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law 
CRIMINAL LAW - applicant charged under <case> and 73 of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) - pleads guilty to six sexual offences against his daughter A and nine sexual offences against daughter B - total sentence amounted to sixteen years penal servitude of which thirteen would be served before he became eligible for parole - appeal against sentence as manifestly excessive.

Held: The overall sentence fixed by sentencing judge fell outside the discretionary range, and an effective overall sentence of thirteen years should be substituted of which ten should be served before eligibility for parole.

ORDERS 
Leave to appeal granted.
Orders below varied, so that they take effect as in following paragraphs.
Count 1 - two years fixed term of penal servitude.

Count 2 - minimum term of nine years penal servitude with an additional term of three years penal servitude.

Count 3 - four years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 4 - four years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 5 - four years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 6 - two years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 7 - four years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 8 - four years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 9 - four years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 10 - four years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 11 - two years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 12 - two years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 13 - two years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 14 - two years fixed term penal servitude.

Count 15 - two years fixed term penal servitude.
Each of the fixed term sentences of two years commences on 5 June 1996 and expires on 4 June 1998.
Each of the fixed term sentences of four years commences on 5 June 1996 and expires on 4 June 2000.
The minimum term of nine years ordered on count 2 is to commence on 5 June and expire on 4 June 2006 and the additional term of three years is to commence on 5 June 2006 and expire on 4 June 2009.
The court recommends that: a) The prisoner serve his term in gaol at the Cooma Correctional Centre, or such other suitable correctional centre as can provide for the prisoner to have continuing counselling and therapy.
 b) The prisoner serve his term in gaol in protective custody.
 c) Counselling and therapy for the prisoner continue during his period of parole.

JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY ACJ: I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of Priestley JA. I agree in general with his Honour's judgment. In view of the issues which have been raised in the application, I shall add some observations of my own. 
This application has caused me significant anxiety. The offences with which the applicant has been charged and to which he has pleaded guilty are very grave. I agree with the observation of the sentencing judge, Twigg DCJ, that the offences "are undoubtedly at the higher end of the range of penalties, falling only marginally short of the maximum penalty".

The gravity of the offences and the circumstances in which they were committed must attract severe punishment. The evidence refers in some detail to the effect, and the continuing effect, of the offences upon the women upon whom they were committed. Offences of the kind here in question are obviously apt to produce effects of this kind. This must be taken into account in assessing what is the appropriate sentences.

In addition, it is important that the court, by the sentences which it adopts, make clear that conduct of this kind will not be tolerated: it must not happen. Insofar as judgments of the court may operate to deter other potential offenders and to set the standards which the community should adopt, it is in my opinion important that the sentences sanctioned by this Court leave no room for misunderstanding in this regard. What this Court does in this case should be seen as clearly establishing that conduct of the kind in question will be the subject of severe punishment.

I have had regard to some of the observations of the applicant as recorded in the statements which were made by his wife, the mother of the two women involved. Reference was made to what happened, or was said to have happened, in the area. There should be no doubt that conduct of the kind here in question involves serious breach of the law and will attract punishment accordingly.

Having said these things, I am conscious of a feeling that the Court is required to deal with this application without a full appreciation of what occurred, without a full and complete statement of what has been involved. My saying this involves no criticism of those preparing the case. A full psychological profile of each of the parties would be necessary for the Court fully to understand what was done by the applicant and the effect of it upon the women involved and upon the applicant. Each of these would require a volume: at least, it would involve a great deal more material than is before this Court. Accordingly, I suspect that the Court cannot know the true circumstances of the matter and the effect of what has happened upon the woman concerned. The psycho-dynamics of the applicant, then and now, will never be known to the Court.

These matters are relevant in determining whether the sentences imposed by the learned trial judge are appropriate and whether this Court can and should intervene. I am satisfied that there was no error of legal principle involved in the reasons of the learned judge in sentencing the applicant. Nor was there any error of fact which would affect the appropriateness of the sentences. The judge, as was proper, was concerned with the totality of the evil committed and of the criminality of the offences for which punishment was to be assessed. The complaint of Mr Byrne SC for the applicant was, in the end, that, though no error of principle or of fact was involved, the sentences were in aggregate too long.

Mr Byrne SC pressed his submissions in a number of ways. It is not necessary to repeat the models or analogues to which he referred. If the offence had been, eg, one of inflicting physical injury resulting in the loss of an arm, sentences totalling ten years would, I think, have been not inappropriate. The
Court is entitled to know that fourteen years was until comparatively recently the time which in practice was served by a person guilty of murder. But caution must be used in comparing sentences. What is appropriate in the case of serious physical injury or of murder may not be a model for a case such as the present.

In the end, I agree with Priestley JA that the total imprisonment resulting from the sentences should be reduced. Mr Ellis, for the Crown, has informed the Court that, with one exception, the totality of the imprisonment here imposed goes beyond the range of sentences conventionally imposed for offences of the present kind. Each offence must be considered in its own context and the sentence for each offence must be determined accordingly. However, Mr
Ellis has frankly stated that (using the term in the sense which is here appropriate) the range for comparable sentences is one extending from six to ten years. Having considered the material before the Court, I accept that Mr
Ellis's statement of the position is correct. Accordingly, I accept that the totality of the imprisonment to be imposed in the present case should be reduced.

The fact that the Court reduces the total period of imprisonment should not be seen as indicating that it regards the offences as less serious than did the trial judge. The effect of prison upon any prisoner is, of course, to be taken into account: those who have not seen the inside of a prison can, I think, never know of the effect of it upon those who are within it. It is appropriate that the sentences in the present case accord, in total, with what, as the
Crown has indicated, is the conventional range.

I agree with the orders proposed by Priestley JA.
 
PRIESTLEY JA: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentence. The applicant is called D in these reasons so that the proceedings in this court will not contribute to the identification of D's victims, who were two of his daughters.

On 5 June 1996 D pleaded guilty to fifteen counts in an indictment charging him with six sexual offences against his daughter A and nine against his daughter B.

The indictment was presented in the District Court, where his Honour Judge
Twigg QC was the sentencing judge.

Extensive materials were put before the sentencing judge, without objection, giving the full history of D's sexual acts with his daughters. The fifteen counts in the indictment were representative. The material showed that D's sexual acts with his daughters began in 1982 or 1983 with B when she was eight or nine and in 1983 with A when she was ten, and continued with B until August when she was twenty and with A until June 1994 when she was twenty-one. B reported her complaints to the police on 16 February 1995. D was arrested the same day. In the material tendered to the sentencing court without objection was a document entitled FACTS FOR HEARING AT ... LOCAL COURT ON 17 FEBRUARY
It named D as the accused, said he was charged under [ss
C(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s66c.html) and [73](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s73.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), and said in the body of it, (some details are omitted to avoid identification): "FACTS: The accused resides ... 20 kilometres west of ... with his wife and son aged fourteen years. It is alleged that another daughter presently aged twenty years and who has been staying on the property during the Christmas break from her studies ... in Sydney, was repeatedly subjected to sexual intercourse by her father since about August/September, 1988 when she was aged fourteen years.
 
It is alleged that the first time sexual intercourse took place was in the main bedroom of the house on the family property. The accused was lying on the bed with his daughter and he alleges that they began to, 'fondle each other'.
That led to the accused performing sexual intercourse with his daughter.

It is alleged that sexual intercourse took place between the accused and his daughter on a regular basis up until approximately August 1944 when the accused visited his daughter at ... Sydney ... where he stayed with her overnight in her room ... It is alleged that the accused slept in the same bed as his daughter and that sexual intercourse took place. The accused has informed police during an electronically recorded interview that from his recollection, that the offences outlined above were the first and last occasions that he can recall that involved sexual intercourse with that daughter. The last incident as recalled by the accused and subject of admissions made during that recorded interview, is not presently subject of a criminal charge. It should be brought to the attention of the court, that the last incident referred to is similar to other offences admitted by the accused during that recorded interview which involve sexual intercourse performed by the accused upon his daughter whilst she was between the ages of seventeen and twenty years. Information relative to those admissions has been forwarded this date to the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions with a view to having those offences dealt with pursuant to [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s78a.html) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) /1900 where it is a requirement of law to seek sanction from the Attorney
General to prefer charges of incest.

It is important for the court to be aware that if it was at all possible, the accused would have been charged with numerous counts, at least ten at this time, of incest. The fact that such charges have not been laid is a matter of technicality and legislative procedure but there is a need to highlight the accused's admissions to performing sexual intercourse with his daughter on those ten occasions and at various locations whilst she was between the ages of seventeen and twenty years.

The second charge before the court relates to an allegation that the accused performed sexual intercourse with that daughter on the family property between February 1990 and 31 March 1990 when she was aged between sixteen years and seventeen years of age.
 
The accused was arrested at his property ... about 9 pm on Thursday 16
February 1995. The accused made admissions to his sexual involvement being intercourse with the daughter subject of the charges before the court and of sexual intercourse with another daughter and further indecent assaults upon another daughter which have occurred on a repetitive basis for a number of years, at least since 1988." 
As a general introduction to the case this statement is helpful, but its "facts" are significantly different from those on which the indictment was later based, after further enquiries were made, and after the police obtained a detailed statement from A, on 17 March 1995.

A summary of the offence charged in each count of the indictment, the maximum penalty for it, and the sentence imposed, is as follows:
May 1983: indecent assault on A, being under sixteen, to wit about ten.
Maximum penalty six years penal servitude. Sentence, two years penal servitude.
May or June 1983: carnal knowledge of A, age ten, daughter. Maximum sentence fourteen years penal servitude. Sentence nine years minimum term, three years additional term.
December 1987: sexual intercourse with A, above ten and under sixteen, to wit fifteen, and under authority of D. Maximum sentence ten years penal servitude. Sentence four years fixed term.
May 1986: as for 3, A then being fourteen. Sentence four years fixed term.
May 1986: as for 4. Sentence four years fixed term.
June 1994: indecent assault upon A. Maximum sentence five years imprisonment. Sentence two years fixed term.
August or September 1988: sexual intercourse with B, above ten and under sixteen, to wit fourteen, and under D's authority. Maximum sentence ten years penal servitude. Sentence four years fixed term.
August or September 1988: as for 7. Sentence four years fixed term.
Between 1 June 1988 and 30 July 1988: as for 7. Sentence four years fixed term.
March 1989: as for 7. Sentence four years fixed term.
January or February 1992: carnal knowledge of B, being D's daughter.
Maximum sentence seven years penal servitude. Sentence two years fixed term.
April 1992: as for 11. Sentence two years fixed term.
June/July 1992: as for 11. Sentence two years fixed term.
November 1993: as for 11. Sentence two years fixed term.
August 1994: as for 11. Sentence two years fixed term.

The sentencing judge ordered that each of the fixed term sentences of two years should commence from 5 June 1996 and expire on 4 June 1998. He ordered that each of the fixed term sentences of four years should commence from 5
June 1996 and expire on 4 June 2000. He ordered that the minimum term of nine years penal servitude fixed in regard to the second count should commence from June 2000 and expire on 4 June 2009 and that the additional term of three years should commence on 5 June 2009 and expire on 4 June 2012. D would thus become eligible for parole on 5 June 2009.

Looked at in total, therefore, D was sentenced to sixteen years penal servitude of which thirteen years would be served before he became eligible for parole. D was born in 1944. He was fifty-two at the date of sentence and would be sixty-five when he became eligible for parole.

Counsel for the applicant relied on four grounds in seeking leave to appeal against what was said to be the manifestly excessive sentence.

The first ground was that the sentence imposed in regard to the second count exceeded the maximum penalty applicable. The details of this submission were set out in the applicant's written outline of submissions. The point was answered by the written submissions for the Crown. In oral argument, counsel said that the point was a technical one, and not important in the overall scope of the application. No answer was suggested to what had been said by the
Crown in its written submissions.

In the circumstances, I need do no more than say that the point relied on was dealt with by this court in R versus Davies (CCA, unreported, 25 May 1995) adversely to the applicant. Davies deals with the precise point raised in the present case, and is direct authority for the view that the applicable maximum penalty for the offence charged in the second count, at the time the offence was committed upon a girl of ten years of age, was fourteen years penal servitude, and remained so at the date of sentencing.

The first point fails.

The fourth point was that the sentencing judge erred in failing to find "special circumstances" under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/).

In regard to this Twigg DCJ had said that in view of the length of the sentence he was imposing one third additional term on parole in regard to the sentence on the second count would enable time for continuing counselling and that because of that he did not think there were special circumstances justifying a variation of the additional term beyond one third. The suggested reason for varying the one third term upwards had been the rehabilitation of
D. Twigg DCJ said he thought that could take place during the relatively long period that he proposed for the overall sentence.

In the circumstances of the case, I see no error in this decision of the sentencing judge.

The second and third points relied on for the applicant were that the sentencing judge had erred in accumulating the sentence on the second count and that the overall sentence was manifestly excessive.

In the course of argument counsel both for the applicant and for the Crown observed that these two points really involved the one question, what, after considering all the counts was an appropriate sentence for the total criminality involved in the offences to which D pleaded guilty. This was the basis on which the sentencing judge had approached the matter. He had said "I must evaluate the overall criminality, yet impose sentences on all the offences, recognising their respective criminality". This was the question which became the focus of the proceedings in this court, and about which both counsel made their chief submissions.

In reaching his conclusions on sentence, Twigg DCJ considered all the factors relevant in the circumstances. He summarised the offences, with particular reference to some of their more abhorrent features. He mentioned that the offences against the two daughters were going on during the same periods, although neither daughter knew what was happening with the other and all the activities were concealed from the rest of the family. In February 1995 first
B told a younger sister and then her mother of the history, and shortly afterwards A made her parallel disclosures. Once D knew that his family had become aware of what he had been doing he began to seek counselling. He was arrested on 16 February 1995 and in a first interview with police who put to him the allegations made by B, he substantially confessed. When later in another interview the allegations made by A were put to him, he, apparently on legal advice, did not make any comment in answer to questions by the police.

D always denied that he had used any violence against either daughter. He gave evidence to this effect at the sentencing hearing. Particularly in the statement of A which was before the sentencing judge without objection, considerable detail was given of violence at the time of some of the offences against A. It was submitted for the applicant that the judge did not resolve the conflict of evidence that thus arose, and yet sentenced on the basis of the truthfulness of the evidence against D. I think however that Twigg DCJ did deal with any conflict of evidence. At one point he said that he rejected D's suggestion that he did not use any violence on his daughters in any way verbally or physically, and at others he seems to me to have made it plain that he rejected D when he was in conflict with other evidence.

Twigg DCJ accepted the evidence before him of the continuing effect upon the two daughters of what their father did to them. He noted that their physical well being had been affected, their thoughts ranged from suicide to devastation and depression and they had psychological wounds that would take years to heal if they healed satisfactorily at all.

Twigg DCJ also recorded a number of matters concerning D himself. The revelation to D's wife of what he had done to their daughters led quickly to the end of their marriage. In the settlement that followed D lost what interest he had had in the property on which he and his family had lived. He lost the respect of all his family with the possible exception of his son.

Twigg DCJ was satisfied of D's remorse. He had saved his family the distress of giving evidence. He had pleaded guilty. He had become a willing participant in therapy. The sentencing judge accepted there were good prospects for D's ultimate rehabilitation and that the likelihood of further offending was reasonably low.

In the course of his reasons Twigg DCJ referred to the wide range of penalties fixed for the different offences with which D was charged. He said this wide range demonstrated both the horror with which the community regards crimes of the type committed by D and also the wide discretion reposed in a sentencing judge. He later referred to some sentences in similar cases, saying that from them there emerged a bewildering list of penalties regarded by different judges as appropriate.

The sentencing judge clearly took considerable pains to deal with his sentencing task in an appropriate and proper way. However, having considered all the materials in the case as carefully as I can, my conclusion is that the sentence imposed was greater than what was appropriate by a margin which in my opinion calls for this court to intervene. There is no single factor which of itself brings me to this conclusion, but several considerations operating together.

First, Twigg DCJ recognised what he himself described as "the importance of confining attention to the offences, which are the subject of the plea of guilty". Earlier he had referred to other offences mentioned in the various materials before him which he acknowledged were "not the subject of charges and penalty of the prisoner ..." but were "nonetheless, matters of history to be taken into account".

These remarks are indicative of the accepted approach when courts are imposing sentence in respect of "representative" charges to which pleas of guilty have been entered. That approach is that the overall history of the conduct from which the representative charges have been selected may be looked at for purposes of understanding the relationships between the parties, to exclude any suggestion that the offences charged were of an isolated nature and as bearing upon the degree of any leniency the court might be considering in regard to sentencing. The history should not be used as the basis for sentencing the convicted person for charges other than those in the indictment or as matter of aggravation of those charges.

In the sentencing judge's remarks on sentence in the present case there are indications that he was influenced in arriving at his overall sentence by the history of D's long series of sexual offences against his daughters in a way going beyond the permissible use of the history. For example in the statement of facts which had been presented to the Local Court in February 1995, which was also before him, there was reference to "indecent assaults" upon a third daughter. In his summary of the history, the sentencing judge mentioned this third daughter and that a statement by her, also in evidence, referred to a possible sexual offence against her by D. Simply taken in isolation, the judge's reference to this matter would not warrant any remark. However, it is one example of a number of references of a similar kind which, taken together with the matter to be mentioned next, have led me to conclude that the sentencing judge was in fact influenced by the very lengthy history of very numerous offences by D in fixing the overall term he eventually arrived at.
The particular matter which clinches this view, to my mind, is the summary the judge gave of D's conduct towards A. That conduct was the subject of the first six counts, two relating to 1983, two to 1986 one to 1987 and one to 1994. The sentencing judge after referring to the first of the 1983 offences said: "Thereafter, A was subjected to repeated acts of sexual intercourse until she was 18 years of age. The prisoner, at every opportunity availed himself of the chance to have sexual intercourse with A in the paddock, in the front seat of his truck, and in bed. Not content with sexual intercourse, the prisoner performed various acts of cunnilingus on A despite his daughter's protests of abhorrence, and all these invasions of her sexual privacy." 
The sentencing judge's revulsion at this continuing course of conduct is fully understandable, but it seems to some extent at least to have distracted him from the necessity of sentencing D only upon the charges to which he pleaded guilty.

Another matter which appears to have had some influence on the sentencing judge is the last of the offences charged against D in respect of A, count 6, relating to 1994, very shortly before A's marriage. The charge was of indecent assault. The circumstances in evidence may well justify the suspicion that if
D had not been interrupted in the course of this incident, he was fully intending to have sexual intercourse with A; but the evidence does not support the conclusion that sexual intercourse took place, this situation being recognised by the form of the charge itself. However, at a significant point in his reasons the sentencing judge referred to this occasion as being one when D "forced sexual intercourse" on A. Against the background of the fifteen charges to which D pleaded guilty, this slip on the part of the judge would of itself be of little significance. Taken however with the other factors I am dealing with, I think it should be mentioned.

The third matter is that in light of my own experience of cases of this kind, which I must state is only intermittent, the overall sentence seems to be high, although were it not for the next matter to be mentioned I would not have thought that, by itself, it was so high as to be in the manifestly excessive class.

The final factor however has given me some further insight into sentencing in this area. The Crown presented the court with a schedule, not available to the sentencing judge, listing forty-four cases of offences by fathers and stepfathers against daughters or stepdaughters dealt with by this court from July 1991 to 18 June 1996. Although it is not possible to make any direct comparisons between any one of the cases in the schedule and the present case, and although I think it is quite inadmissible to consider the question whether the sentence in the present case was manifestly excessive by a simple comparison of a few selected facts (which is all the schedule contains) from one or more of the cases, with the facts of the present case, I have no doubt that even the scanty material in the schedule is very helpful in showing the overall trend of this court's approach to the range of appropriate sentencing in the present kind of case. The trend and the range are at a somewhat lower level than that arrived at by the sentencing judge in the present case. Many of the cases involve continuing abuse over periods comparable to those in the present case and also involving more than one victim. All the cases except one resulted in significantly lower sentences than that in the present case. The exception was R versus H (CCA, 24 October 1994, unreported). That case involved a father, a daughter and a stepdaughter, offences over a fifteen year period and sadistic and other violent and degrading behaviour. Bad as the present case is, by all ordinary standards the case of H was very significantly worse.

What emerged from the schedule tendered by the Crown, which the court was informed contained all the cases of a comparable kind that the Crown had been able to locate, was sufficiently clear as to trend and range as to lead Crown counsel to say to the court that the Crown felt bound to acknowledge that the usual range for offences of the general kind in the present case was six to nine years. (He was referring to periods prior to eligibility for release.) I do not think this court should take such a range as being of any prescriptive force. The overall sentence is a primary consideration. Particular circumstances may well result in courts arriving at sentences outside the range drawn to our attention by the Crown, both below its lower end and above its upper end. Its use is as a guide only. In the present case however, bad as all its detail shows it to be, the sentencing judge does not appear to have had any particular matters, relating to the charges to which D pleaded guilty, in mind as requiring an overall sentence so far outside the usual pattern as the one he decided on.

The various matters I have mentioned lead me to the conclusion that the overall sentence fixed by the sentencing judge fell outside the discretionary range appropriate in the circumstances. I therefore propose that leave to appeal against the sentence be granted.

On this footing it becomes necessary then for this court to resentence D.

Although I have indicated reasons for my thinking that Twigg DCJ erred in arriving at the total sentence he imposed, I agree generally, except in the areas to which those reasons are directed, with his approach and comments on sentence. Because of this I see no need to repeat what is set out in his reasons. I agree with him, that on the material before him concerning the effect upon the daughters of D's conduct towards them was to cause in them "an overpowering sense of shame, guilt and powerlessness". I also agree that the evidence showed that special relationships developed between D and each of the daughters (which in my view can only have had a sadly distorting effect on their normal development, for an indefinite time) and that the offences were "undoubtedly at the higher end of the range of penalties".

Taking into account the factors considered by the sentencing judge as set out in his reasons, and attempting to confine the sentencing of D to the offences to which he pleaded guilty, my conclusion is that his total criminality, judged by reference to those offences, was so serious as to warrant the sentences actually imposed by Twigg DCJ in regard to each separate charge, and, as to the criminality in total, to require an effective overall sentence of thirteen years structured so that it will be ten years before he becomes eligible for parole. This is a little above the top of the range shown to us by the Crown, but (i) essentially in line with it, and (ii) warranted by the facts of the case.

The appropriate result will be achieved by leaving each separate sentence as pronounced by the sentencing judge, with the exception that in relation to the second count the minimum term of nine years penal servitude imposed by the sentencing judge to commence from 5 June 2000 and expire on 4 June 2009 should be varied to commence from 5 June 1997 and expire on 4 June 2006 and the additional term of three years pronounced by the sentencing judge should be varied to commence on 5 June 2006, to expire on 4 June 2009. D will be eligible for parole on this proposal on 5 June 2006.

Like the sentencing judge I do not think there are special circumstances justifying a variation of the additional term, for the reasons given by him.

I therefore propose the orders indicated above should be made.

I also propose that this court should recommend, as the sentencing judge did, that: ) The prisoner serve his term in gaol at the Cooma Correctional Centre, or such other suitable correctional centre as can provide for the prisoner to have continuing counselling and therapy.
 ) The prisoner serve his term in gaol in protective custody.
 ) Counselling and therapy for the prisoner continue during his period of parole.
 
SULLY J: I agree with Priestley JA.
 * * * 
