

Regina versus Boian; Regina versus Carter Matter Nos Cca 60246/97; Cca 60247/97 [1997] NSWSC 471 (10 October 1997) 
Regina versus Dan Antonio Boian /97 
Regina versus Rhonda Mary Carter /97 October 1997 
Smart J, Grove J, Studdert J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown Appeal against Sentence - District Court (Davidson QC DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 60246/97; 60247/97 
DELIVERED: Friday 10 October 1997 
HEARING DATE: 29 August 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Dan Antonio BOIAN 
REGINA versus Rhonda Mary CARTER 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART J, GROVE J, STUDDERT J 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: L Lasry QC (Department of Public Prosecutions) 
Respondents: T Hughes QC; F Carnovale (Boian) 
J Conomos (Carter) 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: B Hayward and Co (Boian) 
Baker and Edmunds (Carter) 
Respondents: Solicitor for Commonwealth Public Prosecutions 
CATCHWORDS: Fraud against Commonwealth (Department of Community Services and Health)- Nursing home proprietor- "Ghosting"- Falsification of Records-Objective seriousness of fraud- General deterrence.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Boian- Crown Appeal allowed 
Carter- Crown Appeal dismissed 
NO. OF PAGES: 22 
REGINA versus Dan Antonio BOIAN 
REGINA versus Rhonda Mary CARTER 
B, the proprietor, via a number of companies, of several nursing homes for the frail aged, was convicted of 13 counts and pleaded guilty to 5 counts of defrauding the Commonwealth under s. 29D of the Crimes Act (Cth). He was convicted of 9 counts of making false statements to obtain a benefit under s. 62(1)(f) of the National Health Act. He had made false claims for the nursing and personal care staff costs of the 5 homes between 1987 and 1991. The fraud was elaborate and involved "ghosting" whereby claims were made for work done by people who were not employed. Claims were also made for nursing and personal care by family members when such care was not given. Fraudulent bundy cards hindered the Department in uncovering the fraud. It was also falsely claimed that general staff, including building workers, had rendered nursing and personal care work which alone attracts Commonwealth funding. The total amount of the frauds was in excess of $1.7 million and was applied for the benefit of B and his family. Prior to sentencing, all of the money wrongly obtained had been repaid. 
B was sentenced to a total of 6 years with eligibility for parole after 3 1/2 years.

C, an experienced and competent secretary, who had been a close friend of B for many years, became his office manager in 1987. In that position C administered the financial affairs of the nursing home and under B's directions controlled the falsified documentary material. Despite being knowingly involved in the fraud, she received no extra financial benefit beyond her salary as office manager. The psychiatric evidence was that C was a shy, vulnerable and dependant lady with an unhappy personal history. She "worshipped" B and worked long hours for him without extra pay. C pleaded guilty, was in poor health and provided impressive references at the sentence hearing.

C was sentenced to 2 years imprisonment with an order that she be released on recognizance after serving six months.

HELD: 
Boian: 
Nursing home proprietors are in a special position in having nursing and personal care expenses for residents met by the Commonwealth which depends heavily upon them acting honestly and truthfully and only making valid claims.
The Commonwealth cannot be expected to supervise every nursing home in detail.
These frauds are difficult and costly to detect. It is critical that the limited community resources be used to care for the frail aged and not for the benefit of nursing home proprietors and their shareholders. These resources should not have to be diverted to meet the costs of lengthy administrative action and supervision to ensure proprietors are acting honestly or to meet the costs of investigation into what has happened. The frail aged are often in no position to make effective complaints and are very vulnerable. These are amongst the most serious frauds. Nursing home proprietors and operators can expect to receive stern punishment for such frauds.

The repayment of the fraudulently obtained money by Boian prior to sentencing does not affect the criminality of the offences, however, it is an important consideration and bears upon the length of the sentences which should be imposed. This is so despite the fact that the Commonwealth could have recouped the money by making deductions from future payments.

Notwithstanding the subjective features applicable to Boian and the facts favourable to him, the sentences are manifestly inadequate. They do not allow for the objective gravity of the offences.

Orders:
Crown appeal against sentence allowed.
Sentence imposed quashed. In lieu thereof, Boian is sentenced to a total of 8 years imprisonment, comprising: 
On each of counts 1, 2, 6, 8, 12, 13, 15, and 19 of the jury Indictment, concurrent terms of imprisonment of 3 years and 9 months to start on 3 March and end on 2 December 2000.

On each of counts of 4, 10, 14, 17 and 21 of the jury Indictment and counts 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the later indictment to which he pleaded guilty, concurrent terms of imprisonment of 4 years and 3 months to be cumulative on the sentences of 3 years and 9 months and to start on 2 December 2000 and end on 1 March 2005.
A non parole period of 4 years and 6 months is set, to start on 3 March , with Boian being eligible for parole on 2 September 2001.
Appeal against concurrent sentences imposed for the offences under s62(1)(f) of the National Health Act dismissed.

Carter: 
Having regard to her subsidiary position, her being under the influence of
Boian, her not receiving any benefit, her submissive personality, her health and her previous good character, intervention was not warranted although the sentence was lenient. The sentence imposed sufficiently emphasised the aspect of general deterrence.

Order: 
Crown appeal against sentence dismissed.

LAW REFORM: 
These proceedings have revealed a defect in the Legislation in that there was no capacity on the part of the Commonwealth to recover interest on moneys incorrectly claimed and paid to nursing homes. This allows nursing homes to have the free use of moneys wrongly obtained. This requires attention.

REGINA versus Dan Antonio BOIAN 
EXPLANATION 
Mr Dan Antonio Boian, this Court has decided that increased terms of imprisonment are necessary in your case and that no other sentences are appropriate.

The Court has decided that there is a minimum period which you must serve in gaol, namely, 4 years and 6 months, commencing on 3 March 1997. That is called a non parole period.

At the expiration of 4 years and 6 months, that is 2 September 2001 you will be eligible for release on parole. If you are then admitted to parole you will serve the balance of the sentence in the community on parole. Provided you comply with the conditions of your parole you will not be required to return to prison during that period.

If an order is made allowing you to serve the balance of your sentence on parole, that order will be subject to certain conditions. The parole order may be amended or revoked if you do not follow the conditions when you are released on parole. In particular, it would be revoked if you were convicted of further serious crime. If the parole order is revoked then you are at risk of being returned to gaol.

Put simply, if you behave well in prison you will be released on 2 September
On your release you will continue to serve the balance of your sentence.
If you behave well while on parole and comply with the conditions of parole you will not be required to go back to gaol and the head sentence will expire on 1 March 2005.

A copy of the Court's reasons for judgment and this explanation will be given to you.

REGINA versus Dan Antonio BOIAN 
REGINA versus Rhonda Mary CARTER 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: The Director of Public Prosecutions has appealed against sentences imposed on Dan Antonio Boian and Rhonda Mary Carter on the ground that they are inadequate. Boian did not pursue his cross appeal against sentence. 
Boian 
Boian was sentenced in all to imprisonment for 6 years and was eligible for parole after 1/2 years.

After a lengthy trial Boian was convicted by a jury of 13 counts of defrauding the Commonwealth (Department of Community Services and Health) by making false claims for nursing and personal care staff costs in relation to some 5 nursing homes for the frail aged. These counts covered the period 1 July 1987- 30 June and were laid under s 29D of the Crimes Act (Cth). He was also convicted of 9 counts under s (1)(f) of the National Health Act of making a statement in writing, by certifying a document presented to the Department of Community Services and
Health being a reconciliation of nursing and personal care staff costs and other cost reimbursed expenditure in respect of a nursing home which was false in a material particular and was capable of being used in support of a claim for a Commonwealth benefit.

After conviction and on sentence Boian pleaded guilty and was convicted of a further 5 counts of defrauding the Commonwealth by making false claims for nursing and personal care staff. The period covered was from 1 July 1990 to 30
September 1991 and there was one count in respect of each of the 5 nursing homes, namely, Hillcrest Nursing Home, Oatley, Russell Lea Nursing Home, Five
Dock, Lansdowne Nursing Home, Cabramatta, Parramatta Nursing Home and Bamfield
Nursing Home, Bankstown.

Each of the <case> offences carries a maximum term of imprisonment of 10 years and each of the <case>(f) offences carries a maximum of 5 years. The five nursing homes were operated through a group of companies known as the Boian family group. The judge found, upon ample materials, that Boian had a beneficial interest in each of the nursing homes either directly or through another company. Boian was a director of the companies which operated 4 of the nursing homes as well as of the companies which owned the land on which the nursing homes stood. The Lansdowne Nursing Home was operated by Rondah Pty Ltd in which Rhonda Carter was a director and shareholder and Boian was the company secretary. One of the Boian family companies held shares in Rondah Pty
Ltd.

The judge found that Boian had an effective beneficial interest in each of the nursing homes either by virtue of the shares he held in the companies which ran the homes (or owned the land) or by virtue of shares which he held in companies which had shares in the operating or landholding companies.

As a result of the false claims the Commonwealth paid a sum slightly in excess of $1.7 million to the proprietors and operators of the 5 nursing homes. The ultimate beneficiaries of these false claims were Boian and his family although the moneys were paid to the nursing homes.

The Australian community has long accepted that the frail aged need substantial support particularly in their closing years. That support, which is costly, is provided through the Commonwealth Aged Care Programme. The
Commonwealth reimburses a large amount of the cost of nursing and personal care in nursing homes. A significant element of these costs is the moneys paid to permanent and casual staff who provide that care.

Residents in an approved nursing home are classified into specified levels of care categories and, depending on the category, attract staff hours for nursing and personal care which is fully funded by the Commonwealth.

Each month the Commonwealth makes a payment to the nursing home upon receipt of an NH3 form detailing the patient numbers and categories for the month. At the end of each financial year a "Reconciliation of Nursing and Personal Care
Staff Cost" form (NH20) must be submitted by each nursing home proprietor to the Commonwealth. Total figures for staff expenditure for nursing and personal care must be provided. The Health Department uses the form to reconcile the actual expenditure by the nursing home for nursing and personal care staff with the benefit paid monthly to the nursing home throughout the financial year. On the basis of the information provided, the monthly sums paid for the ensuing financial year may be varied.

Nursing home proprietors were not entitled, for example, to claim for the costs of employees who worked in or for the nursing home but were not nursing and personal care staff. For example, nursing home proprietors could not claim for clerical, kitchen or cleaning staff.

The offences involved a sophisticated scheme of lying to the Commonwealth about the amount of money which Boian's nursing homes had spent on nursing and personal care of the residents. I shall touch on some aspects of the fraud.
 "Ghosting" was used, that is persons who had never been employed (and some of whom may have been non existent) were claimed to have worked at the nursing homes and to have been paid salaries. The names of "ghost employees" were entered in the payroll records, employment records were made up for them and cheques were written in payment of "wages".

Members of the Boian family including Boian, were falsely claimed to have been engaged in nursing or personal care at various nursing homes in the group.
These claims included Boian's wife, children and mother. False claims for his family comprised a substantial part of the moneys fraudulently obtained.

False claims were made about the work which some actual employees did. Several workmen who performed building work for Boian at the nursing homes were claimed as nursing staff. Some employees engaged in domestic duties were falsely claimed in some instances as having been involved in nursing and personal care of patients. There were some persons employed in office and clerical duties and in Boian's pharmacy in respect of whom, in some instances, it was falsely claimed that they had rendered nursing or personal care to residents of nursing homes. Much of the clerical work was done in an office attached to the Beverley Hills Pharmacy of Boian. There were also false claims for pharmaceutical items.

As there were a large number of employees at the nursing homes, the work which each did had to be given a classification. The employment records were computerised with the employees' names and the classification being entered in the computer records. The most common classification was "AIN" (Assistant in
Nursing). The wages paid to an AIN are a nursing and personal care expense.

When Department officers (Validators) sought to determine the accuracy of amounts claimed as nursing and personal care expenses fraudulent bundy cards were prepared. Unlike the genuine bundy cards the fraudulent ones had a red tinge in the stamping where the hours were printed onto the card. The false bundy cards were designed to make it appear that the computerised wages records were accurate.

The "ghosts" were paid not less than $117,615. The cheques for the ghosts were either cashed, there being an endorsement to pay cash by either Boian or
Carter, or deposited to the credit of the Boian night chemist account. The members of the Boian family received not less than $632,913. About $607,157 represented payments made by the Commonwealth for people who worked for the
Boian group but did not render nursing and personal care. No Commonwealth benefit was payable in respect of them. These figures relate to the 13 counts of which Boian was convicted. Similar figures were not given in respect of the further five counts to which Boian pleaded guilty for the later period of 1
July 1990 - 30 September 1991.

This short narration of the facts reveals that frauds of a grave nature were committed over an extended period and involved large sums of money. At the trial Boian claimed that he was not aware of the frauds committed and suggested that Ms Carter and others were responsible. This was rejected by the jury.

There were lengthy committal proceedings, each of the 45 witnesses being required by Boian to give evidence orally. Boian is not to be criticised for this.

After the conclusion of the committal proceedings when the strength of the
Crown case must have been apparent, Boian entered into negotiations with the
Department and paid the Commonwealth $1,063,737 on 13 November 1995 and $44,528 on 16 November 1995. By the time of the sentencing hearing all the moneys wrongly obtained had been repaid. This does not affect the criminality involved in the making of the fraudulent claims. However, it is an important factor that all the money has been recovered and bears upon the length of the sentences which should be imposed.

The Crown contended that too much weight should not be given to this factor as the Commonwealth had the capacity to recover the moneys wrongly received by making deductions from future payments. The Commonwealth usually took this course rather than closing down nursing homes and thereby upsetting the residents. While I have noted that the Commonwealth has this alternative method of obtaining payment, it does not detract from the important consideration that a large amount was repaid in late 1995 and that all moneys had been repaid prior to the sentencing hearing.

These proceedings have exposed a serious flaw in the legislation. The Crown advised that there is no provision for the payment of interest from the date of the wrongful payment to the date of repayment. In the present case that means there was no entitlement to or payment of interest for periods ranging from 4 years to 7 years while the defrauding nursing home proprietor had the use of moneys wrongfully obtained from the Commonwealth. It is to be hoped that this flaw has been or will be rectified by amending legislation. I proceed on the basis that Boian has fully repaid the moneys wrongfully obtained and is given credit for so doing.

The judge took into account, by way of mitigation, the plea of guilty to 5 counts of defrauding the Commonwealth during the period 1 July 1990 to 30
September 1991, that Boian was previously a man of good character, that he was aged 54 and suffered from hypertension, major anxiety, depression and iron deficiency anaemia. Boian's doctor considered Boian to be a high risk of
Ischaemic heart disease and heart attack. The hypertension and the anxiety/depression may have been contributed to, in part, by the proceedings.

The judge also took into account that it was unlikely that Boian would ever be permitted to practice as a pharmacist again and that it was clear that he would never be permitted to operate a nursing home again. Consequently, upon release, Boian will have to establish himself in other fields. Boian came to
Australia in 1960 and in 1963/4 began the pharmacy course at Sydney
University. He had worked hard and successfully built up a major pharmacy and nursing home business. He is a man of considerable capacity.

The judge accepted that the Commonwealth scheme depended on the honesty and integrity of nursing home proprietors and the accuracy of the information which they supplied to the Commonwealth. He found that Boian's conduct involved serious and consistent breaches of trust over 4 years, that there had been detailed planning in falsifying the records and that staff had been co- opted to carry out the falsifications. The judge felt that a substantial period of imprisonment was called for to reflect the seriousness of Boian's criminality.

The judge stated expressly that he had had regard to all relevant matters as required under <case> of the Crimes Act (Cth) and to <case>. The judge stated that because of the long period of time which had elapsed from the commission of the first offence to the last offence cumulative sentences should be imposed in respect of the fraud offences under <case> of the Crimes Act. The judge accepted the Crown submission that the sentences for the offences under s 62(1)(f) of the National Health Act should be concurrent. On counts 1, 2, , 8, 12, 13, 15 and 19 of the Indictment which were the subject of the jury's verdict and related to defrauding the Commonwealth by false claims for nursing and personal care staff costs during the period 1 July 1987 to 30 June 1989
Boian was sentenced to 2 1/2 years imprisonment on each count to be served concurrently.

In respect of counts 4, 10, 14, 17 and 21 of the Indictment which was the subject of the jury's verdict and related to defrauding the Commonwealth by making false claims for nursing and personal care staff costs for the period 1
July 1989 to 30 June 1990 and the 5 counts to which Boian pleaded guilty and which related to the period 1 July 1990 to 30 September 1991 Boian was sentenced to 3 1/2 years imprisonment on each count to be served concurrently with each other but cumulatively on the sentence of 2 1/2 years imprisonment.

On each of the charges under <case>(f) of the National Health Act being counts 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 16, 18, 20, and 22 in the Indictment the subject of the jury's verdict, Boian was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment on each count, each to be served concurrently with each other and the sentence of 2 1/2 years imprisonment. The non parole period was 3 1/2 years.

The Crown contended that the sentences imposed did not reflect the objective gravity of the offences. Further, the judge did not mention general deterrence in his reasons and yet this is an important element in a sentence for offences of the kind in question. The Crown contended that the judge had not taken general deterrence into account. It was not a matter which a judge could fail to mention when sentencing for these offences. Alternatively, the judge had failed to give sufficient weight to general deterrence.

I am not persuaded that the judge failed to take general deterrence into account. However, it does not appear to have been a consideration to which he gave prominence or great weight. It is an important consideration in the present case.

Counsel for the parties, despite extensive searches, were not able to refer the Court to a broadly comparable case. My own researches have not found such a case.

Over the last ten years a considerable number of cases have come before this court involving financial frauds and breaches of trust. Some have related to defalcations by employees of varying degrees of seniority. Some of these cases were discussed in Pantano v. The Queen [(1990) 49 A Crim R 328.]
The circumstances may vary greatly.

This Court has also had to consider a number of social security frauds where benefits have been obtained over a number of years. Sometimes there has been no element or a small element of need and the fraud has been driven by greed.
Stern sentences have been imposed. See for example, R v. Sopher, CCA,
Unreported, 17 December 1993.

This Court exercises restraint in considering a Crown appeal against sentence.
The sentence must be manifestly inadequate and quite outside the permissible range before the Court will intervene. The Court does not interfere where the sentence is just a little lower than that which this Court considers permissible. The Court attaches importance to the Crown appeal placing a prisoner in jeopardy again. Finality is important.

The Commonwealth depends heavily upon nursing proprietors acting honestly and truthfully and only making claims which are valid. Nursing home proprietors are in a special position in having nursing and personal care expenses for residents met by the Commonwealth. It is the nursing home proprietors who know or can inform themselves of what work was done and what nursing and personal care was rendered to the frail aged. They know what claims can be made honestly. These offences are difficult and costly to detect. The moneys paid to nursing home operators are substantial. The Commonwealth cannot be expected to supervise every nursing home in detail and the care which is being rendered.

It is important that all the money set aside by the Commonwealth for the frail aged be used for the nursing and personal care of residents and not for the benefit of nursing home proprietors or their shareholders. Such money is not to be diverted. It is critical that the community resources should not have to be utilised to meet the costs of lengthy and detailed administrative action and supervision to ensure that nursing home proprietors are acting honestly or to meet the costs of investigations into what has happened. The frail aged are often in no position to make effective complaints that they are not receiving the nursing care and personal attention for which the Commonwealth has paid.

The limited resources must be used to provide the frail aged with the nursing and personal care which they need. They are a very vulnerable group. These are amongst the most serious frauds in the community.

Notwithstanding the subjective features applicable to Boian and the facts which are favourable to him, the sentences are manifestly inadequate. They do not allow for the objective gravity of the offences. The facts reveal exceedingly bad frauds. They continued for 4 years and covered five nursing homes. A large sum of money ($1.7 million) was involved. The frauds were implemented in a sophisticated way and generally with cunning. When the
Department officers commenced investigation false bundy cards were created.
Staff were used in creating false records and false claims. The sentences must incorporate and be seen to incorporate the element of general deterrence.
"Ghosting", claiming for family members who did not do the work claimed and the false claims for nursing and personal care when the work done was of a different kind are exceedingly serious.

There are no sound reasons why the court should not proceed to re-sentence
Boian in the exercise of its discretion. This is not a case where it would be appropriate for the Court to dismiss the appeal in the exercise of its discretion.

The extent of the frauds and the lengthy period over which they were committed leads to the imposition of cumulative sentences. It was appropriate to separate the offences into 2 groups, namely, those committed during the period July 1987 to 30 June 1989 and those committed during the period 1 July -30 September 1991.

I have taken into consideration all the relevant matters as required under s
A of the Crimes Act and the terms of <case> of that Act and its operation in this case.

In the circumstances of the present case the permissible range of sentences for the offences of defrauding the Commonwealth during the period 1 July 1987 - 30 June 1989 is 4 to 5 years and that for the offences of defrauding the
Commonwealth during the period 1 July 1989 to 30 September 1991 is 4 1/2 to 6 years. These ranges allow for the principle of totality and the absence of remissions in New South Wales.

As this is a Crown appeal and double jeopardy is an important factor the Court exercises restraint and does not impose the sentence which would otherwise be determined. While it is correct to increase the sentences because of their manifest inadequacy they should not be increased to the level which would have been appropriate if Boian was being sentenced for the first time.

Applying the principle of totality, Boian should be sentenced to concurrent terms of imprisonment of 3 years 9 months on each of counts 1, 2, 6, 8, 12, , 15 and 19 of the jury Indictment to start as from 3 March 1997 and to concurrent terms of imprisonment of 4 years 3 months on each of counts 4, 10, , 17 and 21 of that Indictment and counts 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the later
Indictment to which he pleaded guilty, to be cumulative on the sentences of 3 years 9 months and to start on 2 December 2000 and end on 1 March 2005. That is a total of 8 years imprisonment.

I would not interfere with the concurrent sentences imposed for the offences under <case>(f) of the National Health Act.

I propose a non parole period of 4 years 6 months to start on 3 March 1997.
This would render Boian eligible for release on parole on 2 September 2001.

This court regards nursing home frauds as particularly serious. Nursing home proprietors and operators can expect to receive stern punishment for such frauds. This is the first reported large scale fraud. Future large scale frauds will not be dealt with so leniently.

Carter 
She was sentenced to imprisonment for 2 years but the judge ordered that she be released on recognizance after having served 6 months imprisonment.

Carter pleaded guilty in November 1996 to 5 counts (1-5) of defrauding the
Commonwealth by making false claims for nursing and personal care staff costs between 1 July 1987 and 30 September 1991 in 4 cases (Hillcrest, Russell Lea,
Lansdowne and Bamfield nursing homes) and between 1 August 1988 and 30
September 1991 in the case of Parramatta Nursing Home (s 29D of the Crimes
Act (Cth)). She pleaded guilty to 3 counts (6-8) under <case>(f) of the
National Health Act of making a statement in writing by presenting a document to the Department of Community Services and Health containing information which was false in a material particular in connection with a claim for a Commonwealth benefit.

Carter was the office manger for Boian and ran the office subject to his directions. I will not repeat the facts earlier narrated as to Boian, the operation of the nursing homes and the fraudulent claims.

Carter had known Boian and his family since 1972. They were close friends and he had helped her. Their friendship was platonic. She was an experienced and competent legal secretary noted for her dedication to her work, her devotion to her employer and her stable and good work history. In about 1987, Boian persuaded Carter to come and work for him.

The judge found that Carter was the secretary between 27 June 1988 and 8
November 1996 of Luvetti Pty Ltd which operated Hillcrest and Russell Lea
Nursing Homes. Between 4 March 1988 and 8 November 1996 she was the secretary of Boian Geriatric Services Pty Ltd which operated the Parramatta Nursing
Home. Between 15 April 1988 and 8 November 1996 she was the secretary of Boian
Holdings Pty Ltd which operated the Bamfield Nursing Home.

From September 1983 until 29 March 1994 Carter was one of two shareholders of
Rondah Pty Ltd which operated Lansdowne. Carter was also a director of that company from September 1983 to November 1996. She was the signatory to the
NH20 forms sent to the Department in support of claims for nursing and personal care for residents of Lansdowne.

The judge found that as the person who ran the office from which the financial affairs of the nursing homes were administered, Carter had the effective control of the documentary material which was falsified to maintain the false claims on the Commonwealth for subsidies. I will not reiterate the nature of the false claims which were made over the 4 year period, the falsification of the records of the business and the deception of the Commonwealth's investigating officers.

The Crown conceded that Carter was not the principal beneficiary or intended beneficiary of the fraudulent conduct. The police had not found any evidence that she had received any remuneration other than her salary as office manager of the Boian Nursing Home Group. The police had reported that the wages paid to her for allegedly providing nursing and personal care during a particular period was part of her salary as office manager. She received nothing extra.

The reasons for Carter's conduct are to be found in the detailed history and conclusions of Dr W L Walker, a consultant psychologist. That history reveals a shy, withdrawn, vulnerable and dependant lady who is a follower and not a leader. She obeys her leader implicitly and is unable to accept that her leader may be a bad person or embarking upon wrong conduct.

She had had a very unhappy if not disastrous personal history and needed and received psychiatric treatment. There had been a suicide attempt. Shortly afterwards and in 1972 she met Boian and they became friends. On one occasion when she suffered respiratory arrest, with an asthma attack, he took action which saved her life. This added to her attachment to him. He also lent her a modest sum of money at 10% interest to assist her in the purchase of her home.

Carter worked very long hours for Boian. She was neither paid nor sought overtime. The judge accepted that she followed Boian's instructions as a result of her absolute loyalty to him.

The judge accepted Dr Walker's assessment that Carter had always been "a shy, submissive, very reserved and strange person without assertiveness skills in a close relationship though she can be adequately assertive in the workplace if her duties are defined for her" and that her "involvement in fraudulent activity stems from the worship of her boss Dan Boian who has been her best friend since 1972 and her boss sine 1987." She was not in good health and had suffered much stress.

Carter was born on 1 June 1947. She has never married and she has no dependants. She had no previous convictions. References were produced from people of good repute testifying to her industry, loyalty to her employer and honesty. That from a senior solicitor who had daily contact with her from 1972 to 1981 during each working week and kept in frequent contact with her thereafter is impressive. The judge found that the likelihood of Carter re- offending was remote. I agree.

The judge held correctly that Carter was entitled to a substantial benefit for her plea of guilty and was satisfied that this was an indication of her remorse. The plea had saved the community a good deal of time, effort and expense. The judge noted that all the moneys obtained had been repaid. He had regard to all the relevant matters which he was required to take into consideration pursuant to <case> of the Crimes Act (Cth). So have I.

The materials suggest, and the judge found, in effect, that she was completely overwhelmed by Boian and subjugated to his wishes. Her own assets are modest.
This is a strange case.

The Crown has criticised the judge's conclusion and his remarks upon sentence.
The judge said: "Whilst there is a great deal ... to be said in mitigation so far as you are concerned ... some degree of full-time custody is necessary to mark the seriousness of the lengthy course of criminal conduct in which you engaged whilst involved with Mr Boian.

In your case however the period of imprisonment ... is justifiably to be almost symbolic having regard to the matters of mitigation pressed on your behalf." 
The judge then imposed sentences on each of counts 1 to 5 of 2 years imprisonment and sentences on each of counts 6 to 8 of 9 months imprisonment with all sentences to be served concurrently. He ordered that she be released on $500 recognizance on 1 November 1997 and subject to a such conditions as may be imposed.

The Crown contended that the judge had not adverted to the need for general deterrence and that the sentences did not reflect, and certainly did not sufficiently reflect, the need for general deterrence. The Crown criticised the judge for imposing a sentence "to be almost symbolic". The Crown contended that there was no such sentence as one which was "almost symbolic" and that, in any event, this was not a case for an "almost symbolic" sentence. The Crown also contended that the judge had not given sufficient weight to the objective gravity of the offences and had given undue weight to the mitigating features.

The judge was moved by the mitigating features a number of which bore upon and reduced Carter's criminality. While the judge was not prepared to accept that she lacked a full awareness of the implications of what was being done, it was implicit in the judge's findings that she was overwhelmed by Boian and her loyalty and gratitude to him and that it did not occur to her to reject what he wanted.

The judge specifically recognised that a period of full time custody was necessary to mark the seriousness of the offence. By his use of the phrase "almost symbolic" the judge was conveying that there had to be a public denunciation of the fraud and her participation in it and an element of general deterrence by imposing a custodial sentence but that in view of the mitigating features which went to the extent of her criminality as well as circumstances favourable to her, that sentence did not have to be a long one.

The sentence imposed was a lenient one and on the light side but I am unpersuaded that it was so light as to warrant the intervention of this court.
She did receive 2 years imprisonment albeit that she is to be released after 6 months upon a recognizance.

The Crown appeal against the severity of the sentence imposed upon Carter should be dismissed.

REGINA versus DAN ANTONIO BOIAN 
REGINA versus RHONDA MARY CARTER 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: I agree with Smart J. 
REGINA versus DAN ANTONIO BOIAN 
REGINA versus RHONDA MARY CARTER 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: I agree with Smart J. * * * 
