

Regina versus White Matter No Cca 60646/97 [1998] NSWSC 343 (23 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
REGINA versus RAYMOND LESLIE WHITE 
CCA 60646/97 June 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Sheller JA, Newman J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
HEADNOTE 
Held:
It was open to the trial judge to take into account the failure to acknowledge the applicant's guilt as a factor which would cast doubt over the applicant's rehabilitation. While continued assertion of innocence is not necessarily inconsistent with manifest rehabilitation or the prospect of rehabilitation, lack of contrition may be taken into account on the assessment of prospects of rehabilitation.

Admission of guilt and associated contrition is significant for other aspect of the policy served by sentencing, particularly acceptance of the sentence by the relatives and friends of the victim.
The trial judge was entitled to give minimal weight to the factors presented by the applicant as factors which should have mitigated the objective seriousness of the offence. The factors constituted the motive for the murder. It is not the case that every explanation of conduct is a matter of mitigation. The circumstances in which motive may be a mitigating factor must be confined to cases in which motive impinges upon the moral culpability of the defendant. These can include mental, emotional, or medical problems or impulsive conduct. However the degree to which motive is pertinent will depend on the whole of the circumstances.

R versus Wright [(1997) 93 ACrimR 48] @ 50-51;
R versus Engert [(1995) 84 ACrimR 67@] 68 and 71 
The most significant circumstance is the nature of the offence. Where the crime is a carefully premeditated murder, it is difficult to conceive of any circumstances in which motive could be regarded as a mitigating factor. Sexual jealousy, however, is not such a factor.

ORDER 
Leave to appeal refused.

JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The applicant, Raymond Leslie White, seeks leave to appeal from the decision of McInerney J of 14 November 1997. 
The applicant had been sentenced by McInerney J himself to penal servitude for life on 24 June 1988. This was an "existing life sentence" within [s13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) ("the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/)"). Under [s13A(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html)
McInerney J set a minimum term of sixteen years and an additional term of five years. The applicant now appeals to this Court pursuant to [s13A(12)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/).

The applicant was found guilty of a charge of murder and also of a factually related charge of arson of a motor vehicle. The applicant was sentenced to six years imprisonment on the arson charge.

The deceased, of whose murder the applicant was convicted, was one Andrew John
Westwood, at that time aged 34 years. His body was found on 22 September 1985 in shallow water underneath the Pheasants Nest Bridge near Wilton. The deceased was killed by a gunshot wound to the chest. After death his body had been thrown 75 metres from the parapet of the Pheasants Nest Bridge.

The evidence disclosed that the deceased was last seen alive on the afternoon or evening of 11 September 1985. The motive for the murder, according to the
Crown case at the trial, was the relationship that had developed between the deceased and the applicant's wife.

The applicant and his wife had been in partnership in a trotter trainer/driver business. The deceased had worked for this business between 1982 and 1984.
From November 1984 to his death in September 1985 the deceased was an employee of the Harness Racing Authority. He was provided with a motor vehicle for use in the course of this business. It was this motor vehicle that was the subject of the arson.

A personal relationship developed between the deceased and the applicant's wife. In January 1985 the applicant and his wife separated. In June 1985 the deceased moved in with Mrs White and her two daughters. This arrangement continued until the murder of the deceased in September 1985.

The case against the applicant was circumstantial, but a strong one. As his
Honour indicated in his reasons on sentence: "The association between Mrs White and the deceased obviously enraged the applicant." 
The applicant made a number of threats to the deceased over a period of time.
As early as November 1984 Mrs White overheard a conversation in which it became clear to her that the applicant had found out about the relationship and was making threats about the deceased.

In December 1984 an uncle of the deceased was told by the applicant: "Well, I've got a rifle, I'm finished buggering around with him." 
In January 1985 there was another conversation between the same two men which was of particular significance for sentencing. During the course of the conversation the applicant said: "I'm going to get rid of him because all you get is eight to ten years and I will still be young enough to have a normal life when I come out." 
On another occasion the applicant had said to the deceased in the presence of
Mrs White: "I'll kill you, you bastard".

In June 1985 there was a car chase in which the applicant pursued the deceased in his car and subsequently on foot.

The applicant also approached a John Szabo and asked him if he would hold someone down while he bashed him up. Later that night the applicant, Szabo, armed with a steel bar, and another person went to the deceased's home unit but failed to gain entry.

The applicant also said to a cousin of the deceased words to the effect: "I will kill the bastard".

The applicant had also approached Szabo with a view to burning a car, allegedly for an insurance job. This was the subject of the second charge. On September 1985, either the day after or the day of the murder, the applicant took Szabo and pointed out the car. The applicant paid him $800, told him to burn the vehicle and to remove and dispose of both number plates.
On 13 September 1985 the police were called to observe a burning vehicle. It was identified as the panel van issued to the deceased by his employer.

That evening Szabo spoke to the applicant about reports that the deceased was missing and about his burnt out vehicle having been found. The applicant said to him: "There is nothing to worry about he's just left town".

As I have said, the deceased was last seen alive on 11 September 1985.

The applicant appeals from the determination by McInerney J on two grounds:
His Honour erred in linking an apparent absence of contrition to the prospects of the ultimate rehabilitation of the applicant.
His Honour failed to give sufficient weight to factors which may have mitigated the objective seriousness of the offence.

Both these grounds raise matters of weight which are quintessential matters within the discretion of a sentencing Judge, not simply for reasons of sentence but for reasons of principles of law that are applied to discretionary decisions by judges at first instance in all matters.

With respect to the first ground of appeal, counsel for the applicant relied on the applicant's denial of any involvement in the offence, which the applicant has maintained from the day of his arrest to date. In submissions the applicant directed attention to three passages in his Honour's reasons on sentencing. The first at p14: "The applicant continues to deny his involvement in this crime. However, in my view, the Crown case was an overwhelming, strong, circumstantial evidence case. Thus there is no evidence of contrition, and the applicant's lack of contrition was quite obvious when I observed him giving evidence before me.
This is a matter of concern as to his ultimate rehabilitation." 
The second at pp19-20: "Whilst I am satisfied that the applicant has performed excellently whilst in gaol, which is to his credit, nevertheless there is no contrition in this man.
As stated earlier, the case against him was an extremely strong one, and his steadfast denial at the trial (amongst other matters) that he was not even aware of an association between the deceased and his wife beggars belief. His denial of making threats towards the deceased, bearing in mind the evidence given at the trial by persons who could not be said to be bias against him, also beggars belief. The applicant's attitude whilst giving evidence before me displayed the same approach, namely that everyone was lying but him." 
The third extract was in his conclusion at p25 where his Honour said: "Whilst the applicant has taken giant steps towards rehabilitation, a question mark must remain as to his ultimate rehabilitation because of his refusal to accept responsibility for this crime." 
The applicant relied on a number of indications of rehabilitation, including the applicant's role in the young offender's program, his participation in the metal shop and advising on systems, his conduct during an explosion and a riot at the prison, his educational achievements whilst in prison, favourable psychological reports and favourable gaol reports. All of these matters were before his Honour. Indeed, he referred to them in his judgment.

Whilst accepting a degree of rehabilitation had occurred his Honour took into account the failure to acknowledge his guilt as a factor which would tend to cast a "question mark" or constitute a "matter of concern" over his "ultimate rehabilitation". In my opinion, it was open to his Honour to do so.

It would not have been permissible for his Honour to proceed on any basis other than that the continuing denials of involvement were false. Whatever may otherwise suggest good prospects of rehabilitation, the failure to admit that he committed the crime may be seen as casting a doubt on his rehabilitation.
As the Crown submitted in its written submissions to the Court: "There is nothing to suggest that given the same set of circumstances the applicant would not act in the same way." 
That is not to say that a continued assertion of innocence is necessarily inconsistent with manifest rehabilitation or the prospect of rehabilitation.
Lack of contrition - which his Honour said appeared to him from his own observation of the applicant as a witness - may, however, be taken into account on the assessment of prospects of rehabilitation.

Nothing in his Honour's reasons suggests that the weight he gave this factor was in any way open to criticism on appeal and although this did not feature in his Honour's reasons, I should add that admissions of guilt and associated contrition remain matters of significance for other aspects of the policy served by sentencing, particularly with respect to the acceptance of the sentence by the relatives and friends of the victim.

In my opinion, the first ground of appeal should be rejected.

With respect to the second ground, it was suggested that his Honour failed to give sufficient weight to a number of factors which should have mitigated, at least to some extent, the objective seriousness of the offence. It was suggested that his Honour failed to have in mind these factors or at least to have given them appropriate weight. The factors which are said to be mitigating were the following: . The prior relationship of the applicant as an employee of the deceased. . The disadvantage which came to the applicant as a result of that relationship. (Presumably this is a reference to the opportunity that the employment gave for the deceased to form a relationship with the applicant's wife.) . The departure of the applicant's wife from the matrimonial home in favour of the deceased. . The nature of the relationship between the deceased and the applicant's wife. . The deceased's adultery with the applicant's wife. . The deceased's apparent poor relationship with the applicant's children. 
These matters were referred to in the course of his Honour's judgment. His
Honour was entitled to give them minimal weight. It is not clear to me why any of them are in fact matters of mitigation. All they do is explain the applicant's motive for murdering the deceased.

Counsel for the applicant suggested these matters could constitute provocation. This characterisation is not appropriate, in my view, particularly given the degree of premeditation here involved.

It is not the case that every explanation of conduct constitutes a matter of mitigation. The circumstances in which motive, whether characterised as provocation or not, may be a mitigating factor must be confined to cases in which motive impinges upon the moral culpability of the prisoner. These can include mental, emotional or medical problems or impulsive conduct. However, the degree to which motive can be seen to be pertinent must depend on the whole of the circumstances. See eg. R versus Wright [(1997) 93 ACrimR 48] @ 50-51;
R versus Engert [(1995) 84 ACrimR 67] @ 68 and
The most significant circumstance is the nature of the offence. Where the crime is a carefully premeditated murder, motive should not be regarded as a mitigating factor. In sentencing matters it is, perhaps, never appropriate to say "never". However, it is difficult to conceive of any circumstances in which motive could be such a factor but, assuredly, sexual jealousy is not one. There is nothing in this case to lessen the weight appropriately given by his Honour to the requirements of general deterrence.

McInerney J reiterated the remarks he had made on sentence at the 1988 trial in which he said inter alia: "He allowed insane jealousy and bitterness to consume him over a long period of time...".

His Honour made reference to the allegedly mitigating factors. His Honour did not err in failing to give them sufficient weight. He was correct to conclude: "This was a planned premeditated killing. Whilst he may have felt aggrieved at the behaviour of his wife and the deceased there is nothing of a subjective nature which in any way reduces his criminality in this crime. It was a crime of the most serious kind." 
The second ground of appeal also fails.

In my opinion, leave to appeal should be refused.

SHELLER JA: I agree. 
NEWMAN J: I also agree. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The order of the Court will be leave is refused. * * * 
