

O'Sullivan versus National Australia Bank Limited Matter No 1411/97 [1998]
NSWSC 303 (11 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
O'SULLIVAN versus NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LIMITED /97 June 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings between a bank's customer and the bank have now been resolved by settlement or otherwise except with respect to the second cross claim. 
In order to understand the issues that arise on the second cross claim, I must give a short sketch of what the litigation is all about. I will do so in a very summary form and the over-simplification I present is merely for purposes of background; it is certainly not any real attempt to state with great accuracy the facts as they appear to be.

O'Sullivan controlled a company called Frogs for Fitness Pty Ltd. That company took a lease of premises from the State Superannuation Board. The Board required O'Sullivan to give a guarantee for the rent. O'Sullivan arranged with the National Australia Bank to provide that guarantee. The reversion of the lease was assigned by the State Superannuation Board to Nesova Pty Ltd. Frogs for Fitness became in arrears with rent. Nesova called up the guarantee. The
National Bank paid to Nesova $254,436. The rent owed was very much less than that amount and was approximately $42,725. The National Bank made it clear that it wished to proceed against O'Sullivan to reimburse it for the amount it had paid under the guarantee and O'Sullivan commenced these proceedings for a negative declaration to head that action off. The National Bank put in receivers over Frogs for Fitness Pty Ltd. Frogs for Fitness then lodged the second cross claim against Nesova to recover the overpayment.

On 24 April last, the original form of the second cross claim was the subject of a motion to strike out brought by Nesova. During argument it was quite clear that the cross claim in that form was demurrable and I struck it out with leave to replead. A repleaded version was filed on 27 April 1998.
Unfortunately, the repleaded version only made very slight amendments to the previous document. Nesova now moves to strike it out. I heard argument on the question on 11 May 1998 and reserved my decision. I said in court during argument that I thought that as this was the second attempt to mount a cross claim, that if I considered the cross claim should be struck out, I would do so without any further grant of leave to amend and both parties were prepared to proceed on that basis.

The cross claim pleads the basal facts I have set out above, and says that
Frogs for Fitness procured the bank guarantee from the National Bank, Nesova claimed on the guarantee and was paid more than it was entitled to hold and is obliged to account to Frogs for Fitness for the whole of the amount or alternatively the overplus. It was further pleaded that there was an implied term in the lease that the overplus would be repaid or, in the further alternative, Nesova has been unjustly enriched.

The clear facts which were uncontested in the directions hearings I have held and which have been treated as the assumed facts for the present purpose, is that Frogs for Fitness procured the bank guarantee by requesting O'Sullivan to approach the bank to give the guarantee. There is no evidence at all to suggest that Frogs for Fitness paid any of the bank fees in respect of issuing the guarantee, or that O'Sullivan has ever received any payment from Frogs for
Fitness for obtaining the guarantee.

Mr Aitken for Nesova says that ordinarily in the scenario painted above, the
National Australia Bank would have the obligation to pay the full amount of the guarantee to Nesova, and if there were any surplus, then the surplus would have to be paid back to the person who provided the money; see Australasian
Conference Association Ltd versus Mainline Constructions Pty Ltd <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 335], 349. The real question is, says Mr Aitken, who is the party who provided the funds? He says the answer to that question must be "O'Sullivan".

Mr Aitken relies for that proposition on the decision of Morison, J in
Cargill International SA Antigua Geneva Branch versus Bangladesh Sugar & Food
Industries Corp [[1996] 2 Lloyd's Rep 524],
After referring to the Mainline case his Lordship said, "I take the view that if there has been a call on a bond which turns out to exceed the true loss sustained, then the party who provided the bond is entitled to recover the overpayment. It seems to me that the account party may hold the amount recovered in trust for the bank, (where, for example, the bank had not been paid by him) but that does not affect his right to bring the claim in his own name. In the normal course of events, the bank will have required its customer to provide it with appropriate security for the giving of the bond, which would be called upon as soon as the bank was required to pay. ... In principle, I take the view that the account party is always entitled to receive the overpayment since his entitlement is founded upon the contract between himself and the beneficiary." This decision was approved by the
English Court of Appeal in Comdel Commodities Ltd versus Siporex Trade SA <case>; [[1997] 1 Lloyd's Rep 424],
Furthermore, the Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal from Morison, J's decision. The appeal is reported as Cargill International SA versus Bangladesh
Sugar and Food Industries Corp <case>; [[1998] 1 WLR 461.] The appellate court did not spend time on this particular point, see p 465.

I accept all these submissions, but with respect, I do not consider that they operate so as to make the present cross claim demurrable. What Morison, J is primarily saying is that it is a matter of contract between the person who provides the security and the person who gets paid under the security, and that one does not muddy the waters by looking to see how the promised bond was furnished because it can be assumed that there will be collateral contracts between other parties which will deal with that situation commercially.

It seems to me on this reasoning it is enough that contractually Frogs for
Fitness agreed to furnish the bond. That and the fact there is overplus provides a cause of action. It may be that O'Sullivan or someone else can make a claim against Frogs for Fitness in contract, trust or otherwise, so that any moneys recovered by Frogs for Fitness will in fact flow through it like a conduit to the "real owner". That, however, does not prevent Frogs for Fitness maintaining an action.

Although I have mainly dealt with a question of law, I do bear in mind that applications to strike out only succeed if the matter is that a claim is not struck out unless it is manifest that there is no reasonable argument in favour of it. It does not really matter exactly which form of words one uses to describe the test, the present claim clearly is one which should be allowed to proceed. However, I do not wish to be taken to have made any final pronouncement on the question of necessary implied terms in this sort of contract. That seems to be one of the ways in which Morison, J approached this sort of problem, but it may have to be reconsidered in New South Wales in the light of the recent Court of Appeal decision in Australis Media Holdings Pty
Ltd versus Telstra Corp [(1998) 43 NSWLR 104.] Again, the question of unjust enrichment may need far closer examination in the circumstances of the present scenario. All I am deciding at the present is that the contractual obligation of a person to furnish a security entitles that person in its own name to sue for an overpayment under the guarantee.
These issues will need to be dealt with at trial.

I believe that I should merely order that the motion to strike out the amended second cross claim filed on 27 April 1998 be dismissed with costs and stand the matter over for mention before the Registrar on 26 June next at 9.30 am.
If the pleadings are then complete, consideration will need to be given as to whether the cross claim should remain in this Division and if so, how it should be tried, or whether it should be transferred to a more appropriate court in view of the relatively small amount of money involved.
 * * * 
