

Collins versus Starway Electric (Smithfield) Pty Limited Matter No 20640/95 [1998] NSWSC 607 (25 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 December 1998 
RAYMOND RICHARD COLLINS versus STARWAY ELECTRIC (SMITHFIELD) PTY LIMITED /95 September 1998 
David Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Mr Raymond Collins claims damages against his employer, Starway Electric (Smithfield) Pty Limited (Starway Electric). The claim arises out of an incident on 1 March 1994. The defendant has admitted liability. The issue, therefore, is the assessment of damages. 
Background 
The plaintiff was born on 8 October 1941. He is a married man with two adult children. He spent his early years in Lithgow, where he was educated to the age of 13 years. Having left school he performed a variety of jobs, all unskilled, although he did obtain the qualification of crane chaser.

In approximately 1965 Mr Collins was employed as a truck driver by H L Wallayn of Merrylands. The manager of H L Wallayn was Mr Leslie Taylor. In June 1972,
Mr Taylor left that company to establish Starway Electric. He invited Mr
Collins to join him as a truck driver. Mr Collins did so. He thereafter worked for Starway Electric for the next 22 years until the time of his accident in
March 1994. Having had the accident, Mr Collins was dismissed by his employer on 21 September 1994.

Aspects of Mr Collins' job with Starway Electric were plainly arduous. The company reconditioned electrical motors. Some were large (15 tonnes), and others were small. Mr Collins was mainly concerned with their pick-up and delivery. His truck was not fitted with a lifting device. Sometimes he was able to use a crane, or obtain assistance at the premises which he attended.
On other occasions no such assistance was available. He had to do the best he could.
The Accident 
The circumstances of the accident on 1 March 1994, themselves, demonstrate the nature of Mr Collins' work. He attended the premises of Vic James Pty Limited.
He was required to pick up a rotor. The rotor was made of steel, and weighed approximately 40 kilograms. It was fitted with a shaft. It was therefore both heavy and awkward. Mr Collins carried the rotor to the truck. There was a
V-shaped cradle on the rear of the truck. He was obliged to lift the rotor above chest level and, with a twisting motion, position the rotor and shaft in the cradle.

He said that he had performed that task without difficulty "a thousand times before". However, on the afternoon of 1 March 1994, he felt a twinge of pain in his neck. He continued working, and completed the day.
The Course of Treatment 
On the day following the incident Mr Collins woke up to find his neck stiff and painful. The only way in which he could obtain relief was by supporting his neck with his hand. He nonetheless went to work. Having arrived at work, he was unable to continue. He lay down for a number of hours. The pain, however, persisted. Ultimately his employers referred him to a medical centre at Merrylands. He thereafter went home.

In the weeks which followed he saw his local doctor in Umina. He was in considerable pain. He was given, amongst other things, injections of
Pethidine. He was also referred to a neurosurgeon, Dr Raymond Cook.

Dr Cook saw Mr Collins on 31 March 1994. He complained of neck pain which had spread rapidly to his right upper limb. Dr Cook observed marked wasting to both biceps and triceps muscles on the right side.

On 8 April 1994 a myelogram was carried out at the Mater Hospital. Dr Cook described the result in these terms: "... the myelogram - post myelogram CT scan clearly showed a broad based posterior prolapse of the C5/6 disc to the midline and to the right side obliterating the lateral recess and impinging on the right C6 nerve root. The other levels appeared intact, in particular the C6/7 level was normal." 
Conservative treatment was attempted without success. On 21 April 1994 Dr Cook operated to remove the C5/6 disc, and a number of osteophytes. The vertebrae at this level were then fused. Dr Cook's report on the operation included the following: "The pathology was a prolapsed IV disc with resultant cord compression and compression of the right C6 nerve root. This C6 nerve root was identified and all sequestrated fragments were removed from it. Osteophytes of the C5/6 vertebral bodies were then removed." 
The plaintiff remained in hospital for eleven days. Dr Cook then saw the plaintiff. He reported in these terms: "He retained some dysanaesthesia in the right C6 dermatome and this was essentially unchanged as a result of the surgery. The pain in the right arm has resolved but his weakness in the biceps and the triceps mechanism was unchanged." 
The plaintiff was again seen by Dr Cook on 16 June 1994. Dr Cook noted "very significant neck stiffness". Physiotherapy was prescribed but did not assist.
Mr Cook was fitted with a collar.

The picture, thereafter, is one of fairly rapid decline. When the plaintiff gave evidence, four years on, he presented as a person who was significantly disabled. He is physically a big man. His size magnified his disabilities. The cervical collar which he wears is unusual. It is known as a Philidelphia collar. It is much larger and stiffer than the usual cervical collar. It sits upon his shoulders so that his chin rests upon the front of the collar. By this means the neck is held flexed. The collar, however, makes it difficult, if not impossible, for him to look down, although he can, of course, survey the ground some short distance in front of him. To look from side to side he must swivel his body, as he did when giving evidence. I mention these matters because they are significant in the context of certain other disabilities which I will shortly describe.

The plaintiff walks with a shuffling gait, taking small steps, as though feeling the ground in front of him. It appeared difficult for him to make the short journey from his seat in court to the witness box (which included three steps). For part of his evidence, by reason of that difficulty, he gave his testimony from the well of the court.

The plaintiff's wife and son described his daily routine. He has become an invalid, and a recluse. He spends most of his day in bed. He has ceased to have his meals with the family at the dining table, preferring to eat in his bedroom. His main interest is sport on cable television. Friends rarely call.
He does not even venture out of the house to collect the mail. There are three steps at the front of the house, and no handrail. He says that he is afraid of falling over.

A number of issues arise: * First, is the plaintiff as disabled as his appearance would suggest. The defendant maintained that he was exaggerating. Indeed it was suggested that he had retired to his house in order to avoid the preying eyes of insurance investigators. * Secondly, there is a complex issue of diagnosis. The plaintiff has a bewildering list of symptoms, with no obvious relationship to the injury, or operation. * Thirdly, the plaintiff complains that he is now impotent. He identifies the accident as the cause. The defendant disputes that assertion. * Fourthly, quite apart from the physical symptoms, the plaintiff complains of psychiatric disabilities which he relates to the accident. There is an issue as to the extent of any such disability, and its relationship to the accident. 
I will deal with each issue in turn.
The Genuineness of the Plaintiff 
Dealing with the first issue, Dr Mathieson, qualified by the defendant, did not accept aspects of the plaintiff's presentation. The plaintiff had a tremor. Dr Mathieson believed that it was contrived. He described the plaintiff's walk (in September 1996) as "small, shuffling, unconvincing steps". Dr Mathieson concluded in these terms (Report 2.9.96 - p 3): "In my view, he has sustained no injury on 1.3.94 and there is no disability from this event. This incident did not lead to his surgery. I think this man is over-diagnosed and over-treated." 
Dr Mathieson, however, was alone in that view. The evidence is overwhelming that Mr Collins sustained a disc injury on 1 March 1994. Dr Bodel, another doctor qualified by the defendant, described the injury as a disc rupture at
C5/6 (Report 3.9.96). I accept (as did the defendant in its submissions) that the plaintiff ruptured the C5/6 disc on 1 March 1994, necessitating operation.

Dr Slezak also found aspects of the plaintiff's presentation unconvincing. In his report of 30 January 1996, he expressed the view that there was considerable embellishment of the extent and severity of symptoms. Dr Bodel, on the other hand, found some exaggeration in the midst of genuine disabilities. He said this (3.9.96): "The complaints of ongoing discomfort are difficult to justify, although he clearly does have significant pathology in the neck and genuine disability in the right upper limb with an absent reflex and wasting. It is the more widespread disability and problems in the lower limbs that I find difficult to correlate." 
In contrast, Dr Westmore, a psychiatrist qualified by the defendant, made the following assessment in his report of 31 January 1996: "Certainly from a psychiatric perspective I did not think that he exaggerated his history in any way, he did not provide very much embellishment on his dysfunction but stated it rather flatly without emotional overlay.
Nevertheless in cases where there is uncertainty about the full nature and extent of a worker's injuries, investigations should continue into his matter.
Needless to say at this time the major psychiatric problems that I see him experiencing are those related to his pain management and in particular the very high levels of analgesics he is taking." 
Dr Westmore provided a further report on 17 September 1997 which included the following: "Once again he was not an overdramatic historian in any way and presented his history in what I would describe as being a relatively straight forward, matter of fact type fashion." 
Dr Westmore saw no evidence that Mr Collins was malingering, although he acknowledged that the issue needed to be addressed.

Dr Barrow has been the plaintiff's local doctor for some time, including before the accident. He has been largely responsible for his management since the accident. Dr Barrow has witnessed the plaintiff's decline. He described the plaintiff before the accident in these terms (T114): "A. Well, he was very outgoing, very happy and very positive and he struck me as a very, you know, enormously strong fellow." 
Dr Barrow added: "He was a very fit 50 year old, very muscular build, very agile, you know, moved freely." 
Dr Barrow then described the changes that he had observed since the accident :
 "Q. As you have seen him over the years, what did you notice about his physical muscularity and other features of his physical condition compared with what you said he was like before March of 1994? 
A. A very great change from being very muscular and strong with, you know, well-developed muscles of his biceps and back across to quite a wasted sort of state such as now, where the muscles are very thin and without definition." 
The plaintiff's son, Mr Gregory Collins, made a similar contrast. His description of his father at the present time was in these terms (T105): "He is a shattered wreck. He is a shell of what he was. As I say he was a strong and healthy and outgoing (man), now he is a pathetic drug addict." 
The evidence from Dr Barrow and Mr Gregory Collins corresponds with the plaintiff's own assessment. Before the accident he had a full life. He enjoyed his work. He was strong. He played tennis, went bushwalking, camped with his children, and enjoyed fishing. He described himself as a gregarious person who liked a drink, and the company of friends. He now sees himself as "useless".
He rarely sees anyone. He has entertained thoughts of suicide.

Dr Middleton, a rehabilitation specialist, spent a number of hours with the plaintiff before furnishing her report of 18 August 1997. When asked by counsel for the defendant whether it was possible that the plaintiff was overstating his symptoms, Dr Middleton responded as follows (T163): "A. Not in the sense of overstatement or misrepresentation of the basic symptoms of pain, weakness, impairment of balance, those sorts of things." 
Dr Dent, a psychiatrist qualified by the plaintiff's solicitors, provided the following opinion in September 1997: "I have no difficulty with the view that he suffers from a Chronic Pain
Disorder, which by definition is neither feigned nor malingered, but where there are considerable psychological components which are reinforcing him in the view that he is an ill person and where he is affirmed in that view by the treatment given him within his home network." 
I prefer the evidence of Dr Middleton to that of Dr Mathieson. My own very definite impression was that the plaintiff was genuine. There is considerable objective evidence to support his complaints of pain (abnormal myelograms, wasting in a number of limbs, paraesthesia conforming by and large to nerve patterns or dermatomes, depressed reflexes and so on). There is little, except conjecture, to suggest an absence of genuineness. The more difficult question is causation. I now turn to that issue.
 The Issue of Diagnosis 
Determining what is wrong with the plaintiff, and whether it is attributable to the accident, is the more difficult because the issue has never been investigated satisfactorily by either plaintiff or defendant. Doctors qualified by both sides expressed the need for further investigation, and the opinion of a neurologist. Neither plaintiff nor defendant took up that suggestion. The court's task would certainly have been easier had someone done so.

Three diagnoses were put forward to explain the plaintiff's physical symptoms (as distinct from his psychiatric claims). The diagnoses were: * First, cervical myelopathy. * Secondly, a disease known as peripheral neuropathy. * Thirdly, a condition which may have its origin in one or other, or both, of these diseases, known as chronic pain syndrome. 
Before examining these alternatives, it is necessary to identify the first recorded manifestations of certain symptoms. The chronology appears to be as follows: * On 15 July 1994 (that is four months after the accident, and ten weeks after the plaintiff's discharge from hospital following the operation), the plaintiff saw Dr Barrow and complained of weakness in his right leg. * On 4 August 1994, Mr Collins again saw Dr Barrow. He complained of weakness in his right arm, and a tendency to drop things. * On 11 November 1994, Mr Collins reported to Dr Barrow that he had fallen due to weakness in his right leg. This was to be the first of many falls. 
Dealing with the last matter, the plaintiff described how his right leg would give way under him. On one occasion he fell at the supermarket. On another he fell at the doctor's surgery. Many of his falls have occurred at home. In one such fall he struck the corner of the bath, shattering his false teeth. Each fall has caused an acute exacerbation of neck and arm pain, lasting between two and six days.

Mr Collins saw Dr Cook on 2 December 1994. Dr Cook noted the following (Report .1.95): "... again there was no significant improvement in the mobility of the neck. I noted that he was not using his right arm and the arm had become progressively wasted. At that review he also informed me that he had a fall some weeks ago and developed a weakness in the right leg with some numbness of the right L5 dermatome. Examination on the 2nd December revealed a four and a half on five weakness of the biceps and the triceps on the right upper limb. The rest of the myotomal groups were normal." 
Dr Cook concluded that Mr Collins had developed a frozen neck. He arranged for an MRI scan to check whether there was any residual radicular/cord compression. Compression would transmit pain to the leg, and explain the right leg symptoms which were physically remote from the neck.

The MRI was carried out on 9 February 1995. The conclusion of the radiographer, Dr Brazier, was as follows: "At the C5/6 level there is evidence of an interbody fusion. No evidence of narrowing of the exit foramina on either side is identified at this level and no definite reason to explain the patient's radicular symptoms is identified.
No abnormality is identified within the cord.

CONCLUSION: Degenerative disc disease particularly at the C3/4 and C4/5 levels. Previous surgery C5/6 noted. No definite evidence of compression upon the nerve roots." 
Dr Mathieson saw the scan. He believed no abnormality whatever was evident.
The plaintiff's leg symptoms were, therefore, unrelated to the neck in his opinion. Dr Middleton appeared to take the same view.

Dr Barrow, the plaintiff's general practitioner, did not personally examine the MRI. Interpreting the report of Dr Brazier, however, he drew attention to the use of the expression "No definite evidence of compression upon the nerve roots". Dr Brazier, therefore, did not completely exclude such pressure.
Indeed he "hedges his bet" (T141).

Dr Barrow also received a further report based upon the same MRI scan. It was provided by Dr Hayes, and was described in these terms (T140): "... the second-hand report that I had that said marked impression at C4- 5 level especially on the right and osteophytes at C6-7 indenting the cord, which seems somewhat at odds with this report here." 
Dr Cook, having received the MRI scan, expressed the following view (21.2.95): "To summarise the above, the MRI scan and the functional views show that radiologically the fusion at C5/C6 has achieved what it set out to achieve, ie to stabilise that level and to decompress both the spinal cord and exiting nerve root. Unfortunately the radiological appearance does not transcribe into a good clinical outcome as he remains with his frozen neck. I have advised him to continue with his physiotherapy." 
Physiotherapy, however, did not help.

At some point, which is difficult to determine, Mr Collins developed numbness in both feet, as well as pins and needles in the right and left calf. The first reference to these complaints in the local doctor's notes (Dr Barrow) is on 14 November 1997. Dr Slezak (qualified by the defendant) recorded a similar complaint somewhat earlier (examination 22 January 1996). There was also pain above the left elbow, although it appeared to improve.

Dr Mathieson excluded cervical myelopathy, or indeed any significant disability arising from the neck, and did so upon the basis of the MRI. He, therefore, looked for another explanation. The plaintiff, pre-accident, was a heavy drinker. He would drink 10 to 12 cans of beer a day. He admitted to the occasional "binge", where even that consumption would be exceeded. Dr
Mathieson, in these circumstances, offered the view that the plaintiff was suffering from peripheral neuropathy, probably induced by alcohol.

I will return to the diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy in a moment. Dealing with the suggested cause, namely alcohol, there were difficulties with that suggestion. First, Mr Collins had consumed alcohol in these quantities for a long time. Dr Middleton, in these circumstances, asked why after the accident, should there suddenly be a problem? There is, therefore, the aspect of coincidence that needs to be explained, although it should be noted that there was some delay (a matter of months) before the plaintiff complained of the symptoms which may be referable to the peripheral neuropathy. Moreover, if alcohol were the explanation, you would expect, according to Dr Barrow, an abnormal result upon a liver function test. Dr Barrow recently arranged such a test. He described the result in these words: "A. All of the liver tests bar one were completely normal. One liver test was marginally elevated in relation to the alkaline phosphatose reading. It should normally be a limit of 120 and that may simply be due to his size or may indicate there may have been very mild liver damage or bone injury. I have found people in isolated cases to have had an elevated level of alkaline phosphatose and there hasn't been any significant pathology underlying it. It also increases with age." 
Another possible cause of peripheral neuropathy was suggested. Approximately twelve years ago the plaintiff was diagnosed as suffering from non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. Peripheral neuropathy is a common complication of diabetes. However, diabetes as an explanation for the plaintiff's symptoms, was also less than satisfying. Dr Barrow expressed the view that "you would normally expect other complications of diabetes to be apparent by the time the diabetes had caused enough damage to be damaging nerves". The other complications include trouble with vision, kidneys and the elevation of protein in the blood. The plaintiff exhibited none of these symptoms.

Returning to the suggested diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy, the disease was described by Dr Mathieson in these terms (T78): "A. Peripheral neuropathy is some degeneration of the distal endings of the nerves. Usually the process starts distally in the feet and generally involves the sensory parts first and the motor parts much later and the hands also tend to get symptoms after the appearance of symptoms in the feet.

Q. So it starts distally and it starts with the feet, is that right? 
A. Yes." 
Dr Barrow, when giving evidence, agreed with the following definition of peripheral neuropathy put by counsel for the defendant, presumably based upon a medical dictionary (T136A): "Q. And I am asking you whether you accept that its classic presentation is as a distal symmetric primarily sensory peripheral neuropathy affecting the feet and legs more than the hands in a chronic slowly progressive manner? 
A. I would agree with that, yes." 
The absence of ankle jerks is a marker of peripheral neuropathy.

The plaintiff's symptoms did not precisely fit these brief definitions. His symptoms did not begin distally in the feet. The first symptom (15.7.94) was weakness of the right leg. Numbness of the feet was not recorded as a symptom until January 1996 (Dr Slezak). Further, the pattern of deficit has not been symmetrical. The complaints in respect of weakness have been confined to the right leg, although numbness has affected both feet. Ankle jerks are absent.

The alternative diagnosis of cervical myelopathy was tentatively suggested by some doctors. Dr Searle, an orthopaedic surgeon, said this (29.2.96): "He had a shaky shuffling gait reminiscent of patients with cervical myelopathy and he was wearing a hard plastic collar." 
Dr Bodel, orthopaedic surgeon, thought both cervical myelopathy and peripheral neuropathy may be operating to produce the diverse symptoms exhibited by Mr
Collins. He said this (3.9.96): "His clinical presentation suggests the possibility of cervical myelopathy but the disability in his lower limbs may also arise as a result of a peripheral neuropathy." 
Dr Middleton made a painstaking examination in August 1997. She concluded that the lower limb symptoms were caused by "an unrelated peripheral neuropathy".
By "unrelated" she meant unrelated to the accident. Dr Middleton concluded, however, that the right arm and neck pain were probably the result of both peripheral neuropathy and nerve root irritation, the latter arising from the injury, the operation and its aftermath.

I believe, as a matter of probability, that the lower limb symptoms are the consequence of an unrelated peripheral neuropathy. The symptoms of the neck (including headache) and the right arm, on the other hand, are attributable, or largely attributable, as a matter of probability, to the accident, and the treatment which followed.

It was apparent from Dr Middleton's evidence that there may be a relationship (in the sense of interaction) between the plaintiff's neck pain, and the various symptoms associated with the peripheral neuropathy. Dr Middleton explained the mechanism in these terms (T173): "A. Well, it could be from a disturbance of the metabolic biostatics in a person, from anything including the various medications being consumed as part of pain management. In his particular case, I would feel that the most likely possibility is more that the pain symptoms are being contributed to significantly that by the peripheral neuropathy, but they may not have become a pain, or it may not have become a painful disorder had he not developed significant musculoskeletal pain resulting from the neck injury and the nerve root impingement which resulted in persisting pain, that then sort of unmasked an element of discomfort, nerve irritation, whatever, in the peripheral neuropathy to extend the pain experienced to include the neuropathic nerves as well as the peripheral neuropathic nerves as well as the nerves that were irritated, impinged, whatever, from the cervical structural pathology.

Q. Not an uncommon development? 
A. It is very common when you have a chronic musculoskeletal pain disorder to have the pains expand and affect areas which are not directly related to the initial pathology. Often areas that have other sensitivities, for whatever reason." 
A number of doctors expressed the view that the damage to the plaintiff's neck had given rise to a chronic pain disorder (Dr Dent and Dr Middleton). I accept that the plaintiff has such a disorder arising from the accident. The evidence, as it stands, however, does not allow me to draw the inference that the symptoms, which have been identified as being referable to peripheral neuropathy, have only become troublesome and painful because of the neck injury. Although there is a degree of coincidence as to the timing of such symptoms, it is not so striking as to enable me to draw that inference as a matter of probability.
The Allegation of Impotence 
The plaintiff said that he has suffered from impotence since the operation. He was embarrassed about it. Dr Barrow's notes first make reference to impotence more than a year after the accident (19.5.95). Although the notes are silent as to when Mr Collins first noticed the problem, Dr Barrow's report of 12
April 1996 included the following: "He has suffered impotence since the time of the injury." 
The defendant points to other possible causes in the plaintiff's history.
Impotence is commonly multi-factorial. Peripheral neuropathy, heavy cigarette smoking (as was the case with the plaintiff before the accident), heavy drinking, as well as diabetes may each give rise to impotence, or contribute to its presence.

The plaintiff's wife, when cross examined, said that there had been no sexual relations since the accident. There had been three or four attempts, all unsuccessful because the plaintiff was in too much pain. There had been no sexual difficulties before the accident. Indeed, sexual relations had been very regular.

Mrs Collins is accepted as a truthful witness. I believe, as a matter of probability, that the plaintiff's impotence has come about as a result of the accident.
The Plaintiff's Psychiatric Condition 
The plaintiff was seen by a number of psychiatrists. Each has remarked upon the volume of analgesic medication taken by the plaintiff each day. The plaintiff himself complained about being confused. This is hardly surprising given the variety, and quantity, of medication consumed. Mr Collins has Endone (a synthetic opiate), Morphine, Prozac (for depression), Mogadon (for sleep), to mention but a few.

As mentioned, the plaintiff has contemplated suicide. He is anxious. Dr Hook, a psychiatrist, diagnosed a major depression in February 1997. Dr Dent, another psychiatrist, formed the same view in September 1997. He attributed the psychiatric condition to chronic pain syndrome, which he attributed to the accident.

Dr Westmore, a psychiatrist qualified by the defendant, did not believe the plaintiff was depressed when he saw him in 1996, although he was anxious. He thought that the major psychiatric problem that he saw related to pain management, and the high consumption of analgesics. Dr Westmore again saw the plaintiff in September 1997. His view remained the same.

The plaintiff presented, when giving evidence, as a forlorn and anxious man.
That presentation conforms to the description of his daily life. He rarely sees his friends. He almost never goes out. He lies in bed most of the day watching television. He has difficulty sleeping. He is irritable. He is in pain. I accept, in these circumstances, the views of Drs Dent and Hook that, as a matter of probability, he is suffering from a major depression which stems from the accident.
The Relevance of the Peripheral Neuropathy to the Assessment 
The implications of the finding that the plaintiff is suffering from peripheral neuropathy, which is unrelated to the accident, should be stated before determining the damages to be awarded under the Motor Accident Act, .
 * First, there is little evidence concerning the likely progress of the plaintiff's peripheral neuropathy. It is described as a chronic, slowly progressive disease. * Secondly, whatever its progression, many people are able to adapt. Dr Middleton said this (T160): "A. ... For many forms of manual work, if you have a gradual onset of these sorts of problems, it is quite amazing how much people just keep going and can keep going for years or decades with quite severe levels of measured sensory motor loss in activities that are familiar that they develop their way of doing things. Exactly like with spondylosis, where 50 percent of the population by the age of 40 have x-ray changes of wear and tear in their spine that are significant, but many have no symptoms and many will go for several decades - even in quite physical, active lifestyles, including quite heavy manual work - without any symptoms and it's only when something happens to throw their whole, sort of, biomechanical and muscular skeletal physiological balance that things tip over the edge." 
I think it likely that, but for the accident, the plaintiff would have adapted to the peripheral neuropathy, and coped with that condition. He enjoyed his work. He had a good work history. His job as a truck driver was more physically demanding than it ought to have been because of the admitted failure of his employer to provide mechanical assistance to carry out heavy aspects of his work. Dr Barrow described the plaintiff before the accident in these words (which I accept) (T114): "A. ... he struck me as a very, you know, enormously strong fellow. He had a number of conditions that I thought, you know, required him to go to hospital.
For example - if I might go on? 
Q. Yes.

A. For example, when he had very swollen painful testes and he elected to stay at home for five days before eventually submitting to the surgery that he needed.

Q. In your medical experience less stoical males would have done so? 
A. That is correct." * Thirdly, assuming sensory loss and weakness is the right leg had caused the plaintiff to fall from time to time, the consequences, had he not been injured, would probably not have been grave. No doubt there was a risk that he may be injured in such a fall, and that risk must be taken into account. Ordinarily, however, one would expect him to pick himself up, and carry on, just as he does now. At the present time, in his injured state, however, each fall not only carries the risk of injury, but causes an acute exacerbation of pain. Worse, the falls appear to have eroded the plaintiff's confidence, and contributed to his withdrawal from the world. * Finally, the falls themselves, according to Dr Middleton, may not be due to leg weakness, so much as the plaintiff incorrectly positioning his leg in relation to the ground beneath him. His inability properly to see the surface directly beneath him by reason of his neck restriction (especially when he is wearing the Philidelphia collar) place him at a special disadvantage. His neck injury therefore makes him more vulnerable to falls. In short, the peripheral neuropathy, though unrelated, interacts with the injuries which are compensable. 
I now turn to the task of assessing the damages which ought to be awarded to the plaintiff, against the background of these findings.
Non Economic Loss 
It is plain that the injuries to Mr Collins have seriously interfered with his ability to lead a normal life, and that these injuries are likely to be permanent (s79(1)). The maximum amount which may be awarded for the most extreme case under [s79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) was, at the relevant time, $250,000. I believe that it is appropriate to characterise the plaintiff's disabilities, which are attributable to the accident, as being percent of the most extreme case, that is $150,000.
Past Special Damage - $41,992.03 (agreed).
Past Wage Loss 
The plaintiff's disabilities, putting to one side those which relate to peripheral neuropathy, have rendered him unfit for work in the view of Dr
Middleton (which I accept), and of other doctors. Dr Middleton, in offering that opinion, was principally concerned with the plaintiff's physical disabilities. His psychiatric condition (depression, anxiety) has further eroded his capacity for work.

I have little doubt that, but for the injury, the plaintiff would have kept working as a truck driver to the present time. His peripheral neuropathy, though present and progressive, would not, as a matter of probability, have prevented his performing that work. I believe he would have adapted to whatever symptoms presented. The net wage loss, which was agreed (as to the arithmetic) amounts to $112,485.70 to 1 September 1998. It is appropriate to include that sum in the plaintiff's award, adjusted to 30 September 1998, namely, $114,541.86.

The agreed Fox versus Wood component is $2,543.46. That, likewise, must be included.
Future Economic Loss 
The plaintiff said that, but for his injury, he had intended to work to the age of 65 years. That evidence was not challenged, and is accepted.

There can be little doubt that the plaintiff is totally unfit for work, and will remain so. Dr Middleton, and others, related the plaintiff's incapacity for work to his neck disorder. I accept that evidence. The psychiatric symptoms (depression and anxiety), which are related to the accident, are also disabling.

However, in assessing the plaintiff's loss, it is necessary to recognise that there were a number of matters in the plaintiff's life which, even without injury, may have prevented his working (or working continuously) as an able- bodied truck driver earning a full wage until the age of 65 years. The matters were: * First, the peripheral neuropathy, being progressive, may have become disabling with age even though I believe the plaintiff would probably have adapted, and kept working to age 65 years. Insofar as falling is a feature of this disease (as it appears to be), there is the risk of injury arising from an awkward fall. * Secondly, the plaintiff suffers from various other progressive conditions which, although controlled by medication, may have become disabling before he reached retiring age. He has diabetes mellitus. He is also taking medication for blood pressure. * Thirdly, the plaintiff was, perhaps, the more vulnerable to illness and periods of incapacity, because his lifestyle included heavy drinking, and heavy smoking. Dr Mathieson, for instance, offered the opinion (which, on this aspect, is accepted) that the combination of smoking and diabetes mellitus was unwise, and potentially lethal. 
Taking account of these matters, and attempting to reflect the degree of probability (Malec versus J C Hutton <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 638] at 643), I believe it is appropriate to discount the claim made for future wage loss by 35 percent, rather than the usual 15 percent. The appropriate amount under this head is, therefore, $115,473.95.

It is also appropriate to include an amount for loss of superannuation, both for the past, and to age 65 years. I have been provided with certain calculations by the plaintiff, and the defendant, in respect of that aspect of the plaintiff's loss. However, the matter is not entirely clear. I will reserve this aspect of the plaintiff's award for further submissions in the light of these findings. No doubt the appropriate amount can be agreed.
Past Care 
The plaintiff has been significantly disabled since the accident. Apart from the period in hospital (11 days), and a period during which his wife was obliged to attend upon her own relatives (approximately 3 days), the burden of caring for the plaintiff has fallen upon the plaintiff's wife.

The [Motor Accidents Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), [s72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html), limits the amount which may be recovered in respect of services of a domestic nature, or services relating to nursing and attendance, where those services have been provided by a member of the same household or family, as in this case.

During the early stages, no doubt the attendances by Mrs Collins upon her husband were greater than was the case once the disabilities stabilised, and a regime had been established. Taking the plaintiff's description of his present regime as a basis for inferring the level of attendance in the past is, therefore, likely to be conservative.

What care has the plaintiff required by reason of his neck, arm and mental state? The division of labour in the plaintiff's household before the accident was along traditional lines. Mrs Collins described herself as a home-maker.
She was responsible for washing, cooking, ironing and cleaning. Mr Collins, however, made a contribution to the performance of these chores. He was also responsible for the upkeep of the house, garden and the maintenance of the car. He was apparently able to maintain the car mechanically, largely without assistance. The family home is a normal suburban block, although a separate building has been constructed at the rear providing additional accommodation.

The plaintiff is able to get in and out of bed by himself (although he sometimes has assistance). If given sufficient time he can dress himself.
Again, his wife usually assists him because he is lacking strength and dexterity in his right hand (being his dominant hand). He finds it difficult, for instance, to do up buttons.

The plaintiff is able to feed himself. He has a tendency to gag as he swallows. He requires what he termed "mushie food". If he has meat it must be chopped into small portions. I infer that the plaintiff's dietary needs require the preparation of additional ("mushie") food.

The plaintiff is able to shower himself, but feels the need for his wife to be close by because he is afraid of falling. Mrs Collins may assist in drying her husband before he dresses.

Mrs Collins performs a number of other services for her husband in the course of a day. She administers his quite complex drug regime at different times of the day. She also "fetches and carries" for him, whilst he remains in bed watching television.

The plaintiff acknowledged that he could do some of the things which are done for him. He finds it difficult, however, to hold a knife or to exert pressure with a knife. He probably could butter a slice of toast if the butter were soft. He may be able to make himself a cup of tea, although he would have difficulty carrying it. Mrs Collins was apprehensive that he may harm himself if he were required to handle scalding water. She has never known him to do so.

Mrs Collins gave the following evidence (T59/60): "Q. How many hours per day would you spend either doing things for him or being in attendance that is in the vicinity of where he is to render assistance if asked for or required? 
A. Say at least 18 or 19 hours, I might occasionally go to the shops but I always make sure my other son or somebody is there with him." 
Mrs Collins added: "A. ... It's a great strain when somebody is so dependant on you, you lay there and you listen for him falling or you know when they get up to go to the bathroom or any noise and you think, you know, something is wrong if he is gagging, I stand outside the bathroom door but I don't want to embarrass him if I go in but I am scared he will slip so I stand outside the bathroom door listening for him to breath. I find all those things very demanding especially as he was, I never had this type of thing before, never that type of relationship." 
The presence of Mrs Collins for so many hours per day appeared to relate more to the plaintiff's psychological needs than the physical demands of his condition. He has now lost confidence. He will not, for instance, carry money or wear jewellery in public because he could not defend himself. If Mrs
Collins leaves the house to go shopping, she makes arrangements for her son, or someone else, to be in attendance. The dependency of the plaintiff upon his wife is something that has arisen since the accident.

In respect of the claim for future care, the defendant made a number of submissions. First, it was suggested the need for Mrs Collins to provide care can be traced primarily to the plaintiff's fear of falling. The risk of falling, however, on the defendant's case, was referable to the peripheral neuropathy, which was non-compensable.

Secondly, although Mrs Collins claimed she needed to be close-by because the plaintiff had difficulty swallowing, and may choke, the fact is that in more than four years he had not choked.

Thirdly, Mrs Collins essentially provides services which would have been provided if her husband had not been injured (s72(3) of the Act). No doubt, there is some additional work. But if one were to aggregate the time taken to perform each task, it would not exceed six hours per week, and hence, should not be the subject of an award of damages (s72(4)).

Dealing with the first submission, it is accepted that the mechanism which may cause the plaintiff to fall is related to his weakened right leg which, in turn, is referable to the (non-compensable) peripheral neuropathy.
Nonetheless, for the reasons stated, the injuries sustained in the accident are relevant to the plaintiff's need for care. The plaintiff is more vulnerable to falls because he is liable to position his weakened leg inappropriately in relation to the surface beneath him, and that because he cannot properly see that surface. His neck injury and the large collar restrict his ability to look where he is going. Further, whatever the reasons for the falls, the consequences for the plaintiff are an acute exacerbation of his neck and arm symptoms. But for the accident, he would more than likely have simply picked himself up and carried on. I therefore cannot accept the defendant's submission.

In respect of the second submission, I accept that by reason of his injuries the plaintiff has difficulty swallowing and that he "gags". The fact that he has not choked thus far does not mean that he may not do so in the future. I accept that it is reasonable that Mrs Collins should be within earshot during the short intervals that Mr Collins is eating his meals.

The third submission relates to the amount of care which the plaintiff is said to require. His needs for physical assistance are limited. He requires such assistance for short intervals at various times. For the most part the plaintiff is physically independent, although vulnerable to injury. It would not be appropriate, in my view, to isolate each service which the plaintiff's wife performs for him (which she would otherwise not have provided), and aggregate the times taken in respect of each. The services are performed throughout the day and night. On the other hand, to assess the plaintiff's need upon the basis of his wife's continuous presence for 18 hours per day, would be to over-compensate the plaintiff.

I accept the plaintiff's evidence that he feels more vulnerable since the accident, and associates that vulnerability with the disabilities from which he now suffers. I also accept that Mrs Collins has ensured that either she, or someone, is continuously present to assist the plaintiff should the need arise. However, there was no psychiatric evidence suggesting that, by reason of the plaintiff's anxiety or depression, he requires such arrangements to be made. I am therefore not satisfied that there is a need for someone to be continuously present.

Evidence was given by the plaintiff's son, Mr Gregory Collins, as to the time taken to perform various tasks outside the home (including car maintenance).
These were the tasks previously performed by Mr Collins himself. I accept Mr
Gregory Collins as a truthful witness, although he obviously had some difficulty in providing an average of the time he spends each week. I believe a reasonable allowance for the services he performs on behalf of the plaintiff, which the plaintiff cannot now perform, is about two hours per week.

A reasonable allowance in respect of the services provided by Mrs Collins, which she would otherwise not have provided but for the accident, is approximately six hours per day, seven days per week (42 hours). The house maintenance is a service of a domestic nature (2 hours per week). It should, therefore, be added to the services provided for the plaintiff by his wife (42 hours), so that the total services provided to the plaintiff amount to 44 hours per week. Making the adjustment required by s72(4), the compensable services provided amount to 38 hours per week.

As at 25 September 1998, four years and 30 weeks have elapsed since the accident (1.3.94). Section 72(2) provides that compensation should only be awarded after the elapse of six months (26 weeks). It is also reasonable to deduct a further two weeks to take account of the period during which the plaintiff was either in hospital or (in the early stages) substantially on his own (when Mrs Collins was otherwise engaged). The period used for the purposes of the calculation of past care, therefore, is four years and two weeks (210 weeks). The agreed hourly rate during that period (being an average) is $14.63. The appropriate amount for past care, therefore, is $116,747.40.
Future Care 
According to the life tables the plaintiff, being a man aged 57 years, could expect to live a further 22.08 years. That figure reflects, no doubt, the statistical average. However, a number of doctors have expressed the view that the years of life left to the plaintiff are likely to be less than the life tables suggest. Some discount needs to be made for the various afflictions suffered by the plaintiff which are unrelated to the accident (the high blood pressure, the diabetes, the heavy smoking for more than 30 years, the heavy drinking during the same period, the peripheral neuropathy). Dr Bowers, a rehabilitation specialist, suggested (report 23.2.98) that the diabetes mellitus alone would be likely to decrease the life expectancy of Mr Collins by 10 per cent. Dr Mathieson said this (report 24.12.96): "Life expectancy. This is unaffected by his injury. However persisting consumption of opiates can lead to reduction in life expectancy and similarly large doses of analgesics such as paracetamol or aspirin derivatives can also lead to respectively liver and kidney failure and stomach ulceration and these in turn can reduce life expectancy. Thus Mr Collins' life expectancy is shortened by his excessive demands for medication and has not been shortened by his injury as such. It is difficult to estimate the shortening of ones life expectancy in relation to opiate consumption and heavy analgesic consumption.
The cause of death is often sudden and unexpected such as with massive gastric haemorrhage or liver failure or renal failure. With his level of analgesic taking and opiate taking one would consider that this man's life expectancy is reduced by 50%." 
The consumption of analgesics is an aspect which is, however, related to the accident. Dr Middleton acknowledged that the various ailments of Mr Collins which are non-compensable are likely to affect adversely his expectation of life. She declined, however, to state the degree to which his life is likely to be shortened.

Doing my best to reflect the probabilities, I believe that the life expectancy for a 57 year old man (22.08 years) should be discounted by approximately 30 per cent, say 16 years.

I believe the plaintiff will require the same level of care in the future as he has in the past. It is likely that Mrs Collins will continue to provide that care. Making the appropriate adjustments required under the Motor
Accident Act, 1988, 38 hours of care per week should be provided for the remaining 16 years of the plaintiff's life. The hourly rate is $15.24, so that the present day weekly cost of such care is $579.12. Using the 5 per cent table, and a 16 years life expectancy (multiplier 579.5), the appropriate award under this head is $335,600.04.
Future Medical Expenses 
The agreed weekly cost of the plaintiff's medication and medical supervision is $13.73. The defendant submitted, however, that the plaintiff plainly ingests too much medication, so that the present day cost should be moderated to, say, $10 per week. Although I acknowledge, as a layman, that the variety and volume of the plaintiff's medication is startling, nonetheless, that medication and supervision has been established by those who have responsibility for his care. I therefore believe it is reasonable to include the full $13.73. The calculation of future care should obviously take account of the plaintiff's reduced life expectancy according to the findings I have made (16 years). The appropriate amount, on my calculations, is $7,956.54.
Worker's Compensation 
The plaintiff was paid the following Worker's Compensation by the defendant: - weekly benefits $43,298.15 - out of pocket expenses $41,243.73 $84,541.88 
That sum should be deducted from the plaintiff's verdict.

Summary 
Subject to a provision for superannuation, and the calculation of interest, the verdict for the plaintiff will be as follows: 
Non-economic loss $150,000.00 
Past Special Damage $41,992.03 
Past Wage Loss $114,541.86 
Fox versus Wood (agreed) $2,543.46 
Future Economic Loss $115,473.95 
Past Care $116,747.40 
Future Care $335,600.04 
Future Medical $7,956.54 $884,855.28 
LESS: Worker's Compensation $84,541.88 
Total $800,313.40 
The final verdict of the plaintiff must await the submissions in respect of superannuation and interest. The slip-rule will apply to any mathematical error.

Once those submissions have been made, I will enter judgment for the plaintiff in the appropriate sum, plus costs.
 * * * 
