

Laljichudasama and Anor versus Consumer Claims Tribunal and Anor: The Minister for Fair Trading, Intervener Matter No 30032/97 [1998] NSWSC 714 (22 July )

Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
PRAVIN LALJICHUDASAMA & ANOR versus CONSUMER CLAIMS TRIBUNAL & ANOR: THE MINISTER FOR FAIR TRADING, INTERVENER /97 July 1998 
Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
By their Amended Summons the plaintiffs Mr & Mrs Laljichudasama seek prerogative relief relating to an alleged denial of natural justice occasioned to them by the Consumer Claims Tribunal (the Tribunal). The Tribunal is immune from judicial review except, relevantly, where a party to a claim has been denied natural justice: see <case>(b)(ii) of the Consumer Claims Tribunal Act (the Act).

In order to appreciate the nature of the case which the plaintiffs seek to make, it is necessary to trace some of the history of the matter. The plaintiffs purchased a block of land at 3 Glover Avenue Quakers Hill upon which they decided to erect the family home. In 1993 they entered into a contract with a building company Dainton-Gough Homes Pty Limited (the builder) to erect a home on that land. Disputes arose about the quality of the construction (particularly of a structural nature) and the plaintiffs complained to the Master Builders Association.

In order to obtain support for their claim the plaintiffs consulted Mr Alfred
Frasca a consulting structural engineer, the proprietor of Alfred Frasca &
Associates Pty Ltd, the second defendant in these proceedings. On 6 March 1995
Mr Frasca accepted the commission from the plaintiffs to visit the building site and to prepare an appraisal of building works which had been completed to date. On 24 March 1995 Mr Frasca submitted his preliminary report to the plaintiffs. For present purposes it is relevant to note paragraph 3.5 "Ground
Floor Concrete Slab Edge" of this report which is in the following terms: "The owner has advised us that the concrete slab edges at the exterior weather rebate step were constructed out of alignment and had spalled concrete. The owner further advised that the timber floor frame was overhanging the slab rebated edge. The owner further advised that certain repairs to the slab edge rebate had been carried out by the builder.

Our Opinion: 
The extent of slab edge out of alignment and extent of slab edge spalling could not be established since all work was now covered.

Recommendation: 
We recommend that a Structural Certificate be issued by the design engineers certifying that the spalled concrete has no adverse effect on the structural stability and construction of the timber frame stud walls. Also the design engineers shall certify the structural adequacy of any repairs which have been carried out to the spalled concrete edges." 
On 31 March 1995 Mr Frasca attended a meeting of the Master Builders
Association, at the request of the plaintiffs, and made submissions on their behalf in his capacity as a structural engineer. There was no resolution of the dispute between the plaintiffs and the builder at this meeting. By this time an invoice had been rendered by Mr Frasca to the plaintiffs in the sum of $6,107.00.

Following the failure of any settlement to be achieved as a result of the meeting at the Master Builders Association, Mr Frasca advised the plaintiffs that "Further investigation work, in the form of a final report, would assist your case." Mr Frasca contends that the plaintiffs accepted this advice and instructed him to do whatever was necessary to assist their case. On or about April 1995 Mr Frasca completed his final report. At about the same time Mr
Frasca rendered an additional invoice in the sum of $1,659.00 to the plaintiffs, bringing the total sum owed by them to $7,766.00. On 3 July 1995, the plaintiffs forwarded a cheque for $1,000.00 to Mr Frasca.

The plaintiffs filed a complaint against the builder in the Building Services
Corporation (the Corporation) and, following a hearing in which the plaintiffs relied (inter alia) on Mr Frasca's reports, The Corporation awarded them $60,000.00 damages. The plaintiffs have always contended that such award was insufficient.

According to Mr Frasca, some time shortly before 13 June 1996 the plaintiffs wished to move into their home and Mr Laljichadasama said words to him to the following effect: "Alfred, could you approach your builder and set up a contract just to fix the roof up so it can be safe to move in." 
Mr Frasca replied: "There is still a lot of money outstanding." 
Mr Laljichadasama said: "I'll give you another progress payment. Then after the BSC proceedings are resolved, we'll work out the rest of the money." 
On or about 13 June 1996 the plaintiffs paid an additional $2,100.00 to Mr
Frasca.

On 6 September 1996 Mr Laljichudasama wrote to Mr Frasca in the following terms: "Dear Alfred, 
We are referring to our meeting at the above building site in March 1995 when you assured us that the Building Services Corporation will pay the fees for the engineers report, according to your previous experience, and you agreed to wait for the payment of your bill until BSC has paid.

As BSC has denied approx. 40 % of our claim, including your engineers fees, we are still in dispute with BSC, which has led to an appeal in the Commercial
Tribunal.

As our dispute with BSC is taking too long, you requested some part payments from us, which we paid to you. You assured us that you are willing to wait for the remaining amount until BSC has paid it out.

We will pay the outstanding amount of your bill as soon as we have received the full amount of your engineers fees from BSC." 
On 16 September 1996 Mr Frasca replied as follows: "We have reviewed your letter dated 6/9/96. We note in your letter that you state the following.
 `.....you assured us that the Building Services Corporation will pay the fees for the engineers report according to your previous experience, and you agreed to wait for the payment of your bill until BSC has paid.' 
We do not agree with your statement in fact our advise (sic) to you was to contact the BSC and follow their advise (sic) regarding your rights regarding the settlement of consultants fees by the BSC for consultant's services requested by yourself.

Further we have always advised you that settlement of our accounts in full is your responsibility." 
On or about 12 September 1996 the plaintiffs lodged a claim form with the
Tribunal against Mr Frasca complaining that Mr Frasca would not accept "less money what BSC might pay, but expects the full amount from us". The amount in issue was stated to be $4,666.00. The Details of Claim are pleaded as follows: "On the 5 March 1995 we met the structural engineer Mr. Alfred Frasca at the building site of 3, Glover Avenue, Quakers Hill, to check whether the house shows any structural defects.

For this brief inspection Mr. Frasca quoted $ 100.00 which we paid.

He then confirmed that structural defects are existing and indicated that a further detailed inspection has to be carried out.

We asked him about his fees for this, and he replied $ 85.00 per hour. but could not tell us how many hours would be involved, and explained that
Building Services Corporation will anyway reimburse the engineers fees, which they have in the past according to his experience, provided that structural defects are proven, which was the case with our house.

We explained that we don't have money to pay his fees, as we lost a lot of money due to the builder's problems, and Mr. Frasca expressed his willingness to wait for the payment until BSC would pay for his report.

We received the following invoices: .03.95 - $ 6,107.00 .05.95 - $ 1,659.00 
Total -$7,766.00.

In July 1995 Mr. Frasca requested a part payment of $ 1,000.00 to cover some of his costs/receipt 3.7.95.

In December 1995 BSC denied (sic) to pay the engineers fees with the reason that the charges are far too high.

In June 1996 Mr. Frasca requested a further payment of $ 2,000.00 / receipt .6.96(including the first $ 100.00 paid on the 5.3.95).

On Friday 13.9.96 we visited Mr. Frasca in his office and asked him, up to how much minimum he would accept, so that we know what we could negotiate with
BSC.

He then said that he requests the full amount to be paid, and that he does not care how much BSC is going to pay, we would have to pay the difference.

Had we known that we have to pay anything for the engineers report at all, we would have asked for a quote for the complete work before engaging him.

But we were under the opinion, that Mr. Frasca knew how much he can charge / how much he would get paid back by BSC, according to his past experiences with other clients and BSC dealings." 
The dispute between the plaintiffs and Mr Frasca consumed three hearing days before the Tribunal, namely, 20 November 1996, 17 December 1996 and 28 January , when the Tribunal reserved its decision. The Tribunal consisted of the
Referee Mr Graham Miner. This brings me to the matters immediately relevant to the proceedings before this Court. As a result of the plaintiffs' dissatisfaction with the order of the Corporation they sought a review of this decision by the Commercial Tribunal. It appears that as part of their preparation for the hearing in that Tribunal the plaintiffs caused a Summons for Production of Documents to be served upon Appleyard Forrest Consulting
Engineers Pty Limited to produce documents. Appleyard, apparently, were involved as consulting engineers in the construction of the plaintiffs' home.

That file was produced to the Commercial Tribunal and on 14 February 1997 the plaintiffs attended the office of that Tribunal and inspected the file.
Amongst the documents produced by Appleyard was a copy of a letter dated 30
May 1994 to The Manager Washington Gray Pty Ltd. I quote that letter in full: "30 May 1994 
The Manager 
Washington Gray Pty. Ltd.

P O Box 200 
HORNSBY NSW 2077 
Att: Ms. Sandy Nealer 
Re: Proposed Residence for Laljichudasama: 
Lot 1230 Glover Avenue, Quakers Hill 
Concrete Spalling of Edge Beam 
Dear Sir, 
We acknowledge receipt of your instructions in relation to the above matter.

We confirm having attended the site on 13 May 1994.

Observations: 
The slab is out of alignment by 20mm with the timber floor frame overhanging a total of 40mm due to the spalling of the concrete.

Recommendations: 
Form up and grout pack cavity with Fosroc Renderoc HB or equivalent. refer to the attached sketch no. 242630/2/0.

Should you require any further assistance with this matter, please do not hesitate to contact the undersigned.

Yours faithfully 
APPLEYARD FORREST CONSULTING ENGINEERS PTY.LTD.

Together with this letter were three photographs apparently taken by the consulting engineer about 13 May 1994 which clearly show the spalling of the concrete and the fact that the slab was out of alignment.

The letter dated 30 May 1994 was part of the evidence before the Referee but the photographs were not in evidence and prior to 14 February 1997, the plaintiffs were unaware of their existence.

According to the plaintiffs, a letter under the hand of Mr Laljichudasama was written to the Tribunal on 16 February 1997 in the following terms: "P. & S. Laljichudasama 
P. O. Box 658 
Castle Hill 2154 February 1997 
Consumer Claims Triubunals 
P. O. Box 4117 
Parramatta 2124 
Ref.: TPA96/993 - Alfred Frasca & Associates Pty. Ltd..

Hearing dates: 20.11.96, 17.11.96, 18.01.97.(sic) 
Dear Sir, 
We wish to inform you that we have requested the file of the builder's engineer Appleyard Forrest Consulting Engineers Pty. Ltd. at Commercial
Tribunal.

On Friday 14 February 1997 this file was produced by the engineer to
Commercial Tribunal and viewed by us.

In this file we found three photographs of our building taken by the engineer on the 13 May 1994 with only the timber frame being errected (sic) and therefore clearly showing the `slab out of alignment', `spalling of concrete' and the `overhanging timber frame', as referred to in the engineer's rectification instructions dated 30 May 1994.

As these photos forms (sic) a vital evidence in our above case regarding the slab, we are enclosing herewith a coloured photocopy of those 3 photos and ask you to pass it on to the Referee Mr. Minor. (sic) to be considered for his decision / order.

Should it not be possible that this evidence be considered without the other party being present / informed about, we request a further hearing to be listed to show and discuss those photos.

Yours sincerely (P.Laljichudasama)" 
The three photographs were annexed to that letter.

The evidence satisfies me that the letter was correctly addressed and posted on 17 February 1997. As the letter was not returned to the plaintiffs, I am satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the letter was received by the Tribunal: Watts versus Vickers 86 L.J.K.B.177. There was, however, no response from the Tribunal to the letter and on 12 March 1997 the Tribunal handed down its decision rejecting in toto the plaintiffs' claim.

In the statement of reasons the Tribunal summarised the basis of the plaintiffs' claim and Mr Frasca's response, as follows: "The basis of the claim is as follows.
The claimants submit that the respondent misled them by preparing a complete report including non structural matters and rectification drawings, which they did not request. In effect they claim that the respondent carried out unnecessary work.
The respondent did not check and follow up the main structural problem with the property - the slab. The claimants submit that the respondent's work should have been confined to an examination of the property's slab.
The claimants contend that Mr. Frasca on behalf of the respondent misled them into believing that the Building Services Corporation ("the BSC") would pay its fees or reimburse them for its fees. Had they not been so advised they would have insisted on a firm quote or required that the BSC carry out the inspections.

In summary, the respondent's response to the claim is that he carried out an appraisal of the completed building works in accordance with his retainer and that all work was approved by the claimants. The respondent claims the sum of $4,666-00 from the claimants in these proceedings." 
The plaintiffs were concerned, having received the reasons of the Tribunal rejecting their claim, whether their letter of 16 February 1997 and the photographs had been placed before the Referee. Accordingly, on 18 March 1997
Mrs Laljichudasama attended the office of the Tribunal at Parramatta and asked to see the file. She there spoke to Mrs. House. There are conflicting views as to what transpired on this occasion. However neither lady gave evidence before me. In any event, it is common ground that neither the letter of the 16th
February or the photographs were on the Tribunal's file and they certainly were not drawn to the attention of the Referee.

The plaintiffs' discontent with the situation can be discerned from a letter dated 26 March 1997 which Mrs Laljichudasama wrote to The Senior Referee
Consumer Claims Tribunal (copied to the Minister Mrs Faye Lo-Po). That letter is in the following terms: "Dear Sir, 
We are referring to our yesterday's fax sent to you in this matter and wish to inform you about the meeting with Mrs. House on Tuesday, 18 March 1997, when I asked to see the file.

Mrs. House explained that I could not see the file, only the claim lodged, the order made, and the reasons given by the Referee for the order.

I asked whether I could at least see whether the Referee has made any notes about our letter dated 16.2.97 and the enclosed copy of photos, which Mrs.
House refused.

Then I asked Mrs. House to check whether our letter 16.2.97 with the copy of photos is in the file.

She showed me the corner of a page with photos, being one of the family room with the pink painted room and the white cornice being cracked.

As these were not the ones I looked for, I explained to Mrs. House that these photos she showed me are the ones from CTI report, while I am looking for the ones showing the building with only the timber frame errected (sic) on the concrete slab, but no brickwork started yet.

She looked through the file, could not find it and said, there is anyway nothing I could do, as the order was made, and I would have to appeal to the
Supreme Court.

I remarked that the C.C.T. could at least have answered my letter or sent the copy of photos back, so we would have known that we can't do more than through it in the dustbin. Mrs. House then replied: "That's why we have already thrown it in the dustbin ourselves anyway." 
This remark left me shocked and speechless, as I did not know that letters / documents / evidences (sic) would be thrown away at C.C.T." 
There is a file note by Mrs House on the Tribunal's file in which she gives the following version of what transpired on 18 March 1997.
 "Claimant, Sylvia Laljiichudasama (sic) came to the counter, most unhappy with decision handed down by the tribunal.

C had a copy of the CCT Act which she was referring to. She demanded to see the file in its entirety.

I pointed out Section 9 which refers to official record. Claimant insisted on sighting correspondence particularly a letter she states was sent to the
Registry dated 28/2/97(sic). She further wanted to know what evidence the
Referee had considered when he had made his decision i.e was this letter taken into account.

I advised C that I do not know what the referee had considered as I was not present, however he would consider all evidence which had been presented in the right format i.e sworn oral or written evidence presented at the hearings by parties to the claim.

C demanded to see someone who could answer her question about the evidence considered by Referee.

I pointed out to C that there was no one who could tell her how or why
Referee had made his decsion. (sic) However the brief reasons do explain how the Referee reached the decsion (sic) he had, and C has a copy of these.

C then asked that if this letter of 28/2/97 was not sworn it would not be considered by the Referee.

I again reiterated that all evidence must be presented at the hearing (and not after) and if written evidence is not sworn i.e is not on a statutory declaration or an affidavit it cannot be admitted as evidence.

C stated that she would contact Senior Referee about this matter to have the order changed as the referee has not considered vital evidence which she had submitted.

I informed C that the Senior Referee could not change the order and if she intended to appeal the order, appeal only to the Supreme Court.

Grounds of appeal are on limited grounds being either denial of natural justice or that tribunals (sic) lacked the jurisdiction to hear the matter.

Claimant `stormed off', shouting as she slammed interviewing room door, passing shot with words to the effect that 'you have thrown my letter in the dustbin and what right have we to call ourselves Fair Trading'." [some remarks upon the file not relevant for present purposes have been excluded].

Section 17(1) of the Act is in the following terms: "Except as expressly provided by this Act or the regulations, a tribunal has control of and responsibility for its own procedures, but in exercising its functions under this Act must conform to the rules of natural justice." 
Counsel for the plaintiffs submitted that the fact that the letter and photographs were not drawn to the attention of Referee Miner constituted, per se, a denial of natural justice in relation to the hearing or determination of the plaintiffs' claim by the Tribunal within the meaning of <case>(b)(ii) of the Act and called for the intervention of this Court. To put it another way counsel's submission was that the failure to draw the Referee's attention to the letter and photographs constituted a failure to afford procedural fairness to the plaintiffs.

Counsel's submission, in my view, oversimplifies the situation. It is quite impossible to predict what would have been the response of the Referee had the letter and photographs been drawn to his attention, bearing in mind that he had sole control of and responsibility for the procedures relating to the claim before him. The letter and photographs could only be looked upon as an application by the plaintiffs to re-open the evidence. In the form in which they were sent to the Tribunal they did not comply with the requirements necessary to constitute evidence within the meaning of <case> of the Act.

The Referee may have taken the view that he did not have power to re-open the proceedings (although I would doubt this) or that if he did it was too late.
One must bear in mind that there was a very small amount of money, relatively speaking, involved in these proceedings and that the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal is directed to the speedy and cost effective resolution of consumer disputes.

The most the plaintiffs could have hoped for was that the Referee would have provided Mr Frasca with a copy of the new material and informed him that he was re-listing the matter to hear an application by the plaintiffs to re-open the evidence; an application which Mr Frasca was at liberty to oppose. Even if the Referee were to have taken this course he may well have rejected the application to re-open the evidence.

Counsel for the plaintiffs sought to rely upon the decision of Toohey J in
Videto versus Minister for Immigration And Ethnic Affairs <case>; [(1985) 8 FCR 167.] In that case an officer of the Immigration Department innocently took steps which had the effect of depriving the Minister of relevant information with regard to his determination whether or not to deport a person.

That judgment focuses upon what I believe to be the primary issue to be resolved in the subject proceedings, namely, whether the three photographs would have had any relevance or made any impact upon the decision handed down by the Referee. It is to this question which I now turn.

During the course of his evidence before me Mr Laljichudasama was asked why the photographs would have been significant evidence in the plaintiffs' case before the Tribunal. He replied: "The reason is that Mr Frasca is a structural engineer and as a structural engineer we have appointed him to come and have a look at the house and what he has done is he has done all the other parts of the house, checked all the other parts of the house, but he didn't go into the main slab and we explain to him and give him a drawing that there was spalling of concrete around that area and that is why it is very vital because you can see very clearly it is overhanging - the wood is overhanging on the slab - " (transcript page 8) 
Broadly speaking this response is in accordance with para 1 and 2 of the plaintiffs' claim as summarized by the Referee. But there is more than one difficulty with this proposition. The first is that the photographs were taken almost a year before Mr Frasca attended the site. At the stage he attended the site the slab had been covered over. The second problem is that Mr Frasca was fully alive to the problem of the slab being out of alignment and the spalling of the concrete. This can be seen from his report which I have quoted above.
It is also relevant now to quote the following extracts from the reasons of the Referee: "The claimants relied upon two reports: A report of Mr. F Salome, a director of CTI Consultants Pty Ltd, dated 29
July 1996 on the condition of the concrete floor slab. That report also suggested certain remedial action.
 .A report of Mr. Monier Mouafi, a structural engineer, dated 10 December which, in summary, certified that the property is `not suitable for living'.

I am not satisfied that either of these reports establishes that the respondent should have determined that the slab was not structurally sound at the time of his involvement.

The inspections carried out by Mr. Salome and Mr. Mouafi were, respectively, carried out approximately 15 months and 20 months after the respondent's inspections. Their reports do not address the respondent's reports, inspections or involvement.

Further I am satisfied that the respondent's reports do address the problems with the slab which were observed at the time of the inspections in
March/April 1995 and make certain recommendations:
In respect to site conditions (Section 3.13).

Mr. Frasca observed cracks in the floor slab 0.1mm to 0.5mm wide in the family room and garage. His evidence was the cracking was most attributable to the swelling of the reactive clay. He recommended that certain work be carried out to divert surface and sub surface water away from the building and prevent moisture migration under the building.

Mr. Frasca's evidence was that the site conditions addressed constituted the major problem with the property. The recommended work was not carried out. Mr.
Frasca's last inspection was on or about 12 April 1995. The respondent was not further involved with the property after the report of 28 April 1995.

I am satisfied that the claimants dealt directly with the BSC themselves.
In respect to spalling of the slab edge (Section 3.5) 
In summary, the claimants advised the respondent that slab edges were constructed out of alignment, had spalled concrete and that certain repairs to the slab edge had been carried out by the builder.

The claimants submitted that the statement by Appleyard Forrest ("AFCE") in their letter dated 30 March 1995 to the respondent that `We have not been involved with the repair work' of the spalled concrete, was false and that this should have given the respondent reason to follow up and identify the slab was faulty. The claimants based their view that the AFCE's statement was not true on an inspection report with rectification recommendation submitted to the builder by AFCE dated 30 May 1994. That document does not appear in the list of documents reviewed by the respondent (see section 2 of the report dated 28 April 1995). There is no evidence before the Tribunal that it was supplied to the respondent. In any event, whilst AFCE may have submitted a report and rectification recommendation to the builder concerning the spalled concrete they may well `not have been involved with the repair work' i.e. the actual work.

The respondent reported to the claimants that the extent to which the slab edge was out of alignment and the extent of the spalling could not be established since all work was covered.

The respondent recommended in its report that a structural certificate be issued by the design engineer that the spalled concrete has no adverse effect on the structural stability and construction of the timber frame stud walls.
Also that the design engineer certify the structural adequacy of any repairs which have been carried out to the spalled concrete edges.

Further Mr. Frasca carried out an investigation on site to verify items in the letter from AFCE dated 30 March 1995. The respondent reported Mr. Frasca's observations in a letter to the claimants dated 20 April 1995 (Appendix 7 to the respondent's report). That letter also made certain recommendations including that the builders obtain a structural certificate that the repairs which have been carried out to the spalled concrete are structurally adequate (Item 2 Para. 2).

That in my opinion was, in all the circumstances at that time, a logical step to recommend. There is no evidence before the Tribunal that this recommendation was followed or that an instruction was issued to the respondent to proceed any further. The respondents' involvement ended with the report of 28 April 1995." 
I am affirmatively satisfied, having considered the above, that even if these photographs had been drawn to the attention of the Referee, they could have had no bearing at all upon the ultimate judgment which he formed with regard to the entitlement of Mr Frasca to be paid in full for his services. The photographs could have had no bearing, at all, on the Referee's finding that
Mr Frasca was not negligent with regard to the services he rendered for the plaintiffs, with particular reference to the slab and the spalling of the concrete, or indeed any other aspect of his investigation.

The plaintiffs believe in their own minds that they have suffered an injustice at the hands of the Tribunal. Sensitive to their reaction in this regard I have carefully considered all the relevant material to discern whether the fact that their communication of 16 February 1997 was not brought to the attention of the Referee has resulted in any way in a denial of natural justice to them. I am satisfied that it has not in the sense that the decision of the Referee would have been no different were he to have had access to the photographs and received the submissions which the plaintiffs would have made with regard to them.

Accordingly the Amended Summons will be dismissed. However I do have a discretion insofar as costs of these proceedings are concerned. It is well established in cases such as Morosi versus Mirror Newspapers [[1977] 2 NSWLR ]
at 808 that costs do not, in special circumstances, necessarily follow the event. To my mind there are special circumstances in this case, flowing from the lack of response to the plaintiffs' letter, which justify my ordering that all parties pay their own costs. Accordingly I make that order. I should add here that the claim by the plaintiffs was opposed by counsel for the Minister
Intervening. There were submitting appearances by the Tribunal and Mr Frasca.
 * * * 
