

Regina versus Kairouz Matter No 60674/96 [1997] NSWSC 265 (18 July 1997) 
Regina versus Beshara "Charlie" Kairouz /96 July 1997 
Newman J, James J, Dunford J 
The Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA V BESHARA "CHARLIE" KAIROUZ 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I will ask Mr Justice Dunford to deliver the first Judgment in the matter. 
DUNFORD J: The Appellant has appealed against his conviction following trial by a jury before her Honour Judge Backhouse QC in the District Court at Penrith, for knowingly taking part in the cultivation of a prohibited plant, namely cannabis, contrary to [section 23(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s23.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) and he also seeks leave to appeal against the sentence of imprisonment for a minimum term of two years with an additional term of one year imposed by her Honour. 
The facts briefly were that Nimab Rimac owned a home at 3000 Remembrance
Drive, Bargo which he had leased to a person giving the name of Robert Smith.
He initially understood this person to be called "Joe", but subsequently knew him as "Charlie", the appellant. The lease document was dated 25 April 1994 and was apparently filled in by the appellant.

On occasions Mr Rimac attended the premises to collect rent and attend to jobs around the house and at times he saw the appellant, and later also the appellant's friend, Ms Penrose, at the premises. The appellant requested and
Mr Rimac permitted him to install a partition between the kitchen and the hallway of the premises on condition that the premises were to be returned to their original condition when the appellant vacated the premises.

In about August or September 1994 Mr Rimac attended the premises in the absence of the appellant and observed plants growing in milk cartons and trays under lights in each of the three bedrooms of the house. Approximately 130 to two to three-foot high plants were in the premises in the various trays and there was artificial lighting attached to wiring in each of the bedrooms.

On a return visit to the premises a few weeks later with Mr Campbell and his family, the plants were gone but the premises were observed as very messy and vegetable matter was packed up in bags in the corridor.

Milk crates were all over the place and some trays had gone. The lights were still on and the windows in the bedrooms taped, Mr Campbell saw pH testers and a hose attachment to an extra faucet in the bathroom and the linen press contained an aquarium heating device.

During this visit the appellant arrived at the premises with Ms Penrose and an argument ensued in the kitchen between Mr Rimac and the appellant, in the course of which the appellant picked up a knife. Mr Rimac said that the appellant appeared annoyed because he was in the premises with other people during the tenancy of the appellant. Ms Penrose advised the appellant to put the knife down, which he did.

Mr Campbell advised Mr Rimac to report the situation to the police which he eventually did and, on 27 September 1994, police attended the premises and collected a number of items for forensic purposes, including a green plastic tub containing green vegetable matter, orange coloured clay balls, receipts for gardening equipment and plastic bags containing material. The vegetable matter was subsequently examined and identified as cannabis leaf.

Ultimately on 11 October Mr Rimac contacted the appellant in respect of repairs to the property and outstanding rent and they arranged to meet at Town
Hall Railway Station. This meeting was observed by police. Mr Rimac entered the appellant's motor vehicle and a short time later the vehicle was stopped by police and the appellant arrested and subsequently charged.

The appellant's fingerprints were identified on a copy of the lease agreement found in the premises and also on a lemonade bottle and cigarette packet but not on any of the equipment apparently used in the cultivation.

Mr Thomas, who acted as caretaker for the neighbouring property, gave evidence of speaking to the appellant at the premises in about August or September and he also observed a woman at the premises and noted drapes on the window as unusual but, in cross-examination, there was some issue taken as to the dates on which he had spoken to the appellant at the premises.

There was also evidence from a Mr Hearne of Home Plant Pty Limited concerning receipts for equipment from his store which the police found in the premises on 25 September 1994. These receipts which became Exhibit BB were dated 10 and June 1994 and one of them listed the items purchased, which were materials capable of being used in hydroponic cultivation.

The appellant gave evidence and said that he arranged to rent the premises from Mr Rimac, but denied that there was any formal tenancy agreement involved. He said he moved in in about May or June 1994 and later said he moved in about the time of Ms Penrose's birthday, which was in the middle of
June.

He and Ms Penrose said they resided there for about six weeks and left at the end of July. The appellant denied any involvement or knowledge of the cannabis cultivation.

A number of grounds have been taken, which I will deal with in turn. The first ground was that her Honour erred in admitting into evidence Exhibit U which consisted of a plastic tub containing green vegetable matter and a white plastic bag containing green vegetable matter, which were found and removed from inside the house by police on 27 September 1994 and was the green vegetable matter later identified as cannabis leaf.

It has been submitted that there was no evidence to link the vegetable matter with the plants allegedly observed by Mr Rimac on his first visit, as the plants were not present on Mr Rimac's second visit and Mr Campbell, who accompanied him on that occasion, gave evidence of having observed the tubs but having made no observation of the plants.

In my opinion the finding by the police on 27 September 1994 of vegetable matter later identified as cannabis leaf is logically consistent with and supports the evidence of Mr Rimac that a short time earlier he had seen plants growing inside the house, whose description was consistent with being cannabis leaf, although not positively identified as such.

The plants were no longer there by 27 September but the presence of cannabis leaf was capable, along with the other evidence in the case, of leading to an inference that the plants had been harvested and become cannabis leaf.

It was evidence which could rationally affect, directly or indirectly, the assessment of the probability of the existence of a fact in issue, namely, that cannabis plants had been cultivated in the premises and was, accordingly, relevant evidence and therefore admissible: [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html) and [56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s56.html).

In R versus Tait (unreported - CCA - 2 May 1996) the appellant had been charged with cultivation of cannabis plants and at the appellant's premises police found a small bag of cannabis leaf in the refrigerator of an upstairs kitchen, fragments of cannabis leaf on the floor of different rooms in the house, plastic tubing and other material, including chemicals, lights and fittings which had, or could have been, used in hydroponic cultivation of about 20 cannabis plants.

It was claimed that the trial judge erred in admitting the evidence of the finding of the cannabis leaf in the refrigerator but, rejecting such submission, Allen J, with whom other members of the Court agreed, said, at pp -9:- "The fact that the cannabis was in the refrigerator of the very premises of which there was evidence otherwise of hydroponic cultivation, was powerful evidence in what was broadly a circumstantial case. It was in the same category as the finding of cannabis fibre in the Otto bin and the finding of small pieces of marijuana scattered throughout the house. . . It was evidence which was very much directed to the establishment of the circumstantial case against the appellant. . .
 ...

It would have been wholly artificial to separate it from the other circumstantial evidence relating to the finding of cannabis or cannabis residue".

It has been submitted that Tait is distinguishable, in that in that case there was no dispute as to the appellant's occupation at the relevant time but
I reject that submission. In my view it was part of the finding that the green vegetable matter later found to be cannabis was logically and relevantly probative of the cultivation, that the plants which had previously been there had been cannabis plants.

I have already referred to the argument between the appellant and Mr Rimac a short time previously, about Mr Rimac bringing the Campbells to the premises whilst he was the tenant. In my opinion the discovery of cannabis leaf on 27
September, after the previously observed plants had been removed, was a relevant circumstance in what was essentially a circumstantial case and to have excluded it would have been highly artificial.

The second ground of appeal is that her Honour erred in amending the dates of the alleged offence in the indictment from "between 1 March 1994 and 1
September 1994", to "between 1 March 1994 and 28 September 1994".

S 365(1) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) provides :- "Where, before trial, or at any stage of a trial, it appears to the court that the indictment is defective, the court shall make such order for the amendment of the indictment as the court thinks necessary to meet the circumstances of the case, unless, having regard to the merits of the case, the required amendments cannot be made without injustice".

The wording of the section suggests to me that where the circumstances (which includes the evidence in the case) require it, the appropriate amendment to the indictment should be made unless the making of such amendment will lead to an injustice.

In R versus Clarke [(1993) 71 A Crim R 58] at , Badgery-Parker J said:- "Section 365 of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) requires that the amendment be made at any stage if it appears that the indictment is defective provided that amendment can be made without injustice. There is ample authority for the proposition that an indictment may be regarded as defective in the relevant sense if the allegations which it makes do not correspond with the evidence that has been given in the depositions of the committal proceedings and/or of the trial".

See also R versus Stuart (unreported - CCA - 8 March 1996) at 6-7.

Here the evidence as led at the trial suggested that the cultivation could have continued after 1 September, the original end of the period, to as late as 27 September and, accordingly, the section required that the date in the indictment be amended unless such amendment would lead to injustice.

I can see no way in which such amendment could have led to any injustice to the appellant in the conduct of his defence. He did not claim that he had an alibi for the period 1 to 28 September or that he only became involved in the cultivation of cannabis plants during that period.

His case was that he ceased to occupy the premises at the end of July and that he had nothing to do with the cultivation of cannabis plants, either before or after 1 September. Accordingly, it has not been shown that the amendment did or could lead to any injustice and this ground of appeal fails.

The third ground is that her Honour erred in admitting into evidence Exhibit
BB, which were three receipts found in the premises on 27 September 1994, including one that listed the items the subject of the purchase, which were items which could be used for hydroponic cultivation, for example, Sontes lights, Perlite, expanded clay aggregate; and, as to the receipts that did not list the items, there was evidence that the company issuing the receipts, Home
Plant Pty Limited, also traded in other hydroponic equipment, such as fertilisers and growing mediums.

The appellant claimed that he and Ms Penrose moved into the subject premises just before or just after her birthday, which apparently was 16 June, and stayed about six weeks, leaving at the end of July.

These receipts were therefore capable of supporting an inference that at about the time the appellant moved into the premises, someone purchased from Home
Plant Pty Limited materials capable of being used in hydroponic cultivation and the receipts remained in the premises throughout the period that the appellant admitted he resided there. This was a most material circumstance when taken in conjunction with the other circumstances, including that the hydroponic cultivation of the cannabis plants was subsequently discovered in the premises. It is trite that in circumstantial evidence cases, it is not the individual circumstances that must be examined but the totality of them.

It is also submitted that the evidence should have been excluded, either under [s 137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), or in the exercise of her Honour's discretion under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html); in particular that the prejudice to the appellant or the confusion caused by the admission of the evidence would occasion the potential of the jury misusing the evidence on a basis unconnected with the case, namely, that the appellant bought items from a business which sold items similar to those found on the premises which could be used for hydroponic cultivation. I do not agree.

If the jury had used the evidence in the way suggested, it would, in my view, have been an appropriate use of the evidence, as the evidence was probative of those matters. Both [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) and [137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) refer to "unfair" prejudice. All evidence given in a criminal trial which points to the guilt of the accused is prejudicial, but that does not make it "unfair". This ground, accordingly, fails.

Next, it was submitted that the jury should have been directed that there was an intermediate fact that had to be proved beyond reasonable doubt (see
Shepherd versus The Queen (No 2) <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 573)], namely the appellant's occupancy of the Bargo premises at the relevant time. It was open to the jury to find the accused guilty, either by himself taking some step in the cultivation of the cannabis or by knowingly permitting the premises to be used for cultivation and, indeed, it was open to individual jurors to find him guilty on either one of those bases.

There was no dispute that he was in occupation of the premises for part of the time specified in the indictment and there were a number of additional circumstances which, when taken together, pointed to his involvement in the cultivation, including his request for permission to put a door on the outside of the kitchen to block off the view to the rest of the house, his concern of the Campbells being shown over the premises and the resultant argument involving the knife, and the inferences which I have already referred to which were open as a result of the finding of the receipts, Exhibit BB.

In my opinion there was no intermediate fact which needed to be proved beyond reasonable doubt before the jury could examine all the circumstances and, accordingly, there was no defect in this regard in the summing-up. This point was not taken at the trial and therefore would require leave for it to be raised now. Having considered the point and concluding that it is without substance, I would refuse leave.

Finally, there is an application for leave to appeal against sentence. The appellant, as I have already said, was sentenced to imprisonment for a minimum term of two years with an additional term of one year. In imposing the sentence her Honour took into account a further matter on the Form 1, namely, the possession of cannabis leave on 27 October 1994, the day of his arrest.

The particular challenge to the sentence imposed is that her Honour erred in finding, as a matter of fact, that the appellant was actively involved in the hydroponic cultivation of cannabis, as opposed to merely permitting the premises to be used for that purpose, both bases having been left to the jury and it not being known on which basis the jury reached their guilty verdict.

However, where the jury's verdict does not identify for the judge the precise facts which the jury must have accepted as being proved, the judge must form his or her own view of the facts within the ambit of the jury's verdict, and is not bound to sentence on the version of the facts which is most favourable to the accused.

I consider that there was ample evidence to justify her Honour coming to the conclusion and sentencing the appellant on the basis that he was actively involved in the cultivation. Her Honour took all subjective matters into account and, in my view, the sentence was well within the range of a proper sentencing discretion.

I therefore propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed. I would grant leave to appeal against sentence but dismiss the appeal.

NEWMAN J: I agree with both the reasons given and the orders proposed by Mr Justice Dunford. 
JAMES J: I also agree. 
NEWMAN J: The orders of the Court will be then as proposed by Mr Justice Dunford. * * * 
