

D K Lloyd versus Regina [1996] NSWSC 385 (30 August 1996) 
DOUGLAS KILGOUR LLOYD versus REGINA /96 
FRIDAY 30 AUGUST 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: This is an appeal by Douglas Kilgour Lloyd against his conviction, after a trial in the District Court before his Honour Judge Nash and a jury, on one count of sexual intercourse with a child under the age of 10 years, an offence under section 66A of the Crimes Act which carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for twenty years.

The complainant was a girl born on 27 May 1988, who was a child of the appellant's step-son. I will refer to the complainant as K or the complainant.
It was alleged by the Crown that the offence had been committed at some time between 26 May 1993, that is the day before K's fifth birthday, and 27 May , K's sixth birthday. Judge Nash sentenced the appellant to penal servitude for two and a half years to be served by way of periodic detention.
In the event of the appellant's appeal against conviction being unsuccessful, the appellant seeks leave to appeal against sentence.

The indictment which had been presented at the commencement of the trial contained four counts. The count of sexual intercourse on which the appellant was found guilty was the first count in the indictment. The second count in the indictment was an alternative count charging an indecent assault. The third count in the indictment charged another act of sexual intercourse allegedly committed between 1 March 1994 and 30 June 1994 and the fourth count contained an alternative charge of indecent assault. The jury returned verdicts of not guilty on the third and fourth counts. The trial was held in
April 1996 and hence the provisions of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) applied to the trial.

As I have already indicated, the appellant was a surrogate grandfather of the complainant. The complainant lived with her mother, who I will refer to as Z, and her older brother in a house in the Newcastle suburb of Adamstown. The complainant's mother had separated from the complainant's father shortly after the complainant was born. The complainant's father lived with his mother and the appellant, to whom his mother was married, in a house in the suburb of
Merewether.

The witnesses who gave evidence in the Crown case were the complainant, her mother Z, Dr Ticehurst (a medical practitioner) Mrs Mavis Lloyd (the appellant's wife and the complainant's grandmother) and a police officer named
Ure.

It was common ground that at least on some occasions the complainant had visited her grandmother and the appellant at their home at Merewether and had stayed overnight. A bedroom in the house at Merewether was referred to as K's bedroom but in fact she slept with her grandmother in her grandmother's room, only using the room known as her bedroom for other purposes such as a room to play in. The appellant slept in the room known as K's bedroom.

The complainant was found by the trial judge to be competent to give sworn evidence. In her evidence the complainant gave evidence firstly of the alleged offence charged in the third and fourth counts of the indictment. She said that on this occasion she had been "in my bedroom". At about six o'clock in the afternoon the appellant had entered the room. The complainant's grandmother was in the kitchen. The appellant closed the door to the bedroom and, according to the complainant, "he picked me up and threw me on my bed".
The appellant pulled off the complainant's shorts, underpants and T-shirt. The appellant "got his finger and he put it into my vagina".

A little later in her evidence the complainant said that the appellant had put two fingers into her vagina, that he had inserted his fingers up to the second knuckle from the fingertips and had moved his fingers around. The complainant called out "Grandmother help" but the appellant put his other hand over the complainant's mouth and told her to be quiet. The appellant left the room.

The Crown Prosecutor then asked a series of questions designed to elicit when the complainant said this incident had happened. I will set out these questions and the responses of the complainant.
 "CROWN PROSECUTOR: Q. Are you able to tell us when this thing happened to you?
Can you remember now when it happened? (No verbal reply) 
Q. If I tell you this that you spoke to a police lady in September 1994, can you tell us how long before then that it happened to you? (No verbal reply) 
Q. If I can help you a little bit. Was it the day before or the week before or months before or years before or what? 
A. I don't remember because - I don't remember because-- 
Q. That's all right. You have your birthday each May, don't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. You were - you'd turned six on 27 May 1994. Can you tell us whether this thing happened before or after your birthday that year? 
A. It happened twice the same and one happened after and one happened before.

Q. One happened after your birthday and one before your birthday, is that what you told us? (No verbal reply) 
Q. You just nodded then. I take it you mean yes to that? 
A. Yes.

Q. You said it happened twice. Did these things both happen in 1994? You've already told us about one thing that happened in - before your birthday or after your birthday. Did they both happen in that same year? (No verbal reply) 
Q. Perhaps if I put it to you this way, K--. The one that you just told us about did that happen before or after your birthday that year? 
A. After I think.

Q. Can you tell us how long after your birthday/ 
A. One month.

Q. Sorry? 
A. One month away".

The complainant was then asked questions about the other occasion on which she said something had happened to her. The early questions and answers were as follows: "Q. The time that something happened to you before your birthday in 1994 I want you to tell us about that now, okay? (No verbal reply) 
Q. Could you do that? Could you just think about that for a minute and tell us whereabouts you were when it happened? (No verbal reply) 
Q. Do you remember what room you were in? (No verbal reply) 
Q. You've just shaken your head then. You can't remember what room you were in, is that right? (No verbal reply) 
Q. Whose house were you at? (No verbal reply) 
Q. At Grandma's house, were you? (No verbal reply) 
Q. And were you in the house or out of the house when it happened? 
A. In the house".

The complainant eventually gave evidence that the appellant "had done the same thing". "He threw our (as said) clothes on the floor again". On this occasion she said the appellant had put two of his fingers in the complainants's vagina up to between the first and second knuckles from the fingertips and had moved them around. This had hurt the complainant. The appellant had said to the complainant, "Don't tell anyone" in a "mad" tone of voice.

The complainant was asked why she did not make any prompt complaint and the transcript of her evidence reads as follows: "Q. Why didn't you tell Grandma? 
A. 'Cause I was afraid she wouldn't believe and that she'd tell Doug.

Q. Why didn't you tell your mother? (No verbal reply) 
Q. At that time? (No verbal reply) 
Q. All right. But you said-- 
HIS HONOUR: What was the answer? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: She shrugged her shoulders, your Honour, and that's the response that I saw.

Q. And your Dad. Why didn't you say anything to Dad about it? 
A. 'Cause I don't know.

Q. You don't know, but you're shrugged your shoulders again, okay. What about your older brother. Did you say anything to your older brother about these things at all? 
A. I didn't tell anyone".

The complainant gave evidence that she had first made a complaint on a day which would have been about early September 1994. She had stayed home from school so that her mother could take her to see a film. In fact the film was not on. On this day she said to her mother, "Grandpa got his fingers and put them in my fanny".

The complainant also gave evidence that she was given lollies at the appellant's house, including a lolly known as a Soother. She said "I said 'I want a Soother' so he gave me the one out of his mouth". The complainant said in cross-examination that on one occasion the appellant had passed a Soothers to her out of his own mouth by kissing her and putting his tongue in her mouth.

The complainant was also cross-examined ;about an answer she ;had given when interviewed by the police in September 1994, to the effect that the appellant had put three fingers and not merely one or two fingers in her vagina.

Z, the complainant's mother, gave evidence of the making of the complaint. She said that a little later on that day in September she telephoned the complainant's grandmother, who came to the house at Adamstown. That evening the appellant himself came to the house at Adamstown. According to Z's evidence the appellant said that Mavis had told him what K had said and "he would not do that". He did not believe anyone would do that and then he said, "Well, why did she wait so long to say anything?" 
The complainant's mother was extensively cross-examined and it is necessary to refer to some of the cross-examination. In cross-examination the complainant's mother agreed that she had separated from the complainant's father when the complainant was about six months old.

In 1992 the complainant's mother had been a heroin addict. She had criminal convictions for drug abuse and assault. She was asked, "Is this the position from 1992 onwards Mr and Mrs Lloyd were seeking to get custody of K from you?
She answered, "They have been trying to get K away from me since she was a baby".

The complainant's mother was aware that the appellant and his wife had been complaining about her to the Department of Community Services about the way she was caring or not caring for K. She said that she had always disliked the appellant and his wife; she had always hated them. She was constantly getting visits from officers of the Department of Community Services inquiring into the welfare of her child and she knew that that was happening at the instance of the appellant and his wife.

On 31 May 1994 she had asked Mrs Lloyd for $50 and when Mrs Lloyd had refused she had told Mrs Lloyd that she and her husband would not see K again.
Inconsistently, she then said that K had been at the Lloyd's place many times after her sixth birthday. Later she said she did not remember whether K had been at the Lloyd's house between May and September 1994. She agreed that just before K spoke to her in September 1994 about the alleged incident the police had conducted a telephone operation called "Operation Paradox", which was concerned with child abuse and that officers of the Department of Community
Services had come to interview her about complaints made against her as part of Operation Paradox. She believed that the appellant and his wife had "dobbed her in".

It was put to her that she had put K up to making these allegations against the appellant, as a way of countering allegations which had been made against her fitness to have the care of the complainant. She denied this suggestion.

Mrs Mavis Lloyd, the appellant's wife, gave evidence in the Crown case. She gave evidence of being contacted by the complainant's mother in September 1994 and of having spoken to the appellant. She said that she had been told nothing by the complainant's mother and had told the appellant nothing about when it was that the incidents were alleged to have occurred. She said that the last time she had seen K before that day in September 1994 was 29 May, just after
K's sixth birthday.

Dr Ticehurst, a specialist in paediatrics, who examined the complainant at times which are not clearly established by the evidence, found her hymeneal membrane appeared quite normal with no evidence of recent or past injury. Dr
Ticehurst expressed the opinion that if the complainant's account of the incidents was true, nevertheless, given the delay between the incidents and her examination of the complainant, "one would not necessarily expect any injury".

A police officer, Detective Ure, gave evidence that in November 1994 the appellant had attended a police station with his solicitor. When asked if he had anything to say about a statement from the complainant which he had been asked to read, he said, "It never happened". The solicitor said the appellant would not take part in an interview.

Detective Ure said that on 7 September 1994 an operation named Operation
Paradox had been conducted by the New South Wales Police Service, inviting complaints about child abuse to be made to a central telephone number and that a complaint had been received relating to Z, the complainant's mother.

The appellant gave sworn evidence in the defence case. At the time of the trial he was 71 years old. He had no prior criminal convictions. He denied committing any of the offences or any of the acts alleged by the complainant.
He said that the complainant had had trouble with her schoolwork and that in
February and March 1994 the appellant had arranged for a local school principal he knew to give the complainant reading lessons. When asked why he had said what he had when he spoke to the complainant's mother at her house in
September 1994, he said "We hadn't seen her since May and this was September when she suddenly comes up and says I did this, that and the other and why? I hadn't seen her for four, five months. Why wait this long? If I had have done anything to her why didn't her mother raise it before then?" 
The appellant said on many occasions he had given the complainant a Soothers.
He had said to the complainant, "Well, give me a kiss and I will give it to you. So I put it in my lips and she would give me a kiss and take the
Soother". He denied he had ever put his tongue in the complainant's mouth when transferring a Soother to her.

He confirmed evidence already given by his wife that for some years they had been trying to obtain custody of, or at least access to, the complainant.

Mr Lewis, the school principal referred to by the appellant, gave evidence in the defence case. He confirmed that he had seen the complainant at the request of the appellant. In his opinion as a schoolteacher of many years' experience, the complainant was in need of assistance in reading, her attention span was very limited even for a child of her age and the complainant had a condition which he described as echolalic, that is that she repeated herself a lot. Mr
Lewis also gave character evidence for the appellant.

Mr John Mason, a Minister of the Uniting Church and a former member of parliament, also gave character evidence for the appellant.

In summing-up the trial judge said that there was no evidence which would corroborate the complainant's evidence. His Honour told the jury that there were no admissions and that the evidence of the complaint was not to be taken as evidence that the incidents complained of had taken place. Elsewhere in the summing-up his Honour said that the evidence of Dr Ticehurst was "completely neutral".

A number of grounds of appeal against conviction were raised, including that the trial judge had erred in not giving directions in accordance with
Longman versus The Queen <case>; [(1989-90) 168 CLR 79] and in not giving directions in accordance with [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). His Honour did give the jury a warning against convicting on the uncorroborated evidence of the complainant. However, it is unnecessary to deal with these grounds of appeal because, in my opinion, the verdict of guilty on the first count should be held to be unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The principles to be applied by the Court of Criminal Appeal in determining whether a verdict of guilty is unsafe and unsatisfactory have been stated by the High Court in M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] especially at 493 to 495 and by this Court in R versus McKnoulty [(1994) 77 A Crim R ] at 338-9 and there is no need to repeat them in this judgment.

I have made my own independent examination of the evidence to determine whether upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty on the first count and even allowing for the advantage the jury had in seeing and hearing the witnesses, I have concluded that it was not so open.

At the trial the complainant was a child of seven years of age giving evidence about events which she said had happened during a period between the day before her fifth birthday and a short time after her sixth birthday. There was evidence by Mr Lewis, an experienced school teacher, that at least in early the complainant had reading difficulties and that her attention span, even for a child of her age, was very limited. The complainant's evidence about the incident the subject of the first count was quite brief. As I have already stated, she made no verbal reply to the first few questions she was asked about this incident. She then said that the appellant "had done the same thing" as he had done on the occasion of which she had given evidence earlier, which was in fact a later occasion. She then gave the brief further evidence I have already summarised.

There are inconsistencies between the complainant's evidence and what she had told the police in a statement made to the police, including inconsistencies about the number of the appellant's fingers which she said the appellant had inserted in her vagina. The complainant's evidence was uncorroborated. The evidence of the doctor who examined the complainant much later was, as his
Honour told the jury, completely neutral, to say the least. There was no evidence of injury.

The trial judge told the jury, correctly, in my view, that there had been no admissions by the appellant. I agree that what the appellant said to the complainant's mother at her house in September 1994 should not be regarded as an admission by him. The alleged passing of lollies from the appellant to the complainant via the appellant's mouth was a flimsy basis for inferring some kind of guilty attachment between the appellant and the complainant.

Very importantly in the present case, the complainant at all material times was residing with her mother. The complainant's mother said in her evidence that she had always hated the appellant and his wife. She had been a heroin addict and had a criminal history. From time to time officers of the
Department of Community Services visited her enquiring into the welfare of the complainant and she knew that the visits had resulted from complaints made by the appellant and his wife. She had tried to borrow money from the appellant's wife and had been refused. The allegations by the complainant emerged only after Operation Paradox had been conducted by the police in early September and a departmental officer had come to interview the complainant's mother about a complaint made about her fitness as a mother, which the complainant's mother believed had been made by the appellant and his wife.

The appellant gave sworn evidence denying his guilt and called impressive character evidence. I appreciate that character evidence tends to be of less importance with this kind of offence.

There was a basis on which the jury could rationally have distinguished between the two pairs of counts in the indictment, so as to return a verdict of guilty on the first count but a verdict of not guilty on the third and fourth counts but that this basis existed was partly due to confusion in the complainant's own evidence.

In my opinion the ground of appeal against conviction that the verdict of guilty on the first count was unsafe and unsatisfactory should be upheld and I would propose that the appeal against conviction be upheld and that the verdict of guilty on the first count in the indictment be quashed absolutely.

HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the order proposed by Mr Justice James for the reasons he has given.

SMART J: I also agree.

HUNT CJ at CL: The orders of the Court are as delivered by Mr Justice James.
 * * * 
