

Shoalhaven City Council versus Lovell [1996] NSWSC 599 (4 December 1996) 
SHOALHAVEN CITY COUNCIL versus LOVELL /93; LEC 10452/92 DECEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, MAHONEY P, SHELLER JA 
CATCHWORDS: Building control and town planning - Development consent for subdivision of land near Air Base in ANEF zone - Effect of Defence (Areas Control) Regulations (Cth) 
Land and Environment Court - granting of consent to subdivision - Effect of
Commonwealth defence regulations on exercise of discretion 
Words and Phrases - "public interest" 
Environmental Planning & Assessment Act 1979, ss 90(1)(q) & (r);
Defence (Areas Control) Regulations (Cth) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:DISMISSED 
Respondent Lovell sought development consent to subdivide land near Naval Air
Base at Nowra - Appellant Council refuses consent - Lovell institutes class 1 appeal in Land and Evnironment Court (LEC) - LEC upholds appeal and grants consent to subdivision - Council appeals to Court of Appeal on question of law pursuant to [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s57.html) of the [Land and Environment Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/).

Exercise of discretion by LEC judge in accordance with <case> of the
Environmental Planning & Assessment Act 1979 - Relevance of proximity of land to Naval Air Base and inclusion in ANEF zone - Consideration of DCP No 38 "Policy of Residential Development within ANEF Noise Zones" - Consideration of "public interest" and "circumstances of the case" - Effect of proposed subdivision on safe operation of Naval Air Base - Whether and to what extent existence of Defence (Areas Control) Regulations (Cth) affects the exercise of the <case> discretion - Held: appeal dismissed: The judge gave appropriate consideration to the Regulations in the exercise of his discretion pursuant to <case> Environmental Planning & Assessment Act 1979 to approve the subdivision. Accordingly there was no error of law.

O'Sullivan versus Farrer <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 210]; applied.

Warringah Shire Council versus Sedevcic [(1987) 10 NSWLR 335]; referred to.

ORDER 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Mahoney P. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons.
 
MAHONEY P: Harold Arthur Lovell owns land near the Naval Air Base at Nowra. He desires to subdivide the land into four lots. To do so he needs the approval of the Shoalhaven Shire Council. The Council refused that consent. Mr Lovell appealed to the Land and Environment Court against that refusal. It is agreed that the appeal, as a Class 1 appeal, was an appeal by way of rehearing in that Court. The Court upheld Mr Lovell's appeal and gave approval to a subdivision. The Council has appealed to this Court against the judge's decision.

The appeal to this Court is limited to a question of law: [Land and
Environment Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/), [s (1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s57.html) 
It was thought that the appeal involved, or might involve, a constitutional question within the relevant provisions of the [Judiciary Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/): see [ss
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/s78a.html) and [78B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/s78b.html).
Mr Katz SC, who has appeared for the Council, has submitted evidence to establish that the requirements of the [Judiciary
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/) have been complied with. The Amended Notice of Appeal was, the evidence indicates, served upon the persons to be served in accordance with the legislation. The
Court is satisfied that it may proceed to hear the appeal.

Mr Katz SC has appeared before this Court on behalf also of the Attorney
General of New South Wales, as intervenor. Nothing has been urged to turn upon that intervention.

At the commencement of the hearing before this Court Mr Katz SC indicated that the grounds of appeal to be pressed were limited to grounds 1, 2 and 3 of the
Amended Notice of Appeal. The other grounds of appeal were abandoned. The grounds pressed were: "1. That his Honour erred in law in holding that the Defence (Areas Control)
Regulations evinced an intention to cover the subject matter of safe defence aeronautical navigation as affected by building on private land in the vicinity of Nowra Airfield, to the exclusion of State Law by operation of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s109.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).
That his Honour erred in law in holding that the Environment Planning and
Assessment Act 1979 did not extend to issues regarding the safe operation of the Naval Air Base and safe flying courses for aircraft.
That his Honour erred in law in excluding from consideration under <case> of
Environment Planning and Assessment Act 1979 the effect of the development application on the Naval Air Base and the use of the Naval Air
Base, including those considerations of which Commodore Morton gave evidence which was accepted." 
During argument, Mr Katz SC indicated that he did not contend that his Honour had erred in holding that the Act did not extend to the safe operation and safe flying matters referred to in ground 2. However, what his Honour said in that regard is relevant to other aspects of the matter.

It is common ground that, upon the appeal to the Land and Environment Court, that Court was to determine whether, in its discretion, it should grant approval to the proposed subdivision. The Court had for these purposes all of the relevant powers of the Council. As the result of the argument before this
Court, by Mr Katz SC for the Council and Mr Robertson for Mr Lovell, two main issues emerged: whether, in the exercise of his discretion, the trial judge had taken into account irrelevant factors or failed to take account of relevant factors; and whether, in considering the effect to be given to the
Defence (Areas Control) Regulations ("the Regulations") his Honour had acted upon a wrong construction of them.

In order to understand these issues and the way in which they emerged, it is necessary to refer briefly to the structure of the appeal as it was before the trial judge. The land in question was subject to the restrictions imposed by the Local Environmental Plan 1985 ("LEP") prepared by the Council. The land was in Zone 1(a) (Rural "A" Zone) referred to in the LEP: cl 9. The subdivision of it was controlled principally by cl 10 and following of Pt III of the LEP. The LEP provided (or assumed) that the relevant land could not be subdivided except with the consent of the Council and provision was made: see generally cl 11; for the circumstances in which that consent could be given.
The argument proceeded upon the basis that the subdivision would involve a "concessional allotment" as there referred to. The plan of proposed subdivision involved, inter alia, that dwelling houses would or could be erected upon the allotments and reference was made inter alia to Pt III cl
All of these provisions indicated that the Council, and accordingly the
Land and Environment Court, had a discretion to grant or refuse the relevant consent.

It is accepted that, in the exercise of the discretion, the Council and the
Court act in accordance with <case> of the Act. That, as far as is here relevant, provides that in "determining a development application, a consent authority shall take into consideration such of the matters as are of relevance to the development the subject of the development application" specified in the section. Those matters include the provisions of any environmental planning instrument: <case>(a), "the circumstances of the case": (q); and "the public interest": (r); and any control plan relevantly in force.

The Council, in its letter of 10 October 1991 notifying refusal of the consent, gave as its reasons: "1. The proposed subdivision is contrary to the provisions of Development
Control Plan No 38 adopted by Council on 17 October 1989 in that the proposal is located within 25-35 ANEF zone.
In the circumstances of the case the subdivision is not in the public interest." 
As appears from the judgment of the learned trial judge, the appeal was concerned in particular with the significance of the fact that the land was close to the Naval Air Base and with the effects which generally that would have. The evidence and the argument were directed inter alia to the effect upon the Naval Air Base and its operation of the subdivision of land and the building of dwellings so close to it and to the effect upon persons living in such dwellings of their closeness to the Naval Air Base. The Council had prepared the Development Control Plan No 38, described as: "Policy of
Residential Development within ANEF Noise Zones around RANAS Nowra (HMAS
Albatross)". ("ANEF" means "Australian Noise Exposure Forecast"). The Council had divided the relevant area into zones according to the noise apt to be experienced in those zones. The ANEF Noise Contour Map had been issued by the
Department of Defence in September 1987. The bulk of the land in question was within ANEF Zone 25-30, Zone 30-5: a small portion was in Zone 20-25. The
Council's policy, as set forth in Development Control Plan No 38 was that relevantly subdivisions would not be approved in the Zones 25-35. The purpose of this policy was "to prevent subdivision and building in areas exposed to unacceptable levels of noise". His Honour said: "The DCP refers to other relevant controls and considerations affecting subdivision applications in the vicinity of the Naval Air Base. For example, it states that applications concerning dwelling houses should aim to site the buildings as far from main flight paths as possible." 
However, as the judge held, it is now conceded that consent to the present subdivision could be granted if it was thought proper that it be so.

In argument before the trial judge, the Council raised "the second ground, public interest" and, his Honour recorded, "raised concerns as to possible air accidents affecting persons using the subdivided land". Serving officers of the Royal Australian Navy and the Royal Australia Air Force and others gave evidence "as to the present and future defence needs of the Naval Air Base at
Nowra". His Honour, during an eight day hearing, had evidence "as to the flight paths and an aural comprehension of the noise involved in the landing and taking off of Air Force fixed wing aircraft from the base". His Honour summarised the evidence given by one of the main witnesses in this regard,
Commodore Morton, as being: "1. It will set a precedent. Building in high noise contours will affect base operations. Residents in those areas will often complain about noise and make representations to alter flight paths.
Building in the 25-35 ANEF contour will constrain flight operations.
As opposed to civil aerodromes, naval and air force planes and helicopters may fly in formation and not be fitted with equipment to reduce noise." 
His Honour said the evidence as establishing "that any aircraft flying over the Lovell land would be at an altitude of 600 feet ...".

At the end of the hearing, an event occurred which gave rise to complications and to which Mr Katz SC has referred in his submissions. During the hearing his Honour had asked "whether or not the Commonwealth of Australia took some role in safeguarding its aeronautical requirements as to the approaches to the base". It was "not until the close of the last day of the hearing that counsel for the applicant discovered" that a certificate given under <case> of the Act was incomplete. (Section 149 provides for a council to issue a certificate specifying prescribed matters). It was then discovered that the Commonwealth had made some provision in this regard. His Honour was referred to the
Defence (Areas Control) Regulations.

Those Regulations were made under the [Defence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/da190356/) of the
Commonwealth. At the relevant time they applied, as the Court is informed, only to the Nowra Naval Air Base. As far as is here immediately relevant, they did two things. First, they identified particular areas in the vicinity of the
Air Base and provided that, in respect of each area, a person should not construct a building higher than the height specified in the Regulations: see regs 5, 6 and 7. Second, the Regulations, as in force at the date of the judgment 23 August 1993, provided that a person "must not, without reasonable excuse, bring onto, have on or construct on affected land an object hazardous to aircraft or to communications". The present land is accepted to be within "affected land".

In his judgment, the learned trial judge dealt, inter alia, with two things: the effect of the Regulations and generally "the Defence Issue" raised in relation to the air base; and the "Environmental Issues" arising under the
Town Planning legislation and the Act. It is in connection with the way in which his Honour dealt with these two matters that the appeal has been pressed.

It will be convenient to consider what matters were relevant, or not relevant, to the exercise of the discretion to grant or refuse consent under the LEP and then to consider what, in that regard, the judge did.

THE MATTERS RELEVANT TO THE EXERCISE OF THE DISCRETION: 
The subject land is very close to the air base and, as the judge indicated, is in line with or proximity to flight paths apt to be taken by aircraft using the air base. Over-simplified, the considerations said to affect the discretion may be considered by reference to three things: the effect of the air base and its operations upon those living in or otherwise on the subject land; the effect upon the safety and other aspects of the operation of the air base of the fact that persons would live or otherwise be upon the land when subdivided (including the "precedent" effect of the subdivision); and the
Regulations.

It is, I think, not in doubt but that it was relevant for the Court, in the exercise of the discretion, to have regard to the effect of the air base upon those living on or using the land, if subdivided, and generally the effect upon the amenity of persons who would come to be upon the land in its subdivided state. It was the essential purpose of the relevant environmental planning instruments, including the LEP and the Development Control Plan No , to determine or indicate, eg, aircraft noise level and the "disturbance to everyday activities" which proximity to the air base would have in relation to persons coming to the land if subdivided.

Before the trial judge, there was, it would appear, contest as to whether the second group of considerations had relevance to the exercise of the discretion. Consideration was given to whether the effect of the subdivision upon "the safe operation of the Naval Air Base and safe flying courses for aircraft" was relevant to the exercise of the discretion.

In my opinion, there were some matters affecting such issues which were proper to be taken into account in the exercise of the discretion to grant or refuse consent to the subdivision. If the Regulations be, for the moment put aside, it would in my opinion be relevant in deciding whether to grant consent to a subdivision, to consider whether the subdivision involved, or was apt to lead to, the erection of structures on the land which might increase the risk to aircraft using the air base. It would be relevant to consider whether the activities apt to flow from subdivision of the land and its use would affect, eg, communications with aircraft using the air base. Thus, if a particular development proposal involved structures of an unsafe height or activities which would interfere with communications of that kind, it would in my opinion be proper for the Land and Environment Court to take such matters into account in deciding whether the consent should be given.

In his judgment the learned judge concluded that no matter how "wide the definition of 'environment' in <case> of the Act may be", that definition did not "extend to the issues regarding the safe operation of the Naval Air Base and safe flying courses for aircraft ...". The Act has as its purpose the institution of "a system of environmental planning and assessment for the
State of New South Wales": see the preamble to the Act; and "environment" is defined to include "all aspects of the surroundings of man, whether affecting him as an individual or in his social groupings". The objects of the Act, as specified in <case>, include "the protection of the environment": <case>(a)(vi).

However, by <case>(q) and (r) the Land and Environment Court is to take into account, in exercising such a discretion, "the circumstances of the case" and "the public interest". The ambit of these terms is wide. In my opinion, "the public interest" includes measures taken to reduce the risk of aircraft accidents and matters of that kind, whether such risks affect those in the aircraft, those in the air base, or those who, in land near the air base, may be affected by aircraft crashes and the like.

In considering the relevance of considerations of this kind, two questions may arise: whether the considerations can, in a proper factual context, be relevant to the exercise of the discretion or whether they cannot in any circumstances be so relevant; and, if they can be relevant, whether in the circumstances of the instant case, they are relevant. In my opinion, such considerations are within the scope of relevance in respect of the discretion and, in appropriate circumstances, may be relevant to what the Court does.

These considerations were relevant in the present case. It would be relevant, in deciding, eg, whether by subdivision additional persons should be attracted to the land, to have regard to the possibility that they might be injured, physically or psychologically, by aircraft crashing on or near the air base.

It is arguable that safety and similar considerations were not in fact relevant in this case because the consent sought was a consent merely to subdivision of the land and that matters affecting the safety of the aircraft, eg, the height of structures or the interference with communications, could and should be controlled when the occasion arose to approve the erection of buildings or structures or the use of the subdivided land generally. I do not think that that is a correct approach. The erection of building structures and the use of electronic equipment and the like is something which is apt to occur if land is subdivided for residential and similar use. Such things are or may be incidents of that use. It is relevant to consider the possible effect of them at the earlier rather than the later stage.

The term "public interest" is not defined in the legislation. The matters comprehended by it are in my opinion of a wide ambit. In O'Sullivan versus Farrer <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 210], Mason CJ,
Brennan, Dawson and Gaudron JJ: at 216; said: "Indeed, the expression 'in the public interest', when used in a statute, classically imports a discretionary value judgment to be made by reference to undefined factual matters, confined only 'in so far as the subject matter and the scope and purpose of the statutory enactments may enable ... given reasons to be [pronounced] definitively extraneous to any objects the legislature could have had in view': Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission v
Browning <case>; [(1947) 74 CLR 492] at 505, per Dixon J." 
In Warringah Shire Council versus Sedevcic [(1987) 10 NSWLR 335] at 339,
Kirby P referred to the significance of "public interest" in the context of
Environmental Planning legislation.

I come to the effect of the Regulations. As I have indicated, the two main matters presently relevant which are dealt with by the Regulations are the height and nature of buildings or structures near the air base and the having upon the relevant land of an object hazardous to aircraft or to communications. As I have said, such matters can be within the scope of the discretion to be exercised by the Land and Environment Court and, in the present case, were within the scope of that discretion. Had the Regulations not been enacted, the Court could and, in my opinion, should have taken matters of that kind into consideration in determining whether the consent should be given. But argument was directed to the effect of the Regulations in this regard. As I have said, relevantly their main effect was to limit the buildings or structures to be erected on relevant land: regs 5-7; and to prevent their being on the relevant land objects hazardous to aircraft or to communications: reg 12. Such Regulations would, in the case of inconsistency within [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s109.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), prevail over State legislation: the learned judge referred to University of
Wollongong versus Metwally <case>; [(1984) 158 CLR 447] at 456, Botany Municipal Council versus Federal Airports
Corporation <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 453] at 464-5 and Scutchings versus George <case>; [(1991) 1 VR 732] at 741. But, in the present case, the issue is, in my opinion, not one simply of inconsistency. The question is whether and to what extent the existence of the regulations affects the matters which may be taken into account in the exercise of the [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s90.html) discretion.

The two matters relevantly dealt with by the Regulations, viz, buildings and structures and communications, are not the only matters which may affect the safety of aircraft using the airport and the flight paths which they may follow. For example, the judge's assessment of the evidence of Commodore
Morton was that the Commodore saw the possibility of residents affected by noise making representations such as would "constrain" flying to and from the base and/or lead to the alteration of flight paths from those which otherwise would have been adopted as most suitable. As his Honour's judgment indicated, experience has shown that agitation by those in the vicinity of airports may result in the modification of what otherwise would have been followed as the safest or most expedient method of aircraft operation.

In my opinion, it was not the intention of the Regulations that the provisions made by it, viz, in relation to the height of buildings and structures and the interference with communications, were to be the only considerations to be taken into account in relation to the operation of the air base. Such matters were not prescribed as the only matters which could or should be taken into account when the operation of the air base was considered by a governmental or other authority. Accordingly, it was not the intention or effect of the
Regulations that, in considering whether land should be divided or buildings built upon the relevant land, a state or other authority should not take into account other matters apt to affect the safety or expedient operation of the air base. Insofar, at least, as such matters fell within "the public interest" the Court was not precluded from taking them into account.

It is not necessary to consider whether, in exercising the relevant discretion, the Court could, for example, see safety considerations as requiring a greater measure of precaution in respect of the two matters dealt with by the Regulations than the Regulations themselves required. It is arguable that, in respect of an area where the Regulations prescribe that, without approval, a building or structure shall not be higher than 15 metres: see reg 5; the Court could provide that consent should not be given unless the building or structure was no higher than 10 metres. I am inclined to the view that it was not the purpose or effect of the Regulations to prevent the Court acting in that way in the exercise of the discretion. But that issue does not arise in the present case.

Accordingly, the Court could and (if it was appropriate) should, in the exercise of the discretion, have taken into account the significance of the grant of consent qua the safety and operation of the air base. To the extent that the facts raise such a matter for consideration it was a matter that the
Court could and should have taken into account.

WHAT DID THE COURT DO? 
The complaint made by the Amended Notice of Appeal is that the judge erred in not taking into account, as a matter relevant to the exercise of his discretion, "issues regarding the safe operation of the Naval Air Base and safe flying courses for aircraft": ground 2; and "the effect of the development application on the Naval Air Base and the use of the Naval Air
Base, including those considerations of which Commodore Morton gave evidence which was accepted": ground 3.

Mr Robertson, for Mr Lovell, submitted that the judge's judgment, properly understood, indicated that he had taken such matters into consideration.

The judge's judgment was, I suspect, affected by the way in which the
Regulations came before him and the argument advanced to the effect they had.

Mr Katz SC submitted that, in dealing with "the defence issue" the judge had excluded from consideration matters of the relevant kind. There is, in my opinion, force in that argument. His Honour said, in terms, that "environment" in <case> of the Act "does not extent to the issues regarding the safe operation of the Naval Air base and safe flying courses for aircraft ...". He observed that, had the Regulations been brought to the Court's attention earlier, he could have avoided "investigating an issue beyond the competence of State law" and he recorded his opinion that the Regulations "evince an intention to cover the subject matter of safe defence aeronautical navigation as affected by building on private land in the vicinity of Nowra Airfield to the exclusion of state law". Had his Honour done no more, I would conclude, as Mr Katz SC has submitted, that his Honour excluded such matters from his consideration in exercising the discretion.

However, his Honour, having referred to the matters to which I have referred, said: "In case I am in error, I set out Commodore Morton's concerns regarding the development application:
It will set a precedent. Building in high noise contours will affect base operations. Residents in those areas will often complain about noise and make representations to alter flight paths.
Building in the 25-35 ANEF contour will constrain flight operations.
As opposed to civil aerodromes, naval and air force planes and helicopters may fly in formation and not be fitted with equipment to reduce noise.

These considerations are of considerable force, and coming from the Commodore of the Naval Air Base, are to be respected. For the reasons given above, I believe they are a matter for the Commonwealth." 
It is not clear what his Honour meant by this: in particular, it is not clear what is meant by: "For the reasons given above, I believe they are a matter for the Commonwealth". His Honour may have meant that, as he had previously indicated that the Regulations, on their proper construction, excluded State powers relating to such safety and other issues, he should not take such matters into account in the exercise of his discretion. Alternatively, his
Honour may have meant, it being within the power of the Commonwealth to make provision for such matters and provision having been made to the extent forth in the Regulations, he concluded that he should not refuse consent to the subdivision because of such matters. The subdivision itself would involve merely a division of land; it would not, as such, involve directly that more people be on the land or that buildings, structures or activities be there.
Whether they would be so would depend upon what happened in the future and, to the extent that consent was necessary, upon future consents. His Honour may have meant that, if future developments indicated problems in this regard, it was within the competence of the Commonwealth to prevent untoward developments by passing further Regulations and that it was "a matter for the Commonwealth" to provide such safeguards as should in that regard be necessary.

On balance, I am of opinion that what his Honour did approximated the second rather than the first of these alternatives. If he had meant to exclude the relevant matters from his consideration, he need have done no more than he did in stating his construction of the Regulations. On that view, the relevant considerations were excluded from the discretion. But his Honour's observations, to which I have referred, were made "in case I am in error".
Accordingly, his Honour made the observations upon the basis that the
Regulations, properly construed, did not exclude such matters from the Court's consideration. He accepted that they were within the scope of his consideration but gave them only such limited effect as I have referred to.

So construed, his Honour's judgment does not, in my opinion, indicate error of law in the exercise of the discretion. Therefore, I would dismiss the appeal with costs.
 
SHELLER JA: I have had the benefit of reading the judgment Mahoney P has prepared. I agree with the order his Honour proposes and substantially with his Honour's reasons.

The development application, to which the appellant Council refused consent and Bannon J in the Land and Environment Court granted approval, was to sub- divide two parcels of land (the subject land) into four lots, three of which were intended for dwelling sites. The subject land was near the Nowra Air Base and was affected by certain of the Defence (Areas Control) Regulations made under the [Defence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/da190356/) (Cth). The relevant regulations limited the height to which a building might be constructed on the subject land and prohibited a person, without reasonable excuse, from bringing onto, having on or constructing on the subject land an object hazardous to aircraft or to communications. There was no suggestion that these regulations were beyond the enabling regulatory power or the power of the Parliament, or that they did not amount to an exercise of exclusive power in the sense that they were intended to express completely, exhaustively, and exclusively, what should be the law governing their subject matter; Ex parte McLean <case>; [(1930) 43 CLR 472] at 483. Equally, there was no suggestion that development in accordance with the respondent's application would infringe the regulations.
However, the field the regulations covered was limited to the construction of buildings above a certain height and to the presence on the subject land of objects hazardous to aircraft or to communications.

Evidence was placed before the Land and Environment Court that building on the subject land could affect base operations, because the residents might complain about noise or make representations to alter flight paths, thereby constraining flight operations. Bannon J's preferred view was that the
Commonwealth regulations evinced an intention to cover "the subject matter of safe defence aeronautical navigation as affected by building on private land in the vicinity of Nowra Air Base to the exclusion of State law". As I understand it, this led his Honour to conclude that the effect of the proposed subdivision on the operations of the Nowra Air Base was something he should not take into account in considering the respondent's appeal from the
Council's refusal of the development application. In this, with the greatest respect, I think his Honour erred. In particular, if it be thought to be in the public interest not to have the use of the Nowra Air Base limited because of the need to cater for complaints or representations from new residents about the effect of noise from the air base, I see no reason why this would not be an appropriate planning consideration to be taken into account by the consent authority in considering a development application for residential living near the air base: see for example [s90](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s90.html) (r) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/)..

However, these considerations are beside the point. In case his preferred view was an erroneous one, Bannon J summarised the concerns regarding the development application in so far as it affected the air base and acknowledged their force. His Honour then said: "For the reasons given above, I believe they are a matter for the Commonwealth." Like the President, I do not think
Bannon J, having undertaken a consideration of the application on the basis that his preferred view was erroneous, intended then to decide the matter only by reference to that preferred view. Having read and re-read his Honour's reasons and listened to and read in transcript the submissions of the parties,
I am satisfied that his Honour took the view that, to the extent the proposed sub-division did or might adversely affect operations on the naval air base, the Commonwealth had it within its power to take steps to resolve the problem.
If this correctly represents what his Honour meant, the appellant's sole ground of appeal, as it was ultimately presented to the Court, fails. Bannon J had appropriate regard to the effect of the proposed sub-division on the operations of the Nowra Air Base. Having done so he upheld the appeal.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
