

Kable versus Dr Westmore Matter No 20033/97 [1997] NSWSC 653 (16 December 1997) 
Kable versus Dr Westmore /97 December 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Kable versus Dr Westmore 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff was convicted of manslaughter of his late wife. Between September 1989 and 4 January 1995, he served a sentence of imprisonment for the manslaughter. 
Whilst serving that sentence, he engaged in conduct which was seen by some as threatening violence to members of the community. His impending release attracted controversy.

In December 1994, the Community Protection Act, 1994 (the Act) was enacted. It purported to enable the making of Preventative Detention Orders.

Thereafter, the Director of Public Prosecutions brought process under the
Act. Firstly, an Interim Detention Order was made by Hunter J. Secondly, a
Preventive Detention Order for six months was made by Levine J. An appeal to the Court of Appeal was unsuccessful. The plaintiff then sought leave to appeal to the High Court.

Grove J declined to make a further Detention Order. The plaintiff was released upon the expiry of the Detention Order. His appeal to the High Court was successful and the Act was invalidated (including section 28 which purported to protect certain persons from liability).

The defendant is a forensic psychiatrist. He has prepared certain reports concerning the plaintiff (including reports dated 11 November 1994, 21
November 1994, 30 March 1995, 9 June 1995 and 1 August 1995). The instructions came from the Crown Solicitor's Office and reports were used in the process brought by the Director of Public Prosecutions (the DPP).

By 14 November 1994, the defendant had been expressly made aware of the possibility of legal proceedings. By 21 March 1995, he had been appointed as an assessor under the Act and reports were prepared pursuant to its statutory requirements. He gave oral evidence in legal proceedings.

In these proceedings, the plaintiff propounds a claim for damages. His originating process has been amended a number of times. The present formulation of the claim may be found in the Further Amended Statement of
Claim. This document contains a variety of allegations. It appears to have been drafted by the plaintiff himself and there is difficulty in discerning the precise case sought to be advanced. For present purposes, it is not necessary to make exhaustive reference to all of the allegations. However, I shall mention some of them.

It is alleged that the defendant was retained by the State of New South Wales to examine and report on the plaintiff.

It is alleged that reports (being those of 11 November 1994 and 21 November ) were produced and disseminated without the plaintiff's consent and without an examination of the plaintiff.

There are allegations of false imprisonment by the State of New South Wales and of subjection to compulsory examination by the defendant under the Act.
It is alleged that the defendant was an accessory to an "Abuse of Process" by acting as agent for the Government. These seem to be related allegations. It is said that the abuse resulted in imprisonment and permanent labelling. There are allegations of trespass and assault. These allegations seem to be related to earlier allegations. There are allegations that the reports were false and misleading and damaged the plaintiff's reputation. There are allegations of negligence. It is said that the defendant was seeing the plaintiff as a doctor and/or in the capacity of assessor and that he was negligent as a professional doctor (the Particulars of Negligence appear to be set forth in paragraph 18).
There are allegations of breach of the provisions of section 42 of the Fair
Trading Act. The allegations of damage may be gleaned from the contents of paragraph 23 and the second of the two paragraphs numbered 10 of the document (these include pain and discomfort, loss of liberty, shock, depression and anxiety, and economic loss).

On 1 August 1997, the defendant filed a Notice of Motion. It seeks, inter alia, an order that the proceedings be dismissed generally. A special fixture was allocated for the hearing of the Notice of Motion on 11 December 1997.

The defendant is seeking summary dismissal of the proceedings. The Court has a discretionary power to grant summary relief. The power is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The applicant for summary relief bears the onus of satisfying the Court that an order should be made. There is ample authority for the proposition that the relief should only be granted in what has been described as clear cases (see Webster versus Lampard <case>; [116 ALR 545).] 
Before proceeding to deal with the summary dismissal application. I should digress to deal with certain preliminary matters which cropped up at the commencement of the hearing, upon the defendant seeking to file an Amended
Notice of Motion.

Leave to file the Further Amended Statement of Claim was obtained from the
Court subsequent to the allocation of the special fixture for this hearing.
Leave was given with the consent of the defendant. However, there has been dispute between the parties as to the terms upon which that consent was given.
The defendant was of the understanding that the plaintiff had given his consent to the filing of an Amended Notice of Motion on terms which allowed the defendant to agitate an application for the striking out of the process on the basis of pleading deficiencies. Exhibit 1 (which was tendered by the defendant) did not give support to that contention. Because of the particular circumstances of this case and the practice usually followed by this Court in relation to special fixtures, the application for amendment of the Notice of
Motion was refused.

Before leaving this aspect of the matter, it may be observed that it is apparent from the face of the Further Amended Statement of Claim that it is plagued with a number of pleading deficiencies. However, for present purposes,
I put the matter of pleading deficiencies to one side.

The application has been argued on the material to be found in the pleadings and in the affidavit sworn by Jann Cordeaux Cathels (which was read without objection). The affidavit annexes copy correspondence and reports from the defendant. Also, it deposes to the matters set forth in paragraph 3 thereof.
The plaintiff has not placed any evidence before the Court. His submissions contained criticism of aspects of the affidavit evidence.

Counsel for the defendant has prepared a written outline of argument. This document has been supplemented by detailed oral submissions and references to authority.

The plaintiff appears in person. He has prepared a lengthy and detailed written submission containing various annexures. This document was supplemented by oral submissions.

There have been many matters agitated in these submissions. It is not possible to deal with all of the matters that were raised. However, the parties are assured that careful consideration has been given to all of the submissions that have been made.

The defendant relies on a defence of witness immunity to the claims made by the plaintiff. It is conceded that the principle would not apply where there is an allegation of a physical nature (such as in the usual assault or trespass case). In this case, allegations of that nature are absent.

The authorities (including Cabassi versus Vila <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 130]; Evans versus London Hospital Medical College (University of
London) [(1981) 1 WLR 184]; X versus Bedfordshire County Council <case>; [(1995) 2 AC ] and
Hillman versus Black & Ors <case>; [(1996) 67 SASR 490)] demonstrate that the defendant does have a good defence to the claims which the plaintiff seeks to make in relation to the reports prepared by the defendant and the evidence given by him.

In Cabassi (at pp 140-141), it was said that no action lies in respect of evidence given by witnesses in the course of legal proceedings (no matter how false or malicious the evidence may have been and whether or not it was given as part of a conspiracy). The protection has been said to extend to evidence prepared, given, adduced or procured by witnesses in the course of legal proceedings. This "rule of law" (Cabassi at p 141) extends beyond the evidence that is given in the proceedings to acts involved in preparatory processes (including communications, information and reports given by a potential witness).

In this case, the claims made by the plaintiff relate to reports prepared by the defendant in response to instructions and the evidence given by him in the legal process prosecuted by the DPP.

I shall now turn briefly to some of the other matters agitated by the parties.
Firstly, there is the matter of negligence.

Whilst the claim purports to be framed in negligence, in substance it relates to the matters of the reports and the evidence given by the defendant. The defendant further contended that it was doomed to failure because no duty of care was owed to the plaintiff in the circumstances of this case. Again, the defendant looks to, inter alia, the X case as authority for this submission.

The authorities make it clear that it may be difficult at an early stage in a proceeding to form a view as to the prospects of success of a claim framed in negligence. Whilst the arguments put on behalf of the defendant appear to have considerable force, this case does have some novel features (viz. the role as an assessor under the Act). The question of the owing of a duty of care has not been fully argued and does not need to be determined in this case.

The pleading uses the terms abuse of process, assault and trespass. The pleading does not contain the statement of material facts necessary to found any of these alleged causes of action. The material does not suggest any arguable claims of this nature. The submissions further exposed the untenability of the allegations of assault and trespass. It was made clear that these allegations were founded on the dissemination of reports and the emotional effect had on the plaintiff as a consequence of his reading of reports. In my view, the allegations made under the guise of these terms are doomed to failure.

The allegations of breach of section 42 of the Fair Trading Act appear to relate to the reports and oral evidence (see paragraph 17). They are also otherwise doomed to failure. There is a bare allegation of breach. The alleged false and misleading conduct is not identified. It cannot be said that what was done by the defendant could be arguably regarded as being "in trade and commerce".

It is not said that the defendant falsely imprisoned the plaintiff. The concept of False Imprisonment appears in paragraphs 9, 19 and 20. Paragraphs and 20 are intended to propound claims made in the alternative. The nature of the allegations sought to be made is unclear. There appears to be an association with either "Abuse of Process" or "Trespass". The role of the defendant is that of "Agent for the Government" or "accessory". The pleading does not contain the requisite statement of material facts which enable the disclosure of a cause of action relating to "False Imprisonment". The submissions saw the making of many assertions (including a contention that the defendant was aware from the outset of the invalidity of the Act). In any event, it seems that the words are used in respect of the matters of the reports and evidence. Finally, it has to be observed that the material demonstrates that this aspect of the claim is otherwise doomed to failure.

In applications of this nature, the Court takes into account the consequences of the granting of summary relief. The plaintiff may be deprived of the use of interlocutory processes of the Court and his case does not go to trial.

In submissions, the plaintiff repeatedly stressed his need to have the benefit of cross-examination of the defendant. The stress placed on this matter unfortunately focuses attention on the weaknesses of his case. It highlighted the hope had by the plaintiff that cross-examination would reveal a case which is not presently shown to exist.

The plaintiff clearly harbours strong feelings in relation to the defendant.
Unfounded allegations were rampant. The case is very much seen in emotive terms. However, it must be appreciated that the Court is required to determine this application according to law.

In the circumstances of this case, I am satisfied that it has been demonstrated that this is one of the clear cases which justify the granting of summary relief.

I order that the proceedings be dismissed. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the proceedings. The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
