

Regina versus Thomas Chung No. 060334/95 Criminal Law [1996] NSWSC 29 (15
February 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ at CL(1), SMART(2) AND STUDDERT(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY December 1995 #DATE 15:12:1995 #ADD 15:2:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant    I.M. Barker QC with 
D.R. Campbell 
Solicitors for the Appellant   Ledlin Partners 
Counsel for the Respondent    D.A. Buchanan 
Solicitor for the Respondent   Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions
ORDER
Appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
HUNT CJ at CL I agree with the orders proposed by Studdert J, for the reasons which he has given.
JUDGE2
SMART
J I agree with Studdert J.
JUDGE3
STUDDERT J The appellant Thomas Fong Fui Chung stood trial in the District
Court with William
Roy, both men being charged on a single count expressed in these terms: "Between about 19 October 1990 and about 30 October at
Sydney, New South Wales (they) conspired with each other and divers other persons to defraud the Commonwealth by evading sales tax and customs duty on goods imported into Australia for human consumption in Australia."
After a lengthy trial Roy was found not guilty but the appellant was found guilty and convicted. He now appeals against his conviction and he also seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence imposed.
 
The facts
In 1990 the appellant was a director of the Chinese
Cultural Club Limited in Sydney and Roy was a senior customs officer stationed in this city. The charge concerned the content of two containers shipped to Sydney from Hong
Kong on separate vessels. One container, which for convenience I refer to as the forty foot container, arrived in Sydney aboard the container vessel, the "Asian Jade". The second container, which I refer to as the twenty foot container, arrived in Sydney aboard the container vessel, "Konstantine
Paustovsky". These containers held mainly restaurant equipment and foodstuffs but the forty foot container also contained personal effects.
The content of these containers attracted customs duty and sales tax, and ultimately it was determined that the duty and the tax payable on such content amounted in aggregate to $15,975.
The system in 1990 to ensure that importers paid the appropriate duties and taxes on their imports was that they were required to "enter" their goods into customs under one of three categories, the relevant category for present purposes being, "human consumption". The importers' liability could then be determined by reference to the documentation completed by the importer.
The relevant form for completion where goods were to be entered for home consumption was predictably called "An entry for home consumption".
This provided for details of the goods and for classification of them according to tariff and origin and price. This information provided the basis of calculation of duty and sales tax. Where such documentation was completed the "entry" was passed by customs by having the entry document stamped "May be delivered" or by having customs issue a "Clearance advice". In the ordinary course such documentation would then be presented, together with quarantine documents, to the shipping company and then, provided the shipping charges and any warehousing charges were paid, the goods could be collected by or on behalf of the consignee.
The Customs Act, however, provided exceptions to the requirement to enter" goods for home consumption, and contemplated approval being granted by a
customs officer for the "entry" procedure not being followed. In respect of those goods for which a formal entry document was not to be required the procedure was for an authorised customs officer to issue a delivery advice note (DAN). Where a DAN was validly issued the importer or his agent could collect imported goods equipped with the necessary shipping documents and quarantine entry and clearance, but without having to present evidence that sales tax and duty had been paid.
The Crown case was that the appellant
Chung sought to take possession of each of the containers, in each case relying upon a DAN. He succeeded in collecting the twenty foot container but the attempt to collect the forty foot container was frustrated when a customs officer detected some irregularities on the DAN for that container and its delivery was stopped. No customs duty or sales tax had been paid on the content of either container, in the case of the twenty foot container when its content was delivered, and in the case of the forty foot container when its movement was stopped by customs.
In each case it was proved that the DAN relating to the container in question was a forgery. Whilst the DAN forms were authentic, in neither case were the customs stamps impressed upon the respective forms placed there legitimately, and in neither case was the writing on the form placed there legitimately.
 
The parties to the conspiracy
The Crown went to trial unable to prove who forged the details originally placed upon the DAN, or who stamped them, but the evidence indicated that it was a customs officer because of the need for familiarity with the procedures, and more importantly because of the need for access to the forms and to the customs stamp required.
The Crown before trial particularised the overt acts relied upon against the appellant and against the co-accused, Roy, but the "divers persons" referred to in the indictment were not named before trial as, the Crown stated, "their identity is not known to the Crown." 
The grounds of appeal
Grounds 1, 2(d) and 2(e) of the grounds stated in the notice of appeal were abandoned. It is convenient to consider Grounds 2(a), (b) and (c) together since, as Mr Barker of Queen's Counsel recognised, these grounds, and indeed Grounds 3 and 4, all depend upon the same point, namely that the jury was directed that they could find a conspiracy to which only one of the named accused was a party. Grounds 2(a), (b) and (c) concern what it is contended amounted to misdirections by the trial judge concerning the conspiracy charged (a) In failing to direct the jury that it was encumbent upon the Crown to prove the conspiracy charged, the essence of which was an unlawful agreement between the applicant and the co-accused Roy.
In instructing the jury that the charge could be made out if it found the applicant had conspired with some other person or persons rather than the accused Roy.
In failing to instruct the jury that in the circumstances of the case it was not open to the jury to acquit one accused but convict the other.
 .
The summing-up contained the following directions: 
At p 6: "The substantial circumstantial evidence here is evidence of conduct by both of the accused which the Crown says would tend to prove that there was in existence at the time of the conduct an agreement to commit a criminal offence, that is to defraud the Commonwealth in this case, and that the two accused and possibly others were parties to that agreement." 
At p 7: "Now as I adverted members of the jury to what you are dealing with here is an allegation of conspiracy between these two accused - I should have told you that you will also have a copy of the indictment, the charge, when you retire. The charge alleges that these two accused between 19 October 1990 and 30
November 1990 at Sydney conspired with each other and divers other persons to defraud the Commonwealth by evading sales tax and customs duties on goods imported into Australia for home consumption in Australia."
The judge then went on to give instruction as to what constituted a conspiracy before continuing (at p 8): "I emphasise members of the jury, there must be at least two persons who have so agreed. There may be more and there is also the possibility that others may join into the conspiracy.
They may themselves, the conspiracy having been entered into between other persons, themselves become a party to that conspiratorial agreement."
There followed then a passage of the summing-up in which it is contended that the jury was misdirected (at p 9): "I did say earlier members of the jury, that you have got to look at each of these accused separately.
It would be open to you as a matter of law, to find one of these accused guilty on the charge alleged, and the other not guilty. That would be on the basis that you concluded that one particular accused had conspired, had agreed to the objects alleged with some other person, either an identified person or an unidentified.
There are a number of combinations. It would be open to you as a matter of law to find that these two accused had agreed together to defraud the Commonwealth. As I have said, that these two accused and other persons, one or more, had made such an agreement. OR, AS I HAVE SAID, ONE OF THESE
ACCUSED
AND ONE OTHER OR OTHERS HAD SO AGREED. So those combinations are possible and for that reason it would be possible to return a verdict of guilty in respect of one of these two accused and not guilty in respect of the other, but of course you would have to find that there was such an illegal agreement, a conspiracy between the accused that you found guilty and some other person, either identified or unidentified." (Emphasis added)
In the words emphasised above is to be found the nub of the complaint in relation to the grounds of appeal at present being considered. The appellant contends that the direction as expressed in that sentence was erroneous.
It was submitted that since the accused named in the indictment were charged with conspiring with each other, it was fundamental to the Crown case that an unlawful agreement between those two persons be proved and not some agreement between only one of them and some third person. It was submitted that the trial judge should have given the jury a direction to this effect.
The Court was referred to decisions in R versus Ongley [57 WN 116]
R versus Ongley illustrated that where a conspiracy to defraud two persons was charged in a single count in an indictment one accused could not be convicted of conspiring to defraud one of those persons and the second accused of conspiring to defraud the other. In this case Jordan CJ said at 117: "Where a count in conspiracy charges, as it should do, only one conspiracy to effect some one or more improper purposes, the only issue before the jury under that count is whether all or any of the accused are guilty of the conspiracy alleged.
The jury may find that all or any two or more of the accused are guilty of a conspiracy to effect all the improper purposes alleged: [Crimes Act, 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), s.393; O'Connell versus The Queen 11 Cl.
and F. 155 at 236-7, or to effect some only of the improper purposes alleged: ibid (at -7); but they cannot find some of the accused guilty of a conspiracy to effect only some of the improper purposes and other of the accused guilty only of a conspiracy to effect only other of the improper purposes; because to do so would be to find the existence of two conspiracies under a count which charges one only; and this, the law does not allow: ibid (at ); The Queen versus Manning [12
QBD 241] at 244."
However R versus Ongley seems to me to be plainly distinguishable from the present case. Here the Crown has not charged the accused named in the indictment with separate conspiracies in the one count which would not have been permissible but with a single conspiracy the object of which was to defraud the Commonwealth by the evasion of sales tax and customs duty. The only issues were: did such a single conspiracy exist, and, if it did, who were the members of that conspiracy.
In R versus Lee a conspiracy to supply heroin was charged, a conspiracy allegedly involving three participants. In addressing the principles relevant to the proof of the conspiracy Gleeson CJ, with whom the other members of the court agreed, said at 280: "The conspiracy alleged in the indictment, being one to which
Ah Shek and the appellant and Huynh were all parties, would not be established by proving separate conspiracies between
Ah Shek and the appellant, and Ah Shek and Huynh. If all that emerged were a series of identical but separate conspiracies between Ah Shek and a number of distributors, including the appellant and Huynh, the charge in the indictment would not be made out. The Crown was setting out to prove a single conspiracy, to which Ah Shek, the appellant and Huynh were all parties, whose object or purposes related to the heroin to be distributed by Huynh and the appellant. Put another way, the
Crown had to prove that the conspiracy to which the appellant was a party involved, as an object, the distribution of heroin by Huynh, and that the conspiracy to which Huynh was a party included, as an object, the distribution of heroin by the appellant."
Those dicta do not assist the appellant here. What they emphasise is the necessity for the Crown to prove a single conspiracy, that is to say the one conspiracy with the same objective or objectives.
Mr Barker submitted that the summing-up left it open to the jury to find a conspiracy that had not been charged and which was inconsistent with the prosecution case. He complained that it had never been suggested by the Crown that there was a conspiracy outside that joined by the two named accused, except to the extent that there may have been other parties to it. To assess this submission the Court was invited to consider certain parts of the opening address for the Crown at the trial and passages of the summing-up, including a summary review by the trial judge of the final address of the Crown
Prosecutor.
Having considered the relevant material in the appeal books, I am not persuaded that the case against the appellant was left to the jury on a basis inconsistent with the presentation of the Crown case. Nor can I detect any basis for complaint of procedural unfairness. The case as opened was that both accused were parties to the conspiracy with whoever was responsible for the preparation and the issue of the forged DANS, and the Crown outlined the case it would seek to prove against each of them. When referring to the forged DANS the Crown told the jury it could not prove who was responsible for the forgeries.
The review by the trial judge in the summing-up of the Crown's final address does not indicate a shift in the prosecution case. From beginning to end the Crown case against the appellant was that he had conspired with Roy and others whose identity the Crown could not establish, but I see nothing in the material which leads me to the conclusion that the manner of presentation of the prosecution case demanded that the jury be directed that before the appellant could be found guilty it must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the guilt of Roy. Nor did the manner in which the indictment was expressed compel such a direction.
From beginning to end there was the one conspiracy advanced, namely the conspiracy with the object of defrauding the Commonwealth which involved the use of the DANS. Since the appellant was charged with conspiring with Roy and divers other persons the Crown had to prove against the appellant that he entered into the agreement with the object specified, but the evidence of involvement against the appellant differed from that against the co-accused
Roy and it did not follow that the jury had to reach the same verdict against both accused. I shall return to this when considering Ground 3. It was the
Crown case that the accused Roy was a party to the conspiracy but a finding by the jury that he was a party was not essential before the appellant could be convicted of the charge. Given the evidence proving the forgery of the DANS, involving at least one customs officer as the jury was entitled to decide, and given the evidence of the appellant's endeavours to take possession of the imported goods, and the use made by the appellant of the DANS in those endeavours, the proof of the appellant's guilt was not dependent upon proof of the guilt of Roy. The jury did not have to be satisfied of the identity of the guilty customs officer before it found the offence charged proved against the appellant.
In my opinion the trial judge made no error in omitting to give the directions the subject of Grounds 2(a) and 2(c) and the directions in fact given were appropriate. These three grounds therefore fail. (f) In giving a particular direction as to the admissibility of acts done or statements made by persons other than the particular accused, the case against which the jury was considering.
This ground, first introduced at the hearing of the appeal, complained of the following direction: "...in order to establish the existence of a conspiracy, evidence is admissible of acts done or statements made by persons other than the particular accused that you are considering, even if he was not present. Not to prove the truth of what was said or done but in order to establish from the fact that the acts were done or the statement were made, the inference that the agreement which constituted the conspiracy charged had been entered into and the nature and extent of that conspiracy.

Furthermore such evidence is so admissible even if the acts were done or the statements were made before the particular accused joined or became a participant in the conspiracy."
Mr Barker acknowledged that no point was taken complaining of the above direction at the trial so that the leave of this Court would now be required to allow this as a ground for appeal. Mr Barker further acknowledged that he could not point to any practical significance resulting from the giving of this direction for the purposes of this appeal. In these circumstances, argument on the ground not having been pursued, the need does not strictly arise to determine whether there was any error in the direction given. However the direction given accords with statements of principle to be found in Ahern v The Queen <case>;  <case>; [(1981-82) 148 CLR 668] it is settled that the conviction of a conspirator may stand even though an alleged co-conspirator tried with him was acquitted of the same conspiracy "unless in all the circumstances of the case his conviction is inconsistent with the acquittal of the other person".
See also R versus Mok [(1987) 27 A Crim R 438]
In determining whether such inconsistency exists, there is of course a need to examine the evidence that was available at the trial against each of the conspirators. In Mok (supra) Hunt J expressed the task to be undertaken in these terms (at 442): "It is necessary in each case to consider the evidence given at the trial against each of the alleged conspirators and to determine whether any difference in the evidence admissible against each is of such significance as to provide an explanation of the jury's different verdicts. A practical, common-sense approach is required, focusing upon the justice of the particular case- Jones [(1985) 20 A Crim R 142] at -147."
The jury in this case was correctly instructed that it must consider the position of each accused separately and the evidence available against each accused separately. The overt acts relied upon as against each accused and about which the jury was directed differed markedly in number and in content.
There were nineteen acts relied upon against the appellant (which the trial judge identified for the jury: see pp 1556-1561 of the appeal book) and eleven acts relied upon as against the accused Roy (which the trial judge also identified in the summing-up: see pp 1561-1563 of the appeal book).
Consideration of the different nature of these overt acts is illustrative of the difference in the prosecution case against these two accused.
As a director of the consignee company, the appellant had an interest, albeit indirect, in any avoidance of sales tax and customs duty, on the container goods. The appellant had purchased the goods in Hong Kong and arranged for their shipment to Sydney. It was the appellant who undertook the task of having the relevant paperwork processed and of paying the fees for the shipments and for such paperwork. He arranged for the quarantine clearance of the containers and it was he who presented the false DANS. The appellant leased the storage space into which the twenty foot container was delivered and unloaded. It was the appellant who arranged for that delivery and unloading.
He also tried unsuccessfully to have the forty foot container moved. On the prosecution case when the appellant was interviewed by a customs officer after the forty foot container was stopped, he denied knowledge of any twenty foot container. He also concealed information as to the storage area which, on the prosecution case, he had leased to receive the container.
Further, there was evidence that he lied about the contents of the forty foot container, asserting that it contained only personal effects for employees.
 .
The evidence on the other hand against the co-accused Roy concerned what he did in processing the paperwork and arranging for transport of the containers. There was no evidence that he had been the one to issue the forged
DANS which apparently came from the customs office at Mascot and not the city office where Roy worked. Roy did later add to what was written on the DANS, but according to Roy the DANS when presented to him were already signed and stamped by the authorising officer and he did not consider what he added was significant. There was no evidence as to how Roy might have benefited from any involvement in the conspiracy, and, as the Crown has submitted, the jury may not have been satisfied that Roy was other than a person used by the appellant and by another with whom the jury was satisfied that the appellant had conspired.
I observe that the appellant made an unsworn statement and that the co-accused gave evidence on oath.
It seems to me that the case against the appellant was more formidable than that against his co-accused and the evidence presented as to his involvement was quite different from that presented as to the involvement of
Roy. It was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty, whilst at the same time entertaining a reasonable doubt about the guilt of Roy. The verdicts were not inconsistent.
That the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory.
Mr Barker did not seek to support this ground other than on the basis already addressed, namely that the appellant could not properly be found guilty by the jury unless the named co-accused was also found guilty. That submission has not been made good, and on the evidence available against the appellant, it was clearly open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to his guilt.

In my opinion this appeal against conviction fails.
 
The sentence imposed
The offence of which the appellant was convicted was in a category for which the maximum penalty available was twenty years imprisonment and a fine of $200,000. The appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for one year to be served by way of periodic detention. His Honour also imposed a fine of $20,000.
 .
This Court has been informed that the goods imported in the two containers were released to the consignee. The Court has further been informed that the duty payable remains unpaid but the goods were released upon the lodgment of a bond for the total value of them, so that it would appear that the revenue is protected.
In seeking leave to appeal against this sentence Mr Barker did not argue that there was any obvious error in the remarks made by the judge on sentence but he submitted that the sentence was contrary to <case> of the
Commonwealth [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), as not being "of a severity appropriate in all the circumstances of the offence."
Reference was made to the subjective features of the case and to the amount of the duty and sales tax that was sought to be evaded, namely $15,975.
Mr Barker submitted that the imposition of a fine without any custodial sentence would have been adequate in the circumstances but the appellant has in any event now served the more onerous part of his sentence which commenced on 21 June 1995 and has moved on to "Stage 2" so that he is permitted to return home overnight. (See R versus Hallocoglu [(1991) 29 NSWLR 67] at 74, where the conditions of sentences of periodic detention were considered.) Mr Barker acknowledged that there was little purpose to be served in now asking the
Court to interfere with the sentence of periodic detention, but submitted that the fine imposed should be reduced.
The appellant is presently forty-eight years of age. He had no previous convictions and evidence was placed before the court as to his good character.
The sentencing judge accepted that the appellant had quite serious health problems and he was satisfied that such problems were due in part to his prosecution. His Honour also stated that he had regard to health problems that the appellant's wife and his son had.
On the other hand his Honour observed that the appellant had shown no contrition and could not therefore be given the benefit of same in the sentencing process.
The judge took a serious view of the offence committed and I consider that he was correct to do so. The offence involved a calculated attempt to defraud the revenue and, as the Crown submitted, it involved the corruption of one or more customs officers. In considering the overall punishment imposed upon the appellant, it is proper for this Court to recognise that the service of a sentence by way of periodic detention is significantly less onerous than one served in full-time custody. As was pointed out in Hallocoglu (supra) a prisoner serving a sentence by way of periodic detention usually serves but one-third of it actually in periodic detention and the rest of the sentence is no more punitive than a community service order. In Roberts [(1994) 74 A Crim R ] the submission that it was wrong for this court to have regard to the administrative arrangements in the operation of the system of periodic detention was rejected.
I note that the sales tax and customs duty sought to be evaded was approximately four-fifths of the fine fixed in the District Court.
I do not regard the punishment imposed upon the appellant as inappropriate in all the circumstances of the offence and having regard to the objective gravity of it. I would grant leave to appeal against the sentence but would dismiss the appeal with time served to count.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/29.html  
