

Regina versus John Charlestait [1996] NSWSC 90 (2 May 1996) 
REGINA versus John Charles TAIT /95 May 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Gleeson CJ, Allen J, James J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - Discretion to reject evidence - Rule 4 - no miscarriage where evidence used to overall forensic advantage.

RESERVED/ 
EX TEMPORE: Ex Tempore 
ALLOWED/ 
DISMISSED: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I will ask Justice Allen to give the first judgment.

ALLEN J: On 29 May 1995 the appellant was indicted before Judge Nield in the District Court at Liverpool on the charge that he knowingly took part in the cultivation of cannabis plants. He pleaded not guilty. 
On 6 June the jury returned a verdict of guilty. The appellant appeals against that conviction. He originally sought leave also to appeal against the severity of the sentence imposed. That application for leave to appeal has been abandoned and leave to appeal, accordingly, should be refused.

The Crown case presented at the trial is, in summary form, as follows. Police commenced a surveillance operation in relation to a house at Bringelly on about 2 July 1993. The appellant was at the time leasing the house and living in it. It was in a semi-rural district set in grounds of 25 acres.

On 6 July police obtained a search warrant to search the house for cannabis and plant that was used in its cultivation. On 9 July police observed a car carrying the appellant and two male companions leaving the house. The car was stopped. The three men were arrested, handcuffed and searched. A small amount of marijuana was found on one of the companions and a small amount of amphetamine on the other companion, but nothing was found on the appellant.

The companions were taken to the police station. The appellant was taken back to the house. Once there a large contingent of police commenced to search the house and the ground. They found the following:
A small bag of cannabis leaf in the refrigerator of the upstairs kitchen.
Very wet floors in what appeared to be two bedrooms upstairs. The carpet had been removed from those bedrooms.
Fragments of cannabis leaf scattered on the floor or floors of those rooms.
Fragments of cannabis leaf elsewhere on the floor of the house.
Very substantial amounts of plastic tubing of various shapes and sizes and other material which had been used or could have been used in hydroponic cultivation.
Substantial amounts of chemicals, and containers for the chemicals, specifically used in hydroponic cultivation.
A large number of lights and fittings of the sort commonly used for indoor hydroponic cultivation to enhance growth.
Various structures apparently designed to suspend and otherwise organise the equipment referred to which was inside the house.
About 20 cannabis plants.
A substantial amount of grow wool, the usual medium used in hydroponic cultivation.
Sixteen empty pots in the Otto bin outside the house in the grounds.
A quantity of gravel containing fibrous root material, many of which were of cannabis plants. These also were in the Otto bin.
Mould growth on the wet floors, indicative of chemical spillage.

Less than 800 metres from the house an unregistered pantechnicon was parked on the side of the road, backed up to an small earth mound which was sufficient to prevent the rear doors from being opened. The curiosity of the police was aroused and after searching, the police rolled the truck forward, opened the rear doors. They found inside it a very substantial amount of equipment similar to many of the items found at the house. These included quantities of grow wool and plastic tubes. Fingerprint examination subsequently detected a fingerprint of one of the two associates of the appellant who had been with him when he had left the house earlier.

Fresh plant material was found at the side of the truck, which was of the same species as that retrieved from a tree, which had a broken branch, on the grounds of the house. Tyre marks consistent with having been recently made by a truck also were found on the grounds.

The evidence disclosed that usage of electricity at the house had been abnormally high for a number of preceding seasons and was irregular.

The appellant made an unsworn statement in which he denied any knowledge of marijuana, other than in the refrigerator, or any knowledge of hydroponic cultivation in the house. He denied that any of the marijuana material, other than that in the refrigerator, had been in the house when he had left it earlier with his companions. It was specifically put to the police on his behalf that the marijuana found in the house, other than in the refrigerator, had been scattered around the house by the police themselves.

As to the material found in the Otto bin inside the boundary he denied that any incriminating material was put there by him. He noted that the bins had not been collected when they should have been recently.

He denied any knowledge of the truck or its contents, explained the wet floors as being the result of a leaking water bed. In that respect there was evidence that a broken water bed was found in the house. On the other hand, the police gave evidence that he told them at the house that the wet floors were the result of the bath overflowing. The appellant denied saying that.

He said that the carpets had been lifted in preparation for painting.

He explained the tubing material as being partly left over by the previous occupant, who was a builder, and partly for use in fixing his own outside water tank and supply system.

He said that the tyre marks were made by a tractor that had attended the property recently.

He accepted that the chemicals were on his property. He said that they had been left there by the previous occupant.

He explained the lights and various structures in the house as having been needed by him to carry out his part-time work as a metal polisher.

He said he knew nothing about the presence of grow wool.

In cross-examination on his behalf it had been elicited that there was, on an adjoining property, at least one tree of a similar type to the broken tree on the grounds of the appellant's house.

The grounds of appeal against conviction are: 
His Honour the trial judge erred in allowing evidence to be led of the finding of cannabis in the refrigerator.

His Honour the trial judge erred in allowing evidence to be led of the conversation between the police and the appellant about the cannabis in the refrigerator.

His Honour erred in not directing the jury that they were to disregard any evidence that the appellant was a user of cannabis.

His Honour erred in not directing the jury that they could not use evidence of Mr Tait's bad character as evidence of his guilt.

The evidence as to the finding of cannabis in the refrigerator came from
Detective Lewis and Senior Sergeant Gould. It was that while these officers were with the appellant in an upstairs bedroom which was being searched, the appellant asked whether he could get his cigarettes from the kitchen.
Detective Lewis said that he could and the three men went into the kitchen, where the appellant got a packet of cigarettes. Detective Lewis used the occasion to advantage by searching the kitchen.

In the refrigerator he found the packet containing a small quantity of cannabis leaf. What then happened was that Detective Lewis said to the appellant, "I have just found this in the refrigerator, can you tell me what it is?" The appellant said, "Just a bit of smoko." Detective Lewis then said, "What do you mean by smoko?" And the appellant replied, "Marijuana." Detective
Lewis asked him who owned it and the appellant replied, "It's mine." Detective
Lewis then arrested the appellant for having possession of the drug.

The appellant was later taken to the police station and was questioned by
Detective Hardie. The Detective asked him, "Do you agree that police found cannabis in your house?" The appellant replied, "Yes." Detective Hardie said, "Where did they find it?" To that the appellant replied, "In the fridge."
Detective Hardie asked, "Who owns the cannabis?" He replied, "It's mine." 
Detective Hardie asked him whether he would make a written statement, and he did so. There was no objection by the appellant's counsel to that evidence concerning Detective Hardie and the making of the statement being put before the jury. The statement was received in evidence, and apart from the formal matters it was brief. It read: "I was arrested this morning. The police entered my house and found some pot in the fridge which was for personal use." 
The only objection taken in relation to any of the evidence associated with the finding of the cannabis in the refrigerator was taken before the trial commenced or, to be more precise, was taken in the absence of the jury immediately after the appellant pleaded not guilty. The transcript note of the application by counsel then appearing for the appellant reads: "Application by Mr Wassilenia to have excluded from the Crown's evidence, two pieces of evidence, one being a fingerprint found on a piece of perspex and the finding by the police of cannabis leaf in a fridge in the accused's residence." 
His Honour dealt with both applications and rejected each. His reasons for judgment in respect of the finding of the cannabis are brief and are as follows: "As to the finding of the cannabis leaf in the fridge in the accused's residence and the accused's admission that that cannabis leaf was his, it seems to me as I indicated to the accused's counsel that the connection between the two is a connection which is relevantly obvious, an inference that can be drawn that the hydroponic growing material found in the residence was used in the growing of the plants from which the leaf was obtained and I propose to allow the Crown to adduce that evidence." 
I turn to the first ground of appeal, namely, that the trial judge erred in allowing evidence to be led of the finding of cannabis in the refrigerator. In my judgment there is no force in that submission. The fact that the cannabis was in the refrigerator of the very premises of which there was evidence otherwise of hydroponic cultivation was powerful evidence in what was broadly a circumstantial case. It was in the same category as the finding of cannabis fibre in the Otto bin and the finding of small pieces of marijuana scattered throughout the house (marijuana allegedly planted there by police to procure a conviction). It was evidence which was very much directed to the establishment of the circumstantial case against the appellant.

A similar situation was dealt with by this Court in R versus Derwent (unreported, July 1989) in a judgment of the Chief Justice. His Honour said: "The evidence was led on the basis that it went directly to the principal issue in the case which was the connection between the appellant and the marijuana plantation in question. Once again, of course, individual items of evidence would not of themselves if they stood alone have established such a connection but that is not the test of admissibility of circumstantial evidence." 
This evidence was part of the circumstantial evidence. It would have been wholly artificial to separate it from the other circumstantial evidence, particularly that relating to the finding of cannabis or cannabis residue elsewhere. I fail to see how his Honour reasonably could have made another decision than to admit it into evidence. It has been urged that his Honour fell into error because he did not expressly state that he had considered whether he should exclude the evidence in the exercise of discretion in that its prejudicial effect would outweigh its probative value. There was no occasion for his Honour to go to such a refinement. It was a clear case. Any prejudice from the admission of the evidence was simply that it went to establish, along with the other things found in the house, the guilt of the appellant.

I turn now to the second ground of appeal. It is that his Honour the trial judge erred in allowing evidence to be led of the conversation between the police and the appellant about the cannabis in the refrigerator. There was no objection taken to that evidence being led. The objection taken at the outset of the trial was specific. It was an objection to evidence of the finding of the cannabis. There was no objection taken to the subsequent evidence as to what was said. The ground of appeal is not directed to the appellant saying that the cannabis was his. As expounded in the forceful submissions put to us, it is that he admitted to the police that he used cannabis himself, it was for his personal use, and that thereby he disclosed that he had committed a criminal offence which was not the cultivation offence with which he was charged. He had committed the offence of possessing marijuana. That admission, however, was not made even at the time when the cannabis was found in the refrigerator. It was made long after. It was made not in what was said but in what was written. It was in the written statement that the appellant said it was for his own use. The objection previously taken did not cover that evidence. Accordingly, the appellant has the problem that to be permitted to argue this ground of appeal he needs leave under r 4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/). In my opinion that leave should not be granted. I can well understand why counsel appearing at the trial would elect not to keep out evidence which showed that the appellant had an explanation for the presence of that marijuana in the refrigerator other than it was part of the marijuana, the cultivation of which was the basis of the charge against him. He had to explain the marijuana found in the refrigerator. The explanation which he gave admitted criminality for a minor offence. But it was his choice. Counsel could have objected. How the objection would have faired matters not. What matters is that there is nothing to indicate other than that counsel wisely chose not to object. Leave should not be granted.

I add this. Even if there were some appealable error in respect of the finding of the marijuana in the refrigerator and what the appellant said, or wrote, about it justice resulted. The fact that the evidence was before the jury was skilfully used by counsel to achieve what, overall, was a substantial forensic advantage. Counsel for the appellant at the trial was faced with an almost impossible task. There was a barrage of circumstantial evidence against the appellant. This case could be a student's classic. The appellant gave innocent explanations, as best he could in his statement, for everything except any real explanation for the fragments of cannabis leaf scattered over the floors of the house. He attempted some very half-hearted explanation that it may have been the result of a party but in substance his case, as put forcefully by counsel at the trial in cross-examination, was that it was material planted by the police. What desperately was needed was some lever with which to make that attack credible. The finding of the marijuana in the refrigerator and what was said about it was of great assistance to the trial counsel in that respect. It enabled him to say "Here I can show that the police conduct that night showed cavalier disregard to properly preserving and recording evidence". He elicited that the detective who found the marijuana in the refrigerator, instead of putting it in a proper place, just left it on the floor while he went away to attend to other things. He elicited that neither of the police who were there at the time bothered to record in their official police handbook the precise words of what the appellant said in, allegedly, admitting to a crime. He elicited that although there were many police there there was no exhibits list. He elicited that they did not take exhibits back. He elicited that they did not keep an exhibits register. All of this was based on the fact they found marijuana in the refrigerator.

It was a godsend in another respect in a desperate situation in which he found himself. It enabled the suggestion to be made to the jury that the police had behaved so despicably that not only had they, in the criminal parlance, "loaded the appellant up" but they had stolen part of the marijuana which they found. That came out because the marijuana was weighed at the police station and found to be a certain weight and it was weighed subsequently by an analyst and found only to be one-third as much. In fairness to the police I should say that there is evidence explaining how that well might be innocent. But it did enable a powerful attack to be made upon the police. This is a case where whatever may have been potentially a forensic disadvantage was turned into a forensic advantage.

I pass now to the remaining two grounds of appeal. They are that the trial
Judge erred in not directing the jury that they were to disregard any evidence of the appellant as a user of cannabis and (4) that he erred in not directing the jury that they could not use any evidence of Mr Tait's bad character as evidence of his guilt. No such directions were sought at the trial.

Leave under r 4 is required to argue these grounds. I can well understand that counsel appearing for the appellant at the trial would not wish such directions to be given. It was a lengthy trial. There was nothing apparently throughout the whole of the trial to emphasise or remind the jury of the criminality involved in the possession of what was a small quantity of marijuana which the jury might well have thought would have been for the appellant's personal use. Was counsel, at the end of the trial, going to seek directions relating to this evidence as being indicative of his client's bad character? One might have thought it would have been forensically most ill- advised to have done so. There is nothing put to us to suggest that it was an oversight on the part of counsel and for my own part, in the absence of any such evidence, I would take the view that it was a deliberate and very sensible choice on the part of the experienced counsel who represented the appellant at the trial.

In R versus Clarke [(1995) 78 A Crim R 226] at Hunt CJ at CL said: "The requirements of r 4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) that leave be granted before a misdirection will be allowed as a ground of appeal where objection was not taken at the trial are not some mere technicality which may simply be brushed aside. One purpose of the rule is to ensure that the trial judge receives the assistance from counsel to which he or she is entitled in the task of giving appropriate directions to the jury. Where a wrong direction is given which could easily have been cured once the judge's attention had been drawn to it, and if counsel for the accused to whose detriment the error may have operated fails to comply with that duty, simply standing by and allowing the error to occur, any suggestion that such detriment automatically entitles the accused to a new trial does not strike a sympathetic chord in the hearts of those who see the right to a fair trial as operating in favour not only of the accused but also of the Crown, which prosecutes on behalf of the whole community." 
In the present case counsel stood by. It is not an appropriate case in respect of either ground to give leave under r 4.

The orders which I propose are that the appeal against conviction be dismissed, that the conviction be affirmed, that leave to appeal against sentence be refused, and that it be ordered that time served count.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

JAMES J: I agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Allen J.
 * * * 
