

Pepsico Australia Pty Limited and Anor versus Vega and Ors Matter No Ca /97 [1998] NSWSC 246 (23 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 
PEPSICO AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED AND PFI AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED TRADING AS FRITO-LAY AUSTRALIA versus MARIA VEGA AND 3 ORS 
CA 040114/97 March 1998 
Meagher JA, Handley JA, Cole JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: This is an appeal by Pepsico, an employer, against an award made in favour of the respondent Mrs Vega, one of its workers. 
During the period 10 January 1976 to date Mrs Vega worked for four different employers, one of those employers the present two appellants who traded as
Frito-Lay Australia, they were the first respondent below. From 2 December until 20 May 1993 the appellant's insurers were HAH Winterthur Workers
Compensation Pty Limited and thereafter they were MMI Workers
Compensation Pty Limited. The present appellants are suing solely in relation to the interests of the former insurers.

Mrs Vega was employed most of the time as a packer. In about 1982 she developed symptoms in her right hand, wrist and elbow. This led to an operation excising the ganglion around the right wrist. She also complained of other pains going right up to the neck. The next important episode in her medical history occurred when she tried to activate a non-functioning turntable on 4 July 1994.

Thereafter the evidence becomes very complex. There are variant accounts of her symptoms between January 1992 and December 1992. There are different accounts about when pain was observed in both her neck and her wrist, medical evidence varying between evidence that the pain radiated from her arm upwards to her neck or radiated downwards from her neck to her wrist and, parallel to that question, whether her basic problem was one with her neck or with her wrist. The medical evidence was also split as to the effect of the excision of the ganglion. More importantly, it was split on the major question of whether the incident of 4 July 1994 was the cause of such suffering or was but the result.

His Honour worked his way through the mass of contradicting evidence and apparently came to the following conclusions: (a) that the worker had suffered a work related injury in 1992 to 1994; (b) that the injury was primarily a neck injury; and (c) that that neck injury caused problems to the right arm.
His Honour made an award and orders in accordance with those findings.

The appellant wishes to challenge those conclusions, initially it was said on the grounds that they were against the weight of the evidence but subsequently by amendment on the grounds that they were unsupported by any evidence. In fact there was oral evidence by Mrs Vega herself in support of the findings of his Honour and there were also medical reports in favour of that.

In those circumstances, since the appeal is limited to a question of law, the first substantial matter argued on the appeal must fail.

The appellant's next submission is his Honour should have made a finding that
Mrs Vega suffers from a disease which has subsequently become aggravated. This is, however, an argument which cannot be put at this stage as it was never put at the trial. It must, accordingly, fail.

The third submission which the appellant has urged is his Honour erred in the application of s.22A of the Workers Compensation Act. In this regard his
Honour's primary finding was that there are no special circumstances. This again is a question of fact and that decision having been made is unappealable. Once that decision is made the rest of his Honour's order as to apportionment is unchallengeable.

The appellant's submission, therefore, that his Honour erred in applying s.22A of the Workers Compensation Act must fail.

In these circumstances I propose the appeal be dismissed with costs.

HANDLEY JA: I agree. 
COLE JA: I also agree. 
MEAGHER JA: The order will be as I have suggested. * * * 
