

Argyrou and Anor versus Halldell Pty Ltd; Orphanides and Anor versus Halldell Pty
Ltd Matter Nos 1822/97 [1997] NSWSC 241 (16 June 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 ` 
Argyros Argyrou & Anor versus Halldell Pty Limited` ` 1822/97` `Andreas Orphanides & Anor versus Halldell Pty Limited` ` 1823/97` `16 June 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /97 - ARGYROS ARGYROU & ANOR versus HALLDELL PTY LIMITED /97 - ANDREAS ORPHANIDES & ANOR versus HALLDELL PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs held leases over shops 2 to 8 in the Doncaster Shopping Centre in Kensington. That shopping centre is now owned by the defendant, an Australian company controlled by individuals resident in Hong Kong. The leases expired between 31 October 1995 and 31 May 1996. The lessees, however, who are the present plaintiffs, continued in occupation. The leases contained options to renew. It may very well be that those options were conditional upon there being proper payment of rent subject, of course, to the provisions of the Conveyancing Act. It is, however, unnecessary to go into this matter as the options were not, in fact, exercised. 
It is a fairly well known fact that it is essential for the commercial viability of a shopping centre, such as the one involved in this case, that the centre have a leading supermarket which will attract customers to the centre. The present centre had such a supermarket, the Flemings supermarket, but this closed in mid-1994. This appears to have caused a drop in profitability of the shops in the centre. It also meant that the landlord's agents were unable to obtain fresh tenants for some of the vacant shops in the centre.

The plaintiffs/lessees told the landlord's representative, who at all relevant times was Mr Eddie Wong, a clerk employed by Mr Kam, solicitor for the defendant landlord, that they were not able to meet the rent. Mr Wong was understandably sympathetic and accepted whatever amount the tenants considered that they should pay. However under that regime, the arrears of rent and contribution to outgoings became quite substantial.

There were in the latter part of 1995 and the first two-thirds of 1996 considerable negotiations between Mr Wong and the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs' spokesperson was Mr Argyros Argyrou, he being the person who spoke the best
English. Most of the negotiations took place between Mr Wong and Mr A Argyrou in the latter's coffee shop in the Doncaster Shopping Centre.

The plaintiffs' position is that a final agreement as to new leases in respect of the shops in question, which are shops 2 to 8 in the shopping centre, was reached between the parties, I think, in June 1996. These leases were for five years with a five year option on the terms and conditions of the existing leases, to commence on 1 July 1996 at a rental figure which reflected a 20 per cent discount on the previous rent plus an amount to liquidate the arrears over a certain period.

The plaintiffs' solicitors in their letter to the defendant's solicitors of 19
August 1996 suggested that the parties had agreed on the terms of the new lease and requested that the defendant's solicitors confirm that those terms were agreeable and if so, to forward lease documents to their office. That letter was not answered until 23 October 1996 when the landlord's solicitor wrote that he was still awaiting instructions and that he contended there was no binding lease until the lease document was executed. The next month the plaintiffs' solicitors protested at that attitude and requested forwarding of lease documents in accordance with the alleged agreement for lease.

After further correspondence, it was clear that the landlord no longer intended to grant leases and on 26 March 1997 the plaintiffs took out the two summonses in the present proceedings which have been heard together for orders for specific performance. The plaintiffs also lodged caveats to protect their alleged interests and they sought orders that those caveats be extended until further order and also damages or equitable compensation. No cross claim was ever filed.

The matters were expedited by the Chief Judge and came into the list for hearing today, Mr D Cassidy QC and Mr I Sanderson appearing for the plaintiffs, and Mr D Murr for the defendant. Mr Cassidy QC's opening indicated that there were four issues involved in the cases, viz, 
Did Mr Wong have authority on behalf of the defendant to enter into the agreement for the leases? 
Was there an agreement as to the commencement date? 
Did the Statute of Frauds apply? And 
Was there part performance on the part of the plaintiffs? 
This limited the issues on the pleadings but the case proceeded on the basis outlined by Mr Cassidy QC in his opening.

Mr Murr put that the court could escape from any necessity to make findings on credibility by accepting the material in Mr A Argyrou's affidavit because even on that basis the plaintiffs must fail. I must say that this is a convenient way of proceeding though I would also add the comment that I thought that each of the witnesses who gave evidence before me, the two plaintiffs and Mr Wong, endeavoured to give as accurate an account as they could of the conversations between them and, indeed, there was very little difference in their accounts.

Mr Argyrou's affidavit, PA02, says that somewhere about October 1995 there were conversations about a new lease between Mr Argyrou and Mr Wong. Mr
Argyrou said, "I want a lease, but I cannot afford to pay the same amount of money because business is reduced." Mr Wong replied, "All right. I'll talk to the owner." About a month later Mr Wong produced a list of rents, a copy of which is in evidence as exhibit PX06. That list showed the present rents for the sets of shops and what the rent would be if the parties agreed on a discount of between 5 per cent and 40 per cent. The schedule also showed the arrears as at 31 December 1995.

Mr Argyrou said that Mr Wong told him that he thought the owner would take the figure in the row marked "20% off". Mr Argyrou argued for 30 per cent. Mr Wong said that he could ask the owner but that he did not think they would come down that low. However, he said he had come to bargain, to come to an agreement but that there would need to be some arrangements to pay off the arrears on a regular basis; if there was to be a discount on the rent there would have to be some money spent to make the shops look good.

The next meeting was on 29 January 1996 when Mr Wong said, "They will take for sure this 20 per cent." Mr Argyrou asked for 25 per cent and Mr Wong said, "I'll go back to them." A further conversation took place, and Mr Argyrou said, "All right. We accept 20 per cent." Mr Wong replied, "The landlord gave me authority to negotiate the amount of the rent. You have to include the arrears into the rent. I think this will be all the rent they want. The arrears are included." There were then some negotiations as to the term of the new lease. Mr Argyrou says and Mr Wong denies that in order to cover the arrears there needed to be a five year lease with a five year option.

In July 1996 Mr Wong collected from Mr Argyrou $4,800 for the amount of rent for that month. He paid a similar amount for the months of August 1996 through
February 1997. This is approximately the figure which Mr Wong had asked for the new rent.

The way in which rent was paid was that Mr Wong would call at the coffee shop and Mr Argyrou would give him a cheque if he were not busy but until about
December 1996 if Mr Argyrou were busy he would hand his cheque book to Mr Wong and Mr Wong would complete the cheque. Mr Argyrou would then sign it and the form would be detached from the book and handed to Mr Wong. However, the amount that was to be inserted in the cheque was always the amount which was specified by Mr Argyrou. The figure that was inserted in July/August was almost certainly computed by Mr Argyrou on the basis that it was the rent under the new lease. Mr Wong was asked why he accepted that amount of money instead of the higher amount of money, especially when it must have been obvious to him that the amount being paid was the rent under the new lease. Mr
Wong's general attitude seemed to be that he knew he was not in a particularly strong position and that he would be content with whatever the tenant reasonably was prepared to pay but he did not really deal with that particular contention.

I now deal with the issues that Mr Cassidy QC outlined. 1. There is no doubt at all that Mr Wong had authority to negotiate on behalf of the lessor but there is a big difference between a person with authority to negotiate and a person who has got authority to actually make an agreement. Mr Murr referred me to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Summit Properties Pty Limited v
Comserv (No 784) Pty Limited (1981) 2 BPR 9173 at 9175 where that distinction is made and that is not the only case where the decision has turned on that particular point. For instance, solicitors, generally speaking, have no authority to enter into an actual agreement for lease as opposed to negotiating the terms of the lease: Pianta versus National Finance & Trustees
Limited <case>; [(1964) 38 ALJR 232], 234.

Mr Cassidy QC relied on two authorities for the proposition that a person in
Mr Wong's position would ordinarily have authority to enter into an agreement for lease as well as negotiate its terms. The authorities were Hamilton v
Clanricarde (1762) 1 Brown 341; <case>; <case>; [(1853) 17 Beav 151] The cases are, to my mind, merely examples of how one could find in particular fact situations that an agent has authority not only to negotiate a lease but also to enter into it. However, the mere fact that this is possible in some situations, does not mean that one moves from that position to saying that when one has a person in a position such as Mr Wong's, he has such authority.

The situation in the present case was that Mr Wong was a solicitor's clerk. In a sense, however, the solicitor, and in another sense, Mr Wong, were managing the centre in that if the tenants had any problems they would mention them to
Mr Wong. It does not seem to me that he was held out by the landlord in such a position as would carry the consequence that he was either obviously a person with authority or a person who was held out by the landlord to have authority to actually bind it to the terms of a new lease.

Indeed, this is reinforced by the way in which Mr Argyrou put the conversations that he had with Mr Wong, not only in his affidavit but also during his cross examination. At almost every turn of the road, Mr Wong made it clear that he would be asking the owner, and he would say, for instance, "They won't take X per cent, but I think they will take Y per cent." 
Even if the parties had reached agreement on all the terms of the new lease, it would not seem to me that they had reached the stage where there was, in law, an agreement for a new lease. That agreement was, at least, to take the form of a formal agreement between their solicitors followed by an instrument in registrable form being submitted to the solicitors. The terms of the solicitors' correspondence in August which, of course, is two months after the alleged agreement, seems to me to suggest that there was still considered by the lessees' solicitors to be room for manoeuvre as to the exact terms of the lease.

Mr Cassidy QC put that where one has tenants who are holding over after an existing lease, it is much easier to infer what the terms of the lease will be because one can assume that unless one says something to the contrary, the terms are as they were before. This is, I think, true to a point but only to a point, and, indeed, the correspondence between the lessor's solicitors and those controlling the lessor in Hong Kong show that there were various matters, which almost certainly would have come out at the time when the formal document was being prepared including the matter that the lease may not be able to be assigned until all the arrears of rent under the earlier lease had been dealt with. Indeed, the parties seemed to be talking about this, on
Mr Wong's evidence, even in August.

I have said that I do not think, even if the parties have reached agreement on all the necessary terms, that Mr Wong would have had authority on behalf of the defendant to enter into the lease. I should make it clear that I am not convinced that the parties had reached the stage where they had agreed on all the terms. Although Mr Wong says that the commencement date was to be 1 July , I glean from the conversations that this was more his wish rather than anything that was actually agreed to by the other side. Certainly Mr Wong was told by his principals in Hong Kong that the commencement date should be about
March 1997. He seems to have ignored this presumably because it was to his principal's advantage, but I would find it difficult if it were necessary to do so, which it is not, to find that all the terms had been agreed between the parties by June 1996.

Accordingly, on the first issue I find the parties had not got to a stage of entering into a binding agreement for lease.

It follows it is not really necessary to the decision in this matter to deal with the other issues, and so I will just very shortly give my conclusions on them.
I am not convinced on the balance of probabilities that there was any agreement as to the commencement date.
I would have thought that it is clear that the Statute of Frauds or some modern equivalent is applicable to the creation of this interest in land.
It is not necessary to look at the issue of part performance.

It follows from what I have said, that the Court should record that the caveats 2637196, 2637197 and 2637198 should now lapse; otherwise the proceedings are dismissed with costs. The exhibits may be returned on the usual basis that should there be an appeal they will be returned to the Court.
 * * * 
