

Regina versus Monks Matter No 60344/96 [1997] NSWSC 289 (5 August 1997) 
Regina versus Stuart Norman MONKS /96 August 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Newman J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA versus Stuart Norman MONKS 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The appellant and his co-accused, Cindy Gai Houlton, were tried before his Honour Judge McGuire and a jury at the Newcastle District Court on a number of charges arising out of alleged aggravated sexual assaults upon the complainant, D, which were said to have occurred on 16 January 1994. For reasons which are not presently relevant, acquittals were directed on some of the charges. The jury convicted the appellant on the remaining charges of sexual assault, including offences of sexual intercourse without the consent of the complainant in circumstances of aggravation. The co-accused was convicted of aiding and abetting. 
Upon the most serious of the offences the appellant was sentenced to penal servitude for a minimum term of nine years and an additional term of three years. He received various lesser, concurrent, sentences in relation to the other offences of which he was convicted.

The appellant appeals against the convictions and seeks leave to appeal against the sentences.

The nature of the case against the appellant may be summarised as follows.

Both the complainant D, and the co-accused Houlton, were disabled persons who suffered from cerebral palsy. The complainant was confined to a wheelchair. At the time of the alleged offences the complainant was aged 25. The co-accused,
Houlton, was slightly older. The complainant and the co-accused had first met as children when they attended a Spastic Centre. They had maintained contact thereafter.

Houlton, at the relevant time, was living at Adamstown with her two children.
D, who lived near Penrith, had arranged to visit Houlton for a week. According to D, after her arrival at Houlton's home she heard Houlton speaking on the telephone to the appellant, and making arrangements for the appellant to call on them. Having regard to the nature of the issues arising in this appeal, it is unnecessary to go into the full detail of what occurred later that evening, and in the early hours of the following morning. It suffices to say that, according to the evidence of D, the appellant arrived at Houlton's house in the company of another man. The appellant, the other man and Houlton drank a quantity of liquor. Over a period of a number of hours, apparently by pre- arrangement with Houlton, D, who was in a wheelchair, and later in a bed, against her will, was subjected by the appellant to various forms of sexual handling and intercourse. D asserted, and Houlton substantially agreed, that the following morning D complained to Houlton. D's mother came to take her away. D also complained to her mother, and shortly afterwards to the police.

When the police first interviewed the appellant, he denied knowing D, or ever having been in her company. His solicitor gave notice of an alibi. The alibi was later admitted to be false.

At the trial, the appellant acknowledged having engaged in sexual activity with D. However, the defence case was that such activity was consensual, and had been initiated by D.

The jury believed the evidence of D and rejected the evidence of the appellant, as they were well entitled to do. It is not suggested that the verdicts were unsafe or unsatisfactory.

I turn now to the grounds of appeal argued on behalf of the appellant.

Ground 1: "The trial miscarried because of the failure of the trial judge to grant an adjournment to enable further evidence to be called in the defence case." 
In order to deal with this ground it is necessary to consider in some detail the course of events before and during the trial.

The alleged offences occurred on 16 January 1994. During March 1995 a doctor who was treating D referred her to a consultant psychiatrist at Penrith, Dr
Chaturvedi. Dr Chaturvedi saw D once, on 17 March 1995. Dr Chaturvedi wrote a report dated 24 March 1995 in which she diagnosed D as suffering from "adjustment disorder with depressed mood" and recorded that she had prescribed some medication. The report, in paragraph 2, said: "(D) is a 26 year old single women (sic) who has suffered from depression since she was sexually assaulted last year in January. She was visiting her girlfriend where she was invited to help with the children. In the presence of this friend and in her home an acquaintance of the family attacked her. She was helpless as the phone was disconnected, the house was locked and the friend ignored her plea of assistance. (D) has become even more distrustful of people. She sleeps poorly and has no interest in eating. She cries a lot and has low stress tolerance." 
There was nothing else in the report of present significance.

The above paragraph evidently states, in an extremely summary form, Dr
Chaturvedi's understanding, fourteen months after the event, of some of the circumstances of the sexual assaults. The report does not identify the complainant as the source, or the sole source, of that understanding, although she may have been. To what extent it simply records what the doctor was told, and to what extent it is based on inferences, does not appear.

The contents of Dr Chaturvedi's report were known to the lawyers representing the appellant at least ten days before the trial, which commenced on 20 May
No steps were taken, before the trial, to arrange for the presence of Dr
Chaturvedi at court. In an affidavit filed in this appeal the solicitor for the appellant said that she thought it would be unnecessary to arrange for Dr
Chaturvedi to be present, because she thought another doctor, Dr Cameron, would be called by the Crown and that "counsel would lead evidence about Dr
Chaturvedi's report through Dr Cameron". (Dr Cameron, it should be mentioned, was not the doctor to whom the report was addressed). Senior counsel for the appellant has acknowledged that the report could not have been tendered "through Dr Cameron" even if Dr Cameron had been called. Furthermore, trial counsel for the appellant had been made aware by the Crown that the Crown did not intend to call Dr Cameron, although this information had not been passed on to the solicitor.

D gave evidence in chief on 20 May, and into the morning of 21 May. In the course of her evidence in chief she made no reference either to the telephone being disconnected or the house being locked. She gave evidence of Houlton ignoring pleas of assistance. Cross-examination of D commenced on 21 May 1996 and extended into 22 May 1996.

On the afternoon of 21 May 1996 counsel for the appellant asked some questions about the telephone, and the front door of Houlton's premises, which were described as a villa. The complainant said that there was a wire door which "just had a clip or something". She said that the wire door was not locked to a person on the inside but was locked to a person on the outside. A person on the inside who wanted to get out could have undone the clip. (The meaning of
Dr Chaturvedi's statement that "the house was locked" is far from clear. There are very few "locked" doors that cannot be opened from the inside.) On D's evidence, the door could not be opened from the outside and was, in that sense, locked. D pointed out that she was in a wheelchair, and would have been in difficulty making an escape. As to the telephone, she said that it was working. D was then asked whether she had ever told anybody that the telephone had been "unplugged", and she answered in the negative. She was asked whether she had ever told anybody that the house was locked, and she answered in the negative. She was then asked about her consultation with Dr Chaturvedi. She remembered being asked by Dr Chaturvedi whether the telephone was disconnected, but denied having told her that it was disconnected. She denied telling Dr Chaturvedi that the house was locked. She said that Dr Chaturvedi spoke with an accent and the two of them had difficulty communicating. As a result of that difficulty she did not return to see Dr Chaturvedi, but consulted another medical practitioner. The subject was left there.

At the conclusion of proceedings on 21 May, and before the adjournment, counsel for the appellant raised, in the absence of the jury, the matter that had been put to D as to what she told Dr Chaturvedi. Counsel said that the
Crown had indicated that it was "prepared to concede that certain things were said by the complainant to Dr Chaturvedi". Without inviting the Crown
Prosecutor to comment, McGuire DCJ expressed some concern about agreements of that kind, indicating that, in the past, embarrassment had been caused because of differences of understanding as to the nature of the relevant agreement.

In the circumstances his Honour's caution was understandable. The complainant had denied that she had told the doctor certain things. She had also asserted that she had a problem of communication with the doctor. There is a difference between a concession as to what the complainant had said to the doctor, and a concession as to what the doctor believed she had been told. The second fact was irrelevant, but it was the most that could properly have been conceded by the Crown.

On the morning of Wednesday 22 May 1996, in the absence of the jury, there occurred the following exchange: "HIS HONOUR: Mr Thomas, it struck me last night that I may have given you the impression that there was something inappropriate in your reaching some agreement with the Crown as to what was or wasn't contained in that doctor's report.

THOMAS: Oh, I didn't get that impression, your Honour. I got the impression that your Honour was saying that these things can give rise to problems which
I concede.
 ......................................

HIS HONOUR: I wasn't seeking to prevent you from reaching some agreement.

THOMAS: I certainly didn't take it that way." 
On the afternoon of 21 May 1996 the solicitors for the appellant had procured the issue of a subpoena to Dr Chaturvedi, requiring her to attend court. There was also a subpoena to produce documents. Neither subpoena was served personally on Dr Chaturvedi. A process server handed both subpoenas to Dr
Chaturvedi's receptionist at Penrith at 4.15pm on Wednesday 22 May. They required her attendance at court at Newcastle on 23 May. No prior contact was made with the doctor to warn her that the subpoenas were coming. The subpoenas were accompanied by a letter addressed to Dr Chaturvedi referring to the report of 24 March 1995 and informing her that there had arisen a dispute as to her record of some things the complainant had said to her. The letter recorded that leave to serve the subpoenas with short notice had been granted on 21 May 1996. (It is surprising that no attempt was made to alert the doctor, before 4.15pm on 22 May, that she would be required at Newcastle at .00am on 23 May). The doctor was requested to attend the Legal Aid office at
Newcastle at 9.00am on 23 May to allow sufficient time for a conference with counsel before court commenced at 9.30am. The letter told Dr Chaturvedi where she could park her car. The author regretted any inconvenience caused.

Dr Chaturvedi reacted unfavourably to these communications and consulted the
Medical Defence Union. Exactly what she was advised is not clear, but she did not turn up at court on the morning of 23 May.

The transcript records that, when proceedings commenced on Thursday 23 May , counsel for the appellant raised the possibility of the issue of a warrant for the arrest of Dr Chaturvedi. There then occurred an exchange between counsel and McGuire DCJ in the course of which counsel conceded that the subpoena to Dr Chaturvedi to attend and give evidence should have been served personally. (That concession appears to have been wrong - cf Registrar of the Court of Appeal versus Maniam (No 1) [(1991) 25 NSWLR 459).] He also acknowledged that both subpoenas had been handed to Dr Chaturvedi's receptionist after 4.00pm on the previous day. He did not press McGuire DCJ to issue a warrant for Dr Chaturvedi's arrest.

The Crown had closed its case on 22 May, and defence evidence lasted until a little after lunchtime on 23 May. During the course of proceedings on 23 May there was discussion, in the absence of the jury, between counsel and McGuire
DCJ about the unavailability, or non-attendance, of Dr Chaturvedi, and counsel was permitted to delay closing his case. Finally, at about 2.30pm on 23 May, after all the defence witnesses for both accused had given evidence, and when the judge was ready for addresses to the jury, counsel for the appellant applied for an adjournment to enable a fresh subpoena to be served on Dr
Chaturvedi. What was evidently contemplated by counsel was that leave to serve a fresh subpoena with short notice should be given, and that late on the afternoon of 23 May Dr Chaturvedi would be once again served with a subpoena requiring her attendance on the morning of the following day. The adjournment was declined. The judge did not specifically deal with any application to serve a subpoena with short notice. Counsel then attempted to tender portion of Dr Chaturvedi's report, (the paragraph quoted above), relying upon [s69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s69.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) . The tender was objected to and rejected. The rejection is the subject of the second ground of appeal.

The transcript records what happened as follows: "(Discussion between his Honour and Mr Thomas regarding Mr Thomas having subpoena served on Dr Cameron. His Honour advised matter will not be delayed waiting for doctor. Mr Thomas seeks pursuant to [s69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s69.html) of the new [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) to tender a portion of Dr Chaturvedi's report) 
Second paragraph of report of Dr Chaturvedi tendered. Objection (Crown
Prosecutor). Legal argument. Tender rejected." 
Counsel then addressed. McGuire DCJ commenced his summing-up on the afternoon of 23 May 1996. The summing-up continued into the morning of Friday 24 May and the jury then retired to consider their verdicts. They returned their verdicts at 4.00pm on the Friday.

The decision of McGuire DCJ to refuse an adjournment in order to enable a further attempt to be made to procure the attendance of Dr Chaturvedi was a discretionary decision that was well open to his Honour in the circumstances of the case. It was not unreasonable. Although the legal representatives of the appellant had been in possession of a copy of Dr Chaturvedi's report well before the trial, no steps were taken to serve her with a subpoena or otherwise arrange for her attendance. At 4.15pm on 22 May 1996, her receptionist was handed a subpoena requiring her to be at the Newcastle court early on the morning of the following day. No adequate explanation was given to the trial judge as to the delay in seeking to arrange for the doctor's attendance. The evidence in the trial was at an end when the application for an adjournment was made. It was undesirable to keep everyone waiting for most of an afternoon. The adjournment would also have required further leave to serve with short notice. Furthermore, for reasons that will appear, the subject about which the doctor's evidence was required was of only marginal significance.

As the manner in which the ground of appeal is expressed recognises, this is not an appeal against McGuire DCJ's interlocutory decision to refuse an adjournment. The question for this court to decide is whether there has been a miscarriage of justice in consequence of the failure to grant the adjournment.
That requires, amongst other things, an evaluation of the significance of the evidence, if any, that Dr Chaturvedi could have given had she been brought to court before the close of the defence case.

At its highest, the argument for the appellant assumes that Dr Chaturvedi could have been called in the defence case to give evidence that, when she interviewed D in March 1995, D, in explaining the circumstances of the sexual assault that had occurred in January 1994, had told Dr Chaturvedi that the phone was disconnected and the house was locked. In the course of giving that evidence Dr Chaturvedi would also have informed the jury that D had told her that she had been sexually assaulted in January 1994, and that she had been attacked by a friend of Houlton in Houlton's house.

It may be remarked that, even if Dr Chaturvedi had given the above evidence, she would have been unlikely to suggest that the reference to the phone being disconnected and the house being locked had been advanced by D as the entire, or even the principal, explanation of her helplessness. As Dr Chaturvedi went on to say in the next paragraph of her report, D suffered from cerebral palsy, and was confined to a wheelchair. That was the main explanation of her helplessness in the face of a sexual attack.

Senior counsel for the appellant has argued the appeal upon the basis that what was involved was an attempt to establish the making of a prior inconsistent statement by the complainant. It was hoped to establish that the complainant had told Dr Chaturvedi that the phone was disconnected and the house was locked, those statements, it was contended, being inconsistent that the evidence she had given in cross-examination. The defence was not setting out to establish that in truth the phone was disconnected, or that in truth the house was locked. If the making of prior inconsistent statements could have been shown then this, it was said, might have been regarded by the jury as reflecting adversely upon the credibility of the complainant.

The appellant's argument overstates the extent of the possible inconsistency.
Even if the complainant had told Dr Chaturvedi that the house was locked, that was not inconsistent with her evidence, either in chief or in cross- examination. That evidence has been summarised above. In effect, she said that a person outside the house could not have entered without assistance from someone inside, because of the clip on the screen door. She said that someone on the inside could have unclipped the door, and got out. Few ordinary doors of the kind in Houlton's villa can be locked in such a manner as to prevent egress.

Perhaps Dr Chaturvedi was referring, not to the condition of the front door preventing escape, but to the doors and windows being closed so that a cry for help could not have been heard by someone outside. If that were so, then the cross-examination was misconceived. Cross-examining counsel asked D about the possibility of escape through the front door. The theory that what had been said to the doctor was a prior inconsistent statement proceeded on the assumption that it was egress through the front door that was in question.

What Dr Chaturvedi meant by the proposition that the phone was disconnected is also unclear. Cross-examining counsel seems to have taken her to mean that the phone was "unplugged". It is true that the complainant acknowledged in her evidence that the telephone was in an operating condition. Indeed, she used the telephone the next morning to arrange for her mother to come and get her.
She also gave evidence of a telephone call made by the co-accused to the appellant. If she had, in truth, told Dr Chaturvedi that the telephone was not in an operating condition, then that would have been a prior statement inconsistent with her evidence at the trial. But what was the importance of the matter? There is no doubt that Dr Chaturvedi had been informed, either by the complainant or by someone else, that the complainant had been sexually attacked by the appellant in Houlton's home. There is also no doubt that, as
Dr Chaturvedi knew, the complainant was suffering from cerebral palsy, and was confined to a wheelchair. There are degrees of helplessness, but by any standards the complainant was in a position of unusual vulnerability. It was argued that, assuming she made this statement to Dr Chaturvedi, it demonstrated a propensity to exaggerate. It is hard to imagine, however, that a jury would have thought this complainant felt a need to exaggerate her vulnerability.

Any benefit which the defence might have hoped to gain from the evidence of Dr
Chaturvedi was, in the context of the whole of the evidence at the trial, slight. It was not unreasonable of the trial judge to refuse an adjournment, and no miscarriage of justice is shown to have resulted from such refusal.

This ground of appeal is not made out.

Ground 2: "The trial judge erred in rejecting the admission into evidence of the report of Dr Chaturvedi sought to be tendered on behalf of the appellant." 
What was tendered was the second paragraph of a copy of Dr Chaturvedi's report, being the paragraph quoted earlier in these reasons.

Defence counsel was not setting out to prove the truth of representations made to Dr Chaturvedi and recorded by her. It was no part of the case, either for the Crown or for the defence, that the telephone had been disconnected, or that the house was locked, whatever exactly those statements might have meant.
The fact that Houlton ignored D's pleas for assistance was not something the defence sought to establish. The point of tender was not to prove any objective facts concerning either the telephone or the door. The appeal has been argued on the basis that the purpose of the tender was to prove the making by the complainant of a prior inconsistent statement; a matter going to the credibility of the complainant.

The principal difficulty in the way of the appellant's argument is that it is not at all clear that the paragraph in question records statements made to Dr
Chaturvedi by the complainant. It may be inferred that the paragraph fairly reflects the belief or understanding of Dr Chaturvedi, but there are a number of difficulties about reaching a conclusion that the paragraph records what the complainant said to the doctor. First, the evidence of the complainant was that she had difficulty in communicating with Dr Chaturvedi, and for that reason, had not gone back to see her again. Second, there is no evidence as to what other sources of information, if any, Dr Chaturvedi might have had. The complainant's physical circumstances are such that it is at least possible that someone accompanied her on her visit to the doctor. We do not know what the referring doctor might have told Dr Chaturvedi. Third, the meaning of what the doctor wrote about the telephone and about the house being locked is unclear.

Particular reference was made to [ss48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s48.html), [60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s60.html) and [69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s69.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) .

The relevant fact which the defence sought to establish by proving the contents of Dr Chaturvedi's letter to the referring doctor was that D had told
Dr Chaturvedi something about the telephone being disconnected and the house being locked which was inconsistent with her evidence at the trial. At least in relation to the telephone, proof that D had told the doctor that the telephone was disconnected would have shown the making of a prior inconsistent statement by D. However, the letter did not in terms contain a representation by Dr Chaturvedi to the referring doctor that D had said that, and in all the circumstances that would not be a safe inference to draw. For the same reason, the letter does not record that a representation to that effect was made by D to Dr Chaturvedi.

The tender was rightly rejected.

In any event, even if the tender had been wrongly rejected, no miscarriage of justice was involved. The paragraph, even if in evidence, would not have established a prior inconsistent statement about the house being locked. The statement about the telephone was of only marginal significance. Moreover, especially having regard to D's evidence about her communication problems with the doctor, and also having regard to the abbreviated and unclear nature of the facts written by the doctor, the relevant part of the paragraph would fairly have been regarded by a reasonable jury as representing, at the most, the doctor's belief about what she had been told; a belief that was probably attributable to a misunderstanding concerning matters of detail that were not particularly important to either the doctor or the patient. On the important matter, which was that D had been sexually attacked, the paragraph was clear, and was consistent with D's evidence.

This ground of appeal has not been made out.

Grounds 3 and 3A: "3 The trial judge failed to adequately direct or warn the jury as to the reliability of the evidence of the complainant.

A The trial judge failed to adequately or properly direct the jury as to evidence relevant in the Crown case against the appellant and the appellant's case." 
Neither of the above grounds raises a matter of complaint about the summing-up that was raised at the trial, and the appellant requires leave to rely on these grounds on this appeal. Leave should be refused. However, the court has heard full argument on the merits of both grounds and it is appropriate to express a view as to those merits. Both grounds lack substance.

It was argued that certain observations made by McGuire DCJ might have given the jury the impression that it was not open to the appellant to call in aid the evidence of the co-accused, at least in so far as that evidence tended to support the appellant's case. We do not know what was said about this matter by counsel in their addresses to the jury. Certainly, nothing was said directly by the trial judge to the effect of the proposition just stated. The failure of trial counsel to make any complaints along the lines now made strongly suggests that he did not gain the impression mentioned above.

The remarks that are said to convey this impression were made in the context of pointing out to the jury that no witness was called to support the account of the complainant. The judge observed that it is quite common, in cases of alleged sexual misconduct, for the conduct to occur in private and for the complainant's evidence to be unsupported by the evidence of some other witness. However, the judge went on immediately to point out that it is also commonly the case that a person accused of sexual misconduct is not normally in a situation where he or she can call some evidence to support his or her version. He said: "It is not that a person who is accused of a crime has to prove or disprove anything, but I merely mention that because those accused are also rarely in the situation of being able to call evidence to corroborate their account or disprove the allegations made against them.

It is therefore essential that you pay close attention to (D), that you carefully consider her evidence, because at the end of the day you are really relying upon her." 
Considered in the context of the entire summing-up, and particularly in the context of the point the judge was making at the time, what was said could not fairly have been given the meaning now placed upon it. As was noted, trial counsel did not take it to have that meaning.

It was also argued that the case called for a warning, either under [s165](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), or under the general law, concerning the possible unreliability of the evidence of D.
The appellant's written submissions on this point were as follows: "The case was dominated by the physical condition of the complainant who made assertions about her mental capacity to be able to relate particular events.
This was a matter where a jury ought to have been appropriately warned, particularly having regard to the physical presentation of the complainant who amongst other conditions suffered from narcolepsy and whose evidence was constantly interrupted by emotional outbursts or the need for breaks to enable her to regain her strength." 
The meaning of the concluding part of the first sentence is not clear. No request was made for a warning. It is true that there are cases where, apart from the provisions of [s165](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html), and in the absence of any request, it would nevertheless be proper to give a warning. The present, however, was not such a case. Whilst it was evident that the complainant suffered from number of physical disabilities, which required frequent interruptions to her evidence, her disabilities did not affect the reliability of her evidence.

Ground 4: "The sentences imposed were manifestly excessive and the trial judge failed to apply proper principles when imposing those sentences." 
The maximum penalty for the most serious offence of which the appellant was convicted was penal servitude for 20 years.

McGuire DCJ said: "I have been dealing with sexual assault matters in some shape or form in the course of proceedings over numerous trials and a multitude of sentencing exercises involving sexual offenders for the most part of the last 14 years. I cannot remember a worse case than this. Monks repeatedly used that girl as virtually a sex object without mercy and without consideration of her person or dignity. All forcible sexual assaults are serious. However, this case demonstrated callousness in the extreme. The victim was systematically degraded and humiliated." 
There is no reason to doubt the fairness of those observations.

The appellant has a long criminal history, but the previous offences were not particularly serious. The judge took into account all relevant subjective aspects of the case and his summary of the objective seriousness did not involve overstatement. There is no error of fact or principle apparent from the remarks on sentence, and, having regard to the number of offences, the maximum penalties involved, and the objective features of the case, the sentences imposed were within the judge's discretion.

It was argued that there was disparity with the sentence imposed upon the co- accused. She was sentenced to imprisonment for three years involving a minimum term of nine months and an additional term of two years and three months.

The physical condition of the co-accused, which was relevant to her sentencing, has already been mentioned. The co-accused had no previous criminal history.

Forming a judgment as to the degree of culpability involved in the conduct of the co-accused could not have been an easy matter. Almost all of the acts of which D complained occurred in the absence of the co-accused, who was elsewhere in the house, usually attending to her children. There was evidence that she ignored a cry for help, but there seems to have been a certain ambiguity about her behaviour, and a possible element of foolishness as much as of callousness. I am not persuaded that material disparity has been demonstrated, or that it has been shown that the appellant can have a justifiable sense of grievance by reason of the manner in which his co- offender was treated.

This ground of appeal must fail.

Conclusion: 
The appeal against conviction should be dismissed. Leave to appeal against the sentences imposed should be granted, but the appeal should be dismissed.

REGINA versus Stuart Norman MONKS 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of the Chief Justice and I agree with both his reasons and the orders he proposes.

REGINA versus Stuart Norman MONKS 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: I agree with Gleeson CJ.

REGINA versus Stuart Norman MONKS 
JUDGMENT 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PRACTICE - ADJOURNMENT - trial judge refused an application, at the conclusion of the evidence, for an adjournment to allow the defence to call another witness - HELD - in all the circumstances, including the time of the application, and the nature and relative insignificance of the evidence that the witness could have given, the refusal involved no error and no miscarriage of justice.

EVIDENCE - medical records - trial judge rejected tender of a copy of a medical report said to be evidence of a prior inconsistent statement by a complainant in a case of sexual assault - HELD - it was not established that the report in fact recorded statements made by the complainant and the tender was rightly rejected. [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) [ss48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s48.html), [60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s60.html) and [69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s69.html) considered.

SENTENCING - the complainant, the victim of the rape, was a disabled person bound to a wheelchair - a sentence of a minimum term of nine years and an additional term of three years was held not excessive. 
O R D E R S Appeal against conviction dismissed.  Leave to appeal against sentence granted; appeal dismissed.
 * * * 
