

Triantafilis versus Commissioner of Stamp Duties for New South Wales Matter No
Ca 40696/95 [1998] NSWSC 112 (28 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
TRIANTAFILIS versus COMMISSIONER OF STAMP DUTIES FOR NEW SOUTH WALES 
CA 40696/95; ED 3714/95 April 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Powell JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: EQUITY DIVISION - HODGSON J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40696/95 ED 3714/95 
DELIVERED: 28 APRIL 1998 
HEARING DATE: 3 APRIL 1998 
PARTIES: TRIANTAFILIS V COMMISSIONER OF STAMP DUTIES FOR NEW SOUTH WALES 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P PRIESTLEY JA POWELL JA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: M J NEIL QC / G THOMAS 
Respondent: H R SORENSEN 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: JOHN ROSE & CO 
Respondent: STATE CROWN SOLICITORS 
CATCHWORDS: STAMP DUTIES ACT SECTION 73(1)(E) - EXEMPTION FROM AD VALOREM DUTY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 10 
TRIANTAFILIS versus COMMISSIONER OF STAMP DUTIES 
FOR NEW SOUTH WALES 
STAMP DUTIES ACT S 73(1)(e) - NOMINAL OR AD VALOREM DUTY - whether purchase price "actually paid" by the "apparent purchaser", within meaning of <case>(e).

The appellant claimed that he purchased a property on trust for his two sons who were then minors. $63,000 of the purchase price was money he claimed belonged to the sons; the remainder ($10,000) was part of $30,000 he borrowed.
The appellant claimed that a transfer of the property to the sons fell within s 73(1)(e) making it subject to nominal stamp duty. The appellant sought to prove he was a trustee, for his sons, of the $10,000 prior to the settlement of the purchase and his sons therefore were the "real purchasers" who "actually paid" the whole of the purchase price. The trial judge found that on no view of the appellant's claims had he become a trustee of the $10,000 before the purchase and that the conditions of <case>(e) were not met.

On appeal, the appellant submitted Hodgson J erred: (a) by not finding there to have been a relevant declaration of trust and consequently not finding the additional $10,000 had been "actually paid" by the sons; (b) by construing s (1)(e) as applying only if the whole of the purchase price was paid by the person alleged to be the real purchaser pursuant to the Stamp Duties Act; or alternatively, by not so construing <case>(e) that 63/73rds of the interest in the property was within that provision.

Held:
There was neither a declaration of trust nor conduct indicating an implied declaration of trust, by the appellant, with respect to the $10,000 prior to its being paid as a proportion of the purchase price; therefore the $10,000 could not have been "actually paid" by the sons, the real purchasers, as part of the purchase money pursuant to <case>(e);
Hodgson J was correct in construing <case>(e) as requiring the whole of the purchase price to have been actually paid by the real purchaser.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Priestley JA. 
PRIESTLEY JA: This is an appeal from a decision of Hodgson J. In his reasons for judgment he set out the facts of the case and the legal arguments in a way which seems to me to be perfectly adequate and which I will therefore not repeat.

The question for decision was whether $73,000 which had been paid upon settlement of a contract to purchase a property in Rozelle in 1980, had been "actually paid" within the meaning of <case>(e) of the Stamp Duties Act, by the two sons of the plaintiff, who were then minors. If it had been so paid, duty was payable at a nominal figure. If it had not, the duty was ad valorem.
Hodgson J held the moneys had not been "actually paid".

As to $63,000 of the $73,000, Hodgson J was prepared to act on the assumption that it had been paid by the sons. This was because he was prepared to assume, without deciding, that the circumstances in which the plaintiff had control of the $63,000 were such as to make him a trustee of that personalty for the two sons. On this assumption, the $63,000 had belonged, in equity, to the sons, and was paid on their behalf by the plaintiff as part of the purchase money for the property.

The basis upon which Hodgson J decided the question adversely to the plaintiff was that he was not satisfied that the remaining $10,000 of the $73,000 purchase money had been "actually paid" by or on behalf of the sons. In regard to this, the case put by the plaintiff had been that the facts surrounding the $63,000 and the $10,000, and the evidence concerning the intentions of the plaintiff, should have led Hodgson J to find that the plaintiff had been holding the $10,000 on trust for his two sons prior to the settlement of the contract of purchase. Had he found this, it was submitted that the requirements of <case>(e) had been fulfilled.

The property purchased was a shop in which the plaintiff conducted a business for seven or eight years after the purchase. In order to complete the purchase the plaintiff used the $63,000 Hodgson J assumed he was holding for the sons, and $10,000 from $30,000 which he borrowed from the Commonwealth Bank. The plaintiff obtained this finance both for the balance of the purchase money and for his own purposes in getting the business in the shop under way.

The evidence gave some support for the view that the plaintiff regarded himself, after the purchase was completed, as holding the property in trust for his two sons. Hodgson J asked himself the question whether, on the assumptions he was prepared to make, he should find that the plaintiff had become a trustee of the $10,000 before settlement of the purchase. On the facts as he was prepared to assume them, in which he was for the purpose of the exercise really taking the plaintiff's case at its highest and most favourable, he could not find any materials justifying a factual conclusion that the plaintiff had, whether explicitly or implicitly, directly or indirectly, declared himself a trustee for his sons of the $10,000 he was in the process of borrowing before settlement of the purchase. That being so, he concluded that the whole of the purchase money ($73,000) could not have been actually paid by the sons and, accordingly, the requirements of s (1)(e) had not been fulfilled.

In the appeal it was submitted for the plaintiff that Hodgson J was wrong in arriving at this conclusion. This was put on two bases.

The first basis was that on the facts Hodgson J should have found there had been a relevant declaration of trust. I do not agree with this submission.
Taking the most favourable view of the facts for the plaintiff, it seems to me that they were just as consistent with any gift/trust intentions of the plaintiff having become actual only at the moment of the completion of the purchase or later, as they were with the conclusion contended for on behalf of the plaintiff.

The facts of what happened on settlement of the purchase contract in 1980 were not fully put before Hodgson J. No doubt this is because of the length of time since that settlement. From what is known of the transaction it seems probable that what happened on settlement followed the usual course: the Commonwealth
Bank attended on settlement as the prospective mortgagee and at settlement handed a cheque to the vendor for whatever amount was needed to make up the purchase price in addition to funds being handed over by the purchaser and prospective mortgagor (on the then face of things, the plaintiff). The Bank would then have taken the documents of title as security for repayment for the sum of the mortgage advance. I do not think it is going too far to say that the foregoing are the probable inferences from the scanty information available; if it is to be thought they go too far, they are at least as probable as any other inferences. On the footing that the Commonwealth Bank handed the money over on settlement I agree with the way Hodgson J put the matter, namely, "that there was no declaration of trust in relation to the $10,000, and no conduct which indicated an implied declaration of trust intended to be final and binding upon the plaintiff, until the $10,000 was actually paid as part of the purchase price of the property." 
If the Commonwealth Bank did not deal with the $10,000 in the way I have inferred, no other dealing with it was proved on the balance of probabilities.

I also agree with the conclusion Hodgson J drew from his finding just set out, namely, that "the trust could not have come to affect the $10,000 prior to its application; but at most, could have come to affect the whole of the property when it was purchased." 
On this footing, the $10,000 could not have been "actually paid" by the sons as part of the purchase money for the property. This is why I think the first basis of the plaintiff's submission on appeal fails.

The second basis on which the plaintiff's appeal was put was that Hodgson J had been wrong in going on to say: "It seems to me further that <case>(e) only applied if the whole of the purchase price is paid by the person alleged to be the real purchaser. It may be that payment of small amounts by some other party could be disregarded as immaterial, but I do not think the payment of $10,000.00 out of a total of $73,000.00 could be disregarded." 
Hodgson J's view of the construction of <case>(e) seems to me to be a straightforward one. The provision is as follows: "73 (1) The following instruments are not to be charged with ad valorem duty as conveyances, namely: ...

A conveyance whereby the apparent purchaser of property that is vested in him upon trust for the person who was the real purchaser and who has actually paid the purchase money therefor, conveys the same to the real purchaser." 
For the plaintiff it was submitted in the appeal that a different construction should be adopted, to the effect that there had been a conveyance which was not to be charged with ad valorem duty, being the conveyance of the 63/73rds interest in the property the apparent purchaser of which was the plaintiff, and which interest became vested in him upon trust for the sons being the real purchasers of that interest who had actually paid the purchase money for it.
On this view the plaintiff would be conveying the 63/73rds of the property he held on trust for the sons together with the 10/73rds which had not been actually paid by or on behalf of the sons, together, in the one transfer of the whole. Then only the 10/73rds interest in the property purchased would not be exempt from duty.

This approach to construction, upon the assumptions Hodgson J was prepared to make without deciding, would have the merit of producing what would appear to be a fairer result than the one arrived at by Hodgson J. However, I do not think the necessary construction can be reasonably placed upon the provision.
As I said earlier, the construction adopted by Hodgson J seems to me to be quite straightforward. The provision in my view is talking about one conveyance where the whole of the purchase money has been actually paid by the real purchaser although title has been taken to the property by an apparent purchaser. In my view a condition of non chargeability with ad valorem duty is that the whole of the purchase money for the one property conveyed by the instrument must have been actually paid by the real purchaser before the exemption from ad valorem duty is available. Thus I think the second basis of the plaintiff's appeal also fails.

Since I do not think that the plaintiff established that all the purchase money had been paid by the sons and since I further think that the exemption is only applicable if it had been, it is my opinion that the appeal fails and should therefore be dismissed with costs.

POWELL JA: I agree with Priestley JA. * * * 
