

Rebenta Pty Limited versus Oceanview Apartments Pty Limited Matter No 50155/97 [1997] NSWSC 405 (16 September 1997) 
Rebenta Pty Limited versus Oceanview Apartments Pty Limited /97 September 1997 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: REBENTA PTY LIMITED versus OCEANVIEW APARTMENTS PTY LIMITED 
Proceedings: 50155/97 
Date of Hearing: 22 August 1997 
Date of Judgment: 16 September 1997 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr J S Hilton SC 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Klimt & Associates 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr K P Smark 
Solicitor for Defendant: KNPW Lawyers 
Leave sought pursuant to [s.33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s33.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) to enforce an award.

Matters which need to be proved on such an application.

Whether the arbitrator's jurisdiction was extended by an implied ad hoc agreement:- 
Mustill and Boyd "The Law and Practice of Commercial Arbitration in England" (Second Edition) pp.133-134; Latham versus Foster's Australian Fibres Limited <case>; [[1926] VLR 427]; Costain Australia Limited versus Australian Airlines Limited (Supreme Court of Victoria - Southwell J - 6 June 1988 - unreported) and Mark Blake Builders Pty Limited versus Davis & Anor (Giles J - 14 November 1994 - unreported) applied and followed.

Held, on the facts of this case, there was such an agreement.

Held that interest under s.95 of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) should run from the date of the Final Award: Alex T. Dobble Pty Limited versus J.N. and M.E. Creer (Smart J - 9 July 1987 - unreported) applied and followed. 
I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Evidence Before Me 2 
The Final Award 10 
The Submissions Made By The Parties 11 
A Consideration Of The Submissions 13 
The Position Thus Far 17 
The Question Of Interest 18 
Costs 19 
Orders 19 /1997 - REBENTA PTY LIMITED versus OCEANVIEW APARTMENTS PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By a Summons issued on 10 July 1997 the plaintiff, Rebenta Pty Limited, for which Mr J.S. Hilton of Senior Counsel appeared, sought an order pursuant to [s.33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s33.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), ("the
Act"), for leave to enforce an award made by The Honourable A.J. Rogers of
Queen's Counsel and dated 27 June 1997. Mr Rogers awarded the plaintiff the sum of $179,124.86 against the defendant, Ocean View Apartments Pty Limited, for which Mr K.P. Smark of Counsel appeared. Mr Hilton appeared for the plaintiff in the arbitration. Mr Smark did not then appear for the defendant.

The Summons did not specify the basis on which the relief was sought and, on the first several occasions the matter was in the list before the Chief Judge at which times Mr Hilton did not appear, and when there was no appearance on behalf of the defendant, there appears to have been some misapprehension as to the material which the plaintiff should put before the Court in support of the relief it sought. Suffice to say that when the matter came before me it was not in issue that a party seeking to enforce an award, pursuant to [s.33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s33.html), must prove, at least, the submission to arbitration, so that the Court may be satisfied that the award was made pursuant to and within the terms of that submission; that the arbitrator has given reasons for making the award: [s.29(1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s29.html); and that the arbitrator was duly appointed.

The Evidence Before Me 
The evidentiary material before me comprised the affidavits of the solicitor for the plaintiff, Mr Peter Klimt, sworn 10, 18 and 25 July 1997 and 13 and 14
August 1997. There was no objection to any part of these affidavits and there was no cross-examination of Mr Klimt on them. Mr Hilton also tendered, as
Exhibit A, the Amended Points of Defence. It is now necessary to track through the evidence relevant to deciding the matters in issue.

In October 1996 the parties entered into an agreement, which recited that they had entered into a written Project Management Agreement dated 18 December 1995 whereby the plaintiff appointed the defendant to act as project manager for the development of a certain property at Bronte; that a dispute concerning the interpretation of clause 7.4 of that agreement had arisen; and that the parties had agreed to refer that dispute to the arbitration of a single arbitrator.

The operative parts of the agreement recorded the appointment of Mr Rogers and his acceptance of that appointment, and that the arbitration was to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Act. A timetable was set forth and, in paragraph 5, under the heading "Dispute Referred to
Arbitration", it was stated:- "(a) Is Oceanview required to make any payments under clause 7.4 of the Agreement when Oceanview has not been given possession of the Development? 
Is Oceanview required to pay interest to Rebenta under clause 7.4 of the Agreement notwithstanding that Oceanview has not taken possession of the Development? 
Is Oceanview obliged to pay interest to Rebenta under clause 7.4 of the Agreement from 1st July, 1996 or otherwise until the date of completion of the Agreement on 3rd October, 1996?" 
Various formal matters were then set forth.

That agreement satisfies me, and no submission was made to the contrary, that there had been a submission to arbitration of the matters appearing under the heading "Dispute Referred to Arbitration"; that Mr Rogers had been duly appointed; and that he had accepted the appointment.

On 24 December 1996 Mr Rogers published a detailed Interim Award. Under the heading "Introduction" he referred to the agreement; the matters in dispute referred to him; directions he gave for the hearing; the representation by the parties at the hearing and the evidence called; and, in paragraph 5, he said:- "At that hearing the Applicant", (the plaintiff), "drew attention to paragraph 11 of the Points of Defence and submitted that it raised an issue outside the matters agreed to be arbitrated. My ruling on this submission was given but it was agreed between the parties that the determination of the issue tendered by paragraph 11 should, in any event, be reserved. It was correctly pointed out that if the arbitration were to result in an award in favour of the Respondent", (the defendant), "it would be unnecessary to proceed to determine the issue tendered by paragraph 11." 
Mr Rogers then noted that because the argument and the evidence thus far received may not dispose of the entirety of the dispute it was agreed that he should deliver an Interim Award "at this stage" and that written submissions were to be furnished to him.

He nextly set forth his determination by reference to the agreement bearing date 18 December 1995. He recited clause 7.4 and referred to other terms of the agreement he considered relevant. Under the heading "The Arbitration" he recorded the facts he had found and noted that the plaintiff's claim was for payment to it by the defendant of $161,593.11 together with interest. He considered the proper construction of clause 7.4, and dealt with certain evidence tendered in an attempt to explain the clause. He was of the view that the evidence was admissible conformably with the statements of Mason J in
Codelfa Constructions Pty Limited versus State Rail Authority of New South
Wales <case>; [(1981-82) 149 CLR 337] at p.382 and, thereafter, he dealt in detail with the various submissions on the question of construction. In the concluding paragraph he said:- "On the result in my opinion subject to the matters in Paragraph 11 of the Defence the Applicant is entitled to a favourable answer to the questions posed which one looks at only the surrounding circumstances dealt with in paragraphs 1-11 inclusive of the wider spectrum looked at thereafter." 
There can be no doubt that Mr Rogers examined the issues before him in great detail and it was not submitted that the Interim Award in any way fails to disclose his reasoning process. I was informed that an application was made to the Court for leave to appeal against the findings in the Interim Award, which
Bainton J refused. The problem, however, was that the matters referred to arbitration dealt only with issues of construction and not with the consequence of a construction favourable to the plaintiff, namely the amount payable to it. However, the questions suggest that if there was an answer favourable to the plaintiff, it would be entitled to a payment.

The plaintiff's Points of Claim had asserted, in paragraph 10, that the defendant was liable to pay it $161,593.11 pursuant to clause 7.4 together with interest pursuant to clause 18. Paragraph 11 of the Defence stated:- "In further answer to the whole of the Points of Claim, the respondent says that any delay in taking possession of the Bronte Inn and paying the Hong Kong Bank $7M until after 1 July 1996 was totally attributable to the conduct of the applicant." 
This was the issue which Mr Hilton had submitted before Mr Rogers was outside the matters agreed to be arbitrated but which, in consequence of Mr Rogers' findings, became relevant.

The matter came before Mr Rogers again on 23 June 1997. Mr Hilton appeared on behalf of the plaintiff and Mr F.G. Lever of Counsel appeared on behalf of the defendant. The defendant had filed Amended Points of Defence, which are
Exhibit A in these proceedings, and in which paragraph 11 was repeated.
Thereafter a number of other matters were raised, and in paragraphs 20 to 22 it was pleaded:- "20. As a consequence of Rebenta/Millie Phillips' obstruction, Oceanview Apartments refinancing arrangements with Metway Bank were delayed thus delaying Oceanview Apartments raising finance to repay the settlement sum.
 . As a consequence of Rebenta/Millie Phillips' conduct in obstructing the Metway Bank finance facility, Oceanview Apartments was forced to purchase the Bronte Inn from Rebenta with a consequence that it incurred additional stamp duty of $400,000 which it would not otherwise have incurred had it been able to proceed with the Metway Bank financial facility.
 . As a consequence of the matters particularised in paragraphs 19 to 21 above, Metway Bank did not advance $6,930,000 to Oceanview Apartments for the purpose of repaying the settlement sum to Hong Kong Bank until 3 October 1996." 
At p.11 of the transcript, Mr Hilton is recorded as stating that the issues about stamp duty and alleged breach of the joint venture agreement were outside the arbitration agreement. Mr Lever responded that there had to be a basis in law for the parties returning before the Arbitrator and Mr Rogers said:- "This is a precise problem." 
Mr Rogers recognised that unless Mr Hilton was incorrect in his assertions the parties would have to enlarge the scope of the arbitration otherwise he would not have jurisdiction to deal with those matters. At p.12 of the transcript the following appeared:- "MR LEVER: The second one was going to be the delay problem. If you say that the arbitrator does not have the power today, we go through the dispute procedure again and we have him appointed again and we come back again.

THE ARBITRATOR: No. If you and he are both agreeable to an amendment to the arbitration agreement, presumably we go on.

MR HILTON: It would be my submission that we are entitled to an award, a final award, for the payment of the money under this agreement. I mean, unless they can rely on something within the arbitration agreement to resist the final payment of interest, then we are entitled to a final award.

THE ARBITRATOR: There are two questions really. Are you entitled to a final award and, even if you are, do you want to waste today and argue this issue on some other day? Is that what you have in mind? 
MR HILTON: We want the most expeditious and efficient method of dispute resolution. On the other hand, our prime aim is a final award for this interest. That is our primary aim. If there are other disputes we are happy to deal with them at a later time, but we want the principal objective, a final award as claimed." 
On several further occasions Mr Rogers referred to the fact that he did not have jurisdiction to hear certain matters unless the arbitration agreement was amended.

At that point, transcript p.15, it appears that clause 5(c) of the arbitration agreement was amended by adding the words "or otherwise", which appear in hand writing on the copy of that agreement annexed to Mr Klimt's affidavit of 25
July 1997. Mr Rogers required that amendment to be initialled by all relevant parties:- ".. so if the matter goes anywhere else there is no doubt about the fact that that was intended to be part of the agreement." 
Thereupon the matter proceeded in relation to the taking of evidence on the defendant's Amended Points of Defence on which it had the onus, and I was informed from the Bar table, without objection, that there was lengthy cross- examination by Mr Hilton of Mr R.F.C. Wise, the defendant's first witness.
After the luncheon adjournment Mr Lever stated he was instructed to discontinue the defence and the transcript, p.51, showed Mr Hilton asking whether that meant Mr Lever's client consented to a verdict. The Arbitrator said that he did not have to consent and Mr Hilton then sought an award for $161,593.11 together with interest at the rate of eleven per centum per annum from 1 July 1996 to date. Mr Hilton further sought an order for costs, which
Mr Lever said was opposed and, at p.52, the following transpired:- "THE ARBITRATOR: So taking it seriatim, do you wish to say anything in opposition to the application that there should be a final award in the sum of $161,593.11 together with interest at 11 per cent from 1 July 1996 to today? 
MR LEVER: I can't say anything in opposition to that.

THE ARBITRATOR: Now, on what basis do you oppose the application for costs?" 
That led to a discussion about a further agreement entered into between the parties and, at p.55 of the transcript Mr Hilton said the calculation showed the amount owing was $179,124.86. Mr Rogers said:- "I suggest that you might like to check that calculation in the intervening period. I will deliver an award on Friday and perhaps Mr Pozniak and Mr Klimt could drop around at some convenient time, that we can decide on in a moment, to pick up the award. If something happens before then, let me know. What would suit you on Friday?" 
There is one other matter to which I should refer. On 3 October 1996 the plaintiff, the defendant and Mr R.F.C. Wise, entered into an agreement in an attempt to resolve matters and, in paragraph 4, they dealt with the continuing dispute in relation to clause 7.4. Clause 4.1.2 recorded the agreement of the parties that they would:- ".. use their best endeavours to resolve the dispute between them through arbitration with all due expedition." 
The Final Award 
Mr Rogers delivered his Final Award on 27 June 1997. It is Annexure "A" to the affidavit of Mr Klimt of 10 July 1997 and recorded that on 24 December 1996 he delivered the Interim Award, which was final with respect to all matters save the issue tendered in paragraph 11 of the Points of Defence and costs. He noted the Amended Points of Defence and a Cross-Claim and the objection taken at the hearing on 23 June 1997 to his dealing with the cross-claim on the basis that it raised a claim outside his jurisdiction. He referred to the fact that Mr Lever withdrew the defences and he awarded that the cross-claim be dismissed; that the plaintiff was entitled to $179,124.86; and that the costs of the arbitration be borne equally by the parties.

Initially this was the only document before the Court and, in the circumstances, it is understandable that the Chief Judge was concerned as to whether the reasoning process by which Mr Rogers concluded that the defendant was bound to pay the plaintiff the amount claimed had been exposed. However, no submissions were put to me to the effect that when the totality of what had transpired was considered, including the detailed Interim Award, which was incorporated in the Final Award, there was any insufficiency of reasons.
Indeed, as the facts have now been fully and properly presented to the Court,
I do not think such a submission could have been made. Mr Rogers determined that upon a proper construction of clause 7.4 the plaintiff was entitled to the payment of money. The original defence, in paragraph 11, and the amended defence in the further paragraphs to which I have referred and the cross- claim, put in issue that entitlement. The defendant carried the onus. Once those pleadings were withdrawn the only question was whether Mr Rogers had jurisdiction to order the payment of an amount of money.

The Submissions Made By The Parties 
Mr Hilton submitted, firstly, that on a proper construction of the arbitration agreement the award of the amount of money was either expressly or by necessary implication encompassed in the matters referred to arbitration. Mr
Smark submitted that the three questions raised did not lead to the conclusion that the arbitrator should award a monetary amount. The better view, in my opinion, is that it would be very strange if the parties, who were seeking to have a resolution of "the dispute between them", did not, impliedly, intend that the questions posed in clause 5 of the arbitration agreement should, if answered favourably to the plaintiff, result in an award for the payment of whatever amount may be owing.

However, I think it is more satisfactory to determine the matter on the second basis put by Mr Hilton, namely there was an implied ad hoc agreement whereby the defendant allowed, without protest or objection, the additional matters to be arbitrated, until the Amended Defence and Cross-Claim were withdrawn, and the award to be made. Mr Hilton relied, of course, upon the manner in which the arbitration had proceeded, and Mr Lever's statement at p.52 together with the defendant's allowing the Award to be made conformably with what was discussed there. In relation to this submission Mr Smark very candidly submitted that the statement by Mr Lever:- "I can't say anything in opposition to that" made it very difficult for him to submit that there was not, by those words, an expansion of the arbitration. He submitted that because of the express matters referred to arbitration that statement was not sufficient, but he agreed that it made it "very difficult" to submit there had been no addition to the arbitration. That becomes, in my opinion, the more so when the further conduct of the parties agreeing to the bringing in of the Award is noted.

I think I should also repeat that Mr Rogers was aware, as one would expect if
I might say so with respect, of the ambit of his jurisdiction and of the fact that he could not exceed that upon which the parties had agreed.

None-the-less, and notwithstanding Mr Smark's frank acknowledgment of the difficulties he confronted, there was no concession by him that there had been an extension of the arbitration agreement. As the matter was argued fully before me I think it may be useful if I set forth some of the authorities which support the view for which Mr Hilton contended and I should note also that Mr Smark said there was no disagreement, so far as he was concerned, as to the principles of law. The only issue he raised was whether all of what had been said and had transpired was sufficient.

A Consideration Of The Submissions 
In Mustill and Boyd "The Law and Practice of Commercial Arbitration in
England" (Second Edition) the authors stated, at pp.133-134:- "Most agreements to refer existing disputes to arbitration are made expressly, and usually in writing rather than orally. But an agreement to arbitrate a dispute and to be bound by the arbitrator's award may be inferred from the conduct of the parties without any express agreement. The most usual case of such an agreement is where an arbitration is already in progress under an existing express agreement and a fresh claim is brought before the arbitrator, which is outside the scope of the original agreement. If no objection is made to the arbitrator's lack of jurisdiction to deal with the fresh claim, both parties will be bound by an award on the merits of the claim. The arbitrator's authority to make such an award derives from an agreement to be inferred from the conduct of the parties.
 ...

An implied agreement to arbitrate which is inferred from the conduct of the parties is not a `written agreement' for the purposes of the Acts. In order to avoid the inconvenience to which this gives rise, it would be better if such agreements were put into writing. Unfortunately it is sometimes not realised until later by one or even both of the parties that the fresh claim was not within the scope of the original agreement: one or both parties may have acted in the mistaken belief that the arbitrator had jurisdiction to deal with the claim. If the belief arises from a fundamental mistake of fact which is shared by both parties, or if it has been brought about by a misrepresentation, it vitiates any implied agreement which might otherwise have arisen. But generally the mistake will be merely a mistake of law as to the meaning of the original agreement; this affords no grounds for impeaching an award made under an implied agreement founded on the conduct of the parties." 
In the present case I can see no possible basis for impeaching that implied agreement and none was suggested.

In Latham versus Foster's Australian Fibres Limited <case>; [[1926] VLR 427], Dixon AJ, sitting as an Acting Judge of the Supreme Court of
Victoria, was confronted with a situation in which the arbitrator had made an award because it had been requested by the contractor and agreed to by the other party that his finding be on a certain basis. It was submitted that that assertion by the arbitrator could not give him jurisdiction and that, even if it be true, it amounted only to an invalid parole variation of a contract under seal. His Honour said, at p.432:- "This last submission seems to me to ignore either the effect of the Judicature Act or the doctrines of equity, and perhaps I may repeat what was said by Wills J in Steeds versus Steeds, of counsel advancing a somewhat similar argument that `he has done injustice to a system of which one recommendation has been supposed to be that it was - sometimes, at all events - competent to correct some of the worst and most odious technicalities of the common law'." 
His Honour noted a statement in the Eighth Edition of "Russell on
Arbitration":- "It often happens in practice, where the submission originally is in writing, that it is altered or added to by parol." 
In the circumstances his Honour did not consider that the additional award had been made in excess of jurisdiction.

In Costain Australia Limited versus Australian Airlines Limited (Supreme Court of Victoria - Southwell J - 6 June 1988 - unreported) the question was whether a party, by its participation in the interlocutory processes, impliedly agreed to submit the matters raised in those processes to arbitration. His Honour was of the view that the conduct throughout those processes "ought to be construed as an agreement to submit the issues raised to arbitration". He referred to a plea denying that the arbitrators had jurisdiction in respect of a particular claim and he was of the view that the party disputing jurisdiction in relation to the balance of the claims should be taken "as impliedly agreeing that the arbitrators had jurisdiction to entertain the other claims made". He continued:- "That conclusion is one which is, in my opinion, in accordance with the law, and I may add it brings about a result which most certainly is in accordance with the justice of the matter. The Court ought not to be astute to assist a party who has apparently willingly allowed another party to expend large sums in costs to arrange a lengthy and undoubtedly expensive arbitration, to resile from its agreement almost on the eve of the arbitration." 
The principle is clear, in my opinion, that where there has been an agreement, in addition to the formal written agreement submitting disputes to arbitration, that other matters should be determined by the arbitrator there has been a submission of those additional matters to arbitration.

Giles J dealt with an ad hoc submission to arbitration in Mark Blake
Builders Pty Limited versus Davis & Anor (Supreme Court of New South Wales -
Giles J - 14 November 1994 - unreported). At p.9 his Honour said, in considering a submission as to estoppel:- "The argument may have gone beyond estoppel, to an alternative contention that there had been an ad hoc submission to arbitration.

There may be an ad hoc submission where parties in fact arbitrate a matter outside an express agreement, although questions of mistake of fact or law may arise ..." 
His Honour referred to certain cases and to the passage from Mustill and Boyd which I have quoted.

Finally, Mr Hilton relied upon estoppel by convention, submitting that the parties conducted themselves before Mr Rogers on the basis that he was entitled to make the award he did if he agreed with the construction of the agreement. It was submitted there was an assumption that there had been no mistake of law, and that if it had been appreciated that this had occurred then the parties could have considered increasing the jurisdiction. The prejudice said to flow was that the resolution of a dispute the plaintiff wished to have referred to arbitration for speedy determination would not be achieved and that the plaintiff was precluded, by the conduct of the defendant, from seeking to have the jurisdiction even more precisely defined.

Mr Smark did not make any submissions to the contrary of the third submission made by Mr Hilton. It seems to me that once it is accepted that the words used by Mr Lever and the conduct of the arbitration had the effect I have found in relation to the second submission, that the type of estoppel for which Mr
Hilton contended does flow.

The Position Thus Far 
Although, as the matter was originally presented to the Court, there were grounds for wondering whether Mr Rogers had set forth reasons, a consideration of the Interim Award and that which transpired at the second hearing makes the conclusion to which Mr Rogers came inevitable. In any event no submission was made to me that there was an insufficient statement of reasons when one read the Interim Award and the Final Award. Even if that submission had been made it seems to me that when the material before Mr Rogers, which was placed before the Court without any objection, was read it is quite apparent that there were sufficient reasons given to enable the parties to understand the basis on which the Final Award was made. Further, it seems to me that the additional material really only is necessary to make plainer what appears, in any event, from the consideration of the Interim and Final Awards.

Nextly, I am satisfied that there was an ad hoc submission to arbitration in the way I have sought to demonstrate and, if that not be so, I consider that the defendant is estopped by its conduct from denying that there was.

The Question Of Interest 
There is a claim for interest calculated at the rate of 10.5 per centum per annum for the period from 27 June 1997 to the date of judgment. No submissions were made in relation to this matter, it being noted that the Summons was amended to reduce the rate of interest claimed from twelve per centum per annum to 10.5 per centum per annum. That amendment, as I would understand it, reflects the reduction in the rate specified in Schedule J. I assume no submissions were made because in Alex T. Dobble Pty Limited versus J.N. &
M.E. Creer (Smart J - 9 July 1987 - unreported) his Honour held that the
Court had power to make an order that interest be paid as from the date of the
Award pursuant to s.95 of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). At p.9 his Honour said:- "Where leave is given to enter judgment in terms of the award, the judgment does not take effect until it is entered. In respect of judgments given by the Court or orders made by the Court for the payment of moneys, the Court has power under s.95(1) to give a direction as to the date from which interest is payable. Although there are some difficulties with the language of s.95, the effect of [s.33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s33.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) is, upon leave being given to enforce an award, to equate it with a judgment. I am of the opinion that the Court does have power to make an order that interest be payable on the amount of the award as from 3 April 1987. It would be curious if the Court did not have such a power. What would happen, for example, if there were protracted proceedings, taking over a year, before leave was given to enforce an award?" 
In all these circumstances, I consider that interest under s.95 should run from the date of the final award. No submission was made that as some delay was caused by the failure of the plaintiff to present the matter properly at an earlier date, the discretion should be exercised differently. Indeed, as the defendant contested the proceedings this could hardly have been argued.

Costs 
Mr Smark said that if the plaintiff was successful "his client would not wish to be heard on the question of costs, but would agree that costs on a party and party basis should be made in favour of" the plaintiff.

Orders 
I order that:-
The plaintiff have leave to enforce the Award made by The Honourable A.J.
Rogers of Queen's Counsel dated 27 June 1997 as a judgment of the Court.
Judgment for the plaintiff against the defendant in the sum of $179,124.86.
The defendant pay to the plaintiff interest on the said sum of $179,124.86 calculated at the rate of 10.5 per centum per annum from 27 June 1997.
The defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.
The exhibit be returned.
 * * * 
