

Regina versus Paul Darryl Meier [1996] NSWSC 144 (21 May 1996) 
REGINA versus Paul Darryl MEIER /95 
Tuesday 21 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, DOWD J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: Following a trial before his Honour Judge Court QC and a jury, in September 1995, at the East Maitland District Court, the appellant was convicted of two offences against a man named Cecil Ryan, both of which allegedly occurred on 4 July 1994 at a small town named Weston. One charge was of assaulting Ryan with intent to rob him; the other charge was of robbing
Ryan of certain money.

The appellant was sentenced, in respect of each count, to concurrent terms of penal servitude involving a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months.

The appellant appeals against his conviction and seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence.

The issue in the case was identification. There was no dispute that Mr Ryan was assaulted and robbed as he alleged. The question was whether the appellant was his assailant.

At about 6.15 in the evening of 4 July 1994 the complainant, who was aged 77 years, went to the Aberdare Hotel at Weston. He purchased a glass of beer and sat down to have a drink and read a book.

There were not many other people at the hotel. Mrs Sneddon, who was serving behind the bar, said that at about 7 o'clock on that evening there were about five or six people in the hotel, and a little later there were about a dozen.

It was common ground that, at the time Mr Ryan arrived, the appellant was also at the hotel, playing pool with a male companion.

The appellant was an unemployed man aged 23. He was evidently short of money.
When he arrived at the hotel he asked the licensee to give credit to him and his companion, and the two of them were told they could have four beers.

Mr Ryan said that, when he arrived at the hotel, there were two or three males using the pool table. They were making a lot of noise. About twenty minutes after Mr Ryan arrived, one of those males came over to Mr Ryan and ran his hand up and down Mr Ryan's back in what was described as a frisking motion. Mr
Ryan picked up his beer and moved away to another part of the bar. When he finished his drink, Mr Ryan went into the toilet area. There he was approached by the same man, who grabbed him by the shoulders and forced him to the floor.
The man then began to touch Ryan's clothes in the area where his wallet was located, but left when another person entered the toilet area. Mr Ryan then left the hotel and began to walk to his home. He had not gone very far when he was again approached by the same man, who grabbed him, threw him to the ground and removed from his pocket a wallet containing one $5 note and one $20 note, as well as various cards and licences.

Mrs Sneddon, who was working behind the bar, knew both Mr Ryan and the appellant. She said that the appellant was one of the men playing pool when Mr
Ryan arrived.

As soon as he arrived home, Mr Ryan telephoned the police and the licensee of the hotel, giving each a description of his assailant.

According to the police evidence, that phone call occurred at about 7.20pm.

In the course of the cross-examination of one of the police officers,
Constable Grant, counsel for the appellant asked what description Mr Ryan gave the police of his assailant. The answer was as follows: "He said he was a big burly bloke with olive skin, dark hair and he said - I remember him saying that he had a higher fringe and he was wearing a black shirt, and that's all he could remember." 
The description of the assailant as a big burly male with olive skin and dark hair, who was wearing a black shirt, was of considerable significance, bearing in mind the small number of people who were at this small country hotel on the evening in question.

In his evidence in chief at the trial, Mr Ryan had some difficulty remembering what his attacker looked like, or what he was wearing. After questioning, however, he said that it was his recollection that the attacker was wearing a black T-shirt.

Mrs Sneddon said that, on the evening in question, the appellant was wearing a black T-shirt. Ultimately, in his evidence, the appellant accepted that he could have been wearing a black T-shirt.

Mrs Sneddon said that she saw the appellant and his companion leave the hotel three or four minutes after Mr Ryan left. Later the appellant came back to the hotel and purchased a schooner of beer for which he paid with a $5 note.

After they had spoken to Mr Ryan, and received his complaint, the police officers, Constable Grant and Constable Herring, went to the Aberdare Hotel.
The appellant was still there. The publican and Mrs Sneddon pointed him out to the police. He was searched, and a $20 note was found in the front left pocket of his jeans. He was arrested. He was then taken to the Kurri Police Station and taken to an interview room. There then occurred the incident which gives rise to this appeal.

Constable Grant and Constable Herring were the only two police officers on duty at the Kurri Police Station on the evening. After Constable Grant arrested the appellant at the hotel he took him to the police station and put him in an interview room. In the meantime, Constable Herring had gone to Mr
Ryan's home and collected him to take him to the station. There was a conflict of evidence between Mr Ryan and Constable Herring as to what Mr Ryan was told as to the purpose of his trip to the police station. According to Mr Ryan he was told he was being taken there to identify his attacker. According to
Constable Herring that was not so; he took Mr Ryan to the station to obtain a statement from him.

It was common ground that, when Mr Ryan arrived at the station, he saw the appellant in the interview room as he walked past it on the way to another room, described as the meal room. The only people at the station, at that time, were Constable Grant, Constable Herring, Mr Ryan and the appellant. The appellant had his back to Mr Ryan. Mr Ryan said: "That's him." The appellant swivelled around in his chair and stood up facing Mr Ryan. Mr Ryan said: "Where's my wallet?". The appellant said: "No", in an animated fashion.

Both police officers acknowledged that the encounter between Mr Ryan and the appellant at the police station was at least unfortunate. They both asserted it was accidental, and they denied that they had intended Mr Ryan to see and identify the appellant.

As will appear, there was no voir dire examination in relation to the evidence of the identification at the police station. The police officers were not asked why they had not kept Mr Ryan and the appellant apart until an identification parade could be arranged. No-one suggested that an identification parade could have been arranged that evening. These events occurred at about 8.00pm in a small country police station, and there were probably not many young men of similar appearance, who could conveniently have been obtained for the purpose of a parade. Clearly enough, after the encounter at the police station, it would have been useless to conduct an identification parade the following day, even assuming one could otherwise have been arranged.

There was no dispute that the appellant was wearing a black T-shirt when he was arrested and taken to the police station.

Mrs Sneddon said that she could not remember any other people at the hotel at the relevant time who were wearing black T-shirts, although she could not be sure there were none.

The defence case was that the appellant was not the person who had assaulted or robbed the complainant, and that the case was one of mistaken identification.

The appellant said that on the afternoon of 4 July 1994 he and his companion,
Kelly Fraser, had gone to a friend's place and consumed two beers before going to the Aberdare Hotel. When they arrived at the hotel he had arranged with the licensee to let them have some beer on credit and then he and Fraser played pool. The appellant said that he did not notice the complainant at the hotel, and he denied any involvement in either of the attacks upon the complainant.
The appellant said that he had left the hotel for a short period of time, in the company of Fraser, for the purpose of going to Fraser's car and borrowing some money from him. He said that Fraser had lent him a $20 note and that he had then returned to the hotel. He denied that he handed a $5 note to Mrs
Sneddon.

Kelly Fraser said that he went to the Aberdare Hotel with the appellant, that they had obtained some drinks on credit, and played pool. He said that when he left the hotel the appellant went with him to his car and that there he had lent the appellant a $20 note.

The grounds of appeal against conviction all relate to the identification at the Kurri Police Station.

The grounds of appeal are as follows: "1 The trial judge erred in failing to exclude the identification evidence.
 The trial judge erred in failing to give reasons for declining to exclude the identification evidence.
 The trial judge erred in failing to consider discretionary exclusion of the evidence of identification after the evidence was adduced." 
The evidence of the identification made at the police station by Mr Ryan was given in front of the jury without any objection at that stage by trial counsel for the appellant. It was given by Mr Ryan, Constable Grant, and
Constable Herring.

Counsel for the appellant has argued, and the grounds of appeal assume, that, even so, there was an objection taken to the evidence. It is not suggested that the objection was taken at the time the evidence was tendered. What is said to have been an objection arises out of an exchange between counsel and the trial judge, in the absence of the jury, before the Crown opened its case.

The exchange in question is recorded in the transcript of the proceedings, and there is no suggestion that the transcript is inaccurate or incomplete in any material respect. In the circumstances, therefore, it is desirable to set out what appears in the transcript. Mr Fitzgibbon was trial counsel for the appellant. The following exchange appears: "FITZGIBBON: There is one matter I would like to raise in the absence of the jury and it may save time at this stage to raise it. Your Honour in relation to the evidence in the matter, there is a dock identification of my client in the Kurri Police Station on 4 July 1994. The evidence as I read it on the brief and this is a matter of course that was done without, that was on a paper committal. As I understand it, a statement was taken from the alleged victim and then my client was apprehended at the Aberdare Hotel and no admissions were made and effectively what happened then was, he was taken back to the Kurri Police Station and there placed in the dock which is very central to the Kurri Police Station complex. Then your Honour the victim was brought into the immediate area where the accused was and the short evidence is that he is alleged to have said `That's the man' and he's alleged to have asked him, `Where's my wallet', to which the accused is said to have said `No'.
Stood up and then said `No'. Now as I understand it your Honour, under the new [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), of course that wouldn't be admissible as such but we're not dealing with a crime that was committed, that started on the 1 September this year, but even under the principles that applied your Honour, under the old system of identification if I can put it that way, I would seek from your Honour a ruling that, that part of the evidence not be lead by the Crown. The position is as I see it, even back on the - I don't want to go into great length at this stage but all the old cases that go to that very issue -- 
HIS HONOUR: Well let's not worry about old great length. The new Act hasn't really changed the law in relation to identification has it? As I read the
Act.

FITZGIBBON: No it's put a gloss on it and it's certainly -- 
HIS HONOUR: Well when you say gloss on it -- 
FITZGIBBON: No.

HIS HONOUR: --it really has codified the old law.

FITZGIBBON: Yes basically that's right.

HIS HONOUR: So can we start from there? 
FITZGIBBON: Yes and basically your Honour my submission is that when we're in a situation like this, we have a small police station, a narrow confined area, the only person in the dock and the victim is taken apparently back to the police station and taken into the area where the dock is, and that's subject of course to - well it's subject to my reading of what material I've got and my own knowledge of where the dock is in the station. Then we're faced your
Honour with the situation of where - and that's knowledge as a counsel I might add, not from any other source. The short answer is that there is no other choice and in those circumstances your Honour, the identification at that time in that place, in my submission, is inadmissible.

HIS HONOUR: But they're jury matters aren't they? 
FITZGIBBON: No I beg to differ on that your Honour because it's not as though there's a line-up or anything like that. It's a situation where there is no other person there.

HIS HONOUR: But that still remains a jury matter surely.

FITZGIBBON: No well the Court has a discretion of course and always has had and that's been, as I say, perhaps codified under the new Act, that in circumstances like this, that sort of evidence should not be led by the Crown.
And that's my application in relation to that part of the evidence.

HIS HONOUR: Well now for the record, what do you ask me to do? 
FITZGIBBON: I'm asking your Honour to direct the Crown that they not leave that part of the evidence from the police officer and from the victim, that in fact this took place.

HIS HONOUR: Yes I reject that application." 
The following aspects of that exchange should be noted.

First, at the outset counsel acknowledged that the matter had been dealt with in the Local Court by way of a paper committal, and what prompted his remarks was what he had read in the brief, by which he would have meant the statements of the witnesses that had been tendered at committal.

Second, (and this may be related to the point just made), there was no reference by counsel to the potentially important dispute of fact between Mr
Ryan and Constable Herring as to why Mr Ryan was taken to the police station.
In due course, as the matter unfolded at the trial, it emerged that Mr Ryan said that he was taken to the police station for the express purpose of making an identification, whereas Constable Herring denied that. Nothing was said about that matter in the exchange referred to above. Having regard to the way the information emerged in evidence, it is quite possible that it was not in the statement of Mr Ryan which counsel had in his brief.

Third, counsel's references to the appellant being in a dock, and to this being a dock identification, do not accord with the evidence as it later emerged. Where he got that idea is not known.

Fourth, there was no application for a voir dire hearing of the kind that commonly occurs where a judge, before a trial commences, or later, is asked to rule, in the absence of the jury, upon the admissibility of certain evidence which the Crown proposes to tender. Counsel made some observations from the bar table, referred in a general way to his understanding of some evidence the
Crown would later seek to lead, (an understanding that was not entirely accurate), and supplemented that with some information as to his personal knowledge of the layout of the Kurri Police Station. The reference by the learned trial judge to "jury matters" follows, and was apparently prompted by, statements from the bar table as to the set-up at the police station.

Fifth, counsel asserted that the evidence to which he was referring was inadmissible, but (consistently with the argument that has been put on the present appeal) went on immediately to acknowledge that the court had a discretion.

Sixth, counsel and the learned trial judge made passing mention of the provisions of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). Further reference will be made to that below.

Seventh, at the conclusion of the exchange, and in a commendable attempt to introduce some formality into the matter, the learned trial judge, saying that he was speaking "for the record", invited counsel to indicate specifically the nature of the application that he was making. Counsel did not respond to that information by saying, for example, that he was applying for a voir dire examination. (How a discretionary decision of the kind earlier mentioned could properly have been made without such an examination, on the basis of the general and rather casual observations that had come from the bar table, is hard to understand). Counsel stated that he was asking the trial judge to give a certain direction to the Crown. It is common ground on this appeal that the trial judge had no power to give such a direction, and that the form of the application, if it were to be taken literally, was inappropriate. The trial judge rejected the application. The Crown prosecutor did not, and was not invited to, participate in the discussion.

The matter then proceeded and, in the course of the evidence of Mr Ryan, and later Constable Grant, and Constable Herring, the jury heard what had transpired at the Kurri Police Station when Mr Ryan saw the appellant. No objection, or no further objection, was taken to that evidence.

Ultimately the trial judge gave the jury a number of warnings about the matter of identification. Included in those warnings was the following: "Another matter to which I should refer, and I will refer finally, is this.
The accused was allegedly identified by Mr Ryan in the police station. That occurred apparently very shortly afterwards in a situation where the accused was the only person in the room in question with uniformed police officers.
You should take that into account. It may well be that you take the view that
Mr Ryan, having been brought into a police station where there was a person, the only person, apart from police officers, might have been more ready to identify that stranger as being the person who committed the assault and robbery upon him." 
No complaint was made at the trial concerning the adequacy of the directions and warnings about identification, and no ground of appeal has been argued in relation to that matter.

Before turning to the grounds of appeal, I should note some matters of general principle, which were not in dispute.

Where a victim of, or a witness to, a crime identifies an alleged offender, who was not previously known to the victim or witness, in circumstances where it is obvious that the person identified has been charged with, or is suspected of, the crime, such identification is often of little value. This may be the case where, for example, the person identified is in custody at a police station, or is in a courtroom dock. The reason for this is the powerful element of suggestion involved in the circumstances of the identification (Davies and Cody versus The King <case>; [(1937) 57 CLR 170] at 178-182; R versus Hallam [(1985) 42 SASR 126]; R versus Corke [(1989) 41 ACrimR 292]).

Nevertheless, such evidence is, at common law, relevant and admissible, subject to the exercise of a judicial discretion to exclude it (Alexander v
The Queen <case>; [(1980) 145 CLR 395]).

The discretion to exclude such evidence may be enlivened by considerations of unfairness to the accused, or impropriety on the part of those who procured the identification, or a comparison of the slight probative value of the evidence and its prejudicial effect.

As to the matter of impropriety, a criticism that is sometimes made of the conduct of police officers is that they have arranged an identification in circumstances where there has been an unjustified failure to conduct an identification parade (eg R versus Hallam, above, R versus Corke, above). A related ground of criticism may be that they have departed from police instructions or guidelines.

Discretionary judgments concerning the admissibility of evidence of this kind, although they are informed by well-established principles, and weighty considerations arising from judicial experience, are not made in the abstract.
They are made in the light of the circumstances of the individual case. The present case illustrates the way in which it may be necessary to respond to particular circumstances. Two examples may be given.

First, there is the matter of the absence of an identification parade. Since there was no voir dire examination, it is not known what, if any, reason the police had for not organising such a parade. However, it requires little imagination to see what kind of explanation they might have given. This was a small country police station, at night. A person said to have been of distinctive dress and appearance had been arrested. It may be inferred that the prospects of arranging a reasonable identification parade, with enough people generally resembling the appellant to make it fair, on that evening, were negligible.

Even so, it may be said, a parade could have been organised for some future date. What if the police responded that they had good reason for wanting an identification as soon as possible? The victim was an elderly man, who did not know his attacker, and who had been mugged in frightening circumstances. The appellant had been arrested on the strength of a description given to the police, to the publican, by the appellant, and, perhaps, some information given to the police by Mrs Sneddon. A desire to ask the appellant at the earliest opportunity to confirm that the police had the right man might be understandable, in human terms. Whether it was in breach of any applicable police rules or guidelines, or constituted proper procedure in the circumstances, is another matter.

In R versus Pearsall [(1990) 49 ACrimR 439], in circumstances that were in some respects similar to the present, it was acknowledged that those circumstances gave rise to a difficult discretionary decision, and the Court of Criminal Appeal declined to interfere with a decision to admit evidence of an assault victim's police station identification of his attacker.

Second, as in Pearsall, and unlike Davies and Cody, the present is a case of an identification made very shortly after the attack. Mr Ryan's recollection of his attacker would have been very fresh. The best evidence of what had stuck in his mind was the description he had given the police: of the size of his attacker; the colour of his hair; his complexion; and the shirt he was wearing. The evidence did not show that there were any, let alone a number of, other people at the hotel at the same time as Mr Ryan who matched that description. Mr Ryan in fact identified the appellant at a time when the appellant had his back to him. Whether this is a case in which suggestibility arising from the appellant's presence at a police station is or is not a likely explanation of Mr Ryan's identification of the appellant is a matter on which views might differ. That, in turn, however, may be affected by what
Constable Herring had said to Mr Ryan before they arrived the station.

None of this is to deny that, if an exercise of discretion had been undertaken, the exclusion of the evidence might have been a proper outcome.
The issue would have been far from clear-cut. Further, a proper decision would have necessitated a consideration of factual issues that were not explored, or explored in sufficient detail, at the trial, and a resolution of a clear conflict of evidence. This lastmentioned consideration is of particular importance, having regard to the grounds of appeal that are now raised.

Certain provisions of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) were in force at the time of the trial. The trial began a few days after the Act commenced. (It is common ground on this appeal that [s114](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s114.html) of the Act, dealing with the visual identification evidence, was not in force). [Sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s136.html), [137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) and [138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) applied. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html), especially, emphasises the broad nature of the discretion to be exercised insofar as a claim for exclusion was based upon impropriety in the conduct of the police officers. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s136.html) is concerned, amongst other things, with unfairness. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) makes evidence inadmissible if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to a defendant.

I turn now to the grounds of appeal. Grounds 1 and 2 were framed upon the premise that what occurred between trial counsel and the trial judge in the exchange outlined above involved an objection to the evidence of the police station identification, an application for a ruling, prior to the commencement of the trial, that the evidence would not be received, followed by a rejection of that application, without reasons.

As has been noted above, no objection was taken to the evidence in question as it was tendered. The informal, indeed casual, observations and submissions made prior to the commencement of the evidence cannot be regarded as an appropriate or sufficient method of putting before the trial judge, for his discretionary decision, the issues which needed to be canvassed relating to the admissibility of the evidence.

In R versus Lars [(1994) 73 ACrimR 91] at 119, this court said: "Where it is sought to explore on the voir dire the admissibility of evidence, the accused must make application to the judge for such an examination, specify the issues to be explored, and show, to whatever extent the judge may reasonably require, that there is indeed a significant issue to be tried." 
When the trial judge, understandably, sought to bring the matter to a head by requiring counsel formally to state, for the purposes of the record, the nature of the application he was making, counsel responded by making an application which, as is acknowledged by appeal counsel, was unsustainable and bound to fail. Indeed, the very hopelessness of the application as expressed by trial counsel has been relied upon as an indication that counsel could not possibly have meant what he said, and that he should have been understood to have been asking for something different. However, the argument did not go so far as to suggest that this was an application for a voir dire examination.

Trial judges are entitled to expect from counsel that objections to evidence, or applications for rulings on the admissibility of evidence, will be made with appropriate clarity and procedural regularity.

For the reasons given above, the evidence in question in the present case was not self-evidently inadmissible, or of a kind that was bound to be rejected in the exercise of a proper discretion. Indeed, the trial judge was given only a perfunctory, incomplete and inaccurate account of what the evidence was. He could not properly have declared it inadmissible at that point.

If counsel for the appellant wanted a discretionary decision of the trial judge about the admissibility of the evidence then, in the circumstances, he should have applied for a voir dire examination or, alternatively, agreed with the Crown upon the facts which the trial judge was to take into consideration in making a decision. No doubt, the possibility of a voir dire hearing was one of the things the trial judge had in mind when asking counsel to state, for the record, the nature of his application.

The trial judge took at face value what counsel said by way of response to his invitation formally to state the nature of his application. The rejection of that application, which was bound to fail, did not require any reasons. Even if the application had been construed beneficially, as an application for a discretionary ruling, on the basis of what had been said from the bar table, that the evidence was not to be admitted, then the proper foundation for such a ruling had not been laid, and an adverse ruling, without elaboration, was justified.

If trial counsel desired to object to the evidence as it was given during the course of the trial, then such objection should have been made at the time the evidence was tendered.

One of the assumptions which underlies the adversary system is that counsel, in representing their clients, will make clear to the court or tribunal the points they wish to argue, and those they do not desire to press, and the procedural applications upon which they seek a decision. It is understandable that there may be, on occasions, a reluctance to be seen by a jury to be taking objections to evidence. If, however, counsel in this case wished seriously to press for the exclusion of the evidence in question, it was not sufficient to leave the matter as it stood at the conclusion of the exchange noted earlier. Counsel may well have thought that the discouraging remarks made by the trial judge in response to his observations meant that he had little ultimate prospect of having the evidence excluded. Even so, it was his duty to the client, and to the court, to make a properly formulated and presented application for an advance ruling on the evidence or, alternatively, to object to the evidence as it was tendered. He did neither of those things, and the complaints made in the first two grounds of appeal cannot be sustained.

I turn now to the third ground of appeal, which raises a question of some difficulty. It involves a consideration of the extent to which there is an obligation on a trial judge to consider the admissibility of certain kinds of evidence even if no objection, or no proper objection is taken.

There are many situations in which, for reasons that might not be apparent to a trial judge, and which a trial judge could never ascertain, counsel might not object to evidence of doubtful admissibility. Indeed, as a practical matter, much of the evidence given at criminal or civil trials is technically inadmissible. It is received because nobody has an interest to object to it.
In the present case, however, the evidence in question was both important and clearly damaging to the defence. There was no possible reason why the defence could have desired its reception. Counsel had indicated that he did not want it received, even though he had not gone the right way about seeking to have it excluded.

Failure to object to evidence may be the result of a deliberate decision made for reasons which a trial judge cannot investigate. It is usually impossible for a judge to know whether such failure is deliberate, or the result of oversight. Where such failure occurs, it may also have important consequences for an appeal, especially having regard to [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/).

Even so, the authorities recognise that there are obligations upon a trial judge which may, on occasion, necessitate intervention even if counsel remains inactive. In R versus Pemble <case>; [(1971) 124 CLR 107] at 117 Barwick CJ said: "Whatever course counsel may see fit to take, no doubt bona fide but for tactical reasons in what he considers the best interests of his client, the trial judge must be astute to secure for the accused a fair trial according to law." (See also Stirland versus Director of Public Prosecutions [[1944] AC 315] at 327).

Many of the cases on this subject are examined in Mr Weinberg's article, "The
Consequences of Failure to Object to Inadmissible Evidence in Criminal
Cases"[[1978] MelbULawRw ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/MelbULawRw/1978/5.html "View Case" ); , [(1978) 11 MULR 408]. The learned author observed that there are two particular areas in respect of which it has been held that a trial judge should act of his or her own volition to protect an accused. One is the area of confessions. The other is in relation to the judicial discretion to exclude unfairly obtained or grossly prejudicial evidence.

In the present case there was, at the commencement of the trial, an inadequately presented attempt to have the evidence of Mr Ryan's police station identification excluded. Whilst the learned trial judge was justified in disposing of that attempt as he did at that stage, there had been brought to his notice a problem which he could not then ignore.

The problem was exacerbated when, perhaps unexpectedly as far as everybody was concerned, there emerged in the evidence of Mr Ryan an assertion about what
Constable Herring had said to him which, if true, added considerable weight to an argument that the evidence should be excluded on discretionary grounds. At that stage, counsel, perhaps because he believed, as a result of what had occurred earlier, that there was no practical point in it, or perhaps because he thought the issue had been foreclosed by a binding ruling, failed to revive the issue.

In truth, the trial judge had not made a prior ruling which foreclosed the possibility of renewal of an application to have the evidence excluded, following a voir dire examination. However, what had occurred at least created the possibility that counsel might have thought otherwise. Moreover, a new and potentially important factual issue had emerged, which was capable of putting a different complexion on the problem.

In those circumstances, in the interests of securing a fair trial, the judge should have intervened and raised for the consideration of the Crown and counsel for the appellant the question whether the evidence of the police station identification should be excluded in the exercise of his discretion. A decision on exclusion would, in turn, have necessitated a voir dire examination.

It is the combination of circumstances, including in particular the possible misapprehension that could have resulted from the exchange between counsel and the trial judge, which dictates that conclusion. I do not suggest that, if counsel had been given an opportunity to consider the matter further, and had declined to press for a voir dire hearing, the judge would have had a duty to take the matter any further.

I would add that this is a case in which the trial judge was not given the assistance from counsel to which he was entitled. From the point of view of an appellate court, however, what is determinative is the effect of what happened on the appellant's right to a fair trial. He was deprived of having the trial judge's discretionary ruling on a matter that may have been of substantial importance, and there is a risk of a miscarriage of justice.

The appeal should be allowed. The convictions and sentenced should be quashed.
There should be a new trial on both counts.
 
DOWD J: I have read the judgment in draft form of Gleeson CJ. I agree with the proposed orders and reasons stated.
 
HIDDEN J: I agree with Gleeson CJ.
 
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - IDENTIFICATION 
The appellant was convicted of assault and robbery. The issue was identification. The evidence for the Crown included evidence that, whilst the victim was at a police station with a police officer, being interviewed, another police officer brought the victim to the station where the victim identified the appellant. The victim said he was asked to go to the station to identify his attacker. The police denied this and said the meeting was accidental - HELD - In the circumstances, which included an inadequately made challenge to the admissibility of the evidence, the trial judge should have given consideration to rejecting the identification evidence on discretionary grounds and the failure to do so involved a risk of a miscarriage of justice.

Davies and Cody versus The King <case>; [(1937) 57 CLR 170], Alexander versus The Queen <case>; [(1980) 145 CLR 395] applied.

R versus Hallam [(1985) 42 SASR 126], R versus Corke [(1989) 41 ACrimR 292], R versus Pearsall <case>; [(1971) 124 CLR 107]; Stirland versus Director of Public Prosecutions [[1944] AC ]
applied.

LEGAL PRACTITIONERS - BARRISTERS 
Duties of counsel as to making and formulating objections to evidence and procedural applications discussed.
 [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) [ss136](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s136.html), [137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html), [138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html).

O R D E R S Appeal allowed.
 Convictions and sentences quashed.
 New trial ordered.
 * * * 
