

Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd versus Nmbe Pty Limited Matter No Ca /96 [1998] NSWSC 595 (23 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 December 1998 
SYDNEY HARBOUR CASINO HOLDINGS LTD versus NMBE PTY LIMITED 
CA 40094/96; CommD 50131/95 October 1998 
Priestley JA, Sheller JA, Sheppard AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: SUPREME COURT - COMMERCIAL DIVISION - ROLFE J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40094/96; COMMD 50131/95 
DELIVERED: 23 OCTOBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 3 JULY 1998 
PARTIES: SYDNEY HARBOUR CASINO HOLDINGS LTD versus NMBE PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT OF: PRIESTLEY JA: SHELLER JA: SHEPPARD AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: J C CAMPBELL QC / D B STUDDY 
Respondent: P M BISCOE QC / I M JACKMAN 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: DUNHILL MADDEN BUTLER, SYDNEY 
Respondent: DOBES & ANDREWS, SYDNEY 
CATCHWORDS: 
HOLDING DEPOSIT - PRE-CONTRACT DEPOSIT - PROPOSED LEASE AGREEMENT 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 26 
SYDNEY HARBOUR CASINO HOLDINGS LIMITED v NMBE PTY LIMITED 
HOLDING DEPOSIT - PRE-CONTRACT DEPOSIT - PROPOSED LEASE AGREEMENT. In negotiating a lease agreement the appellant paid a "holding deposit" to the respondent pending completion of the formal document - in deciding not to proceed with the lease, the appellant sought repayment of this amount - the respondent argued that there was a binding lease agreement, the appellant had repudiated and consequently, that the respondent was entitled to damages for the appellant's breach - Rolfe J did not accept either party's claim - he found there to be no binding lease agreement, however, the respondent was entitled to keep the holding deposit because there had been an agreement that the amount would be refunded only upon the execution of the lease - the appellant appealed and the respondent cross-appealed.

Held:
Rolfe J was correct in finding that no lease agreement had been executed as there was no final agreement on certain important issues, including the option to extend the term and rental increases; further the parties were silent, both orally and in writing, on the "holding deposit" issue in the event no lease was executed, thus to determine this situation, reference must be made to the law on pre-contractual deposits; on this approach, the respondent had no right to keep the deposit because a pre-contract deposit is prima facie recoverable if the prospective contract it is connected with does not come into existence: Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353] at 364-365, Henning versus Ramsay [[1964] NSWR 1165], in England,
Sorrell versus Finch [[1977] AC 728] at 743-5, 754; and in this case the prima facie rule should be applied; alternatively if the parties had achieved a legally binding agreement about the deposit that was not dependant on a binding lease agreement, the holding deposit should be refunded. To find that execution of the lease was necessary for refunding the deposit, when in fact the contract was silent on what would happen if no binding lease or agreement for lease came into existence, involved reliance on a process of implication which begged the question of the meaning to be given to the contractual words; the appropriate implication would be that the holding deposit should be refunded.

BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Limited versus President of the Shire of Hastings CLR 266 
Bruce versus Cole & Ors ( Unreported, Court of Appeal, 12 June 1998) 
Commissioner of Taxation versus Guy <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353] 
Sorrell versus Finch [[1977] AC 728] 
The Allens Group Ltd versus Arena Meetings Conventions and Exhibitions Pty Ltd (Unreported, Windeyer J. 19 June 1997) 
ORDERS
Appeal upheld;
Judgment below set aside and in its place judgment entered for the appellant on its summons, with costs;
Respondent's cross-claim dismissed with costs;
Appellant to have its costs of the appeal and cross-appeal.

SYDNEY HARBOUR CASINO HOLDINGS LIMITED v NMBE PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: These appeal proceedings are brought against the judgment of Rolfe J upon a summons in which Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Limited (SHC) was plaintiff and NMBE Pty Limited (NMBE) was defendant and cross-claimant. 
In the summons proceedings SHC was seeking the return of a "holding deposit" it had paid to NMBE pending completion of the formal documentation of a lease to SHC of premises newly built and owned by NMBE. SHC's case was that it had broken off negotiations with NMBE before any binding contract to enter into a lease had been made and was entitled to return of its holding deposit.

NMBE's case was that a binding agreement for lease had come into existence between it and SHC, that SHC had repudiated that agreement and that NMBE was entitled to damages for SHC's breach, such damages being greater than the $300,000 holding deposit.

Rolfe J did not accept either SHC's case or NMBE's cross-claim, but upheld a lesser claim by NMBE which had emerged at the hearing, that NMBE was entitled to keep the $300,000 holding deposit even if there had been no concluded lease agreement.

SHC appealed against Rolfe J's decision. NMBE cross-appealed.

In the dealings between the parties Mr G. Inberg acted for SHC and Mr Malki for NMBE. In the argument in this court no question was raised about the authority of either of them as his company's agent for all relevant purposes.
(Mr Malki was in any event the managing director of NMBE.) 
In November and December 1994 Mr Inberg had been looking for large commercial premises suitable for occupation by SHC as lessee. Mr A. Dassakis, a licensed real estate agent, had been showing him some properties. On 22 December 1994 in company with Mr Dassakis, he inspected premises at Rosebery owned by NMBE and apparently suitable for SHC's purposes. It happened that Mr Dassakis was
NMBE's agent.

Negotiations then took place on 22 December 1994 in which Mr Inberg, Mr
Dassakis and Mr Malki were the chief participants. In the proceedings before
Rolfe J each gave a somewhat different version of conversations on 22 December
On matters relating to the holding deposit, Rolfe J accepted Mr Inberg's evidence. This evidence consisted of some paragraphs in a witness statement dated 3 October 1995 by Mr Inberg, and evidence given by Mr Inberg at the trial.

Paragraph 10 of the witness statement was as follows "Later that day [22 December 1994] I spoke to Mr Dassakis by telephone. Mr
Dassakis had Mr Malki with him and had his speaker phone on. During that conversation Mr Malki and I said words to the following effect: 
Me: `I don't want you to show the premises to anyone else while we finalise the lease.' 
Malki: `Are you prepared to give a holding deposit to take it off the market while the lease is being drawn?' 
Me: `Yes.' 
Malki: `We will require an amount of $300,000.'" 
Rolfe J was specific about the further evidence of Mr Inberg which he accepted and upon which he appears in large part to have based his decision about the holding deposit. In his reasons, in a paragraph with a brief introductory explanation, he reproduced it, with particular parts underlined, as follows: "Mr Inberg was cross-examined about the telephone conversation on 22 December
He said that to the best of his recollection there was discussion about the various terms and conditions, that there was agreement on the level of rent and a brief discussion about some other matters, and:- `We agreed that Mr Dassakis would come to my office the following day with a
Lease Advice Note at approximately ten o'clock in the morning. We talked about the requirement of the lessor for a bank guarantee on the 23rd. We talked about the holding deposit, payment of the holding deposit and the need to prepare and negotiate and continue with the discussions with regard to the negotiation of a lease and the lease document prior to the 9th.

Q. In respect to the holding deposit, can you remember any more clearly than you said just now, what was said by you and what was said by Mr Malki? 
A. Mr Malki, I recall, was concerned about the financial status of Sydney
Harbour Casino. He was keen to obtain a bank guarantee. We talked about the provision of the bank guarantee and the timing or replacement of such bank guarantee by a corporate guarantee. We talked about the listing of the company which was to occur within six months, approximately the date that we are taking about, and that guarantee would be replaced by a corporate guarantee.

Q. And that exhausts your present recollection of what was said about the holding deposit? 
A. Certainly the holding deposit was part of that conversation. It was discussed that a bank guarantee would be provided on the execution of the lease, finalisation of the lease terms and conditions, execution of the lease, a bank guarantee would be provided. There was discussion about the need to, while we were in that process, to take the property off the market in that period of time and in doing so Mr Malki required a holding deposit.

Q. And that holding deposit, as you understand it, was later to be superseded by the bank guarantee? 
A. That's correct.

Q. So you expected there to be a formal lease document at some future stage and when that formal lease document was executed the holding deposit would be more or less replaced by a bank guarantee; that was your understanding? 
A. Yes, it was.

Q. You have referred to Mr Malki's concerns about the financial status of the plaintiff and you, no doubt, regarded the holding deposit as serving the same commercial function that the bank guarantee would later serve? 
A. No, I saw it more of a holding deposit during that period of time, for the property to take to come off the market between the 23rd and the 9th. I certainly - the bank guarantee would have, as I have said, would have been supplied on the 9th or on execution of the lease document.

Q. You made no mention, during that conversation, of the finalisation of the lease and Mr Malki made no mention of the lease being drawn during that conversation? 
A. Mr Malki certainly said to me that there was no lease drawn up and so I certainly hadn't seen a lease at that period of time.' Tpp.708. (My emphasis)." 
At an earlier part of his reasons Rolfe J had also reproduced par 13 of Mr
Inberg's witness statement: "My intention in relation to the payment of the holding deposit was to ensure that the premises would not be shown to anyone else while this process took place and if finality was not reached the holding deposit would be returned." 
Rolfe J commented that no objection was made to par 13, it was not cross- examined on and it represented the intention of Mr Inberg. He commented further however, that it was not suggested that Mr Inberg's intention had been communicated to Mr Malki or anyone else on behalf of NMBE.

The Lease Advice Note mentioned in the beginning of the above quoted cross- examination of Mr Inberg was received by him on 23 December 1994. The first sheet was on NMBE's letterhead and headed "Lease Advice Note". This sheet described the property, the lessor and the lessor's solicitor and the lessee and the lessee's solicitor. The following two sheets were headed "Conditions of the Lease as agreed by Lessor and Lessee" and ran as follows: "1. Rent :
Lease Term :
Option Terms :
Rent Increases :
Rent Free Period :
Outgoings :
Commencement Date :
Guarantee :
Car Parking :
Sublease : $650,000 per annum nett.

The rent is to be paid monthly in advance for the first year of the lease.
The nett rent to be paid by the Lessee is $31,597.22 per month as from Lease commencement date.
 years 
Six (6) years 
Annual increases fixed at 6% with the market review at the commencement of
Year seven (7) - (i.e., a market review is to take effect upon the lease option being consummated).

Five (5) months rent free period (nett rent only) from Lease commencement date.

All outgoings at cost applicable to the subject floor areas will be borne by the lessee.

The Lease will commence on 9th January, 1995.

A bank guarantee to the sum of $325,000 is required.

This bank guarantee will be returned to the Lessor once the lessor has become a Public Listed Company.

At such time the Lessor will provide a Corporate Guarantee for the remaining term of the Lease.

A holding deposit to the sum of $300,000 is to be provided by the Lessee in favour of the Lessor, this deposit will be returned to the lessee, in full, upon execution of the Lease.

Car parking is as follows: 
All marked car spaces to the rear fronting Primrose Avenue belong to the subject Lessee.

On the basement level there are a total of forty-five (45 car spaces dedicated to the mezzanine office level.

The Lessee is permitted to use the remaining car parking spaces at basement level until such time that a tenant is located and formalises a Lease
Contract for Level 1 and/or Level 2 office space at the subject property.

The Lessee is authorised to sub-lease the office area.

A cheque for one months rent including outgoings is required to be paid before 9th of January 1995. 
The area relevant to the Lease are: 
All the mezzanine office floor 
All the warehouse areas as per attached survey issued by W.D. KIMBER &
ASSOCIATES 
FOR CONFIRMATION FOR ACCEPTANCE (NMBE SEAL (Signed A.Malki) AFFIXED HERE) (Signed Gary Inberg) 
SIGN & SEAL SIGN (Typed) 
AUTHORISED OFFICER 
GARY MARK INBERG (Hand printed)" 
Later on 23 December Mr Inberg handed Mr Dassakis a cheque for $300,000 in favour of NMBE.

Thereafter the solicitors for the parties worked on what they called a travelling draft of the lease in which suggestions and counter suggestions were made as the draft went backwards and forwards between the solicitors. On or about 6 January 1995 an executive of SHC told Mr Dassakis that SHC was still looking at other, cheaper, premises (AB 428). Nevertheless, the draft lease kept travelling between the solicitors and until 9 January 1995 it seemed as if everything was in train for the completion and execution of the lease documents and for occupation to be taken by SHC on or shortly after that date. However, on 9 or 10 January (AB 385, 325) SHC decided the outgoings for
NMBE's premises were too high and notified NMBE that it was not proceeding with the lease. Shortly afterwards SHC requested repayment of the holding deposit. This was refused.

SHC filed its summons on 19 July 1995 seeking repayment of the holding deposit. NMBE filed points of defence and cross-claim on 4 September 1995.
Rolfe J heard the proceedings on 29 and 30 January 1996. He gave judgment on 7
February 1996, ordering that the summons and the cross-claim both be dismissed. These orders had the effect, consistent with his reasons, of leaving NMBE in possession of the holding deposit as of right.

The issues between SHC and NMBE when the hearing began before Rolfe J were clear. Their cases were as I set out at the beginning of these reasons.
Witness statements had been filed by Messrs Inberg, Malki and Dassakis which dealt fully with the critical conversation of 22 December 1994. Their subsequent oral evidence was generally consistent with their witness statements. What I have already set out from Mr Inberg's evidence shows the factual basis upon which SHC was putting its case. The basic difference between his evidence and that of Mr Malki and Mr Dassakis was that they contended the conversation of 22 December 1994 was in terms of a completed agreement.

The way in which this was put appears in Mr Malki's witness statement.
Paragraph 5 contained his account of the conversation. The conversation first covered a number of basic matters on which agreement was reached. There was then argument about a bank guarantee. Eventually the arrangement which appeared in the Lease Advice Note the following day was agreed on. At this point, according to par 5 of Mr Malki's witness statement, the following was said: "MALKI: `I need a deposit. When you become a public company we will accept a corporate guarantee. But first let us have a cheque for $300,000. I will refund the cheque in full as soon as you execute the lease.' 
INBERG: `That's fine. I will. So I take it we have a deal?' 
MALKI: `Yes, we've got a deal provided that you sign the Lease Advice Note and give me a cheque for $300,000.'" (AB 404) 
This was the position Mr Malki maintained throughout his cross-examination.
The terms of the deal were complete, orally, on 22 December 1994 and fully binding upon signature the following day of the Lease Advice Note and the delivery of the cheque for $300,000. The arrangement about the holding deposit was part of the deal.

This position is clearly shown in the following question and answer in cross- examination: "Q. It's clear from that, isn't it, that when you said those words, `Are you prepared to give a holding deposit to take it off he market', that that's precisely what was intended. The holding deposit would be given and in exchange it would come off the market? 
A. No." (AB 36) 
It seems clear that as Mr Malki saw NMBE's case, he had to give this answer.
The judge did not believe him on this point.

The main issue in the case was thus reasonably clean-cut. SHC said that at the time it told NMBE that it was not going ahead with the lease there was no binding lease contract, matters were still in negotiation; as part of that negotiation SHC had paid $300,000 holding deposit to NMBE which would become part of the contractual arrangement if one was made; and in return for the handing over of that sum until the making of the contract SHC was being given the advantage by NMBE of its taking the property off the market. NMBE was saying that a complete conditional contract had been made on 22 December 1994 which became unconditional on the following day when the Lease Advice Note was signed and the $300,000 handed over.

Rolfe J found there was no binding contract. In summary, his reasons were that the actions of the parties' solicitors in working on the draft proposed lease, the correspondence and communications between them, and also between the parties, were clearly more consistent with the parties on each side recognising no binding contract was in existence, but would only come into existence upon execution of the lease, than they were with a concluded agreement having been reached; and (b) significant terms of the lease had not been agreed on at the time when SHC notified NMBE of its withdrawal from the transaction. In Rolfe J's opinion these two matters combined to lead him to state his conclusion as being that: "... the objective facts point strongly away from the parties having an intention to conclude an agreement on 23 December 1994. I am satisfied they did not. In my opinion the document of 23 December 1994 did not constitute a binding agreement for lease." 
I agree generally with Rolfe J's approach and his conclusions. One reason why he based his conclusion on the lack of intention of the parties to conclude an agreement on 23 December 1994 is that it provided a quite adequate answer to the submission that had been made for NMBE (recorded by Rolfe J at AB 484) that the essential requirements for a valid lease were the parties, the property, the length of the term, the rent and the date of commencement, and that all these matters having been established, the situation was that an agreement had been reached and the dealings between the solicitors for the parties and between the parties themselves were directed towards mutually agreed variations to the basic agreement, leaving NMBE in the position where, if the agreed variations could not be achieved, it could fall back on that basic agreement.

It seems to me that there is a further answer to this submission by NMBE. In my opinion, in the case of a modern commercial lease of the kind of property the subject of the present case what the old authorities relied on by NMBE describe as the essential and sufficient requirements for the making of a lease agreement may not meet the reality of commercial needs. I will not explore that further in the present case beyond mentioning that it seems to me that an important aspect of the length of the term in a lease of the present kind is the option arrangement, if there is one. It seems to me likely that in some leases at least, the option to extend the term (as in this case by doubling it) will be a consideration of importance to the intending lessee of the same quality as the length of the term itself. Here, the conditions of the lease numbered 3. and 4. in the Lease Advice Note dealing with option terms and rent increases are plainly incomplete. The conditions do not record any final agreement on those matters. There is no evidence otherwise of any agreement on those matters. The two conditions seem to me to be of sufficient importance to the overall lease arrangement to bring about the result that lack of agreement on those matters means there was no final agreement between the parties at all.

This conclusion would have meant, in regard to the issue that the plaintiff and defendant had gone to court to fight, that SHC should have recovered the holding deposit of $300,000. However, as he recorded in his reasons, Rolfe J himself had suggested on the first day of the hearing that if NMBE failed in establishing that a binding agreement for lease had been entered into SHC might nevertheless not be entitled to recover the $300,000 because SHC's evidence showed that the $300,000 was paid by it to NMBE in consideration for
NMBE's not negotiating with other prospective lessees whilst it was negotiating with SHC, and that the only basis upon which SHC was entitled to recover it was if a binding agreement was entered into (AB 464).

Counsel for NMBE took up the judge's suggestion and, as an alternative to his principal submission at the end of the evidence (that there had been a concluded agreement) made the exact submission that had been suggested by the judge.

As recorded by the judge, NMBE's submission "... was that the evidence established that the $300,000 was paid pursuant to an agreement between the parties that in consideration of NMBE's not seeking to lease the premises pending SHC's negotiating for its lease, SHC would make a one-off payment of $300,000. The agreement was subject to the condition that that amount would be refundable upon the execution of the lease but not otherwise. The evidence, to which I have referred, satisfies me that there was such an agreement. It was established, essentially, by the evidence of Mr
Inberg." 
Rolfe J also recorded in concise form SHC's submission to the contrary, as follows: "Firstly, [counsel] submitted that no such contract was relied upon by NMBE at an evidentiary level. I have dealt previously with his submissions that there was a failure to plead the existence of any such contract. As I have said I am satisfied the issue was raised. The thrust of the present submission is that I should not find such a contract in the absence of any evidence from
Mr Malki, or anyone else on behalf of NMBE, asserting its existence. Mr Studdy submitted it is inherently improbable, in the absence of any such evidence, that such a contract was entered into." 
Rolfe J then stated a little more extensively than previously his reasons for accepting NMBE's submission: "It seems to me, as I have mentioned, that Mr Malki, who to my observation is a very astute business man, was seeking to construct an evidential picture in support of his claim for a binding agreement as from 23 December 1994, which
SHC had breached, thereby giving NMBE a right to damages. As formulated, ultimately, the damages claimed far exceed $300,000. In these circumstances I do not accept his evidence as to the character in which the $300,000 was paid, but I accept the evidence of Mr Inberg. That evidence makes it clear that the payment was to be made for the purpose of ensuring that there was no possibility that whilst SHC was negotiating another party would be granted a lease. In the context that SHC required premises urgently, had been looking for suitable premises for some time, was satisfied that these premises were suitable at a rental and on terms generally acceptable to it, and had lost other premises to other lessees, it seems to me totally probable that SHC would have wished to tie up these premises if it could while negotiations proceeded. The amount of $300,000 for what turned out to be a relatively short period may seem large, but there is no evidence before me to suggest that SHC did not willingly and because it perceived it to be in its commercial and financial interests to do so agree to the amount at a time when it was aware the period was short." (AB 486-487) 
Rolfe J then dealt with a further submission for SHC, that if a binding contractual arrangement had been made of the kind alternatively relied on by
NMBE then it was a term in that contract that the $300,000 was refundable if no lease was entered into. This submission relied on the uncontested evidence by Mr Inberg of his intention (p 5 above) and upon implication from the circumstances.

As to Mr Inberg's intention, Rolfe J thought the evidence about it was inadmissible and said he wondered why no objection was taken to it. He said that even without objection he did not consider that the unexpressed intention could establish a term of the agreement.

Rolfe J rejected the implication argument on the basis that only one of the four requirements for implication stated in BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty
Limited versus President of the Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266 had been met.
Amongst other things he thought that the implied term contended for contradicted an express term of the agreement.

So, the result was reached that the parties had made a binding agreement on 23
December 1994, although not the one originally contended for by NMBE. The agreement found by the trial judge was one that, as a matter of fact, SHC did not intend to make and which NMBE through Mr Malki asserted at all times was not the agreement it claimed had been made. Rolfe J thought the uncommunicated intention of SHC was irrelevant and did not believe what Mr Malki said the agreement was.

The agreement found by Rolfe J was partly written and partly oral. As I understand Rolfe J's approach, the written part was the final paragraph of
Condition 8 in the Lease Advice Note: "A holding deposit to the sum of $300,000 is to be provided by the Lessee in favour of the Lessor. This deposit will be returned to the Lessee, in full, upon execution of the Lease." 
In different parts of his reasons, Rolfe J stated the unwritten part of the agreement in slightly different ways. The evidence upon which he based himself seems to be that which I have earlier set out (pp 2-5 above). For convenience
I will collect it again here, including those parts from the cross-examination of Mr Inberg which Rolfe J underlined.

From par 10 of the witness statement: "During that conversation Mr Malki and I said words to the following effect: 
Me: `I don't want you to show the premises to anyone else while we finalise the lease.' 
Malki: `Are you prepared to give a holding deposit to take it off the market while the lease is being drawn?' 
Me: `Yes.' 
Malki: `We will require an amount of $300,000." 
From the cross-examination: "Certainly the holding deposit was part of that conversation ... There was discussion about the need to, while we were in that process, to take the property off the market in that period of time and in doing so Mr Malki required a holding deposit. ...

No. I saw it more of a holding deposit during that period of time for the property to take to come off the market between the 23rd and the 9th." 
Treating the foregoing as the express, partly written, partly oral agreement between the parties, its meaning must be gathered in light of the surrounding circumstances. The agreement was plainly made in the context of the expectation of both parties that their negotiations would proceed to a concluded and executed lease agreement. One thing clear from Mr Malki's evidence, which was not in this respect as I understand it rejected by the judge, was that the matter of the bank guarantee in the proposed agreement was a matter of importance to Mr Malki and a subject of bargaining between the parties before they reached the agreement in Condition 8 of the Lease Advice
Note. The arrangement about the holding deposit was made in expectation of execution of the lease and as a partial consequence of the agreement concerning the bank guarantee. The parties' minds being directed to what was to happen upon execution of the lease, there was an express stipulation of what was to happen upon execution. Neither in the written part or the oral part of the agreement found by the trial judge was anything said about what was to happen in the event that the negotiations did not end with execution of a lease. In my opinion if the claimed but unexpressed intentions of the parties are disregarded for the different reasons relied on by Rolfe J, the proper inference is that with their attention directed to the probable event of the execution of the lease in due course, and their consequent silence in their contractual writing and words on the question what would happen to the deposit in the event no lease was executed, they made no express agreement at all about what would happen in that event.

The orthodox way of dealing with the situation once that point is reached seems to me to be by reference to the law concerning pre-contract deposits.
This law has a long history in connection with prospective purchasers of land and similar transactions. The cases are collected in Commissioner of Taxation v Guy [(1996) 67 FCR 68] at 76-78. They established that the common understanding, in relation principally to prospective contracts for the sale of land, but also in regard to some other contracts, is that a pre-contract deposit is prima facie recoverable if the prospective contract in connection with which it was paid as a preliminary matter, does not come into existence: see eg in England, Sorrell versus Finch [[1977] AC 728] at 743-5, 754, and in Australia, Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353] at 364-365, and Henning versus Ramsay [[1964] NSWR 1165.] 
The term "holding deposit" has frequently been used to describe pre-contract deposits. Windeyer J recently referred to that usage (in the context of a short term hiring of premises) and the general effect of the cases, saying, "A holding deposit is generally recognised as giving rise to no binding right": The Allens Group Ltd versus Arena Meetings Conventions and Exhibitions
Pty Ltd, unreported, 19 June 1997, at 8.

The nature of the transaction in the present case seems to me to be sufficiently similar to the sale of land situation in which the common understanding of the term holding deposit has grown up to warrant the adoption of the same approach.

On this approach NMBE had no right to keep the deposit and the appeal should be upheld.

The foregoing approach involves the conclusion that the agreement between the parties concerning the holding deposit would only have become legally binding if the parties had reached the stage of making a binding lease or agreement for lease. If the matter were to be alternatively looked at on the basis, as
Rolfe J found, that the parties had achieved, despite themselves, a legally binding agreement about the holding deposit, which did not depend on their subsequently reaching the stage of having entered into a legally binding lease, or lease agreement, then I would still reach the same result.

This would be because I would disagree with the step in Rolfe J's reasoning by which he said that to imply a term in the binding agreement he had held had unconditionally been made, viz that in the event of no execution of lease the holding deposit should be refunded, would be to contradict an express term of the agreement. This proposition was based, I assume, on the view that because the written part of the agreement said that the deposit would be returned to the lessee in full upon execution of the lease, it would not otherwise be refundable. It is only by reading the written part of the contract in some such way that it is possible to say that the term contended for by SHC contradicts an express term of the agreement. However, as I have said, my opinion is that the agreement is silent on the question of what should happen to the holding deposit in the event of no lease being executed. To conclude here that the contract meant that the deposit would not be returned to the lessee except upon execution of the lease, in my opinion, involves reliance on a process of implication based on the unhelpful interpretive canon of expressio unius exclusio alterius (see per Spigelman CJ in Bruce versus Cole &
Ors CA 12 June 1998, unreported, p 17 of the print of his reasons) in circumstances in which its use begs the question of the meaning to be given to the (on this hypothesis) contractual words.

On this approach, the implication would be that the holding deposit would be returned in the event that the parties did not become bound to a lease or agreement for lease.

I do not think that BP Refinery (Westernport) would stand in the way of that implication.

On either approach therefore my opinion is that the appeal should be upheld.

The orders I propose are that the appeal be upheld, the judgment below set aside and in its place judgment entered for SHC on its summons, with costs, the cross-claim of NMBE be dismissed with costs, SHC to have its costs of the appeal and cross-appeal.

SHELLER JA: I agree with Priestley JA. 
SHEPPARD AJA: In this matter I have had the advantage of reading the judgment to be delivered by Priestley JA. I am in agreement with his Honour's reasons and conclusions, and with the orders which he proposes. * * * 
