

Roadshow Entertainment Pty Ltd versus Cel Home Video Pty Ltd and Anor Matter No
Ca 40550/95 [1997] NSWSC 473 (10 October 1997) 
Last Updated: 6 March 1998 
Roadshow Entertainment Pty Limited versus (A/c 053 006 269) Pty Limited Receiver and Manager Appointed (Formerly CEL Home Video Pty Limited) & Anor 
CA 40550/95; CD 50117/94 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ , Handley JA, Brownie AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Commercial Division (Kearney AJ) 
FILE NO/S: CA 40550/95; CD 50117/94 
DELIVERED: Friday 10 October 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: Wednesday 23 April 1997 
PARTIES: ROADSHOW ENTERTAINMENT PTY LIMITED versus (A/c 053 006 269) PTY LIMITED
RECEIVER AND MANAGER APPOINTED (FORMERLY CEL HOME VIDEO PTY LIMITED) &
ANOR 
JUDGMENT OF: Gleeson CJ Handley JA Brownie AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: B W Rayment QC/J S Drummond/Ms R Sofroniou 
Respondent: N A Cotman SC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Gilbert & Tobin 
Respondent: Tress Cocks & Maddox 
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACT - repudiation - essential terms - rescission 
CONTRACT - repudiation - incapacity due to insolvency 
CONTRACT - rescission - available to party in breach 
EQUITY - equitable set-off - available for future debts 
EQUITY - equitable set-off when available against assignee 
SET-OFF - equitable - against assignee - available for future debts and unliquidated claims 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 61 
ROADSHOW ENTERTAINMENT PTY LIMITED v (ACN 053 006 269) PTY LIMITED RECEIVER AND MANAGER APPOINTED (FORMERLY CEL HOME VIDEO PTY LIMITED) & ANOR 
CONTRACT - repudiation - essential terms - rescission 
CONTRACT - repudiation - incapacity due to insolvency 
CONTRACT - rescission - available to party in breach 
EQUITY - equitable set-off - available for future debts 
EQUITY - equitable set-off - when available against assignee 
SET-OFF - equitable - against assignee - available for future debts and unliquidated claims 
Roadshow and CEL/Vision entered into a distribution agreement in February
The agreement provided for a distribution fee to Roadshow of 11% of the net sales price of items sold by retailers. The agreement also provided for a minimum distribution fee to be payable to Roadshow if the earned distribution fees were less than nominated figures. The agreement did not require
CEL/Vision to maintain a minimum volume of supply to Roadshow. On 16 September a Receiver and Manager was appointed to CEL/Vision which were insolvent.
Roadshow withheld payments due to CEL/Vision to secure itself against minimum distribution fees payable in the future. The Receivers gave notice to Roadshow under the agreement requiring payment of the overdue amount within 30 days. On December the Receivers sold the assets of CEL/Vision to a third party. On 6
December 1993 Roadshow purported to rescind on the ground that the sale was a repudiation. On 9 December 1993 the Receivers, relying on Roadshow's failure to comply with their notice, purported to terminate the agreement under an express term. CEL/Vision sued Roadshow who pleaded an equitable set-off.
Kearney AJ found that CEL/Vision had not repudiated the agreement and Roadshow were not entitled to an equitable set-off. Roadshow appealed.

HELD: (allowing the appeal): (1) The agreement imposed an obligation upon CEL/Vision to remain in business to give Roadshow a continuing benefit. Turner versus Goldsmith [[1891] 1 QB 544] applied. 
ORDERS 
Appeal allowed with costs. 
Set aside the judgment entered in the Commercial Division.

In lieu thereof declare that the respondents are entitled to recover from the appellant the sum of $1,224,531.54, together with pre-judgment interest on the sums particularised on p34 of the reasons for judgment of the trial Judge (p1544 of the appeal book) after deducting the sums totalling $111,352 payable to the appellant for co-operative advertising and rebates as and when those sums became payable, such interest to be calculated on the nett amounts from the dates they became payable to the respondents until the date of final judgment.

Declare that the appellant is entitled in equity to set-off the following amounts against its liability so declared: $843,389 payable on 31 October 1994; $250,000 payable on 31 January 1995; 
Damages for loss of the right to an additional distribution fee payable under cl 10.3 of the Distribution Agreement which accrued on 6 December 1993; together with pre-judgment interest on such sums as from the dates the respective causes of action accrued to the date of final judgment.

Declare that the damages referred to in para 4 (c) be assessed at $75,000 carrying pre-judgment interest from 31 July 1994 unless the respondents within days elect by notice in writing to the solicitors for the appellant to have the proceedings remitted to the Commercial Division at their risk as to costs to have such damages assessed by that Division.

In the event of the respondents electing to have the damages assessed by the Commercial Division, declare that the appellant is entitled to set-off damages so assessed, together with pre-judgment interest thereon, from 6
December 1993.

Judgment for the respondents for the balance due after allowing the set- off of such amounts.

No order as to the costs of the proceedings in the Commercial Division to date.

Proceedings remitted to the Commercial Division with liberty to apply for the entry of final judgment pursuant to these orders.

The respondents to have a Certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act 1923 if qualified.

Liberty to apply.

ROADSHOW ENTERTAINMENT PTY LIMITED v (ACN 053 006 269) PTY LIMITED RECEIVER AND MANAGER APPOINTED (FORMERLY CEL HOME VIDEO PTY LIMITED) & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: This is an appeal from a decision of Kearney AJ in the Commercial Division. As so often happens, insolvency has given rise to a dispute as to what would otherwise have been a reasonably straight-forward business arrangement. 
The background to the litigation 
The two respondent companies, which have, for convenience, been referred to jointly as CEL/Vision, were subsidiaries of Comcorp Australia Ltd. They were in the business of producing, under licence, and supplying, for sale by retail, pre-recorded video cassettes and video discs.

The appellant, referred to as Roadshow, was a wholesale distributor of video cassettes and discs.

In late 1992 there were discussions between CEL/Vision and Roadshow about the possibility that Roadshow would become the sole and exclusive distributor of
CEL/Vision's products. It was contemplated on both sides that the volume of business involved would be relatively large, and would require a significant increase in Roadshow's capacity. Roadshow indicated that, in view of the costs associated with the undertaking, it would not be prepared to enter into a distributorship agreement unless the agreement provided a minimum return to
Roadshow.

In February 1993 the parties entered into a Distribution Agreement. That agreement was amended in certain respects later in 1993.

Under the Distribution Agreement, CEL/Vision were characterised as the
Principals, Roadshow was characterised as the Distributor or Agent, and the retailers to whom products were supplied were characterised as sub-agents. The agreement provided that, on sale to a customer by a sub-agent, property in the relevant product passed from the Principals to the customer. Roadshow was obliged, monthly, to account to CEL/Vision for the proceeds of sale of the products, less an agreed distribution fee in the nature of a commission, and less certain other deductions, including allowances for returns of goods by sub-agents.

There was nothing in the Distribution Agreement which directly obliged
CEL/Vision to maintain any particular volume of supply to Roadshow. However,
Roadshow was protected, against the possibility that it might receive supplies insufficient to compensate it for the costs involved in taking on the distributorship, by a provision which obliged CEL/Vision to pay a minimum distribution fee. The clause which dealt with the distribution fee (cl 10.4) provided that the first payment of such fee would be due on, and would be calculated by reference to events occurring up to, 30 June 1994. That date was later amended to 30 September 1994.

In September 1993, CEL/Vision became insolvent. Receivers were appointed to
Comcorp Australia Limited and its subsidiaries, including CEL/Vision.

In circumstances that will require more detailed examination below, the
Receivers decided to liquidate the assets of CEL/Vision, and to cease carrying on the business of producing and supplying video cassettes and discs.

Roadshow, which was holding monies for which it was liable to account to
CEL/Vision, following sales of product, did not want to pay over those monies and be left as an unsecured creditor of CEL/Vision when the time arrived in for the first settling of accounts in relation to the minimum distribution fee. Roadshow determined, therefore, in the words of one of the witnesses, to "keep a foot" on the monies which it was holding for CEL/Vision, by way of security for its entitlement, which would first accrue during 1994, to a minimum distribution fee.

In early December 1993 the assets and business of CEL/Vision were sold to a company named Sunhost Pty Limited. Roadshow claimed that CEL/Vision had thereby repudiated the Distribution Agreement. Roadshow terminated, or purported to terminate, the agreement. In the meantime, CEL/Vision had given
Roadshow a notice of default under the agreement by reason of the failure to pay monies as they fell due, and, a few days after Roadshow's notice of termination, CEL/Vision gave their own notice of termination. One of the issues argued in the case was who actually terminated the contract.

Roadshow, claiming that it had terminated the agreement as a consequence of repudiation by CEL/Vision, claimed an equitable set-off, against the monies
Roadshow owed CEL/Vision, in respect of the damages said to have been suffered as a consequence of CEL/Vision's breach of the agreement and debts payable under the agreement in the future. The damages and debts, it was said, were at least equal to the monies owed by Roadshow to CEL/Vision (agreed, by the time of the hearing at first instance, to be $1,335,883.54). The damages and debts claimed by Roadshow were said to exceed the amount just mentioned, but, because of the insolvency of CEL/Vision, Roadshow did not pursue the excess.

CEL/Vision sued Roadshow for the amount of $1,335,883.54. The only defence was one of set-off. For the reasons just mentioned, there was no cross-claim.
Accordingly, the ultimate question to be decided by Kearney AJ was the amount, if any, which Roadshow was entitled to set-off against the claim made by
CEL/Vision.

The first issue requiring determination in this appeal, concerns Roadshow's contention that CEL/Vision repudiated the Distribution Agreement. Kearney AJ, at first instance, resolved that issue adversely to Roadshow.

In substance, Kearney AJ reasoned as follows. The sale by CEL/Vision of their business and assets to Sunhost did not constitute a breach of any express or implied term of the Distribution Agreement. Nor did it in any relevant sense put it beyond the power of the Principals to perform their obligations under the Distribution Agreement. There was nothing in the Distribution Agreement that obliged the Principals to maintain supplies of product at any particular level, or to make any product at all. In that respect, the protection for which Roadshow stipulated, (a protection which would have been adequate had it not been for the supervening insolvency of the Principals), was the agreed minimum distribution fee. There was no contractual obligation on CEL/Vision to remain in business, or to continue, either for the whole of the term of the agreement, or for any other period, to produce, and supply, cassettes and discs. CEL/Vision could have decided, for any one of a number of reasons, or for no particular reason at all, to go out of business. In that event they remained under an obligation to pay the minimum distribution fee in accordance with the terms of the contract. Roadshow, in those circumstances, not being content (for reasons related to the insolvency of CEL/Vision) to rely upon the entitlement to a minimum distribution fee, endeavoured, without justification, and in breach of contract, to retain monies payable to CEL/Vision, as security for the minimum distribution fee. By doing that, Roadshow exposed itself to termination of the contract by CEL/Vision, and, consequently, to deprivation of the benefit of the minimum distribution fee.

Kearney AJ also rejected a number of alternative grounds upon which Roadshow claimed an entitlement to set-off at least equal to the amount claimed by
CEL/Vision. However, his Honour, for reasons which may be put to one side for the moment, found that Roadshow had established claims totalling $111,352, for expenses that had been incurred in relation to co-operative advertising, and for rebates. That amount was set-off against the sum claimed by CEL/Vision. In the result, there was an order that Roadshow pay CEL/Vision the sum of $1,224,531.54 together with interest.

The terms of the Distribution Agreement 
Kearney AJ, in his reasons for judgment, made the following helpful analysis of the contract.

The agreement came into effect in February 1993.

Clause 2.2 provided that the agreement was to continue until 30 June 1996, subject to provisions for earlier termination and for renewal.

Clause 6 provided the mechanism for ordering and delivering of products. It will be set out in detail below.

Clause 7.1 provided that risk in a product passed to Roadshow upon delivery to its warehouse; this appears to mean that if products were thereafter destroyed or damaged or otherwise lost value, Roadshow had to reimburse CEL/Vision, which remained the owner of the products until sold by a retailer. However, cl .1 also provided that "without prejudice to the (provision for passing of risk)" CEL/Vision was responsible for insuring the products while they were in
Roadshow's warehouse and also whilst in transit (therefrom) to Sub-Agents.

Clause 7.2 provided that CEL/Vision retained ownership of the products until they were sold by the sub-agent. The products ordered by retailers were delivered to them on a `sale or return' basis. This explains the importance in the Distribution Agreement of `returns' by retailers; see cls 8.1(d) and (e), .2(d), the Schedule and cl 10.3.

Under cl 8 Roadshow became responsible for the proper, effective and efficient sale and distribution of the products. Its specific responsibilities in that regard were spelled out in pars (a)-(h) of cl 8.1. They included warehousing the products; processing retailer's orders, including picking, packing, dispatch and invoicing; and processing products returned by retailers and issuing credit notes to them.

Clause 8.1(g) provided that Roadshow assumed the credit risk in respect of the supply of products to sub-agents, up to an aggregate limit of $100,000 in any financial year.

Clause 8.1(h) provided that Roadshow was responsible for implementing all normal merchandising functions in relation to sub-agents except that in relation to major national retail chains such functions were to be conducted in co-operation with CEL/Vision which in relation to those chains would be responsible for the presentation of new releases and associated marketing and promotional proposals.

Clause 8.2 provided for various other obligations on the part of Roadshow, including obligations: "(a) To exercise reasonable care, skill and diligence in the performance of its duties hereunder and to act faithfully on behalf of (CEL/Vision) as agent of (CEL/Vision).

To provide adequate physical security for and control over all Products from time to time held by (Roadshow)".

Clause 8.2(d) and the Schedule set out the topics - daily, weekly and monthly sales (including returns), stock exceptions and stock reports - on which
Roadshow was to make reports to CEL/Vision.

It can be seen from the structure of these arrangements that as CEL/Vision's agent Roadshow would receive, from time to time, from the retailers, monies, being the amounts for which it invoiced them for CEL/Vision's products it had consigned to them for sale or return. Clause 9 explained how Roadshow was to account to CEL/Vision for these monies it received on CEL/Vision's behalf.
Clause 1.1 defines "net Sales Price" as: "The gross amount shown on the consignment invoice for Products delivered by to Sub-Agents without any deduction except for credit allowed for
Products returned by Sub-Agents".

Clause 9.1 instituted a monthly accounting system. As amended in August 1993 it provided that Roadshow would pay CEL/Vision within 60 days: "... after the end of the month in which Products are delivered by (Roadshow) to sub-agents, the aggregate Net Sale Price of the Products so delivered less (Roadshow's) fee then due, any advertising or other deductions made by sub- agents and, at (30 September 1994) and at the end of each succeeding twelve month period, the difference between the aggregate fees for the relevant period and the Guaranteed Fee for that period".

The latter part of cl 9.1 (as amended in August 1993) contemplated that if at September each year the sum total of Roadshow's monthly distribution fees for the preceding 12 months fell short of its annual Guaranteed Fee of $1,000,000 (cl 10.4), that difference could be deducted by Roadshow from its ensuing monthly payments to CEL/Vision. (The evidence showed that the average monthly distribution fee earned by Roadshow in the ten months from 5 February to 3 December 1993 was $45,661. To meet the amount of the (initial) guaranteed fee ($1,300,000) in cl 10.4 for the period ending 30 September , Roadshow would have to have earned a monthly distribution fee averaging $84,339 over the next ten months from 3 December 1993.) 
In cl 9.3 Roadshow acknowledged that it was obliged to make the monthly payments to CEL/Vision as provided for in cl 9.1, which turned on the aggregate amount set out in the consignment invoices for the month, whether or not the retailers had in fact sold any of the products concerned, and whether or not the retailers had paid Roadshow the amounts invoiced for all or any of such products. In other words, Roadshow had to pay CEL/Vision on the amount stated in the monthly invoices, and it was for Roadshow to get in the actual payments by retailers or be out of pocket. However, cl 9.6 put an annual "cap" of $100,000 on Roadshow's liability to pay under cl 9.3; if retailers defaulted in payment, resulting in bad debts aggregating more than $100,000 in the financial year, "the provisions of cls 9.3 and 9.4 ... do not apply". The recovery of bad debts exceeding that annual sum was a matter for CEL/Vision (cl 9.6).

Clause 9.4 required Roadshow to indemnify CEL/Vision against all loss occasioned by retailers not paying for products delivered to them by Roadshow, up to an annual cap of $100,000 provided for in cl 9.6. Beyond that "cap", the recovery of the debt was for CEL/Vision.

Clause 10.1 provided for what Roadshow was to earn for distributing
CEL/Vision's products. CEL/Vision was to pay Roadshow monthly a distribution fee equal to 11% of net sales price as defined in cl 1.1, subject to adjustments required by the remaining provisions of cl 10. This fee was to be deducted by Roadshow from its monthly remittance under cl 9.1. If in any month the fee exceeded the amount due by Roadshow under cl 9.1, the deficiency was to be deducted by Roadshow from the next month's settlement with CEL/Vision (cl 10.2).

Clause 10.3 provided for the additional work entailed for Roadshow if the annual level of returns by retailers exceeded a certain percentage of products delivered to them in that year. It provided for an additional distribution fee to Roadshow varying according to the amount (in percentage terms) by which total annual returns by retailers of unsold products exceeded 12% of annual gross deliveries of products to them. For example, where in a particular year such returns by retailers exceeded 20% of their deliveries, Roadshow's additional distribution fee for that year would be $75,000 (cl 10.3(c)).

Roadshow had been concerned at the negotiating stage to ensure that it earned at least a minimum amount each year for distributing CEL/Vision's products, in view of the "large up-front costs" it expected to incur to carry out that work. This concern was catered for in cl 10 of the agreement.

In cl 1.1 "Guaranteed Fee", as amended in August 1993, was defined as: "The sum of $1,300,000 for the period from the Commencement Date to (30
September 1994) and the sum of $1,000,000 in respect of each succeeding period of twelve months during the currency of this Agreement".

Clause 10.4 as amended on 24 August 1993 provided that this guaranteed fee was payable to Roadshow as a minimum annual distribution fee, viz: "... if the Distribution Fee referred to in Clause 10.1 is, in the aggregate, less than: the sum of $1,300,000 for the period from the Commencement Date to (30
September 1994); $1,000,000 in respect of each succeeding period of twelve months during the currency of this Agreement; then ... the deficiency is first recoverable by (Roadshow) from any amounts due by (Roadshow) to (CEL/Vision) at the end of the relevant period and, to the extent that such recovery is less than the applicable minimum amount referred to above, (CEL/Vision) will, no later than thirty days after the close of the relevant period (in sub pars (a) and (b) above) pay to (Roadshow) the amount by which the aggregate of the distribution fee already paid or due and payable by (CEL/Vision) to in respect of the relevant period is less than the applicable amount referred to in those sub paragraphs respectively". (emphasis added) 
Clause 10.4 contemplated an assessment at a particular date each year, commencing 30 September 1994, and the prompt payment by CEL/Vision of any deficiency found to exist at that time between the total Distribution Fee for the year and $1,000,000 ($1,300,000 on the first occasion).

Clause 10.6 provided that Roadshow may deduct "from any payments due by to (CEL/Vision) under cl 9 any payment due by (CEL/Vision) to under cl 10.1 or under cl 10.4".

Clause 10.7 dealt with a separate topic: where payment by way of a co- operative advertising charge or subsidy or any other amount due to a sub-agent was required for the purpose of securing sales to a particular sub-agent, (such as national chain stores), CEL/Vision was to pay such amounts direct to the retailer if possible. However, if the retailer in fact deducted such a charge from its invoiced account when paying Roadshow, a common practice,
Roadshow was entitled to deduct a corresponding amount from monies due by it to CEL/Vision.

Clause 11 provided that CEL/Vision would at their cost and expense label and package the products supplied to Roadshow.

Clause 15 provided for when the agreement could be terminated. Clause 15.1 provided: "In the event of either or both of (CEL/Vision) on the one hand and on the other hand being in breach or default of any provision of this Agreement, this Agreement may be terminated by notice in writing from (CEL/Vision) (if neither of (them) is the party in breach or default) or from (if either of (CEL/Vision) shall be the party in breach or default) requiring that the breach or default be remedied and, if that breach or default is not remedied within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice by the party or parties in default, the party or parties giving the notice may, by further notice in writing to the party or parties in default, terminate this Agreement forthwith and thereupon this Agreement shall cease and determine".

Clause 15.2 and 15.3 specified various events the occurrence of which entitled one or the other party to terminate the agreement, by giving notice in writing; there was no requirement for the two-stage process in cl 15.1 where the triggering event was "breach or default of any provision" of the agreement.

Clause 15.2 provided for termination of the agreement by CEL/Vision if various contingencies affected Roadshow. Clause 15.3 was a "mirror" provision to cl .2, empowering Roadshow to terminate the agreement if certain contingencies affected CEL/Vision. It provided as far as relevant: "15.3 This Agreement may be terminated by (Roadshow) giving notice in writing to (CEL/Vision) if either of (CEL/Vision) ...
 ... has a Receiver and Manager appointed to all or any part of its assets or income; .....................
 and upon the giving of any such notice this Agreement shall immediately cease and determine".

The event contemplated by cl 15.3(b) occurred on 16 September 1993. It did not result in a notice of termination.

Clause 15.4 on its face provided that after 30 June 1994, unless the agreement was terminated by mutual consent, a party could terminate it but only by giving six months prior written notice of its desire to do so. (There was some dispute as to the true construction of this clause).

Clause 16 provided for the consequences of termination of the agreement.
Clause 16.1 provided that termination was "without prejudice to ... the accrued rights of any of the parties arising in any way out of the Agreement as at the date of ... termination and all provisions which are expressed to survive this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect". Clause 16.2 provided that the provisions of cls 8.13, 9.14, 13.3 and 14 were to survive termination.

Clause 16.3 provided that: "Upon termination of this Agreement - the rights granted to (Roadshow) by this Agreement shall terminate; the obligations of (CEL/Vision) to pay the distribution fee hereunder shall cease except in so far as the same shall have accrued or shall accrue after the date of termination in respect of Products delivered by (Roadshow) up to that date; all stock will be removed from (Roadshow's) Warehouse within fourteen days". (emphasis added) 
Clause 17 provided for an option to renew the agreement. In general terms cl .1 provided that both parties on giving written notice at least three months prior to 30 June 1996: " ... shall respectively have the option ... of renewing this Agreement for a further term of two years commencing on 1 July 1996 and expiring on 30 June ".

Clause 18 prohibited the assignment of any right, liability, etc., under the agreement "without the prior written consent" of the other party.

Clause 20 provided: "Each party shall take all such steps and execute all such documents and do all such acts, matters and things as may be reasonably required by any other party to give effect to any of the provisions or transactions contemplated or referred to in this Agreement".

Clause 24 provided that the agreement sets forth "the entire and final agreement of the parties with regard to the subject matter of this Agreement".

Clause 27 was an arbitration clause.

Termination and counter termination 
Receivers were appointed to CEL/Vision on 16 September 1993 and quickly made contact with Roadshow. Following the appointment of the Receivers, there was a substantial decline in the supply of products to Roadshow.

Internal documents of Roadshow revealed that senior officers of that company became concerned at Roadshow's lack of security in respect of its entitlement to a guaranteed minimum distribution fee. They did a calculation which indicated that, by the time the first minimum distribution fee became due, making allowance for other credits to which Roadshow would also be entitled,
CEL/Vision would owe Roadshow approximately $1,582,000. They noted that
Roadshow was currently holding $1,184,689 which was owing to CEL/Vision.

On 1 October 1993 Roadshow did two things. It paid CEL/Vision an amount of approximately $305,000 which was owing for products supplied in July 1993. A senior officer of Roadshow informed CEL/Vision that it was possible that
Roadshow would not make future monthly payments to CEL/Vision but would, in effect, hold monthly amounts as they fell due against CEL/Vision's accruing liability referred to above.

On 4 October 1993 the Receivers sought expressions of interest from potential purchasers of the assets and business of CEL/Vision. It seems that they received no offer until early November.

On 29 October 1993 Roadshow wrote to the Receivers. The letter referred to the provision for a guaranteed annual minimum distribution fee in cl 10.4 of the agreement, and the commercial reason for that fee. The letter then went on to refer to the fact that the earliest date at which the agreement could be terminated by CEL/Vision was 31 December 1994. At that time it was expected that the accumulated amount owing under the guarantee would be $1.8 million.
The letter said: "Roadshow's recovery against this guarantee for the period ended 29 October is approximately $521,670. Due to the current decline in available product the estimated additional recovery against this guarantee up to 31
December 1994 would be approximately $250,000. Accordingly the estimated shortfall at this time (that is at 31 December 1994) would be approximately $1,000,000".

The letter went on to make various calculations as to estimated credits and debits on the account between CEL/Vision and Roadshow, and calculated that there would be a "total contingent claim by Roadshow" of $1,912,594. Deducting from this the funds then owing to CEL/Vision, there was what the letter described as a "shortfall on contingent claim" of $790,957. The letter concluded: "Roadshow will not be in a position to pay further funds to CEL/Vision until there have been sufficient sales of CEL/Vision's product (to) cover this shortfall".

On 8 November 1993 the Receivers received an offer for the business of
CEL/Vision from Sunhost.

On the same day the Receivers wrote to Roadshow denying the entitlement to withhold monthly payments due under the Distribution Agreement, and served on
Roadshow formal notice of default under cl 15.1 of the agreement, alleging a failure to make by 31 October 1993 payments due in respect of products delivered during August. In accordance with cl 15.1 the notice required that payment be made within 30 days, that is, by 8 December 1993.

No such payment was ever made, and on 9 December 1993 the Receivers gave a further notice terminating the agreement.

In the meantime, on 22 November 1993, the Receivers reached an agreement with
Sunhost concerning the sale to Sunhost of the assets and business of
CEL/Vision. On 26 November 1993 the Receivers informed Roadshow that the proposed sale was nearing completion, that settlement was expected on 30
November 1993, and that a stocktake of CEL/Vision's products in Roadshow's warehouse was required.

Arrangements were then made dealing with matters of stock on hand, and distribution of certain stock by Roadshow on behalf of Sunhost. Those arrangements are not relevant to the subject presently under discussion, although they were relevant to other aspects of the litigation.

On 6 December 1993 the Receivers informed Roadshow of the completion of the sale to Sunhost.

On 6 December 1993 Roadshow's solicitors wrote to the Receivers' solicitors in the following terms: "On our instructions it is clear that there has been a fundamental breach of the Distribution Agreement by CEL and Vision which is in part exemplified by the fact that a Receiver and Manager was appointed to each of CEL and Vision and by the sale of the assets of each of those companies. The breach is of such a nature that it amounts to repudiation. That repudiation is both acknowledged and accepted".

Thus, Roadshow purported to terminate the agreement, on the ground of repudiation of CEL/Vision, on 6 December 1993, and CEL/Vision purported to terminate the agreement on the basis of Roadshow's breach, on 9 December 1993.

We turn now to the resolution of what was described earlier as the first issue for resolution, that is to say, whether Roadshow was correct in asserting that the conduct of CEL/Vision amounted to a repudiation.

Did CEL/Vision repudiate? 
The problem which arises when a principal, having appointed an agent for a certain term, goes out of business before the expiration of the term, is a familiar one. It may arise because the principal disposes of an unprofitable undertaking, or goes into voluntary liquidation, or decides as a matter of policy to discontinue a business, or for any one of a number of reasons. As
Street CJ observed in Coulter versus Readhead <case>; [(1931) 31 SR 432] at 437, there are numerous reported cases in which the Courts have had to consider whether contracts of this character can, without breach, be brought effectively to an end by terminating the business in connection with which they were made (eg Turner versus Goldsmith [[1891] 1 QB 544]; Reigate v
Union Manufacturing Co (Ramsbottom) [[1918] 1 KB 592]; Northey v
Trevillion [(1901) 18 TLR 648]; Lazarus v
Cairn Line of Steamships Ltd [(1912) 28 TLR 244]; Re
Premier Products Ltd [[1965] NZLR 50).] 
The first question to be considered is the meaning and effect of the express provisions of the contract. It may be that, upon its true construction, the contract obliges the principal, during the term of the agency, to continue the business or to take certain steps which depend upon such continuance, or gives the agent a right to a continuing benefit (cf Lazarus, above, per Scrutton J at 245). On the other hand, it may be that there is no such obligation or right to be found in the contract.

Sometimes one party or the other may seek to rely upon an implication; either to the effect that, at least in certain circumstances, the principal may go out of business without being involved in breach of obligations to an agent, or to the effect that, since the arrangements can only take effect so long as the principal carries on a certain business, the principal will not of its own motion put an end to that business (cf Stirling versus Maitland <case>; [(1864) 5 B&S 840], Shirlaw versus Southern Foundries (1926) Ltd [[1939] 2
KB 206] at 224). The principles governing implications are well settled. In particular, any such implication must be necessary, and must not contradict an express term (Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd versus State Rail Authority of NSW <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337).] 
Examples of contracts containing express terms which were construed as obliging a principal to maintain supplies to an agent include Turner v
Goldsmith. A shirt manufacturer agreed to employ an agent for a term of years. The manufacturer's factory was destroyed by fire and he ceased business. The Court of Appeal held that he was contractually obliged to "employ" the agent for the term, and that failure to provide shirts, for whatever reason, was a breach of contract. In Reigate, an agency agreement obliged the principal to accept and carry out orders received from an agent subject to a right of reasonable refusal. It was held that there was no ground to imply a term that the principal's obligation to supply was subject to its continuing to carry on business. The sole issue was whether, in the circumstances, refusal to supply was reasonable.

The provisions of the Distribution Agreement which bear most directly upon the question of construction that arises in the present case are as follows.

First, there are the clauses relating to the term of the agreement, including those providing for early termination and for extension of the terms.

Secondly, there is cl 4 which provides: "4 EXCLUSIVITY 
A Principal will not supply the Product to any person, other than the
Distributor, for distribution or sale within the Territory except with the prior written agreement of the Distributor".

Thirdly, there is cl 6, which is as follows: "6 ORDERS AND DELIVERY .1 Each Principal will select the Monthly Release and the Release Date of each Product of that Principal and will give reasonable prior notice (but being, in any event, no less than ninety days prior notice) to the Distributor of those dates and selections and of any withdrawals of those selections. Each principal agrees that it will use its best efforts to schedule the Release
Dates so that the Distributor is enabled to make deliveries of the Products to
Sub-Agents from the Distributor's Warehouse in conjunction with the delivery of other products by the Distributor.
 .2 The Distributor and each Principal will consult on a regular basis with regard to proposed and possible future Monthly Releases and Release Dates and as to the anticipated market requirements for each Product.
 .3 Each Principal will provide to the Distributor the publicity material reasonably required by the Distributor to promote the sale of the Products and that Principal will bear the cost of producing that publicity material.
 .4 The Distributor will place supply orders for the Products upon each
Principal respectively at a time and at a level adequate to meet anticipated market requirements for the Product concerned.
 .5 On receipt by a Principal of each supply order for the Products from the
Distributor, the Principal will provide written confirmation of that supply order and will place orders on the duplicator of that Principal as necessary for production of the required quantity of the Products.
 .6 A Principal will deliver the Products covered by the supply order placed on that Principal to the Distributor's Warehouse and will use its best efforts to ensure that delivery occurs within two days of receipt of the supply order.
 .7 On the Commencement Date, each Principal will deliver to the
Distributor's Warehouse all stocks of Products then held by that Principal provided that such delivery shall be limited to stocks that a Principal and the Distributor consider to be saleable".

That clause in terms obliges each Principal to take certain steps in relation to products and, in particular, to respond to orders from the Distributor by supplying products. However, the respondents submit that it is a machinery provision which depends for its operation upon the existence of products.
There is nothing in the agreement which in terms obliges the Principals to produce any products at all, or to maintain any particular or minimum level of production.

Fourthly, there is cl 10, and, especially cl 10.4. This, it is argued on behalf of the respondents, is the mechanism by which the parties chose to deal with the problem presently under consideration. It has a double significance.
It has an important bearing on the construction of the written instrument.
Furthermore, one cannot imply a term which is inconsistent with this express term.

Clause 10.4 provides: "10.4 The Principals agree with the Distributor that if the distribution fee referred to in Clause 10.1 is, in the aggregate, less than - the sum of $1,300,000.00 for the period from the Commencement Date to (30
September 1994); $1,000,000.00 in respect of each succeeding period of twelve months during the currency of this Agreement; then and in any such case the deficiency is first recoverable by the
Distributor from any amounts due by the Distributor to the Principals at the end of the relevant period and, to the extent that such recovery is less than the applicable minimum amount referred to above, the Principals will, no later than thirty days after the close of the relevant period referred to in sub- paragraphs (a) and (b) above, pay to the Distributor the amount by which the aggregate of the distribution fee already paid or due and payable by the
Principals to the Distributor in respect of the relevant period is less than the applicable minimum amount referred to in those sub-paragraphs respectively.

PROVIDED THAT in any case where the reason or substantial reason for the failure to achieve the minimum distribution fee referred to above in respect of any of the abovementioned periods is the Distributor commencing, as a consequence of this Agreement, to deal directly, as licensee, with any person who was, at any time during the currency of this Agreement, a licensor of any
Product to either or both of the Principals then the parties will negotiate in good faith in order to reach agreement as to an appropriate reduction to the minimum distribution fee as a consequence of deliveries of the Products concerned no longer being available for the purposes of this Agreement. If the parties are unable to reach mutual agreement as to such reduction within a reasonable period after the commencement of such negotiations then any party may refer the question of such reduction and the quantum thereof to arbitration pursuant to Clause 27. For the purpose of this proviso, `Distributor' includes any related body corporate of the Distributor within the meaning of Section 50 of the Corporations Law and includes any other person or corporation who or which controls or is controlled by, directly or indirectly, the Distributor or any such related body corporate".

The proviso to cl 10.4 addresses the possibility that the reason for a reduction in available supply of product might be that the Distributor, or a related corporation, commenced to deal direct with a licensor and, to that extent, cut out a Principal.

Clause 10.4 provides for a minimum distribution fee and, in that respect, supports the respondents' argument. There is, however, an aspect of the provision which cuts the other way. It provides a mechanism for recovery of the minimum distribution fee which assumes an ongoing business, and which gives the Distributor a right of set-off. To the extent of that right of set- off, the entitlement to the minimum distribution fee is secured.

The appellant relied in argument upon the proposition, stated in ICT Pty Ltd v Sea Containers Ltd [(1995) 39 NSWLR 640] at 656, that "a party who puts it out of his power to perform his contract by divesting himself of assets will be in fundamental breach". That argument, however, begs the question. In the present case the first issue to be resolved is whether the respondents were under an obligation to supply only such products as they chose to make.

To return to the analysis of the problem made by Scrutton J in Lazarus, the question is whether the agreement, on its true construction, obliged
CEL/Vision during the terms of the agency, either to continue their business or to take certain steps which depended upon such continuance, or gave the
Distributor a right to a continuing benefit which could not be defeated by a decision on the part of CEL/Vision to sell their business and assets.

There was nothing in the agreement which directly obliged CEL/Vision to continue their business. However, the provisions set out above both obliged
CEL/Vision to take certain steps which depended upon such continuance and also gave Roadshow a right to a continuing benefit.

The provisions of cl 6 fell into the first category.

As to the second category, cl 4 is of particular significance. Roadshow was appointed the sole and exclusive distributor of the products of a certain business. That was a valuable right. It is difficult to accept that it was the intention of the parties, as manifested in their agreement, that CEL/Vision could defeat that right simply by transferring to a third party, such as
Sunhost, the entirety of the business including the benefit of the licence agreements under which products were produced. The licence agreements held by
CEL/Vision were an important part of the commercial background to the agreement, and Roadshow's right to be, for the term of the agreement, the sole and exclusive distributor of products manufactured under such licences was an important continuing benefit which was intended to last during the term of the agreement.

Reference has already been made to the element of set-off in cl 10.4 which was also a continuing benefit of substantial practical importance.

In our view, the conduct of CEL/Vision in transferring their business and assets to Sunhost amounted to a repudiation of the Distribution Agreement.

Was Roadshow entitled to terminate? 
The next question is whether Roadshow was prevented from accepting the repudiation and rescinding on 6 December. It is argued that Roadshow was itself in breach, and could not terminate.

The Receivers were appointed to CEL/Vision on 16 September. On 1 October
Roadshow paid CEL/Vision $305,051.34 for the July deliveries. On 4 October the
Receivers sought expressions of interest from potential purchasers of
CEL/Vision. Although these approaches did not come to the notice of Roadshow at the time, in late September and early October the Receivers had a number of conversations with Mr Barlow and Mr Bongiorno about a sale of the business to
Roadshow. On 29 October Roadshow wrote to the Receivers referring to the minimum distribution fees payable to it and the likely shortfall. As was noted earlier, the letter concluded: "... Roadshow will not be in a position to pay further funds to CEL/Vision until there have been sufficient sales of CEL/Vision product to cover `this shortfall' (of $790,597").

On 31 October Roadshow failed to pay for the August deliveries. On 8 November the Receivers served notices of default under cl 15.1 requiring payment by 8
December. On 25 November Roadshow learned of the pending sale to Sunhost.
Roadshow did not make the payment due on 30 November, and on 6 December it purported to rescind. On 9 December the Receivers purported to terminate, relying on Roadshow's failure to comply with the notices of default.

Mr Cotman SC, for CEL/Vision, submitted that cl 9.1 was a condition of the contract so that Roadshow was in fundamental breach and not entitled to rescind. Clause 9.1 required payment "no later than sixty days after the end of the month in which Products are delivered". Mr Cotman relied on the emphatic words "no later than", the fiduciary nature of the agency relationship, and Roadshow's duty to account.

The agreement was not a contract for the sale of goods but was analogous to such a contract. Unless a contrary intention appears, stipulations as to time for payment in contracts for the sale of goods are not of the essence of the contract. ([Sale of Goods
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/soga128/) [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/soga128/s15.html) (1).)
This rule, derived from the common law, applies to analogous contracts. See
Decro-Wall International SA versus Practitioners in Marketing Ltd [[1971] 1 WLR ] at .

In our judgment the words "no later than", and the relationship between the parties, do not displace the prima facie rule that stipulations as to time for payment are not of the essence in contracts such as this. In any event, cl .1 must be evaluated in its context. Clause 15.1 which deals with the effect of breaches or defaults provides: "In the event of either or both of the Principals on the one hand and the
Distributor on the other hand being in breach or default of any provision of this Agreement, this Agreement may be terminated by notice in writing from the Principals (if neither of the Principals is the party in breach or default) or from the Distributor (if either of the Principals shall be the party in breach or default) requiring that the breach or default be remedied and if that breach or default is not remedied within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice by the party or parties in default, the party or parties giving the notice may, by further notice in writing to the party or parties in default, terminate this Agreement forthwith". (emphasis supplied) 
The test of whether a term is essential, so that a breach will give rise to an immediate right of rescission, is that stated by Stephen, Mason and Jacobs JJ in DTR Nominees Pty Ltd versus Mona Homes Pty Ltd <case>; [(1978) 138 CLR 423] at 431: "... the quality of essentiality depends ... on a judgment which is made of the general nature of the contract and its particular provisions, a judgment which takes close account of the importance which the parties have attached to the provision as evidenced by the contract itself as applied to the surrounding circumstances".

One of the decisions they referred to was Bentsen versus Taylor Sons & Co [[1893] 2 QB 274] at 281, where Bowen LJ said: "There is no way of deciding that question except by looking at the contract in the light of the surrounding circumstances, and then making up one's mind whether the intention of the parties, as gathered from the instrument itself, will best be carried out by treating the promise as a warranty sounding only in damages, or as a condition precedent by the failure to perform which the other party is relieved of his liability".

As Kerr LJ said in State Trading Corporation of India Ltd versus M Golodetz Ltd [[1989] 2 Lloyd's Rep 277] at :
 " ... the court may have no alternative but to follow the general statement of Bowen LJ in Bentsen versus Taylor ... by making what is in effect a value judgment about the commercial significance of the term in question".

Earlier at 282 he had cited the statement by Fletcher Moulton LJ in Wallis v
Pratt [[1910] 2 KB 1003] at 1012 that conditions are terms: " ... which go so directly to the substance of the contract, or in other words, are so essential to its very nature that their non-performance may fairly be considered by the other party as a substantial failure to perform the contract at all".

The terms of cl 15.1 make it clear that the parties did not intend that an immediate right of rescission would arise on a breach of cl 9.1. A right to terminate for breach after notice excludes any right to terminate without notice, and the continuing failure to remedy any breach did not involve further breaches. See Larking versus Great Western (Nepean) Gravel Ltd <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 221] at 235-8 per Dixon J.

The application of these principles leads to the conclusion that the time stipulation in cl 9.1 was not essential, and Roadshow's assumed breaches on 31
October and 30 November did not confer on CEL/Vision an immediate right to rescind.

Roadshow's letter to the Receivers of 29 October asserted its right to withhold payment of further monies to CEL/Vision because of its rights under cl 10.4. This was a claim under the agreement and, without more, not a repudiation of it, and Mr Cotman did not contend otherwise. The joint judgment in DTR Nominees Pty Ltd versus Mona Homes Pty Ltd states the relevant principles at 432: " ... there are cases in which a party, by insisting on an incorrect interpretation of a contract, evinces an intention that he will not perform the contract according to its terms. But there are other cases in which a party, though asserting a wrong view of a contract because he believes it to be correct, is willing to perform the contract according to its tenor. He may be willing to recognise his heresy once the true doctrine is enunciated, or he may be willing to accept an authoritative exposition of the correct interpretation. In either event an intention to repudiate the contract could not be attributed to him. As Pearson LJ observed in Sweet & Maxwell Ltd v
Universal News Services Ltd [[1964] 2 QB 699] at 734: " ...a party should not too readily be found to have refused to perform the agreement by contentious observations in the course of discussions ...'." 
Later at 432-3 the same Judges said of that case: "... it is a case of a bona fide dispute as to the true construction of a contract expressed in terms which are by no means clear ... In these circumstances the court is not justified in drawing an inference that the appellant intended not to perform the contract according to its terms or that it repudiated the contract".

In Ross T Smyth & Co Ltd versus T D Bailey Son & Co [[1940] 3 All ER ]
at 71-2, Lord Wright said: " ... repudiation of a contract is a serious matter, not to be lightly found or inferred ... mere honest misapprehension, especially if open to correction, will not justify a charge of repudiation".

See also Woodar Investment Development Ltd versus Wimpey UK Ltd <case>; <case>; [(1985) 155 CLR 342] at 350, 365-6. We conclude therefore that even if Roadshow were in breach, CEL/Vision were not entitled to rescind for breach on 6
December.

The decision in this appeal does not require a comprehensive analysis of the effect of a breach on a party's right to rescind. This is not a case where the party attempting to rescind was in breach of a condition or had otherwise repudiated. Compare Morris versus Barron & Co [[1918] AC 1] at 9; Nina's Bar
Bistro Pty Ltd versus MBE Corporation (Sydney) Pty Ltd [[1984] 3 NSWLR 613] at 632-3 per Priestley JA; and The Simona [[1989] AC 788.] Timely payment by
Roadshow was not a condition precedent to be performed before CEL/Vision became bound to perform the obligations repudiated by the sale and was independent of those obligations. Compare Foran versus Wight <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 385.] 
As a general rule, a party in breach of a non essential term is not prevented from rescinding for a fundamental breach or repudiation by the other party.
See Carter, "Breach of Contract", 2nd Ed, 1991, at 347, and Halsbury's Laws of
Australia, Vol 6, "Contract", 1992, para 110-9520, by the same author. The question is whether there is an exception or qualification to this general rule which prevented Roadshow from rescinding. Such an exception or qualification might exist if there were a causal relationship between the breaches of non essential terms by the party attempting to rescind, and the fundamental breach relied upon. See Nina's Bar Bistro Pty Ltd versus MBE
Corporation (Sydney) Pty Ltd [[1984] 3 NSWLR 613] at 614, -1, 632; and compare Suttor versus Gundowda Pty Ltd <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 418] at 440-2.

The Receivers were appointed to Comcorp Australia Ltd and its subsidiaries including CEL/Vision on 16 September. The group was evidently insolvent and the Receivers made no attempt to trade CEL/Vision out of their financial difficulties. The supply of products to Roadshow declined dramatically after the appointment of the Receivers, as can be seen from the amounts due to
CEL/Vision for deliveries each month from August onwards (1544): 
August $ 441,221.10 
September 409,918.48 
October 278,895.81 
November 160,088.52 November - 5 December 45,759.63 $1,335,883.54 
From early October onwards, the Receivers experienced increasing difficulties with their producers and licensors in relation to the supply of existing and new titles. On 7 October the Receivers wrote to Roadshow in relation to the titles due for release that month, advising that one licensor had already terminated and negotiations had broken down with another. On the same day, Mr
Campbell from the Receivers' office told Mr Bongiorno that two other licensors, Thunderbird and Castle, had withdrawn and said, "don't think we will be in the business for long". On 8 October he informed Mr Bongiorno that
Yorkshire TV had told the Receivers to cease distribution immediately, and on October, Mr Bongiorno was informed of the same request from Roc Vale. This process continued relentlessly until the sale to Sunhost.

During late September/early October the Receivers initiated moves to sell the assets of CEL/Vision to Roadshow. They also invited expressions of interest from other potential purchasers, although Roadshow were not aware of this at the time. On 8 November the Receivers had an approach from Sunhost, and the same day they informed Roadshow they would not be adopting the Distribution
Agreement.

Readiness and willingness to perform imports capacity to do so. See De Medina v Norman <case>; [(1842) 9 M & W 820] at  <case>; [(152 ER 347] at 350), and Foran versus Wight at 397, 424, 451. By early
October at the latest, CEL/Vision were no longer ready and willing to perform their obligations under the agreement until 31 December 1994 when they could terminate without breach. In the words of Lord Sumner in British and
Benningtons Ltd versus North Western Cachar Tea Co [[1923] AC 48] at 71-2, referred to by Dixon CJ in Rawson versus Hobbs <case>; [(1961) 107 CLR 466] at 481, CEL/Vision had "become wholly and finally disabled from performing essential terms of the contract". They had "a substantial incapacity" which would prevent them "doing in the future what the contract requires" and had "neither the means nor the intention of performing". See also Foran versus Wight at 404-6, 409, 424-5 and 453.

The incapacity of a party to perform essential terms of a contract may involve an anticipatory breach. See Universal Cargo Carriers Corporation versus Citati [[1957] 2 QB 401] at 436 per Devlin J, Foran versus Wight at 406, 423-4. "The injured party is allowed to anticipate an inevitable breach" per Devlin J above at 438.

It is arguable that Roadshow might have rescinded before 6 December relying on
CEL/Vision's incapacity due to insolvency. However this could have imposed a heavy onus of proof on Roadshow and it wisely elected to wait.

A party in breach of non essential terms who has not repudiated may rescind for fundamental breach. See Hongkong Fir Shipping Co Ltd versus Kawasaki Kisen
Kaisha Ltd <case>; [[1962] QB 26];
State Trading Corporation of India Ltd versus M Golodetz Ltd [[1989] 2 Lloyd's
Rep 277] at 286-7. A party in breach of an essential but independent term may also rescind for fundamental breach. See State Trading Corporation of India Ltd versus M Golodetz Ltd at 285-7. Compare Geraldton Building Co Pty
Ltd versus Christmas Island Resort Pty Ltd [(1992) 11 WAR 40] at 50-1.
Roadshow, we consider, was not, by reason of its conduct, unable to terminate on the ground of CEL/Vision's repudiation.

Thus far we have considered the matter on the assumption that Roadshow itself was in breach. However, at a later stage in these reasons we conclude that
Roadshow's conduct after 29 October in asserting and exercising a right to withhold payment of monies otherwise due to CEL/Vision was justified by its right of equitable set-off.

Equitable set-off is a substantive defence. See Derham, "Set-Off", 1996, -65. As Goff LJ said in Federal Commerce & Navigation Co Ltd versus Molena
Alpha Inc [[1978] QB 927] at 982, a defence of equitable set-off may be set up "not merely as a means of preventing ... judgment, or, at any rate, execution, but also as an immediate answer to ... liability to pay". This must be correct because an equitable set-off impeaches the title of the other party to the legal demand against which it is asserted. When "the circumstances which support an equitable set-off exist, it is unconscionable for the creditor to regard the debtor as being indebted" (Derham at 60). The debtor can therefore claim that the payment demanded was never due. See Tomlinson versus Cut Price Deli
Pty Ltd <case>; [(1992) 38 FCR 490] at 494-5 per Drummond J and the cases there cited.

Roadshow was therefore entitled in equity to withhold the payments otherwise due on 31 October and 30 November and for that additional reason its conduct did not prevent it from rescinding the contract for fundamental breach.

Equitable set-off 
On 6 December Roadshow owed CEL/Vision $1,335,883.54, although some of this was not yet payable. When sued, Roadshow pleaded its liquidated and unliquidated claims against CEL/Vision as defences. It did not plead any cross claim, no doubt because the secured creditors had priority. A set-off of $111,352 was established and judgment was entered against Roadshow for $1,224,531.54. The appeal involved its claim to set-off other liquidated and unliquidated claims.

Unliquidated damages could not be set-off at law under the Statutes of Set-off (Derham 12-13), but legal set-off lapsed in this State with the repeal of those Statutes by the [Imperial Acts Application Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/iaaa1969240/) (Meagher, Gummow and Lehane, 3rd Ed, 1993, at 812, Derham, "Recent Issues in
Relation to Set-Off" [(1994) 68 ALJ 331] at 332). Moreover at law set-off was only available in respect of debts which were due and payable. (Derham 10-13.) Equitable set-off however has been held to be available for unliquidated claims.

The floating charge over the assets and undertakings of CEL/Vision crystallised on or before the appointment of the Receivers. Debts owed to those companies became bound by a fixed charge which operated as a completed equitable assignment to the secured creditors. See In re ELS Ltd  <case>; [(1972) 126 CLR 597.] 
If there had been a legal assignment of Roadshow's debt to the secured creditors under <case> of the Conveyancing Act, the assignees would have taken subject to the "equities" between CEL/Vision and Roadshow. These include cross-claims for unliquidated damages arising out of the contract which gave rise to the debt. In Young versus Kitchin [(1878) 3 Ex D 127] a claim for unliquidated damages for breach of a building contract was set-off against the legal assignee of a debt due under that contract. This decision was approved in Government of Newfoundland versus Newfoundland Railway Co [(1888) 13
App Cas 199] at 213 where Lord Hobhouse said: "Unliquidated damages may now be set-off as between the original parties, and also against an assignee if flowing out of and inseparably connected with the dealings and transactions which also gave rise to the subject of the assignment".

Some aspects of the advice of the Privy Council in that case were doubted and explained by Dixon J in McDonnell & East Ltd versus McGregor <case>; [(1936) 56 CLR 50] at 59-60, but he did not question the principle that unliquidated cross-claims were available against assignees. The merits are clear. As Lord Hobhouse said in the Newfoundland case at 212: "It would be a lamentable thing if it were found to be the law that a party to a contract may assign a portion of it, perhaps a beneficial portion, so that the assignee shall take the benefit, wholly discharged of any counter- claim by the other party in respect of the rest of the contract, which may be burdensome".

See also Stoddart versus Union Trust Ltd [[1912] 1 KB 181] at 189, 191, ; Parsons versus Sovereign Bank of Canada [[1913] AC 160] at 166; Tooth v
Brisbane City Council <case>; [(1928) 41 CLR 212] at 223-4, 227; Clyne versus Deputy Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1981) 150 CLR 1] at 20-22 per Mason J; and James versus Commonwealth Bank of
Australia <case>; [(1992) 37 FCR 445] at 460-462 per Gummow J. This analysis is supported by
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane at 207, 821-2, and by Spry, "Equitable Set-Offs" [(1969) 43 ALJ 265] at 269. Derham offers a different analysis in "Recent Issues in Relation to Set-Off" [(1994) 68 ALJ 331] at 334-7, but his argument is that the principles established in these cases are not confined to equitable set-off against an assignee.

The wider scope of equitable set-off need not be considered in this appeal.
Compare Lord versus Direct Acceptance Corporation Ltd <case>; [(1995) 56 FCR 354.] 
The "equities" available against a legal assignee are those which were available against an equitable assignee before the Judicature Act 1838 . See
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane at 715. The appellant therefore is prima facie entitled to set-off its claims against the debts on which it was sued to judgment. However these proceedings were brought by the Receivers in the names of CEL/Vision, and it is necessary to consider whether this makes any difference.

Rights of set-off against Receivers appointed by debenture holders out of court were considered in Biggerstaff versus Rowatt's Wharf Ltd [[1896] 2 Ch ]; N
W Robbie & Co Ltd versus Witney Warehouse Co Ltd [[1963] 1 WLR 1324]; Inglis
Electrix Pty Ltd versus Healing (Sales) Pty Ltd (1967) 69 SR 311 at 327-8;
Rother Iron Works Ltd versus Canterbury Precision Engineers Ltd [[1974] QB ]; George
Barker (Transport) Ltd versus Eynon [[1974] 1 WLR 462]; and
Business Computers Ltd versus Anglo-African Leasing Ltd [[1977] 1 WLR .]
These cases were decided by the application of the principles governing rights of set-off against equitable assignees and establish that such a receiver is in the same position as the secured creditor who appointed him. These cases involved claims to set-off debts, but the principles apply to unliquidated claims arising out of the same contract. Thus in Rother Iron Works Ltd v
Canterbury Precision Engineers Ltd at 6, Russell LJ said: "It is true that the right of the plaintiff to sue for the debt due from the defendant was embraced, when it arose, by the debenture charge. But if this was because the chose in action ... became subject to the charge on the appointment of the receiver, then the debenture holder could not be in a better position to assert those rights than ... the assignor plaintiff".

Similarly in George Barker (Transport) Ltd versus Eynon [[1974] 1 WLR ], which involved a claim to a lien against a receiver, Davies LJ said at 470: "... the debenture holders could assert their position as assignees of the company's property and contractual rights ... only by themselves recognising and giving effect to the pre-appointment contractual rights of the plaintiff".

Willmer LJ said at 475: "The debenture holders were therefore in no different position from any other assignee to whom the benefit of the contract might have been assigned. I find it impossible to see how such an assignee could take the benefit of the contract without at the same time accepting the liabilities arising thereunder. He could not be in any better position ... than the company itself ... ".

Parsons versus Sovereign Bank of Canada [[1913] AC 160] involved a receiver appointed by the court in a debenture holder's action, but it was followed in N W Robbie & Co Ltd versus Witney Warehouse Co Ltd and George
Barker (Transport) Ltd versus Eynon (supra), where the Receivers had been appointed out of court. In any event the bank's charge must have crystallised on or before the appointment. The debtor, which operated a paper mill, had entered into supply contracts with the appellant which had two to three years to run. The appellant submitted orders to the Receivers and for a time they were executed. The Receivers then repudiated the contracts and assigned the debts due from the appellant to the bank. When the bank sued, the appellant claimed to set-off its damages for breach of the supply contracts and its right to do so was upheld by the Privy Council. Lord Haldane said at 166: "The answer ... depends upon whether the appellants are able to establish that the goods delivered to them were delivered under the old contracts with the company, and not under new contracts made with the Receivers and managers; ... The Ontario statute ... enables ... assignments to be made, but only subject to equities. No doubt a claim for damages for breach would be such an equity if it arose under the same contract, and the point in the case is therefore whether the appellants took the deliveries in respect of which the sums assigned were claimed under new and single contracts made with the
Receivers and managers, as to which there could be no such question of breach, or under the original contracts ... which had undoubtedly been repudiated, and for breach of which the company was responsible".

The Privy Council found that the deliveries had been made under the original contracts and Lord Haldane concluded at 171-2: "As the result a right arose to counter-claim against the company damages for breach, and neither the company nor its assignees could sue for the price of the paper delivered excepting subject to this counter-claim ...".

Since there is no distinction in this context between a receiver appointed by the court, and one appointed out of court, the decision establishes that the appellant is entitled to set-off claims for unliquidated damages against the debts owed to the respondents.

The principal claim pressed by the appellant was based on its rights under cl .4 to the minimum distribution fee. Mr Rayment QC's primary submission was that this was an accrued right which survived rescission, but if not the appellant had a claim to unliquidated damages for loss of its bargain. Clause .4 (as amended) provided that if the distribution fees earned by the appellant for the period to 30 September 1994 were less than $1.3 million, the deficiency would be recoverable firstly from amounts then due to CEL/Vision, and any unrecouped balance would be paid by CEL/Vision within 30 days.

If CEL/Vision had remained solvent, and contractual performance had continued until 30 September 1994, any shortfall in the minimum distribution fee would have become payable as a debt on 31 October, and no question of damages would have arisen. However as at 6 December 1993 this debt was contingent and payable in the future. The effect on Roadshow's right to recover this debt depends on principles formulated by Dixon J. In McDonald versus Dennys Lascelles
Ltd <case>; [(1933) 48 CLR 457] at 476-7, he said: "When a party to a simple contract ... elects to treat the contract as no longer binding upon him, the contract is not rescinded as from the beginning.
Both parties are discharged from the further performance of the contract, but rights are not divested or discharged which have already been unconditionally acquired. Rights and obligations which arise from the partial execution of the contract and causes of action which have accrued from its breach alike continue unaffected".

The question was again dealt with in Westralian Farmers Ltd versus Commonwealth
Agricultural Service Engineers Ltd <case>; [(1936) 54 CLR 361] at 379-80, a case which involved termination without breach under an express term, and its effect on an obligation to make a payment in the nature of commission. The analysis by Dixon and Evatt JJ is also relevant where a contract is rescinded for breach. Their Honours said, at 379-80: "In general the termination of an executory agreement out of the performance of which pecuniary demands may arise imports that, just as on the one side no further acts of performance can be required, so, on the other side, no liability can be brought into existence if it depends upon a further act of performance. If the title to rights consists of vestitive facts which would result from the further execution of the contract but which have not been brought about before the agreement terminates, the rights cannot arise. But if all the facts have occurred which entitle one party to such a right as a debt, ... the fact that the right to payment is future or is contingent upon some event, not involving further performance of the contract, does not prevent it maturing into an immediately enforceable obligation".

See also State Trading Corporation of India Ltd versus M Golodetz Ltd [[1989] 2
Lloyd's Rep 277] at 286-7 (price of goods recoverable after rescission) and Bank of Boston Connecticut versus European Grain & Shipping Ltd [[1989]
AC 1056] at -9 (pre-payable freight recoverable after rescission).

The question is whether Roadshow's rights under cl 10.4 were dependent on "further acts of performance" by it. In our judgment Roadshow's rights under this clause arose when the agreement was entered into. If thereafter
CEL/Vision had refused to supply stock, and prevented Roadshow from earning distribution fees, the minimum fee would, in due course, have become payable by CEL/Vision.

The debt was contingent on Roadshow remaining ready and willing to earn further distribution fees, and it could not recover the minimum fee, in whole or in part, if it refused or failed to earn distribution fees which would reduce or satisfy the obligation of CEL/Vision under cl 10.4. A person cannot take advantage of the non fulfilment of a condition, the performance of which he or she has hindered. See Panamena Europea Limitade Navigacion versus Frederick
Leyland & Co Ltd [[1947] AC 428] at 436. However, no such question arises because Roadshow remained ready and willing to perform its obligations until CEL/Vision became wholly and finally disabled from performing their obligations.

Future performance by both parties could reduce the amount payable under cl .4, but at any point of time Roadshow was contingently entitled to the unearned balance. Rescission deprived CEL/Vision of the opportunity of reducing their contingent liability which accrued when the agreement was made.
Roadshow were not under a positive obligation to earn the balance of the fee, but under a negative obligation not to prevent CEL/Vision from reducing it, and for this purpose it had to remain ready and willing to perform its obligations under the agreement. Reductions in the fee contingently payable were dependent on further acts of performance, but liability for the amount contingently payable was not.

In our judgment therefore the right to the minimum distribution fee under cl .4 accrued when the agreement was made, and Roadshow remained entitled to the unearned balance to 30 September 1994 of $843,389 as a debt. However the due date for payment was 31 October 1994 and the liability was not accelerated. See Westralian Farmers at 380.

Clause 2.2 provided that "subject to the provisions hereinafter contained for earlier termination this agreement shall continue in operation until 30 June ". The provision referred to was cl 15.4 which provided: "The parties acknowledge that, at any time after 30 June 1994, this agreement shall be capable of termination by the mutual agreement of all parties but, unless the following notice period is waived by the mutual consent of all parties, any such termination shall only be accomplished by a party wishing to terminate this agreement giving six months prior notice in writing to the other party or parties of that desire and any such notice may be given at any time on or after 30 June 1994".

This clause contains provisions which appear to contradict each other and, on one view, the right of termination could only be exercised by consent. A literal construction would make the clause ineffective and the Court is free to adopt another construction to avoid absurdity or repugnancy. In our judgment the second limb confers a unilateral power of termination on either party on 6 months' notice so that the agreement could have been terminated without breach on or after 31 December 1994. Accordingly Roadshow is only entitled to a further minimum distribution fee of $250,000 up to 31 December (see cl 16.3) which was not payable until 31 January 1995.

It will be necessary to consider in due course whether Roadshow is entitled to an equitable set-off in respect of sums which were not yet payable when
CEL/Vision commenced proceedings on 31 May 1994.

Roadshow also had a claim under cl 10.3 to an additional distribution fee of $75,000 or for damages for loss of this right. The clause provided, so far as relevant, that if the returns referable to stock delivered by Roadshow to retailers during the period to 30 June 1994 exceeded 20% of the gross unit volume delivered during that period, an additional distribution fee of $75,000 would be payable.

The gross sales by Roadshow under the agreement were $6,143,866. The gross sales by Roadshow under the Sunhost agreement, which expired on 28 February , were $448,000. The figure of $6,143,866 appears to be the relevant figure. Returns during the same period totalled $2,094,240 but later returns totalled a further $399,875. The nett sales under the Sunhost agreement may be relevant to mitigation but on either view the ratio of returns was well over %.

The evidence therefore establishes that on 6 December Roadshow was presumptively entitled to this additional distribution fee. However its rights had not become unconditional because further deliveries and lower returns prior to 30 June 1994 could have reduced the ratio below 20%, or even below %, so that no additional distribution fee would become payable. The figures as at 6 December suggest that the fee was then due, although the right to payment was future and contingent. However the legal rights of the parties would have been the same if the agreement had been repudiated after only 10 units had been delivered if 3 were later returned, and it would not seem right that $75,000 should be payable in such a case.

The fee was clearly intended to reimburse Roadshow for additional costs it would incur in handling excessive returns. The better view is that Roadshow had to earn the fee by handling returns over the full period, and thus further acts of performance were required. In our view the rights of Roadshow under cl .3 sound only in damages.

The prima facie measure is the present value on 6 December 1993 of the $75,000 payable on 31 July 1994, which had presumptively accrued before rescission. CEL/Vision may have avoided some or all of this liability after 6
December by delivering a high volume of Products which attracted a low level of returns, but this would also have been very profitable business for
Roadshow. Rescission put an end to this chance. The amount payable under cl .3 was independent of any additional distribution fee payable under cl 10.4, and Roadshow's rights under the latter clause are not presently relevant. In view of the level of returns as at 6 December (34%), and as at 28 February (38%), no reason appears for further reducing the damages.

Roadshow's remaining claim was for a credit for returned stock. Stock was delivered by Roadshow to retailers (Sub-Agents) on consignment (sale or return). (See cl 1 definition of Sub-Agents and cl 7 Title and Risk.) The agreement dealt with returns in the definition of "Nett Sales Price" in cl 1, which allowed credits for returns to be deducted from monies otherwise payable to CEL/Vision. See also cl 9.1.

Roadshow claimed to set-off $213,499 for such returns in addition to any other returns allowed for in calculating the debt due to CEL/Vision. The trial Judge rejected this claim because the sale agreement between CEL/Vision and Sunhost provided that returns after 3 December were for the account of Sunhost.
Roadshow entered into an agreement with Sunhost which covered the period from December to 28 February 1994. Clause 3 provided: "All returns of CEL Video (Sunhost) stock both before and after the purchase of CEL/Vision by CEL Video will be credited to the CEL Video account. Any payments to CEL Video will be nett of a 17.5% returns allowance ... ".

Clause 3.5 of the agreement between CEL/Vision and Sunhost provided: "In the ordinary course of conduct of the Business video cassettes are sold on a `sale or return' basis. The Purchaser agrees to assume the Vendors' liability in relation to such stock returns ...".

On 4 December a stocktake was held of the former CEL/Vision stock held by
Roadshow. On 6 December the Receivers wrote to Roadshow stating: "We have been advised that Sunhost Pty Ltd has entered into a distribution agreement with Roadshow for the distribution of its video cassettes stored in the Roadshow warehouse. Therefore all sales, returns and direction for stock movements should now be referred to the purchaser".

The Receivers accepted responsibility to Roadshow for rebates and claims for credit from retailers from the commencement of the Receivership to 3 December, but as shown by their letter of 6 December, they sought to transfer responsibility to Sunhost for claims for credit accruing after 3 December.
Roadshow did not release any rights it had against CEL/Vision, there was no express novation, and it was not bound by the sale agreement with Sunhost.
However its contract with Sunhost entitled it to credits from that company for any returns after 3 December. Mr Rayment submitted that cl 3 of the
Roadshow/Sunhost contract did not cover returns in respect of CEL/Vision stock sold, i.e. delivered on sale or return, prior to 3 December. However the sale to Sunhost included the CEL/Vision stock, which was defined by cl 1 as meaning "all the stock-in-trade of the Business owned by the vendor at the completion date ... " and this included consignment stock held by retailers. Any such stock returned later would be owned by Sunhost.

Since cl 3 of the Roadshow/Sunhost contract did not cover returns prior to 3
December, the opening words "all returns of (Sunhost) stock before or after the purchase of CEL/Vision by (Sunhost)" must refer to stock "sold" to retailers before and after the sale to Sunhost. Since Sunhost became the owner of consignment stock sold to retailers before 3 December, and on hand on that day, Roadshow were entitled under their contract with Sunhost to credit for all stock returned by retailers after 3 December, whenever it was delivered to the retailers.

The Judge found that "the vast majority of returns" occurred within 90 days of delivery on sale or return to the retailer. Mr Bongiorno, the Business Affairs
Manager of Roadshow, said in evidence that all returns between 6 December and March were credited to Roadshow in its account with Sunhost regardless of when the stock had originally been sold, and that Roadshow were not out-of- pocket for such returns.

Roadshow accepted substantial further returns during April and May for which it could not obtain credit from either Sunhost or CEL/Vision. According to Mr
Bongiorno this stock, to the value of at least $213,499, must have been delivered to retailers before 3 December 1993. The Judge considered the evidence tendered to prove this entitlement was "far from satisfactory", principally because no attempt had been made at the time to distinguish
Sunhost stock in Roadshow's warehouse on 3 December or delivered later from stock returned by retailers which had been delivered before 3 December.

The Judge found that, on the probabilities, all returns of CEL/Vision stock delivered before 3 December had been received during the 114 days between 6
December and 31 March and that Roadshow had been compensated for these by
Sunhost. On this basis, returns after 31 March were not the responsibility of
CEL/Vision, and Roadshow were not entitled to make a second claim on
CEL/Vision for the returns prior to 31 March. There was ample evidence to support these conclusions, and in our view they cannot be disturbed.

Roadshow therefore established liquidated cross-claims for $843,389 and $250,000, payable on 31 October 1994 and 31 January 1995 respectively, and a claim for unliquidated damages for loss of its rights under cl 10.3. None of these claims were payable on 31 May 1994 when proceedings were commenced by
CEL/Vision. The availability of equitable set-off for debts which have not yet become payable does not appear to have been considered in earlier cases.

The causes of action for unliquidated damages available as equitable set-offs in Young versus Kitchin, Government of Newfoundland versus Newfoundland Railway Co, and Parsons versus Sovereign Bank of Canada had accrued, but at the date of suit the defendants had not recovered judgments on their cross-claims. Equitable set-off in those cases involved a restraint on the enforcement of the plaintiffs' debts until the defendants' cross-claims were liquidated by verdict or judgment.

This has been the situation in other cases of equitable set-off. Thus in
Piggott versus Williams <case>; [(1821) 6 Madd 95] [(56 ER 1027)], Leach VC held that a client had a clear title to restrain his solicitor from enforcing a mortgage for costs until the client's action for damages for negligence had been tried at law. Similarly, in Beasley v
Darcy [(1800) 2 Sch & Lef 403] (conveniently extracted in British Anzani (Felixstowe) Ltd versus International
Marine Management (UK) Ltd [1980] QB 137 at 149-151) a tenant was entitled in equity to set-off unliquidated damages for the landlord's breach of covenant against his liability for rent. An interlocutory injunction was granted to restrain the ejectment action against the tenant on terms that the rent was paid into court.

In Rawson versus Samuel [(1841) Cr & Ph 161] at 178 , Lord Cottenham LC stated the basic rule that "equitable set-off exists in cases where the party seeking the benefit of it can shew some equitable ground for being protected against his adversary's demand". He continued, at (458): "Is there then any equity in preventing a party who has recovered damages at law from receiving them because he may be found to be indebted, upon the balance of an unsettled account, to the party against whom the damages have been recovered? Suppose the balance should be found to be due to the plaintiff at law, what compensation can be made to him for the injury he must have sustained by the delay? The jury assess the damages as the compensation due at the time of their verdict. Their verdict may be no compensation for the additional injury which the delay in payment may occasion. What equity have the plaintiffs in the suit for an account to be protected against the damages awarded against them? If they have no such equity, there can be no good ground for the injunction".

The Lord Chancellor did not refer to the right of a judgment creditor to interest under the Judgments Act , but presumably he did not consider that this would compensate for delay where there was no proof that the balance of the account would favour the plaintiff in equity. In Piggott versus Williams the solicitor was presumably protected against delay by an entitlement to interest under his mortgage. The facts in Beasley versus Darcy however demonstrate, if that is necessary, that relief in respect of an equitable set-off can be granted on terms.

In principle equitable set-off should be available for liquidated cross- demands which are not payable when proceedings are commenced, just as it is available for unliquidated cross-demands before they have been liquidated by verdict or judgment. Equitable relief may not be available in every case of this description, particularly if the cross-demands are not payable for a long time, and terms may be imposed. Equitable set-off may not be available in respect of a cross-demand acquired by the debtor after judgment against him.
See Whyte versus O'Brien <case>; [(1824) 1 Sim & St 551] sed quaere.

CEL/Vision were insolvent and Roadshow would have suffered irreparable injury if its debts had been enforced independently of its cross-claims which would otherwise rank as unsecured in an insolvent administration. There was no suggestion that Roadshow was insolvent, and CEL/Vision were protected against delay by their prima facie entitlement, under <case> of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), to pre- judgment interest from the date their causes of action accrued. The causes of action for Roadshow's liquidated claims did not accrue until 31 October 1994 and 31 January 1995, and until then there was no right to interest under <case>.

Prima facie the damages for loss of the cl 10.3 right are the present value as at 6 December 1993 of the right to receive $75,000 on 31 July 1994. The damages so assessed would carry a prima facie entitlement to pre-judgment interest from the accrual of the cause of action. Substantial justice would be done if a declaration were made that the appellant was entitled to damages of $75,000, together with interest under <case> of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), from 31 July .

The appellant should have its costs of the appeal. The respondents will recover judgment for a significant sum after allowance of the equitable set- offs upheld by this Court, but its claims were never in dispute. The dispute related to the equitable set-off, and on that issue the appellant has substantially succeeded. However, it failed in respect of its claim to a set- off for $213,000,499 in respect of stock returns, and as a result judgment will be entered against it for a significant sum. In these circumstances, there should be no order as to the costs of the trial in the Commercial
Division.

In our opinion the following orders should be made: 
Appeal allowed with costs.

Set aside the judgment entered in the Commercial Division.

In lieu thereof declare that the respondents are entitled to recover from the appellant the sum of $1,224,531.54, together with pre-judgment interest on the sums particularised on p34 of the reasons for judgment of the trial Judge (p1544 of the appeal book) after deducting the sums totalling $111,352 payable to the appellant for co-operative advertising and rebates as and when those sums became payable, such interest to be calculated on the nett amounts from the dates they became payable to the respondents until the date of final judgment.

Declare that the appellant is entitled in equity to set-off the following amounts against its liability so declared: $843,389 payable on 31 October 1994; $250,000 payable on 31 January 1995; 
Damages for loss of the right to an additional distribution fee payable under cl 10.3 of the Distribution Agreement which accrued on 6 December 1993; together with pre-judgment interest on such sums as from the dates the respective causes of action accrued to the date of final judgment.

Declare that the damages referred to in para 4 (c) be assessed at $75,000 carrying pre-judgment interest from 31 July 1994 unless the respondents within days elect by notice in writing to the solicitors for the appellant to have the proceedings remitted to the Commercial Division at their risk as to costs to have such damages assessed by that Division.

In the event of the respondents electing to have the damages assessed by the Commercial Division, declare that the appellant is entitled to set-off the damages so assessed, together with pre-judgment interest thereon, from 6
December 1993.

Judgment for the respondents for the balance due after allowing the set- off of such amounts.

No order as to the costs of the proceedings in the Commercial Division to date.

Proceedings remitted to the Commercial Division with liberty to apply for the entry of final judgment pursuant to these orders.

The respondents to have a Certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act if qualified.

Liberty to apply.
 * * * 
