

Commonwealth of Australia versus Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Limited Nos. Ca /94; Cl 55049/94 Arbitration - Practice and Procedure - Confidentiality [1995] NSWSC 97 (24 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), PRIESTLEY(2) AND MEAGHER(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 7 April 1995 #DATE 27:6:1995 #ADD 24:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    T K Tobin QC and F C Corsaro 
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Australian Government Solicitor 
Counsel for the Respondent:    T E F Hughes QC with 
T G R Parker and L V Gyles 
Solicitors for the Respondent:  Allen Allen and Hemsley
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P
This appeal comes by leave from orders of Rolfe J in the Construction
List of the Common Law Division of the Supreme Court. It raises the question of the power of the Supreme Court, by declaration and otherwise, to supervise interlocutory orders of an arbitrator, appointed pursuant to an arbitration agreement between the parties.
 
A dispute over procedural orders of an arbitrator
The Commonwealth of Australia (the appellant) asserts that the orders of the arbitrator (Mr. J.N. West, QC.) go beyond his power, unreasonably and inconveniently purport to interfere in its governmental rights and duties and that the Court has the power and duty to provide relief.
The Commonwealth rejected the contention that it should seek to have the arbitrator removed for technical misconduct, pursuant to [s.44](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s44.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) (the Act).
Such an extreme remedy would be very inconvenient as the arbitration was already well advanced. It was a course neither appropriate nor necessary to cure the error here in question, which was an isolated one of principle. Nor was the Commonwealth willing to submit to the refinement of the arbitrator's orders, which he left open by affording the parties liberty to apply. For the
Commonwealth, the case raised an important question going beyond the powers of an arbitrator. It concerned the free flow of information in society, the governmental powers of the Commonwealth and the use by a party to an arbitration of its own documents, being documents not specifically brought into existence in connection with the arbitration.
For Cockatoo Dockyard Pty. Limited (Codock) (the respondent) the appeal was a futile and meritless endeavour of the Commonwealth to involve the Court in the reconsideration of a minor Procedural order of the arbitrator. The
Court had no power whether by the [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), the [Supreme
Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) or its inherent power, to interfere in procedural orders made by an arbitrator. But even if it had the power, it would not exercise it in the instant case because the Commonwealth had delayed its application. It had not exhausted its rights to relief before the arbitrator. And it lacked merit.
Such were the broad lines of the parties' respective cases. On the day that this Court heard oral argument in the appeal, the High Court of Australia delivered its judgment in Esso Australia Resources Limited and Ors v. Plowman and Ors (1995) 69 ALJR 404 (HC). The High Court there dealt with the difficult questions which can arise in reconciling the law relating to privacy and confidentiality, which is usually enforced in a commercial arbitration pursuant to private agreement (on the one hand) and the special approach taken, in Australia at least, to secrets and confidences involving Government and its agencies as against the public and other agencies which serve the public (on the other).
Rolfe J did not have the advantage of the decision of the High Court in
Esso which this Court has. He therefore did not have before him the strong endorsement from Mason CJ (Dawson and
McHugh JJ concurring), written in the context of the conduct of a private arbitration between a commercial enterprise claiming protection of privacy, confidentiality and commercial secrecy and governmental agencies resisting the same:- "The approach outlined in (The Commonwealth of Australia v. John
Fairfax and Sons Limited (1980) 147 CLR at 51) should be adopted when the information relates to statutory authorities or public utilities because, as Professor Finn notes "Confidentiality and the Public Interest" AU 497, 505), in the public sector '(t)he need is for compelled openness, not for burgeoning secrecy.' 
The present case is a striking illustration of this principle.
Why should the consumers and the public of Victoria be denied knowledge of what happens in these arbitrations, the outcome of which will affect, in all probability, the prices chargeable to consumers by the public utilities?"
Adapting these words of Mason CJ in Esso, the Commonwealth, before the arbitrator and then Rolfe J, and now before this Court, asks, in effect why should the public of New South Wales, indeed of Australia, be denied knowledge of matters potentially relevant to public safety? How can it be that the
Commonwealth, by the side wind of a commercial contract submitting it to private arbitration, is subjected, in effect, to a veto on the use made of its own document by an arbitrator, purporting to exercise that power of veto as an incident of powers conferred upon him to control procedural matters arising in the arbitration? 
The dispute, arbitration and orders
The Commonwealth has sued Codock claiming that it breached covenants of a lease granted to it to keep, maintain and yield up Cockatoo Island, near
Sydney, in good repair and condition. The island had been used as a naval dockyard from 1857 to 1991. The Commonwealth claims that it is entitled to damages from Codock based on the cost of repairing (or "remediating") the island to a standard suitable for future use as a residential subdivision.
Pursuant to the agreement between the parties, their disputes were referred to arbitration. Mr. West was appointed sole arbitrator. The first hearing occurred in February 1993. The arbitrator had sat for more than 110 days when the appeal came to this Court. He has continued to sit, dealing with other matters, whilst this proceeding stood for judgment.
In January 1994, Codock applied to the arbitrator for directions to secure the confidentiality of documents relevant to the arbitration. Interim directions were given by the arbitrator on 24 February 1994 and on 18 March
Final directions were given on 27 June 1994. The debate concerning the directions occurred on nine different hearing days. The Commonwealth resisted the application by Codock. It challenged the power of the arbitrator to make the directions sought. In the course of dealing with this question, the arbitrator delivered four sets of reasons. In providing the relief claimed by
Codock, he rejected the submissions of the Commonwealth that he had no power, under [s. 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s14.html) of the Act to make directions of the type sought. He rejected the alternative submission that, in the exercise of his discretion in all the circumstances, he should refuse to make any such direction.
Subsequently, on 8 September 1994, the arbitrator clarified the direction which he had made on 23 June 1994. On 21 October 1994, the Commonwealth applied to the arbitrator to set aside his rulings of March and June 1994 on the ground of a lack of power to sustain them. On 26 October 1994, the arbitrator rejected the
Commonwealth's application. The summons of 4 November followed, bringing the matter before Rolfe J. His Honour dismissed the summons on 15 November 1994. This Court granted the Commonwealth leave to appeal against that order of dismissal on 12 December 1994.
There were later skirmishes in which one ground of appeal was struck out as not within the grant of leave. It was in this way that the appeal came for hearing before this Court.
 
Directions of the arbitrator
The arbitrator, in his preliminary reasons of February 1994, recounted a request which had been made by a journalist pursuant to the [Freedom of
Information Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/foia1982222/) (Cth) concerning toxic waste on Cockatoo Island. The arbitrator drew the inference that the intention, if the documents were procured, was to "Publish them to the world". He went on:- "The position confronting Codock then is, that despite the fact that this is a private arbitration where the press can be excluded and which would normally be conducted without any public attention to the evidence or procedures (absent one or other of the parties informing the world as to what was happening) there is a present threat that because one of the parties is subject to the access to documents which the [Freedom of Information Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/foia1982222/) provides, the press could be free to publish what it liked; subject to the laws of defamation etc., before and during the conduct of this arbitration."
The arbitrator rejected the contention that he lacked power. He supported the existence of power as being within the bounds afforded him by s.14 of the
Act. He stated that failure to comply with his direction would be a matter to be taken up before the Supreme Court.
Section 14 of the Act, which is the suggested source of the arbitrator's power, states: "Subject to this Act and to the arbitration agreement, the arbitrator or umpire may conduct proceedings under that agreement in such manner as the arbitrator or umpire thinks fit."
No party to the arbitration suggested that there was anything in their agreement which expressly limited or expanded the procedural powers of the arbitrator as so stated in the Act and as implied by the agreement to submit to arbitration. Each party supported the general arguments advanced in this case by reference to the alleged width or narrowness of the powers of the arbitrator contemplated by the Act.
Codock was not content with the preliminary directions given. Its application in March 1994 sought a direction in wider terms. This extended from forbidding disclosure of, or the grant of access to, documents or materials "prepared for the purposes of, or to be in any way used in" the arbitration to: "...material relating in any way to the issues in, or filed as evidence in, these proceedings provided that a party may disclose such material to his legal advisers, agents and retained experts and witnesses..." 
The arbitrator noted that [s.46](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/foia1982222/s46.html) of the [Freedom of Information Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/foia1982222/) (Cth) (FOI Act) attached certain consequences to orders or directions which he might make. Relevantly, [s.46](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/foia1982222/s46.html) provides: "A document is an exempt document if public disclosure of the document would, apart from this Act and any immunity of the
Crown:- ...; be contrary to an order made or direction given by a ...
person or body having power to take evidence on oath; ..." 
The arbitrator stated: "It seems clear, and common ground, that s.46 of the FOI Act does not invest me with jurisdiction, but rather recognises that, assuming a Tribunal has such jurisdiction as is necessary to make a relevant direction, then a document thereby covered by the direction becomes 'exempt'. ...

The essential issue which I must confront in circumstances where one of the parties to this arbitration is subject to the [Freedom of Information Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/foia1982222/) is whether or not I have power to give a direction as to what may, or may not, be done by the parties to this arbitration, during the currency of the arbitration, with documents, whether brought into existence solely for the purposes of the arbitration or not, but which constitute, or which might constitute, some part of the evidence in these proceedings."
The arbitrator answered this question in these terms: "The release by one party to an arbitration of documents, intended for use in evidence in the proceedings (regardless of their original purpose) may well impact the conduct of the other party's case in the most serious way. The impact may be subtle, it may impact upon a witness outside the hearing room and before he gives his evidence by his seeing or being told of the contents of such documents, which may have been exposed in some way in the media. Is it necessary to dwell upon the possibilities?" 
The arbitrator concluded that his jurisdiction extended to making directions, suitably drafted, with respect to documents to be used in evidence in the proceedings, whether or not they were originally produced for that purpose.
The arbitrator's conclusion as to his jurisdiction was quickly followed by a request that he give directions consequent upon the complaint by Codock of concerning the past release by the Commonwealth to instrumentalities of the
New South Wales Government of such document including one described as a Risk
Assessment Report and another document described as a Fish Tissue Survey
Report".
The actual direction sought was that: "... neither party to the proceedings publicly disclose or grant access to, or further access to, any documents or other material prepared or produced for inspection for the purposes of these proceedings or to be in any way used in or filed as evidence in these proceedings ..."
The arbitrator concluded that he ought not to go beyond what was necessary for the "prudent management" of the arbitration. But with this objective in mind, he added to the directions already in force a direction preventing either party from publicly disclosing reports which he specified, namely "Risk Assessment
Report prepared by CH2M Hill International; Fish
Tissue Survey Report prepared by CH2M Hill International and Remediation Cost
Estimate
Report ...". He further directed the Commonwealth to inform the solicitors for Codock of its intention to release any documents under the FOI
Act identifying any such documents which it proposed to release and doing so hours prior to the intended release. He gave the parties liberty to apply to him "in respect of this question".
In June 1994, the direction sought by Codock was expressed in wider terms:- "A direction that neither party to the proceedings disclose or grant access to any documents or other material prepared or produced for inspection on discovery for the purposes of these proceedings or to be used in any way in evidence in, or filed as evidence in, these proceedings, provided that a party may disclose such material to his legal advisers ..."
It will be observed that the adverb "publicly" had been deleted insofar as it had originally modified the verb "disclosed".
The direction purported to control not only the Commonwealth's release of material specifically produced for the proceedings but other material. It not only controlled release publicly, ie. to the media, but, in its terms, release to any person who was not specifically the Commonwealth. Before this Court, it was asserted that such an embargo would embrace release to a committee of the Federal
Parliament, to an agency of the New South Wales Government, to a Minister of the Crown in New South Wales as well as to a journalist or a member of the public expressing an interest in it.
The arbitrator expressed his determination to "ensure that the integrity of the arbitration is not put at risk". He acknowledged the limits upon what he could legitimately do: "I cannot generally 'gag' the
Commonwealth nor Codock; nor interfere in the performance of Commonwealth functions of government nor place some fetter upon the Commonwealth's obligations with respect to public safety etc. Considerations of public interest might yet emerge in ways not presently indicated by the state of the evidence. I should be conscious of such matters ... (but) as I have earlier said
I think that that obligation (of prudent management of the arbitration) legitimately extends to giving directions with respect to documents to be used in evidence in these proceedings whether or not that was their original purpose when produced.
 ...

What the material demonstrates to me, however, is that there does not yet seem to be any specific need on the part of the
Commonwealth to make any specific kind of disclosure to any specific public authorities in New South Wales or elsewhere.
However, in the event that it is proposed to make one, it seems to me to be necessary for the Commonwealth to devote some care to just what is to be said and to have regard to the necessary extent of the communication.
 ...

I do not believe that I should impose upon either party a straight jacket confining the use of documents which might concern matters which have become issues in the arbitration but which have come into existence within either party and which have been discovered.
I do not intend to suggest that one party should be free to use for whatever purpose they wished the other party's discovered documents. They are not so free. But a party should be able to use its own documents and the information in them for its own ordinary and legitimate purposes. However, to release such documents or information publicly or to third parties other than for legitimate purposes might well create problems in the conduct of this arbitration in the manner or respects I have suggested.

It will be clear that I do not expect that either party will knowingly or wantonly release information about the alleged condition of Cockatoo Island for the purpose of causing 'embarrassment', forensic or otherwise, to the other.
However,
I am satisfied that there is a continuing need for restrictions upon disclosure."
It was against this background that the arbitrator made the directions of June 1994: "1. Direct that neither party to the proceedings disclose or grant access to:- any documents or other material prepared for the purposes of this arbitration any documents or other material, whether prepared for the purposes of this arbitration or not, which reveal the contents of any document or other material which was prepared for the purposes of this arbitration; any documents or material produced for inspection on discovery by the other party for the purposes of these proceedings; any documents or material filed in evidence in these proceedings."
A proviso was added permitting disclosure to legal advisers etc. A direction was added requiring notice of not less than 24 hours should either party, "having formed the view that its interests so require", propose to disclose documents within the foregoing prohibition.
The fresh application of the Commonwealth in October 1994 sought rulings that the directions earlier made by the arbitrator be set aside.
Alternatively, it sought directions additional to those made on 23 June 1994: "(a) that direction I did not include documents within the public domain; that the Commonwealth be permitted to release the following
CH2M Hill reports to the New South Wales Environmental
Protection Agency:- the Supplementary Field Investigation
Data Report, Volumes 1 and 2; the Data Report on Ongoing Releases; the Draft Remedial Concept Report; and the Proposed Response to the Comments of the EPA."
There was also application that the Commonwealth be permitted to "continue correspondence with the New South Wales Environmental Protection
Agency" in respect of the Risk Assessment Report.
The arbitrator dismissed this application expressing his satisfaction that he had the power necessary to make the directions which he had made and that the source of that power was s. 14 of the Act.
This was the state of the arbitration when the summons was filed in the
Supreme Court bringing the controversy before Rolfe J.
 
Decision of the primary judge
After setting out the history of the arbitration and the scope of s. 14 of the Act, Rolfe J turned to the various ways in which the Commonwealth sought to involve the Supreme Court in the review of the arbitrator's interlocutory directions. His Honour reviewed the submissions of the parties on the merits. He then turned to express his conclusions. He rejected the submission that the Court had an inherent jurisdiction to intervene, citing his earlier opinion in Commonwealth of Australia v. Cockatoo Dockyard Pty.
Limited (Supreme Court, NSW, unreported November 1994). He rejected the contention that the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), [s.23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) advanced the Commonwealth's case. He declined to follow the majority of the Full Court of the Supreme
Court of South Australia in
South Australian Superannuation Fund Investments
Trust v. Leighton Contractors Pty. Limited and Ors [(1990) 55 SASR 327 (FC).] He found no basis in the [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) to warrant the intervention of the Supreme Court. He rejected the contention that the directions of the arbitrator constituted an "award" for the purposes of that Act. Even if it were an award, he concluded that there was no manifest error of law on its face.
Nor had there been any attempt to show that the rights of the
Commonwealth would be substantially affected as required by [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s38.html) of the Act.
Finally, he stated that, as the Commonwealth had failed to challenge the substantive directions of 23 June 1994 within days from that date, it was in breach of [Part 72A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/index.html#p72a) [Rule 5(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s5.html) Supreme Court Rules. Under that sub-rule, any application to the Supreme Court under ss.38(4)(b) or 43 of the Act must be made within days of the arbitrator's award. Thus if, contrary to his opinion, the directions constituted an "award", the Commonwealth was out of time and no reason had been shown for extending it.
There being no basis in law to invoke the Supreme Court's intervention,
Rolfe J dismissed the Commonwealth's summons. His Honour seemed unimpressed with the Commonwealth's application on its merits (particularly because of the failure to make application to the arbitrator to "lessen the perceived rigours of the directions"). The essential holding of his decision was that there was no power to intervene, outside the power reserved for removal of an arbitrator for misconduct under s.44. Therefore, even had the directions been clearly too broad, ill-considered or otherwise unfair, the Court would be obliged to leave any challenge until the conclusion of the arbitration. Recent authority of this Court sustains a general policy of non-interference by the courts in arbitrations under the Act reflecting amendments to the legislation which, in turn, follow strongly expressed Parliamentary statements to that end. See
Promenade Investments Pty. Limited v. New South Wales [(1992) 26 NSWLR 203 ]; Natoli v. Walker (Court of Appeal, NSW, unreported 26 May 1994); (1994)
NSWJB 42.
 
Power of the Court to review
It is sensible to consider first the power of the Supreme Court to review an interlocutory order or direction of an arbitrator. If there be no power, it is pointless to consider the merits of intervention in this case.
The Commonwealth advanced a number of alternative propositions for sustained intervention under the Act.
First, the Commonwealth relied on s.47 of the Act. Rolfe J correctly held that it does not sustain appeals against interlocutory decisions of arbitrators. The section reads:- "47. The Court shall have the same power of making interlocutory orders for the purposes of and in relation to arbitration proceedings as it has for the purposes of and in relation to proceedings in the court." 
The argument of the Commonwealth gains some support from the majority opinion in the South Australian Superannuation Fund case. However, with every respect,
I consider that Rolfe J was correct to decline to follow that decision. There was contrary authority in this State. See Imperial Leatherware Co. Pty.
Limited v. Macri and Anor [(1991) 22 NSWLR 653 (SC)], 666 f. Similarly, Smith J in the Supreme Court of Victoria has declined to follow it. See Nauru
Phosphate Royalties Trust v. Matthew
Hall Mechanical and Electrical Engineers
Pty. Limited and Butterworth (1994) 10 BCL 179 (VSC), 193. See also the decision of Acting
Master Hawkins in the Supreme Court of Western Australia in
Cuedale Corp. Pty. Limited (t/as Statewide Constructions) v. State Energy
Commission of Western Australia (Supreme Court of Western Australia, unreported 14 December 1992).
The reasons given by Rolfe
J in his earlier decision in the current litigation (3 November 1994) are compelling. With his Honour, I would say that it would be extraordinary if the Act were so to control and limit appeals against final awards but to provide such a ready entitlement to secure a review of interlocutory orders made in an arbitration. To suggest this is to ignore the context in which s.47 of the Act appears. To the extent that the decisions of Cole J in Aerospatiale Holdings Australia Pty. Limited and Anor v. Elspan International
Limited and Ors [(1992) 28 NSWLR 321 (SC)] and in
Leighton Contractors Pty. Limited v. N.G.I. Investments Pty. Limited (Supreme
Court, NSW, unreported 14 August 1992) suggest otherwise, I would not agree.
Section 47 is intended to empower the Court, in cases properly before it, to make interlocutory orders to the extent that it is not elsewhere specifically provided for in other sections of the Act. Mr. Jacobs draws attention to Part 72A Rule 4 SCR. See M. Jacobs, Commercial Arbitration, Law and Practice (Sydney, Law Book Co, 1990) at 2177. He describes the section as "indeed troublesome". See ibid, 11665. He points out that to permit s.47 a large meaning would "allow unwarranted interference in the arbitral process at an inappropriate stage, and thus do violence to the spirit of intent of the model uniform legislation". I have no difficulty in confining s.47 of the Act as Rolfe J proposed. In its context, it clearly means that the Court shall have the power expressed where otherwise the Court is properly seized of jurisdiction. Even then, the Court must show restraint as Part 72A Rule 4 SCR indicates. To decide otherwise would be to defy the structure and apparent purpose of the Act. It would be to fall into the error, which courts are now enjoined to avoid, of construing a section in isolation and forgetting that it is intended to operate in a context and to achieve the consistent and sensible operation of the Act as a whole.
Secondly, the Commonwealth urged this Court, as it did Rolfe J, to take into consideration the injunction of the High Court in Australian Securities
Commission v. Marlborough Goldmines Limited <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 485], to sustain interpretations of uniform national legislation offered by a Full Court giving meaning to ambiguous provisions. I certainly agree with this approach and ordinarily give effect to it. But the High Court allowed an exception, where it is considered that the interpretation is "plainly wrong". Such exception arise from time to time. See Fernando v. Commissioner of Police (No. 2) (Court of Appeal, NSW, unreported 29 March 1995); (1995) NSWJB 27. The judicial mind should not hasten to find plain error. Cf In the matter of J and E Holdings
Pty Ltd, Court of Appeal unreported 15 June 1995. Where ambiguity exists, it should be prepared to allow the merit of other opinions for the larger purpose of uniform construction of common statutory provisions. It should be especially willing to do so in the case of national legislation such as the model commercial arbitration statutes. But, ultimately, a judge is answerable to conscience and the law. If a decision appears plainly wrong, the judge should not be obliged to give effect to it unless it is laid down in a decision binding on the judge. In the case of the opinions of this Court, it is always open to a party to seek correction in the High Court of Australia or to seek amendment of the legislation. Having regard to the strongly expressed views on the last occasion that this Act obtained parliamentary attention, to the effect that there was too much judicial intervention in arbitrations, I entertain little doubt as to how parliamentary reconsideration of s.47 of the
Act would resolve the ambiguity were Parliament to remain of its earlier opinion. The Commonwealth's reliance on s.47 was rightly rejected.
Secondly, the
Commonwealth relied on s.43. That section provides:- "Subject to s.38(1), the Court may remit any matter referred to arbitration by an arbitration agreement together with any directions it thinks proper to the arbitrator or umpire for reconsideration or, where a new arbitrator or umpire has been appointed, to that arbitrator or umpire for consideration."
The reference to s.38(1) is not present in the equivalent English provision. It ties s.43 back to a section which is designed strictly to limit judicial review of arbitral awards. It makes the provision of the relief envisaged by s.43 subject to the limitations contained in s.38. Reading the two sections together as the opening words of s.43 require, it is plain that the purpose of s.43 is to enlarge the powers which the Court may exercise when, in conformity to s.38, it decides to intervene. But that limits the intervention, relevantly, to correction of arbitral awards.
It is unnecessary to consider whether such an approach is incompatible with what Giles J decided in Sabemo Pty. Limited v. Malaysia Hotel (Australia)
Pty. Limited (Supreme Court, NSW, unreported 4 June 1992). In that case an award had been made. In this case, indubitably, it had not. I regard the
Commonwealth's argument to the contrary as hopeless.
The "award" of the kind contemplated by the Act is the final step in the arbitration. It is certainly not a mere procedural order on the way to the "award".
In order to have a "matter" to remit, the Supreme Court must have that "matter" properly before it. It is not necessary in this case to determine the scope of such a "matter"; cf. South Australian Superannuation Fund Investment
Trust v. Leighton Contractors Pty. Limited [(1990) 55 SASR 327 (FC)], 343 (per
Bollen J). It is enough to say that, in this case, because s.43 effectively incorporates s.38, and because that section refers only to process following an award, there was no "matter" of that character before the Court which could occasion the exercise of the s.43 power. Certainly, s.43 of the Act is not a power at large to remit to the arbitrator, with directions or otherwise, a proceeding which is brought in the Supreme Court. Such a proceeding is only given its legitimacy by the proper invocation of the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court. The opening words of s.43 make it plain that it is an adjunct to the disposal of proceedings in the Supreme Court concerning an award.
Thirdly, the Commonwealth relied on s.38 itself. As the title of the section indicates, this is concerned with "judicial review of awards". There was no award made by the arbitrator in this case. The word "award" is defined by s.4(1) of the Act to mean "final or interim award". I see no suggestion, either in the terms or purposes of the directions given by the arbitrator on procedural questions, that what he decided, now under challenge, constitutes an "interim award". It did not deal in any way with the substance of the parties' dispute. It was purely ancillary and procedural. The reliance on s.38 of the Act is therefore without foundation.
Fourthly, section 44 of the Act provides: "Where the Court is satisfied that:- there has been misconduct on the part of an arbitrator ...
or an arbitrator ... has misconducted the proceedings; the Court may, on the application of a party to the arbitration agreement, remove the arbitrator..."
It is important to recognise that the "misconduct" referred to in s.44 is of a technical kind. It may fall far short of "misconduct" in the popular sense of the word. In the context of arbitration, "misconduct" of the kind contemplated by s.44 may involve no personal turpitude on the part of the arbitrator. See, eg. London Export Corporation Limited v. Jubilee Coffee
Roasting Company Limited [(1958) 1 WLR 661 (CA)], 676. It may amount to little more than a mishandling of the arbitration likely to occasion an injustice.
See Williams v. Wallis and Cox  <case>; [(1927) 39 CLR 570], 587 f, Gas and Fuel Corporation of Victoria v. Wood Hall Limited and Leonard Pipeline
Contractors Ltd <case>; [(1978) VR 385], 391. The cases are reviewed in Doran
Constructions Pty. Limited v. Health Administration Corporation of New South
Wales and Anor
Court of Appeal, NSW, unreported 10 October 1994; (1994) NSWJB .
The Commonwealth declined to invoke s.44, allegedly because of its drastic consequences. Perhaps there should be power under s.44, where technical misconduct is shown, to remit the proceedings to an arbitrator (or umpire) with directions designed to overcome the misconduct, which may only be of minor and limited significance apt for correction. But by the Act no such power exists. The Court only has a discretion to remove the arbitrator (or umpire). In this arbitration so long advanced, the Commonwealth refrained from seeking that remedy. I do not by these observations mean to imply that "misconduct", even of a technical kind, has been committed by the arbitrator here. Not for a minute do I believe that it has.
But Parliament has provided for the case of (technical) misconduct, whilst affording a drastic and limited remedy where it is made out.
Fifthly, a power exists under s.29 of the Act by which the Supreme Court is given jurisdiction "to determine any question of law arising in the course of the arbitration". However, that power is limited to cases where the arbitrator consents or where all of the other parties consent. It was not invoked in the present instance. It can therefore be ignored. It is, in any case, limited by the two prerequisites contained in s.39(2) of the Act.
Sixthly, the Commonwealth relied upon the inherent power of the
Supreme
Court, supported by s.23 in the [Supreme Court Act, 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). The inherent jurisdiction derives from the Court's establishment to receive the royal prerogative to do justice. Whatever doubts may exist concerning courts created by statute, no doubt can exist that the Supreme Court has an extremely large inherent jurisdiction.
It is one sufficient to enable it to act effectively within its jurisdiction. The scope of the power has been demonstrated in many cases. See eg John Fairfax and Sons Limited v. Police Tribunal of New South
Wales and Anor [(1986) 5 NSWLR 465 (CA)], 476; Australian Building Construction
Employees' and Builders' Labourers' Federation and Ors v. Commonwealth Trading
Bank and Ors NSWLR 371 at (CA), 373.
[Section 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) provides a parliamentary endorsement of this large power: "The Court shall have all jurisdiction which may be necessary for the administration of justice in New South Wales." 
In fact, the parliamentary endorsement is even greater than the inherent power in some ways. [Section 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) has not been given a narrow construction. See eg
Riley McKay Pty. Limited v. McKay and Anor [(1982) 1 NSWLR 264]; [67 ALJR 485 ]; 112 ALR 287. Where it is suggested that the inherent or [s.23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) jurisdiction is ousted by specific legislation, so that a superior court of general jurisdiction is deprived of jurisdiction, it is necessary, as a matter of statutory construction, for this to be demonstrated by reference to express words or necessary implication.
See Wentworth versus New South Wales Bar
Association <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 239], 272; North Sydney Municipal Council v. Comfytex Pty
Ltd and Anor [(1975) 1 NSWLR 447 (CA)], 435.
Codock relied upon the specificity of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/). Against its particular provisions and scheme, the general provisions of [s.23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) (or the residual inherent power of this
Court) could not stand. See Pierce and Geddes, Statutory Interpretation in
Australia, 3rd ed, 83. See also David Bailey, "Confidentiality of Arbitration
Proceedings" [(1994) 13 The Arbitrator 79], 85.
Ordinarily, where it is suggested that the jurisdiction of a superior court of general jurisdiction is excluded, the party making that contention must be able to demonstrate that relevant jurisdiction exists in some other court. See eg Board v. Board [(1919) AC 956 (PC)], 75. No such jurisdiction was suggested here.
It is upon this point that the Court reaches the central question which must be answered to determine the issue of its power. Rolfe, J. concluded that it was inherent in the language and purpose of the Act that Parliament had established a code to regulate arbitrations. Parties agreeing to submit their disputes to arbitration were bound by that code. The decisions of this Court in Promenade and Natoli had required that the code be strictly adhered to and interference by the Court limited to the rare cases envisaged by the legislation. In such circumstances the Court was bound to adhere to the principle of restraint and acknowledge that its jurisdiction had been ousted by a clearly expressed parliamentary intention to that end.
Support for this approach is found in a number of English decisions which deny the inherent power of the courts to intervene in the proceedings of commercial arbitration. Specifically, on the subject matter of interlocutory orders, Steyn J in the English
High Court held that there was no inherent jurisdiction left to intervene at an interlocutory stage which did not otherwise fall to be dealt with as misconduct by the arbitrator. See Biakh and
Biali v. Hyundai Corporation Limited [(1988) 1 Lloyds Rep. 187 (HC)] 189; Jacobs op cit, 2179. The theory behind this approach is that arbitrators must be given a free hand in commercial matters; that they must have a specially large jurisdiction in procedural determinations; that nothing else will avoid the pitfalls of cost and delay which are, notoriously, the features of litigation in the courts; that if a significant error occurs it will remain to be challenged at the end of the arbitration if it can get through the gateway of [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s38.html) of the Act; and if the error amounts to "misconduct" then the parties may, if they choose, seek the drastic remedy provided by [s.43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s43.html) of the Act.
I acknowledge the great force of these considerations. They are compatible with my own thinking expressed in Natoli.
They commanded the assent of Rolfe J in this case. They are eloquently summarised by Bollen J in his dissenting opinion in the South
Australian Superannuation Case. They also find support from the majority speeches in Bremer Vulkan Schiffbau und
Maschinenfabrik v. South India Shipping Corp. Limited [(1981) AC 909 (HL)]; 987; cf 938, 997f.
Where a matter is within the scope of an arbitration, I would unhesitatingly give effect to the foregoing consideration and exclude the availability of the inherent power of the Supreme Court or the power expressly elaborated by [s.23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). But I find unacceptable the proposition that the Court is incapable of providing relief, and has lost its powers altogether, simply because parties have entered into a private contract by which they have submitted a dispute to arbitration. The proposition may be tested this way. Imagine that a government and a private company for their own purposes agreed to private arbitration and further agreed that information of profound importance to the community and of legitimate public interest were to be suppressed from public access. Can it seriously be suggested that their private agreement can, endorsed by a procedural direction of an arbitration, exclude from the public domain matters of legitimate public concern? It is no answer to this question to state that, in the present case, the arbitrator reserved powers of exempting the Commonwealth and liberty to apply for variation in his orders for that purpose. In issue here is the scope of the arbitration itself and the ambit of the orders that may properly be made by an arbitrator within that scope.
Allowing that a large circle will be drawn within which the arbitrator may make procedural orders, the circle is not without limit. A point will be reached where the edge of the circle will be arrived at and passed. When passed, the Court, upholding the other interests which lie outside the legitimate scope of the arbitration, will retain its powers to intervene. To deny those powers is to accord too great a right to the parties or the arbitrator to define the limits of the commercial arbitration which the
Act protects from external curial intervention. The power to define the boundaries and to prevent directions which go beyond them, remains in the Court. Any other view permits the parties and the arbitrator to define, without limitation, the territory which they occupy pursuant to their private agreement. That cannot be. The rule of law requires that the Court, protective of other competing public and private interests, will define and, where necessary and appropriate, declare the limits beyond which the purported powers in pursuit of private arbitration intrude into competition with other legitimate public and private rights and duties.
I realise that my view is, to some extent, inconsistent with the opinion of Lord Diplock in Bremer Vulkan (above), at 987f which carried the assent of the majority of their Lordships in that case. Whilst great respect must be paid to the opinion of the House of Lords, and especially in the field of commercial arbitration which is of international concern, I find much more convincing the opinions of
Lord Denning MR in the Court of Appeal and the minority opinions of Lord Fraser of Tullybelton and Lord Scarman in the House of Lords.
Because Lord Fraser, at the conclusion of his speech, embraced the reasons explained by Lord Scarman, I will confine myself to them.
The case involved inordinate and inexcusable delay in the prosecution of an arbitration. A judge granted an injunction to restrain the defendants from continuing. The injunction was upheld in the Court of Appeal. In the House of
Lords (by a majority of three of their Lordships to the two named dissentients) the appeal was upheld. It was concluded that the High Court had no inherent jurisdiction to supervise the conduct of the arbitrator analogous to its power to control inferior tribunals. If they were to make any such application to prevent the further hearing of the arbitration they were obliged to apply to the arbitrator to treat the agreement as at an end.
I do not, for myself, wish to argue against the conclusion which the majority reached in Bremer Vulcan as to the primacy of application to the arbitrator. That is not in dispute in the instant case. Here, the Commonwealth has, on at least four occasions, made application to the arbitrator but has failed. My purpose is to question any general proposition, thought to be derived from
Bremer Vulkan, that by the act of submission to arbitration by private contract, parties generally (and a governmental party in particular) can be deprived of relief by a court of general jurisdiction such as this, if the orders of the arbitrator go beyond the legitimate boundaries of the arbitration. From that assertion I would withhold my assent. So did Lord
Scarman in his speech in Bremer Vulkan.
At 996, speaking of the statute which enlarged the powers of arbitrators in England, he said:- "My Lords, I will deal at once with the scope of this principle.
Though it has been extended in the modern law, it is not of universal application. It has not yet achieved such supremacy as totally to oust the power of the High Court to remedy or prevent injustice in the arbitration process.

The principle yielded in the past to a measure of judicial control and review of the arbitration process: and this remains true of most arbitrations even after the coming into force of the Act of 1979. This power of the Court has been exercised in many ways: for example, review of awards ... removal or arbitrators where their impartiality, fitness or incompetence is impugned, the grant of injunctions to restrain arbitration proceedings where the arbitrator has been shown to be unfit or incompetent. ... (T)he courts retain such a power save where excluded by statute and that parties to arbitration have a
right to a fair arbitration. If the right can be protected within the arbitral process, as in most cases ... it will be, the courts will not intervene; for neither justice nor convenience will require so drastic a step. If the right be excluded by statute, as well it may be under an exclusion agreement rendered lawful by the new Act, there will be no legal right for the Court to protect.
 
What then is the nature of the right? ... The right does not depend upon contract, and cannot be excluded by contract, save where statute allows its exclusion. ... The right arises from the judicial element inherent in the arbitration process which is a process for reaching a decision where parties have not themselves resolved their difference.
Nevertheless in most cases, and this is such a case, the right is implicit in the contract, and, if infringed, may be enforced as a right given by the contract. ... The existence of such a power associated as it is with the requirements of natural justice in any adversarial process, remains, subject to the statutory law regulating arbitrations, a powerful weapon for justice in the armoury of the law, even though the occasions for its use will be few and far between."
I agree both as to the proposition of the continuance of the supervisory power of this Court and to the suggestion that the exercise of the power will be extremely rare. I deny the right of the arbitrator, or the parties, by contract or direction, to define conclusively the proper scope of their arbitration, the limits of the ambit of the Act of the lawfulness of directions purportedly made under the
Act but actually outside its domain.
Where such an excess of jurisdiction exists, it is both proper and necessary that the jurisdiction of this Court should remain to uphold the rule of law and to safeguard other competing lawful rights and duties. Whether this
Court's residual jurisdiction arises from its large inherent powers derived ultimately from the sovereign or from the powers additionally given by [s.23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), I do not have to decide. The powers survive because the [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) will support only such directions as are lawfully made within the large ambit of the operation of that Act. Stray outside that ambit, and the supervisory power of this Court remains to provide relief at the behest of a party showing a requisite interest to invoke that relief.
None of the foregoing is inconsistent with the exclusion of relief resting on the provisions of the Act. Nor is it inconsistent with the holdings of this Court in Promenade Investment and Natoli which concerned the operation of the Act and the principle of restraint which it expresses. What this case is about is a suggested exercise by the arbitrator of a power which took him beyond the arbitration which was his legitimate concern. It involves the making of an order which, properly characterised, went outside the concerns of the arbitration. Neither by the contract submitting to arbitration, nor by the
Act was such a power conferred on the arbitrator. The purported exercise of the power brought the arbitrator into conflict with other competing considerations.
That conflict invites, and permits, the intervention of this
Court.
Thus, I agree with Rolfe J that there is no general inherent jurisdiction of the Court (nor any jurisdiction under [s.23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/)) to supervise decisions made by the arbitrator within the arbitration. But where, as here, the arbitrator exceeds the boundaries of the limits of the arbitration, the Court may, and in proper cases should, intervene to defend the other lawful interests which are at stake.
 
The directions were not "procedural"
Codock, however, successfully contended before Rolfe J that the orders of the arbitrator were sustained by [s. 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s14.html) of the Act. The terms of the section are set out above. There is no doubt that they confer a wide power and a large discretion in the arbitrator. But as Mason CJ pointed out in Esso (above) at : "It is well settled that when parties submit their dispute to a private arbitral tribunal of their choice, in the absence of some manifestation of a contrary intention, they confer upon that tribunal a discretion as to the procedure to be adopted in reaching its decision. ... No doubt the conferral of that power upon the tribunal is incidental to the power which it is given to determine the dispute submitted to the tribunal.
[Section 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s14.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/) (Vic.) specifically empowers the arbitrator or umpire to: 'conduct proceedings under (the) agreement in such manner as the arbitrator or umpire thinks fit.' 
That provision replaced earlier statutory provisions, the effect of which was to enable arbitrators to give directions as to procedural matters. However, independently of statute, arbitrators had authority to exercise that power.

There is no reason to doubt that an arbitrator in the exercise of power with respect to procedural matters, can decide who shall be present at the hearing of the arbitration. ... But that power is not a free-standing power; it is a power to decide who is entitled to attend, having regard to the provisions of the relevant contract."
The foregoing emphasises that the arbitrator, as the donee of power, does not thereby secure jurisdiction at large. The procedural power is only given as an incident to the conduct of the arbitration. The arbitrator could not, in purported exercise of this procedural power, give directions at large which affected the Government of the Commonwealth. Nor could the arbitrator give directions which, without lawful authority, effectively overrode Federal or
State legislation The parties' private agreement would not endow the arbitrator with such powers to override the law.
Later in his reasons in Esso, Mason CJ drew a distinction between the privacy of the arbitration (which sustained its conduct in private, "strangers" being excluded) and the confidentiality of material submitted in the course of the arbitration. Mason CJ was careful, at 411f, to chart the limits: "An obligation not to disclose may arise from an express contractual provision. If the parties wished to secure the confidentiality of the materials prepared for or used in the arbitration and of the transcripts and notes of evidence given, they could insert a provision to that effect in their arbitration agreement. Importantly, such a provision would bind the parties and the arbitrator, but not others.
Witnesses, for example, would be under no obligation of confidentiality. Absent such provision, it is difficult to resist the conclusion that, historically, an agreement to arbitrate gave rise to an arbitration which was private in the sense that strangers were not entitled to attend the hearing. Privacy in that sense went some distance to bringing about confidentiality ... (t)hat confidentiality, though it was not grounded initially in any legal right or obligation, was a consequential benefit or advantage attaching to arbitration which made it an attractive mode of dispute resolution. There is, accordingly, a case for saying that, in the course of evolution, the private arbitration has advanced to the stage where confidentiality has become one of its essential attributes so that confidentiality is a characteristic or quality that inheres in arbitration.

Despite the view taken in (Dolling-Baker versus Merrett [(1990) 1 WLR )], I do not consider that, in
Australia, having regard to the various matters to which I have referred, we are justified in concluding that confidentiality is an essential attribute of a private arbitration imposing an obligation on each party not to disclose the proceedings or documents and information provided in and for the purpose of the arbitration." 
Toward the end of his reasons, Mason CJ was careful to draw a distinction between documents which a party was compelled, by Court process, to produce (which equitable principles would require to be protected) and documents produced for other purposes of the parties which were, or may be, used in the arbitration. Of the latter, he said, at 414: "... consistently with the principle as it applies in court proceedings, the obligation of confidentiality attaches only in relation to documents which are produced by a party compulsorily pursuant to a direction by the arbitrator. AND
THE OBLIGATION IS NECESSARILY SUBJECT TO THE PUBLIC'S LEGITIMATE
INTEREST IN OBTAINING INFORMATION ABOUT THE AFFAIRS OF PUBLIC
AUTHORITIES. The existence of this obligation does not provide a basis for the wide-ranging obligation of confidentiality which the appellants seek to apply to all documents and information provided in and for the purposes of the arbitration.
If the judgments in Dolling-Baker and Hassneh Insurance are to be taken as expressing a contrary view, I do not accept them." (emphasis added)
The reference to the public's legitimate interest in obtaining information is a reference back to Mason CJ's reminder of the different way in which courts have treated Government secrets in this country. See The
Commonwealth of Australia v. John Fairfax and Sons Limited and Ors <case>; [(1980) 147
CLR 39], 51. In that case the judiciary of Australia was enjoined to view the disclosure of governmental information "through different spectacles".
That injunction, consistently applied by Australian courts, is equally addressed to arbitrators. It controls, in my respectful opinion, the approach which arbitrators may lawfully take to procedural directions. Where an arbitrator, in the course of giving a procedural direction, goes beyond the establishment of procedures necessary for the commercial arbitration between the parties and makes orders which impinge upon the public's legitimate interests, the arbitrator goes outside the arbitration. Certainly, the arbitrator cannot then point to [s.14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s14.html) of the Act, unelaborated, as a basis to sustain directions made.
There will be a fine line between procedural directions which are within the large ambit that [s. 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/caa1984219/s14.html) permits and those which go beyond. To the former, the
Court will show restraint, reserving any complaint to be made to the end of the arbitration in any challenge that may lawfully be brought from a final (or interim) award or for the removal of the arbitrator for misconduct. But where the Court concludes that the direction made has gone beyond the purposes of the arbitration proceedings, and is thus extrajurisdictional and unlawful, it will, in a proper case, provide relief. In my view, this is such a case.

The orders made here included orders which would prevent the Commonwealth from disclosing or granting access to any person beyond the arbitrator, the other party or legal advisers etc., of "any documents or other material prepared for the purposes of this arbitration" or documents revealing the contents of the same. In my view, this order is impermissibly wide. It goes beyond documents compulsorily produced for inspection on discovery, in respect of which the Commonwealth now raises no objection. It extends to documents which would ordinarily be subject to production under the [Freedom of
Information Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/foia1982222/) (Cth). It extends to documents which the Commonwealth wishes to produce to a relevant State authority, namely the Environmental
Protection
Authority of New South Wales. Effectively, it puts a lid on the direct or indirect use of material prepared for the arbitration, no matter how significant that material may be to the public at large. For all this Court knows, it is both significant and urgent that the material should be made available, for the protection of public health and the restoration of the environment, both to the
State EPA and to other Federal and State agencies or even to the public generally. It is one thing, as Mason CJ pointed out in
Esso, to protect with confidentiality documents which a party has been obliged by law to produce for inspection on discovery or for the purposes of proceedings. It is quite another to cast the net of confidentiality protection so wide that it embraces a party's own documents perhaps prepared for the purposes of the arbitration but having a wider public interest and utility.
Were the law otherwise, a question would be raised as to how the Commonwealth, with its large constitutional and legal rights and duties could ever submit to a private arbitration the result of doing which might be to surrender its governmental rights and duties completely to procedural orders of an arbitrator which were effectively if not entirely unreviewable.
With every respect to the arbitrator, who has proceeded with great care in his consideration of the directions which he should give, the very wider scope of the orders actually made failed to take into account the limits of the procedural power afforded to him both by the contract and by s. 14 of the
Act.
But what weight should be given to the fact that the arbitrator reserved a power to the parties to return to him for further directions? That, in his reasons, he envisaged the right of the parties to use documents for their own legitimate purposes? That he recognised that [s.46(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/foia1982222/s46.html) of the [Freedom of
Information Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/foia1982222/) (Cth) did not empower him to exempt a document from disclosure under the Act? And that he was concerned to prevent the contamination of witnesses by public discussion in the media of the matters raised in the material the subject of his orders?
I have given much thought to whether these considerations are sufficient to sustain the arbitrator's directions as being arguably within the scope of the arbitration and the procedural powers conferred by s. 14 of the Act. At first, I was inclined to withhold relief upon the footing that any practical difficulty could be addressed adequately by further applications to the arbitrator to refine or modify his directions.
However, the timely reminder by the High Court in Esso of the limits of confidentiality in the context of private arbitration, has convinced me that this would not be a correct response to the issue before this Court. The arbitrator's directions go beyond the control of the use of documents produced under the obligations of the arbitration. They extend to controlling the use by the Commonwealth of its own documents. They had the effect of limiting the operation of the FOI Act in a way which is contrary to, and in my view larger than, that envisaged by s.46 of that Act. They purport to remove from public debate matters of legitimate public concern.
I do not believe that the facility of applying for the exemption of this or that document adequately addresses the fundamental complaint of the
Commonwealth. Nor do I consider that it is lawful, as an indirect consequence of a submission to arbitration in a private agreement, to submit the
Commonwealth's large powers and obligations in such matters to the veto and individual supervision of an arbitrator in a particular case, however important it may be to the parties. This point was made by
Brennan J in Esso, at 415, in the following terms: "Where a party is in possession of a document or information and is under a duty at common law or under statute to communicate the document or information to a third party, no contractual obligation of confidentiality can prohibit the performance of that duty. ... Moreover, a party may be under a duty, not necessarily a legal duty, to communicate documents or information to a third party who has an interest in the progress or outcome of the arbitration. To take an example, it could not be supposed, in the absence of a clear contrary indication, that a party which is a wholly owned subsidiary of a holding company intended to keep confidential from its holding company documents or information relating to the matter in dispute in the arbitration. Nor could a party be taken to have intended that it would keep confidential documents or information when the party has an obligation, albeit not a legal obligation, to satisfy a public interest - more than mere curiosity - in knowing what is contained in the document or information."
It is to be noted that Brennan J twice emphasised that the interest to be defended need not be strictly a legal interest. It may embrace a moral, a political or strongly held philosophical interest eg one favouring freedom of the public to have access to materials and documents of legitimate interest to the public.
It is inconsistent with the common law bias in favour of the public's right of access to information, now reinforced by legislation such as the FOI
Act and more lately further supported by constitutional principle, to hold that an arbitrator, pursuant to a private contract or procedural powers conferred by the Act can effectively oust the Commonwealth's own assessment of the public interest and the use of its documents in furtherance of that interest and its governmental duty to protect it. The powers of the courts and tribunals to limit disclosure of material and information is limited. See, eg.
John Fairfax and
Sons Limited v. Police Tribunal of New South Wales and Anor [(1986) 5 NSWLR 465 (CA)] 473 f. It would be surprising indeed if an arbitrator's powers were larger by virtue of nothing more than the private contract of the parties and the language of s. 14 of the Act.
But what of the suggestion that the directions were necessary to protect witnesses from contamination by information, in the public press or otherwise, which, in default of the direction, the Commonwealth (or those to whom it disclosed the document or material) might give currency? In Australia, witnesses live in a society which is daily bombarded with a vast amount of information and material. There is a risk that sometimes that material will affect the evidence which witnesses give in court, tribunal or other proceedings. This Court will then act to protect the integrity of such proceedings.
There is sometimes a risk that the material might affect a sensitive or susceptible tribunal in determining a dispute. As a society, we are generally content to run these risks because of our general confidence in courts and other decision-makers and because the price of endeavouring to limit the free flow of information (even if it could be successful) is generally larger than the benefit that would be gained. There are exceptions.
But they are rare. The public's interest in the supply of material relevant to issues of public concern is generally greater than the risk of contamination of evidence or impairment of the integrity of curial or arbitral proceedings.
Whilst private arbitration will often have the advantage of securing for parties a high level of confidentiality for their dealing, where one of those parties is a government, or an organ of government, neither the arbitral agreement nor the general procedural powers of the arbitrator will extend so far as to stamp on the governmental litigant a regime of confidentiality or secrecy which effectively destroys or limits the general governmental duty to pursue the public interest. Thus, in the present case, if the public interest required the Commonwealth to disclose documents or other materials to the
State EPA or any other Federal or State agency, I cannot accept that the private arbitral agreement here or the general statutory powers of the arbitrator over procedure could destroy or limit the Commonwealth's duty to pursue that public interest. It would require statutory authority much larger and clearer than s. 14 of the Act to sustain such a conclusion. No other provision of the Act being relied upon, I can see no basis for the arbitrator's directions of 23 June 1994, numbers 1(a), (b) and (d).
 
A constitutional question
During the course of the argument of the application for leave to appeal,
I raised with the parties the question whether the purported directions of the arbitrator, addressed to the Commonwealth, resting on the Act, were beyond power either as being incompatible with the constitutional grant of power to the Commonwealth or with [s.64](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/s64.html) of the [Judiciary Act 1903](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/) (Cth). The notice of appeal filed by the Commonwealth raised these points (Grounds 3 and 4). A motion to dismiss the grounds as outside the grant of leave to appeal, or as occasioning procedural unfairness to Codock, was referred to the Court.
When, however, the appeal was called, the Court was informed that no notice had been given to the law officers as required by [s.78B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/s78b.html) of the [Judiciary Act 1903](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/) (Cth). The Commonwealth was reminded of the strict interpretation by the Court of the obligations of that section. See State Bank of New South Wales v. Commonwealth Savings Bank of Australia [(1986) 4 NSWLR (CA).] The constitutional point (and the possible point under the statute) were then abandoned. The Commonwealth continued to assert that its governmental role was relevant to the demonstration of the excessive jurisdiction on the part of the arbitrator. But it did not advance the separate argument that the directions purportedly given to it were unlawful as imposing on the Commonwealth obligations inconsistent with its constitutional rights and duties. I have therefore determined this appeal without any regard to those considerations.
 
Conclusion and orders
Rolfe J erred in holding that s. 14 of the Act gave the arbitrator power to give the directions which he did on 23 June 1994, confirmed on 26 October
Save for the direction relating to disclosure or the grant of access to documents or material produced for inspection on discovery, it is my opinion that the directions given by the arbitrator purportedly limiting disclosure or the grant of access to documents and materials was beyond power. The directions were not sustained by the power conferred on the arbitrator by s.
 of the Act. In the circumstances, although Rolfe J was correct in rejecting the application for relief pursuant to [ss.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/s38.html), [43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/s43.html) and [47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ja1903112/s47.html) of the Act, his Honour ought to have granted relief under the inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court or pursuant to [s.23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). Neither jurisdiction was excluded, in the circumstances, by the express provisions of the Act. The general jurisdiction of the Court remains, if invoked, to provide relief in an appropriate case. This is such a case.
A question finally remains whether the relief should be denied because of the delay of the Commonwealth in seeking it after the preliminary directions were first given by the arbitrator (as I have explained) in February and March
Codock relied in this respect on [Part 72A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p72a) [Rule 5(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s5.html) SCR. But that subrule applies only to an application under [s.38(4)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s38.html) or s.[43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s43.html) of the Act.
Because the relief which I favour arises externally to the Act, the time limits fixed by the Rules have no application.
Alternatively, Codock argued that, by analogy, the delay on the part of the Commonwealth in seeking relief from the Court, and in failing to explain the delay, denied relief to the Commonwealth in the circumstances. I do not agree. The relief is sought to delimit the excessive jurisdiction of the arbitration. At stake are not just the rights of the Commonwealth and Codock.
It is essential to my reasoning that the rights of the public and the protection of the public interest are involved, including the proper operation of the FOI Act and proper interagency co-operation relevant to the protection of public health and the defence of the environment.
Having regard to those public concerns which underlie the orders which I favour providing relief, the delay in challenging the suggested lack of power of the arbitrator should not be fatal.
The Commonwealth pressed its applications repeatedly before the arbitrator.
At least in the first instance, this was the correct step for it to take. When its repeated efforts failed to persuade the arbitrator, it sought relief from the Court. The Court should give that relief. It does not involve interference in the arbitration. It involves confining the arbitration to its proper bounds. By doing so, the Court upholds the important public interest in the generally free flow of information upon matters of public concern which the direction of the arbitrator, undisturbed, would inhibit.
The orders which I therefore favour are:- 
Appeal allowed; 
Set aside the orders of Rolfe J in the Common Law Division of the
Supreme
Court (Construction List); 
In lieu thereof:- declare that the arbitrator, Mr. J.N. West QC had no power to give directions numbers 1(a), 1(b) and 1(d) dated 23 June 1994, confirmed on 26
October 1994; order that the said directions be set aside; 
Order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the hearing in the
Common Law Division; and 
Order that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal.
JUDGE2
PRIESTLEY JA I agree with Kirby P on the first of the two central issues in this case, that is, whether the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/) (the Act) has absolutely ousted the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to decide the invalidity of procedural directions by an arbitrator which it is beyond his power to give, at a stage before the arbitration has run its course under the
Act, and pending the exhaustion of all appeal and review procedures provided by the Act. In my opinion the reasons given by Kirby P show that the court does have jurisdiction in such a case.
The same answer seems to be required by the authority of Esso Australia
Resources Limited versus Plowman ALJR 404. That case dealt with an arbitration under the counterpart in Victoria of the Act, and shows that the Supreme
Court's general declaratory jurisdiction can be used in regard to at least limited classes of questions arising in an arbitration under the Act.
The respondent in the present case submitted that the appellant had not sought declarations at first instance and should not be allowed to do so in the appeal. Assuming acceptance of that particular argument in the respondent's favour, the chief importance of Esso Australia for present purposes still remains; it shows that the code argument which underpins the respondent's "lack of jurisdiction" submission is not correct.
The other central issue in the case is whether the arbitrator had power to make the procedural directions in question. On this issue also I agree with
Kirby P, for the reasons he has given.
Once the two central issues are decided in the appellant's favour, it seems to me that the respondent's argument concerning the appellant's "delays" lose any force. I can see no discretionary or fairness reason in the circumstances of the present case which should lead the court to withhold relief.
I agree generally with the other matters dealt with by Kirby P, except that in regard to the argument about [s 47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s47.html) of the Act with which be deals, and on which it is not necessary to rule in view of the way the case should in my opinion be decided,
I prefer not to commit myself to a firm view until a case arises in which a decision on the proper scope of the section is necessary to the result.
In my opinion the court should make the orders proposed by Kirby P.
JUDGE3
MEAGHER JA agree with the reasons given by Rolfe J at first instance, and would order that the appeal be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/97.html  
