

Hall and Ors versus National Mutual Life Nominees Limited Matter No Ca 40755/96 [1998] NSWSC 242 (11 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 
HALL & ORS versus NATIONAL MUTUAL LIFE NOMINEES LIMITED 
CA 40755/96; ED 4224/94 June 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: EQUITY DIVISION - BRYSON J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40755/96; ED 4224/94 
DELIVERED: 11 JUNE 1998 
HEARING DATE: 20 FEBRUARY 1998 
PARTIES: HALL & ORS versus NATIONAL MUTUAL LIFE NOMINEES LIMITED 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P PRIESTLEY JA BEAZLEY JA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: R J ELLICOTT QC / W HAFFENDEN / N GUY 
Respondent: D J FAGAN SC / J BARTOS 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: P A BIBER 
Respondent: MIDDLETONS MOORE & BEVINS 
CATCHWORDS: INTERPRETATION OF COMMERCIAL LEASE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 13 
HALL & ORS versus NATIONAL MUTUAL LIFE NOMINEES LIMITED 
INTERPRETATION OF COMMERCIAL LEASE - whether "outgoings" included in "rent".

In a lease of commercial premises two individuals, pursuant to cl 15 of the lease, agreed, as "covenantors" that they would be jointly and severally liable with the lessee to the lessor for rent and other moneys payable under the lease. The lessor agreed to release the two individuals from their obligations once the lessee had paid $750,000 in rent. The two individual covenantors in proceedings against the lessor claimed, on the basis that payment of "rent" in cl 15 included payment of various outgoings, that more than $750,000 had been paid to the lessor and that they were thus released from their obligations under the clause. The lessor, disputing that payment of the outgoings should be counted in the calculation of rent paid, asserted $750,000 had not yet been paid, and that the covenantors remained liable. Both a referee and Bryson J concluded that the language of the lease made "a clear distinction between the rent and outgoings", and that the covenantors remained liable.

On appeal the appellants submitted: The payment of rent in cl 15 included the payment of outgoings under the lease because: (a) the word "rent" was not defined in the lease thereby allowing the court to adopt the modern common law meaning which (they said) included outgoings; (b) "annual rent" referred to in cl 19, when read with cl 20 (both in the First Appendix), was fixed so as to include rent and a proportion of the outgoings, and (c) Heads of
Agreement made before the lease supported the appellants' construction.

Held: 1. As "rent" has a variety of meanings in differing legal and commercial contexts, the precise meaning here depended on the language in the lease; 2. in cll 20 and 21 of the First Appendix, "rent" and "outgoings" were treated quite separately, a distinction made clear by cl 3 of the lease; the other matters of construction relied on by the appellants did not detract from the meaning shown by these three clauses; and the Heads of Agreement, other than assisting in understanding the terms used between the parties in the subsequent lease, were not of material assistance in construing cl 15 of the lease.

ORDER 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

HALL & ORS versus NATIONAL MUTUAL LIFE NOMINEES LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Priestley JA. 
PRIESTLEY JA: This appeal involves one point only, the interpretation of some words in a lease of commercial premises in which National Mutual Life Nominees Limited (NML) was the lessor, Leisuremark Australia Pty Limited (Leisuremark) was the lessee and two companies and two individuals were, by cl 15 of the lease, "covenantors". 
By cl 15.1 of the lease the covenantors covenanted and agreed with NML that they would be jointly with Leisuremark and severally liable to NML for all rent and other moneys payable under the lease. By cl 15.2 NML covenanted and agreed to release the two individual covenantors "from all obligations and liabilities under this guarantee upon the lessee having paid to the lessor rent under this Lease totalling $750,000 provided that the lessee is not then in default in its obligations under this Lease." 
The question raised in this appeal is whether or not the word "rent" in cl .2 should be so interpreted that the payment of various outgoings by the lessee to the lessor, as required by the lease, should be treated as payment of rent for the purposes of cl 15. If it should be so interpreted, then more than $750,000 in "rent" had been paid by the lessee to the lessor at a time when the lessee was not in default in its obligations under the lease and thus the two individuals became released from further obligation under the covenantors' covenants. If not, then the lessee had not paid $750,000 rent to the lessor by the relevant time and the individuals remained bound by their obligations as covenantors.

To obtain rulings on various questions arising from the lease in dispute between NML on the one hand and Leisuremark on the other, Leisuremark began proceedings against NML in the Equity Division principally seeking rectification of various clauses of the lease.

NML filed defences to Leisuremark's claims, and also filed the first cross claim in the proceedings, against five cross defendants, Leisuremark, the two covenantor companies and the two covenantor individuals, claiming that all five were liable for outstanding rental and other moneys payable under the lease. The two individuals then brought the second cross claim in the proceedings, against NML as a cross defendant, raising the question of interpretation now before this court.

The principal rectification claim concerned cl 20 in the First Appendix to the lease, a rent review clause which provided for periodical rent reviews, pursuant to which the rent could go up but not down. Leisuremark claimed that it had been the common intention of lessor and lessee that reduction in rental could be possible under this clause, and sought rectification of the clause to accord with the asserted common intention.

Pursuant to Pt 72 r 2(1) of the Supreme Court Rules the whole proceedings were referred to Mr Peter Jacobson QC for an inquiry and report.

Leisuremark, in its rectification case, sought to rely on the terms of Heads of Agreement which had been signed by the parties and which dealt with their intentions to enter into a lease of the premises. There was argument before the referee on the question whether the Heads of Agreement bound the parties contractually, or represented a pre-contractual document. Leisuremark sought to rely on the terms of the Heads of Agreement, whether binding or not, as indicating the intention of the parties at the time of the execution of the lease. It is unnecessary to say more about this aspect of the case before the referee beyond noting that he found against Leisuremark on it.

In regard to the interpretation question, the referee took the view that "rent" in cl 15.2 meant rent paid in accordance with cl 19 of the First
Appendix to the lease, which did not include outgoings, and that thus the individual covenantors were not released by cl 15.1 from their covenants.

The terms of cl 19 were that the lessee was to pay: "the annual rent set out in item 9 in the Reference Schedule such rent to be paid in advance by ... monthly payments ... equal to one twelfth of the annual rent ... in each year during the term ..." 
In the result the referee decided that Leisuremark's claim failed, the cross claim of the two individuals failed, and that on NML's cross claim "there should be judgment against all of the Cross Defendants for the agreed amount of $602,584.23", (the amount itself not being in dispute once Leisuremark's claim and the cross claim of the two individuals failed).

Subsequently Leisuremark and the two individuals applied to a judge in the
Equity Division, Bryson J, to uphold various objections to the referee's report including objections to the rectification finding of the referee and to his finding, pursuant to his construction of cl 15.2, that the two individuals were liable, along with Leisuremark and the two corporate covenantors, for the amount claimed by NML.

The rectification and interpretation questions were the two matters argued before Bryson J. He found against Leisuremark on the rectification question.
No appeal has been raised against that decision.

The argument before Bryson J on the interpretation question appears to have been relatively brief. Submissions were made to him concerning the various meanings attachable to the word "rent" in the light of reference to various provisions in the lease arguably bearing upon the interpretation of the word in cl 15.2.

Bryson J's conclusion on the interpretation question was that "... in the language of this lease, particularly when provisions relating to rent and outgoings in cl 3 of the lease and in cl 21 of the First Appendix, and in the Schedule are taken together there is a clear distinction between rent and outgoings. The lease in effect writes its own dictionary about what is rent and draws its own distinction between rent and outgoings. The referee decided the point for substantially the same reasons as I have stated, and in my opinion he was correct." 
The two individual covenantors appealed from Bryson J's decision, raising, in their amended notice of appeal, thirteen grounds. When the matter came to be argued before this court, the only grounds pressed were 1(b), 2, 12 and 13.
The first three of these raised the interpretation question and the last a question concerning costs.

Senior counsel for the appellants in written and oral submissions marshalled a number of separate arguments which, taken together, he submitted showed clearly that payment of "rent" in cl 15.2 included payment of outgoings under the lease.

The first matter pointed out was that "rent" as used in cl 15.2 was nowhere defined in the lease. This left room for the court to take into consideration what was then submitted was the modern common law meaning of "rent", a meaning it was said, that included outgoings. Various authorities were relied on as supporting this modern view. Considerable reliance was then placed on the submission that it could be deduced that the "annual rent" referred to in cl 19 of the First Appendix was fixed at a figure which must have included an element attributable to outgoings. This was said to be so because cl 21 of the First Appendix which dealt with outgoings provided that the lessee would during the term of the lease pay 12.242% of increases in outgoings. The inference was that since the lessor was only requiring during the term a proportion of increases in outgoings, the lessor must have allowed in the annual rent a like proportion of the basic outgoings at the commencement of the lease. Hence, the "annual rent" referred to in cl 19 of the First
Appendix was a rent including both rent and a proportion of the lessor's outgoings on the premises. The same meaning should be attributed to the word "rent" in cl 15.2. It was further submitted that this conclusion was assisted by reference to the Heads of Agreement. Then, counsel went carefully through all the clauses of the lease in which rent was referred to (in various ways), and outgoings were dealt with, in an endeavour to show that all the provisions could be read consistently with the interpretation contended for.

Persuasively though these arguments were woven together, I do not think they can prevail against what seems to me to be a comparatively straightforward reading of the lease. I do not think any of the authorities referred to by the appellants can have any governing effect upon the interpretation of the lease in question here. They, and others I have looked at, seem to me to show that "rent" is used in a variety of ways in different legal and commercial contexts; see generally for a convenient overview of the different meanings in different contexts, Strouds Judicial Dictionary, 5th edn Vol 4 (1986) pp -2233. The different uses have a family resemblance, but the precise meaning, for purposes such as the present, and in this lengthy commercial lease, must depend on the language of the lease itself.

Clause 19 of the First Appendix refers to the annual rental at the commencement of the lease. That figure could not be changed until implementation of cl 20, the rent review provision, which could not happen before the expiration of the first two years of the lease. I am not at all sure that it would be right to accept the argument that the first annual rent figure should be treated as one divisible into separate sums, one of which was for outgoings. Even if it could, I do not think it would particularly assist the argument for the appellants in view of other clauses in the lease.

Principal among these are cll 20 and 21 of the First Appendix. Clause 20, the rent review clause, is in sharp contrast to cl 21, the outgoings clause. The two subject matters are treated quite separately and quite differently. This sharp distinction seems to me to be reflected in cl 3 of the lease, "Rent and outgoings". Clause 3.1 "Payment of rent and outgoings" says "The lessee will during the term pay to the lessor the rent and outgoings of the Building all as specified, calculated and payable in the manner provided in the First Appendix hereto." 
Clause 3.3 says: "Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Lease the Lessee shall not be liable for rent for the period commencing the date of commencement of this
Lease [1 February 1992] and expiring on 31 October 1992." 
The separation effected by these provisions between rent and outgoings seems to me to be particularly clear. The separation seems to me to be recognised in that part of cl 15.1 which makes the covenantors liable to pay "all rent and other moneys" under the lease. I can see no persuasive reason for reading "rent" in cl 15.2 as departing from this clear separation of the two subject matters.

It was argued for the appellants that there was some incongruity brought about by this view, in that it was to be expected that the obligations for which the covenantors were liable under cl 15.1 would be co-extensive with the obligations in respect of which payment of $750,000 would entitle the covenantors to release from their obligations. It does not seem to me there is any logical, lexical or commercial reason for the claimed co-extensiveness. It seems to me quite understandable that the parties would have fixed upon an amount of rent to be paid as a condition for release by the lessor of the covenantors of their liability for all rent and other moneys to be paid under the lease.

Clauses 3 and 15 of the lease and cll 19, 20 and 21 of the First Appendix seem to me to be the most important provisions in the lease in regard to the interpretation question raised in the appeal. I have already mentioned the material parts of these clauses with the exception of cl 3.2. They also seem to me to be entirely consistent with the separation of the ideas of rent and outgoings manifested in the other provisions mentioned.

When the other provisions of the lease are examined they all seem to me to fall much more easily into place with the view I have expressed about the effect of cll 3 and 15 of the lease and cll 19, 20 and 21 of the First
Appendix than with the interpretation urged for the appellants.

So far as the Heads of Agreement are concerned, I do not think they are of material assistance in interpreting cl 15 of the lease. Whether or not the
Heads of Agreement themselves bound the parties contractually, a matter that is quite plain from the materials before the court is that in the time between the making of the Heads of Agreement and the execution of the lease there was considerable bargaining between the parties with the assistance of detailed legal advice. It is just as likely that differences between the Heads of
Agreement, implications from its terms and the inferences to be drawn from its terms, and the terms, implications of and inferences from the lease were intentional, as it is that they were the result of some inadvertence or change of style in drafting.

If any recourse is permissible in the present case to the terms of the Head of
Agreement for the purpose of interpreting cl 15 of the lease, I do not think it could possibly be for any wider purpose than an understanding of the kind of terms in use between the parties, with the help of their legal advisers, in arriving at their eventual concluded bargain, in a matter of considerable commercial importance to all concerned. That limited recourse does not, in my opinion, in any way assist the appellants.

These conclusions mean that the ground of appeal concerning costs does not arise.

In the result, I am of the opinion that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Priestley JA. * * * 
