

Regina versus Horan Matter No L002/97 [1998] NSWSC 46 (20 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
REGINA versus PATRICK FRANCIS HORAN 
L002/97 March 1998 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT (Application for Redetermination of Life Sentence) 
HIS HONOUR: 
The applicant, Patrick Francis Horan, has applied for a redetermination pursuant to [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) of a life sentence imposed upon him by Enderby J at the Bathurst Supreme Court on October 1986. On 21 October 1986 he had been arraigned upon a charge of the murder of Const Paul Quinn, to which he pleaded not guilty but guilty of manslaughter. The Crown prosecutor accepted that plea in satisfaction of that count on the basis of diminished responsibility. He also pleaded guilty to wounding Snr Const Ian Borland with intent to murder him, five charges of shooting at other police officers with intent to murder them, and a charge of common assault upon yet another officer. Apart from the charge of common assault, which carried a maximum sentence of two years imprisonment, all the other offences carried at that time a maximum of penal servitude for life.

On the charge of manslaughter his Honour sentenced the applicant to penal servitude for life to date from 30 March 1986, the date of his arrest. On the charge of wounding Snr Const Borland with intent to murder, he was sentenced to penal servitude for 25 years. On the charges of shooting at police officers with intent to murder, he was sentenced to penal servitude for 20 years, and on the charge of common assault to imprisonment for two years. Those sentences also were to commence on 30 March 1986 and no non-parole period was specified: s 21 of the Probation and Parole Act, 1983 (since repealed). By virtue of the transitional provisions in Schedule 2 of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/), the 25 year sentence on the charge of wounding with intent to murder expires on 13
November 2000.

Facts 
At the time of the offences the applicant was 45 years old. He suffered from paranoid schizophrenia and, over the previous 20 odd years, had been admitted for treatment to the Bloomfield mental hospital at Orange on a number of occasions. He was on medication which he tended to neglect when he was not under supervision. He was a single man who had lived with his mother in
Bathurst until the end of 1985. He then moved to a flat, also in Bathurst, in a block owned by his mother, where he lived alone. His last admission to
Bloomfield hospital had been in May 1985 and, for several months prior to
Easter 1986 when these offences occurred, he had stopped taking his medication.

In the afternoon of Easter Sunday, 30 March 1986, the applicant went to his mother's home, where his sister was also present. He argued with the two women about matters which appear to be of no consequence, and behaved in a somewhat bizarre manner. He then left the house and drove off in his Valiant utility.
His mother and sister were concerned about his condition and rang his doctor.
At the doctor's suggestion they contacted the police and, in due course, two police vehicles were despatched to look for him. In the south Bathurst area his utility was seen being driven erratically towards Perthville. The police vehicles set off in pursuit and police at Perthville were alerted. A police truck from that police station was also despatched and, shortly thereafter, those officers saw the utility still being driven erratically at high speed.
In the event, the truck and the utility collided at the approach railing of the Vale Creek bridge.

The applicant carried a .303 rifle with ammunition in the utility. The magazine for the rifle carried ten rounds. The applicant took up the rifle and
Snr Const Byers from the Perthville police truck approached the utility and tried to disarm him. The applicant fired one shot near the officer's head and the officer lost his footing and fell to the ground. In the meantime the two other police vehicles had arrived. Snr Consts Mendez and Tener approached the applicant, who had his rifle pointed towards them. Const Quinn, the driver of their vehicle, ran towards the police truck and the applicant, having observed him, fired at him. The constable was struck in the region of the left clavicle and was fatally wounded. This gave rise to the conviction for manslaughter.

Police then returned the fire. The applicant was shot by Snr Const Mendez and he lost his balance, falling down a slight embankment. There he took up what was described as a "Rambo" style position on the ground and fired at the police until he emptied the magazine. One of the bullets penetrated the door of a police car, causing injuries to the hand and right leg of Snr Const
Borland, who was conveying a message by radio to the Bathurst police station.
Sgt Ashe began to drag Snr Const Borland from the vehicle when the applicant fired again, on this occasion inflicting a severe wound to Mr Borland's left leg. This led to the conviction for wounding with intent to murder. The applicant continued to fire, giving rise to the convictions for shooting at
Sgt Ashe and Snr Consts Mendez, Tener, Cooke and Byers, with intent to murder.
When he ran out of ammunition Const Mather approached him and demanded that he put the rifle down. The applicant pointed the rifle at him, giving rise to the conviction for common assault. However, when the constable directed him to throw the rifle away, he did so and was arrested.

In the course of the incident police fired some 18 shots at the applicant, at least seven of which struck him in the lower part of his body. He was later taken to Bathurst hospital where he underwent surgery for his wounds.

The Proceedings before Enderby J 
Amongst the material before Enderby J was the transcript of a taped interview between police and the applicant on the day after his arrest and a report of
Dr Rod Milton, forensic psychiatrist, who had examined him on behalf of the
Crown. To the interviewing police and to Dr Milton the applicant had claimed that it was the police who had opened fire on him and, in effect, he had returned their fire in self defence. However, by his pleas of guilty, he abandoned any claim of justification in law. Moreover, from his recital of the facts in his remarks on sentence, it is clear that Enderby J was satisfied that the applicant was the aggressor and rejected any suggestion that the police had initiated the shooting. Indeed, addressing his remarks to the applicant, his Honour observed (pp 3-4) that "the police, confronted with your aggression, behaved in what must have been a brave and admirable way and the
Bathurst community can be proud of them." 
Dr Milton noted the applicant's longstanding psychiatric history and was satisfied that he suffered from paranoid schizophrenia. He considered that that illness, uncontained by medication at the time, gave rise to an abnormal mental state substantially impairing his mental responsibility for his acts: the ingredients of the partial defence of diminished responsibility. He saw the applicant as "an afflicted and ill person rather than a bad person ...", but considered him "extremely dangerous" and "likely to remain so for a considerable period". He decried the prevailing practice of discharging patients such as the applicant from psychiatric hospitals, and concluded that he could not be treated effectively outside an institution.

There was other material, including psychiatric reports, before Enderby J, but it is unable to be produced as the original Supreme Court file is missing. It seems that his Honour had before him material from Bloomfield hospital suggesting a history of aggressive and violent behaviour, although he was described in the evidence of his brother, Thomas George Horan, as "very quiet - subdued" when he was taking his medication. After reference to the evidence of Dr Milton in his remarks, his Honour concluded (p 9): "I do hold the opinion that if released from custody in the near future you would probably, certainly possibly, at any stage in your life have to be regarded as a risk to the community." 
A little later (pp 9-10) his Honour observed: "There is little doubt that what happened that day can be regarded as one act even though it gave rise to eight offences. It was a single course of conduct resulting in a large degree from your paranoid schizophrenia and the situation in which you found yourself, but there is also little doubt in my mind that it involved a very high degree of criminality on your part as well.

They were crimes of great seriousness and great magnitude and great danger to the public." 
His Honour had regard to the sentencing principles enunciated by the majority of the High Court in Veen versus The Queen (No 1) <case>; [(1978-79) 143 CLR 458. (The] applicant was dealt with before the High Court reaffirmed those principles in
Veen versus The Queen (No 2) <case>; [(1987-88) 164 CLR 465.)] His
Honour described the applicant's criminality in the killing of Const Quinn as "extreme" and, in the light of that criminality, together with the need for general deterrence and the protection of the community, concluded that the manslaughter charge called for the maximum sentence of penal servitude for life.

His Honour went on to say that he declined to specify a non-parole period in respect of the life sentence, and gave reasons for doing so. He relied upon those same reasons for declining to specify a non-parole period in respect of the concurrent determinate sentences. Of course, his Honour could not, in any event, have specified a non-parole period in respect of the life sentence: see s 19 of the Probation and Parole Act and the definition of "term of imprisonment" in <case>. Moreover, because of the indeterminate nature of a life sentence, it was not the practice to specify a non-parole period in respect of concurrent determinate sentences. However that may be, it is his Honour's reasons for declining to specify a non-parole period which are relevant for present purposes. His Honour said: "My reasons are inherent in what I have already said. I have had regard to the nature of your offence, your antecedent character, which includes the nature and extent of your long standing mental condition. I have also had regard to the uncertainty about whether (you) take or would take, if released on parole, your medication and the difficulty, if not impossibility, of devising a scheme outside of being in custody having regard to your record and your history whereby you would take that medication.

I take account also of what has been said, that it can only be ensured under supervision. I propose to leave such matters to the releasing authorities.
Your condition may improve. Medical science may improve. Better medicines may become available." 
Subjective Case 
The applicant was 45 years old at the time of the offences and is now 58. He has a very old record of convictions in Courts of Petty Sessions, the last entry being in 1971, and I consider it immaterial for present purposes. He was born and raised in Bathurst, one of six children. His father died in 1975.
Most of his siblings still live in the Bathurst/Orange area. He was educated to Intermediate Certificate standard. He was a carpenter by trade and, in evidence before Enderby J, his brother described him as a hard worker who, to his knowledge, had never been unemployed.

It would seem that the applicant never married and has no children. For the purpose of this application he was interviewed in July 1996 by the well known forensic psychiatrist, Dr Bruce Westmore. He told Dr Westmore that he was married with two children and that he was living with them at the time of the offences. This would appear to be delusional. In July 1992 he told Dr Nazeer
Ahmed, who had seen him several times whilst in custody, that he had a wife and two children who were invisible and who lived with him in prison. It is clear from the summary of the facts set out above that the applicant was in fact living alone at the time of the offences. In the course of his consultation with Dr Milton in October 1986 he refused to discuss the matter of relationships with women. In evidence his brother described him as single.
Early in his incarceration he told a Probation and Parole Officer who was preparing a classification report that he was not married at the time of the offences and did not have a girlfriend.

The applicant also told Dr Westmore that his mother died in 1994 or 1995, as did his eldest brother in 1995. I assume that this information is reliable.
Notes of a visiting committee which saw him at Lithgow Correctional Centre in
February 1994 record that he told them that he had attended his mother's funeral at Bathurst the previous day. Curiously, however, a supplementary report of the Serious Offenders Review Council of April 1997 refers to the applicant's request for placement at the Bathurst Correctional Centre, noting that Bathurst is the area "where his elderly mother resides ..." This may be an error on the part of those responsible for preparing that report.

The applicant's behaviour in the early stage of his imprisonment was inauspicious. He was unco-operative with prison staff, particularly those concerned with his psychiatric health. He refused to give information about his background, or to acknowledge that there was anything wrong with him mentally, and he declined to take medication which had been prescribed for him. He was unrepentant about his crimes, maintaining his account that he was merely defending himself, and expressed considerable resentment against the police and his mother and sister who, he believed, were responsible for his predicament. In a memorandum of May 1987 a Probation and Parole Officer considered him "potentially dangerous", adding that he "should be approached in a sensitive, cautious manner".

However, from late 1987 things began to improve. His behaviour became more stable and he came to accept his medication, albeit reluctantly. His bitterness towards members of his family abated, and a psychological report of
December 1989 noted that he was "supported by several members of his immediate family and relatives who visit several times each year." At that time he was at Parklea gaol and he had requested transfer to Bathurst so as to re- establish contact with his family. That was not considered appropriate at the time, but in January 1991 he was moved to Lithgow.

There his improvement became even more marked. Even before the move he had begun to receive excellent work reports and that trend continued. A prison officer's report of November 1992 contained the following comments: "Horan's behaviour has been exemplary. He is well liked by both Officers and inmates. He fully complies with all institutional and Unit rules and procedures. His leisure time is quite restricted as he undertakes charity work by making Rosary Beads. However he readily socialises and participates in Unit activities when he can.
 ...

It appears Horan has adopted a positive attitude since coming to Lithgow
Correctional Centre. He has completed courses and received certificates in
Beekeeping and Introduction to Business Management. Horan works in the Cabinet
Shop and going by his overseer's reports is a valued worker.
 ...

Horan's family have been supportive and visit him regularly. He also phones them and they keep in touch by regular mail." 
The report goes on to note that the applicant's goal upon release is to finance his own beekeeping business and concludes that he "has not been wasting his time while he has been in custody." 
I received in evidence a large number of certificates and testimonials demonstrating that the applicant has undertaken a wide variety of courses available within the prison system, and his commendable dedication has earned him success. Those courses are as varied as beekeeping, horticulture, welding, business introduction and basic computing (among others). Beekeeping, it seems, is a longstanding interest of his, and in recent years he has written a number of articles for the magazine "The Australasian Beekeeper".

He continued to see the police as the aggressors in the incident which led to his imprisonment and, in an interview with a visiting committee in May 1991, he was pressed about his attitude to police generally. He said that, upon his release, he would stay away from police, move to Queensland, and keep bees. A report of the Serious Offenders Review Council of December 1994 concluded as follows: "Except for the period between August and October 1987 when Horan's behaviour was erratic which resulted in his transfer from Parklea to the Prison Hospital and being forced to take medication by way of weekly injections, Horan has been well behaved throughout his custody. His move to Lithgow Correctional
Centre appears to have helped him to achieve reasonable normality. He has completed a number of educational courses and has won the respect of Officers within the complex. The rift between him and his family has been overcome.

Horan's medication has been reduced to 12.5 mgs every three weeks which can be considered as a reasonably low dose. He will most likely require medication for the rest of his life. Whilst the medication does not totally alleviate his problems, it does enable him to behave within socially acceptable parameters.
His attitudes regarding the offence have undergone little change during his incarceration. Due to his lack of insight his attitudes are unlikely to change." 
I have already referred to a supplementary report of the Serious Offenders
Review Council of April 1997. From that report it appears that the applicant's behaviour and his application to work and education have continued to be exemplary. The Council had decided to recommend a reduction to B classification and his placement at Bathurst and this had occurred at the time of the hearing before me. The Council also recommended that a further reduction to C1 classification be considered in due course. Correspondence from the applicant attached to the supplementary report, while indicating that his attitude to his offences is unchanged, contains some expressions of nascent remorse. In December 1996 he wrote to the Prime Minister, apparently to enlist his aid in securing his release. In the course of that letter he wrote: "Judge Enderby convicted me of Manslaughter, but it was the police who broke the law there NOT me!! 
I feel a lot of remorse and a lot of sorrow for the Women-folk of the police involved; but I had no choice in the matter and HAD to defend myself!" 
In February 1997 he wrote to the Council seeking a C classification and setting out his achievements whilst in prison. In that letter he wrote: "... I have no animosity towards the police whatsoever.

And I have prayed to the Lord, for his forgiveness." 
Of course, given the purpose of the letters in which they appeared, those expressions may be entirely opportunistic. However, they may well be genuine and, if so, they suggest that the applicant has developed some insight into the effect of his actions, even though he continues to believe that they were justified.

Sadly, the applicant's psychiatric prognosis does not match his admirable progress in other areas. In his report of July 1992, Dr Ahmed concluded: "Patrick is functioning fairly well and presents no problem within the Prison.
He is always reluctant to take his Modecate Injection but with some persuasion he take(s) his injection. He still has residual elaborate and fixed paranoid delusions regarding past events including delusions about having his wife and children with him.

He has no insight into his illness. Considering his previous psychiatric history there is a high risk of relapse of his illness if his medication is stopped, his non compliance and lack of insight would create further management problems.

It is imperative that Patrick continue his psychotropic medication for some time.

If Patrick is released on parole there is a high risk of relapse due to the chronic above mentioned factors. In future a community treatment order may be seriously considered before his parole or release is contemplated in order to prevent relapses in the future." 
In his report four years later, Dr Westmore wrote that the applicant "has no insight at all into the nature and extent or, indeed, the severity of his illness." He told Dr Westmore that he was an unwilling recipient of his current medication, saying, " ... it's high time they woke up, there's nothing wrong with me." Prison reports suggest that he dislikes the medication because of its side effects, which is understandable. However, he told Dr Westmore that he had believed in the past that his medication was poisoned. Indeed, he suggested that, on occasions when police had taken him to Bloomfield Hospital, they had been conspiring with the doctors there to poison him. Dr Westmore noted that he "has some beliefs relating to previous medication and I thought there was a strong persecutory or paranoid flavour to his mental state in this regard." The doctor concluded: "Over recent years Mr Horan appears to have become more settled and this perhaps reflects, in part, his advancing years, as well as the fact that he is being treated with the antipsychotic medication, Modecate. Paranoid schizophrenic patients frequently retain their personality and Dr Milton in his original report makes some comments about this. The illness also more often than not is quite treatment resistant, at least in the sense that patients frequently remain slightly paranoid and often do not gain good insight into their illness. This appears to be the case with Mr Horan.
 ... He still is showing evidence of his mental illness, he has no insight into it, he would be unlikely to accept medication on his release if this were unconditional.

Nevertheless, it certainly could be considered moving Mr Horan towards a lower degree classification. He does need to be rehabilitated and part of this will involve being placed in a less secure environment. He also needs urgent and extensive counselling regarding the need to take medication on his release. I took the opportunity to have some discussions with him about this, principally to determine his level of flexibility in this regard. He takes medication at this time but under duress. This may in fact be the only way he could or would take medication on his release. Certainly some mechanism needs to be in place to enable him to receive appropriate psychiatric care and supervision.

He certainly talks about having no ongoing animosity towards the police and when he discussed this he did not appear to be angry or agitated in any way.
It is very likely that much of his anger has now subsided, although he still talks about this event as if the police were the aggressors and, certainly, I was impressed that this was his opinion.

My strong recommendation would be that the prison authorities need to be approached to enable Mr Horan to start discussing his long term release and rehabilitation plans, an integral part of which will be the absolute necessity that he continue to take medication." 
Victim Impact Statement 
I received in evidence, pursuant to <case> of the [Criminal Procedure Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/), a statement by Brian Francis Quinn, the father of the late Constable Quinn, concerning the effect of the killing upon him, his wife and his family, and upon the constable's own children. Certain parts of that statement amount to expressions of opinion as to how this application ought be dealt with. Very properly, the Crown prosecutor did not press those parts, and I have had no regard to them. However, what remains is an eloquent and moving account of the impact upon those unfortunate people of this senseless and tragic death. The court extends to them its sympathy, as would any right thinking member of this community.

However, <case> requires that I should not take that statement into account "in connection with the determination of the punishment" for these offences, unless I consider it appropriate to do so. In the context of this application
I take that to mean that, unless I consider it appropriate, I should not have regard to the statement on the question whether the application should be granted and on the determination of the minimum and additional terms, should it be granted. I do not consider it appropriate to have regard to the statement in relation to those matters for the reasons expressed by Hunt CJ at
CL in his remarks on sentence in Reg versus Previtera (unreported, 27 May 1997) at pp 16-19, and my own remarks in Reg versus Audsley (unreported, 30 May 1997) at pp 8-9. Particularly is this so in an application such as this where the applicant's position falls to be considered many years after the events which led to his imprisonment, and in the light of developments throughout those years.

The Application 
The Crown prosecutor opposed the application. Alternatively, he submitted that, if it were granted, the additional term should be for the remainder of the applicant's life: [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/), [s
A(4)(a)(ii).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html)
Mr Nicholson SC, for the applicant, submitted that I should specify a minimum term and a determinate additional term.

It is appropriate to set out some provisions in [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html), inserted by the Sentencing Legislation Further Amendment Act 1997, which bear on this application. Section 13A(4A) provides: "(4A) In considering such an application, the Supreme Court is to have regard to all the circumstances surrounding the offence for which the life sentence was imposed, and all offences, wherever committed, of which the person has been convicted at any time (so far as this information is reasonably available to the Supreme Court)." 
Section 13A(9) provides, among other things: "(9) The Supreme Court, in exercising its function under this section, is to have regard to: ...
 the need to preserve the safety of the community ..." 
Section 13A(10A) provides: "(10A) The Supreme Court, in exercising its functions under this section: must have regard to and give substantial weight to any relevant recommendations, observations and comments made by the original sentencing court when imposing the sentence concerned, and must give consideration to adopting or giving effect to their substance and the intention of the original sentencing court when making them, and must, to the extent that it declines to adopt or give effect to those matters, state its reasons for doing so." 
The matters to which this court must have regard in sub-s (4A) "in considering such an application", and sub-ss (9) and (10A) "in exercising its functions under this section", are relevant to whether the application for determination of minimum and additional terms should be granted, as well as to the length of those terms if it is. The Crown prosecutor submitted that, when appropriate weight is given to the observations of Enderby J and regard is had, in the light of the whole of the evidence, to the preservation of the safety of the community, the application should be refused because the applicant should not be released at this time. In that event, of course, the applicant could reapply in due course: <case>(b), (8B), and the Crown prosecutor did not submit that he should never be released.

For that submission the Crown prosecution relied upon part of the judgment of
Abadee J, sitting at first instance, in Reg versus Malcolm [(1991) 58 A Crim R .] It is necessary to consider this matter because Malcolm is one of the few reported cases on <case> and, with respect, it may be that this part of Abadee J's judgment does not adequately state the relevant law. At p of the report his Honour referred to the judgment of Wood J in another application, Reg versus Sorenson (unreported, 6 September 1990) and, in particular, to the following passage (at p 9): "So it should be that applications for redetermination of existing life sentences under <case>, should only be refused in those cases where, after further review, the court considers the prisoner should never be released, or at least where the court is not satisfied at the time of the application that he should be released, since there is nothing to prevent later applications." 
This could suggest that it is appropriate to refuse an application when it appears inappropriate that the applicant be released at the time of the hearing. It is important, however, to note what Wood J went on to say immediately after that passage: "The possibility remains that in some cases the application should be deferred for a period of time for further assessment. In most cases however a minimum term can be fixed and where there is concern for the future well-being of the applicant, or for the safety of the community, a lengthy additional period including one for the remainder of the applicant's natural life may be appropriate." 
Should there be any ambiguity in what Wood J had to say in Sorenson (which I doubt), his Honour made the position clear in the later case of Reg v
McCafferty (Wood J, unreported, 15 October 1991). In a valuable explanation of the proper approach to these applications, his Honour said (at p 22 of the judgment): "It is true that section 13A contemplates that circumstances may exist where an application should be refused as premature, and also contemplates the exercise of a discretion to permit a fresh application ... The power and discretion so conferred cannot be assumed to be an empty grant, but in my view ... it should only be in exceptional circumstances where the protection of the community requires or where an injustice to the applicant would otherwise be caused, that an application brought after eight years of imprisonment should be dismissed.

In particular it seems to me to be important to pay full regard to the obvious legislative preference for determinate sentences and to the positive incentive which a minimum release date offers for a prisoner. It is a clear milestone towards which the prisoner can work, and it has been recognised consistently as a positive factor in the rehabilitation process. The fixing of such a minimum term does not automatically mean release when that date arrives, since that will still depend on the assessment of the Offenders Review Board, of the applicant's mental state and progress at that time." 
Accordingly, the judge's task is to determine when an applicant should be eligible for parole, not when he or she should be released on parole. The latter decision rests with the Parole Board, applying the guidelines set out in [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s17.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) and having regard, above all else, to the public interest: Reg versus Dennis (CCA, unreported, 6 October 1992) per Carruthers J at p 8; Reg versus Crump (CCA, unreported, 14 September 1993) per Hunt CJ at CL at pp 16-17. Indeed, in Reg v Cribb (CCA, unreported, 4 November 1994) Badgery-Parker J, with whom Finlay and James JJ agreed, expressed the view (at p 12) that an application should be refused only where the judge considers that the applicant should never be released, citing his own judgment in Reg versus Lawson (Badgery-Parker J, unreported, 31 May 1994). In the passage quoted from Lawson, his Honour acknowledged that there might be extraordinary situations in which an application might otherwise be refused, and in Reg versus Johnstone (Badgery-
Parker J, unreported, 20 December 1991) his Honour allowed (at p 10) that "it may be appropriate to refuse an application, not because the case is one where nothing but a life sentence is appropriate, but because to do otherwise might prejudice the interests of the applicant." 
In Crump (supra) Allen J (at pp 38-43) also recognised that there might be cases in which, in the interests of both the community and the applicant, the application should be dismissed as premature, provided that that dismissal did not result in the applicant remaining in prison for a period disproportionate to the gravity of the offence, so as effectively to impose preventative detention (citing Veen No 2 at pp 472-4). Indeed, in dismissing that appeal,
Mahoney JA and Allen J upheld the decision of the primary judge that Crump's application was premature. Only Hunt CJ at CL took the view that his application should have been dismissed because he should never be released.

Accordingly, the weight of authority is that applications under the section should normally be granted. In my view, the force of the observations in the various judgments to which I have referred is undiminished by the provisions, set out above, inserted by the 1997 amending Act. One would expect that cases in which an application was refused because the applicant should never be released would be extremely rare. As I have said, the Crown prosecutor does not suggest that this is such a case. Equally, it would be exceptional that an application should be refused on the basis that further monitoring of the applicant's progress towards rehabilitation was required before a date for parole eligibility could be set. Given that an application cannot be made until the applicant has served at least eight years: <case>(a), there would be ample material in the majority of cases to enable the court to arrive at the appropriate minimum and additional terms.

This is such a case. The applicant has now served almost 12 years. One could never be certain how he might fare if released on parole, particularly in the light of his psychiatric illness, but his condition is now stable and his prospects of rehabilitation are as ascertainable as they ever will be. He is entitled to know now when it is he will become eligible for conditional release.

The Additional Term 
The question which must next be considered is whether I should specify an additional term for the remainder of the applicant's life. That course is open to me, even though the maximum sentence for manslaughter is now 25 years: Reg v Leaver (Carruthers J, unreported, 17 November 1993) at pp 13-14, affirmed by CCA (unreported, 23 November 1994), Crump per Mahoney JA at pp 13-14,
Hunt CJ at CL at p 18 and Allen J at p 34. Nevertheless, as Mahoney JA and
Allen J pointed out, that change in the statutory maximum is a matter properly to be taken into account as it may represent a change in the community expectation of the appropriate sentence for such a crime. In arriving at the appropriate additional term I must have regard to the totality of the criminality of all the offences for which the applicant was sentenced. Indeed,
I must do so for the whole of the resentencing exercise, that is, in fixing both minimum and additional terms: Reg versus Spinks (CCA, unreported, 7 August ) per Gleeson CJ at pp 7-8, Reg versus Leaver (CCA, supra) per Hunt CJ at CL at p 5; and see now <case>(4A).

The Crown prosecutor provided a schedule of all cases under <case> in which the application was granted but an additional term of life was specified. Most of these are murder cases, in which it is not necessary that it be a "most serious case of murder" before the additional term of life is justified:
Spinks (supra) per Gleeson CJ at pp 6-7. Clearly the position is otherwise with other crimes, such as manslaughter. To set an additional term of life in such a case is to impose the maximum sentence for which the law provides.
Allowing for its unique features, what <case> requires is a fresh sentencing exercise governed by ordinary sentencing principles: Reg versus Purdey [(1992) 65
A Crim R 441], per Hunt CJ at CL at pp 444-6, a passage which has been referred to time and time again in subsequent applications. One of those principles, of course, is that the maximum penalty prescribed for an offence is reserved for the worst category of case: Veen No 2 in the joint judgment at p 478.

Of the cases referred to by the Crown involving additional terms of life, four related to crimes other than murder. They were the following: * Reg versus Leaver (Carruthers J and CCA, supra) - maliciously inflict grievous bodily harm with intent (and related offences of kidnapping and indecent assault).
 * Reg versus Howlett (Loveday AJ, unreported, 7 October 1994) - two charges of attempted murder.
 * Reg versus Denning (Wood J, unreported, 26 April 1991) - malicious wounding with intent (with related charge of attempted escape from lawful custody).
 * Reg versus Cox (Badgery-Parker J, unreported, 13 December 1996: affirmed by
CCA, unreported, 19 June 1997) - maliciously shoot at a person with intent to avoid lawful apprehension (with two further related charges of the same kind, together with charges of malicious wounding with intent, armed robbery, kidnapping and escape from lawful custody).

In each case, the judge hearing the application fixed an additional term of life because he adopted the view of the original sentencing judge that the applicant's criminality called for the maximum sentence according to ordinary principles: Leaver (per Carruthers J) at pp 8-9 and 12, Howlett at pp 4-5,
Denning at p 15, Cox (per Badgery-Parker J) at p 30. Like the present application, each of those cases involved more than one offence (of greater or lesser seriousness) arising out of the same incident. In Leaver and
Howlett the applicants suffered from significant intellectual and personal problems leading to concerns about the prospect of their reoffending, but neither suffered a major psychiatric illness such as paranoid schizophrenia.
However, in each of those four cases there were aggravating features absent from the present application. The offences were characterised by a measure of cruelty or callousness which could not be ascribed to this applicant. Unlike this applicant, each of the offenders had a bad criminal record comprising, or including, significant offences of violence.

Great weight must be afforded to the remarks of Enderby J in arriving at his conclusion that the maximum sentence should be imposed. This is the effect of s 13A(10A) and would have been the case, even without that enactment. As Hunt
CJ at CL observed in Purdey (at p 444): "Any comment of the trial judge ... may also be of significance because such a contemporaneous reaction to the crime which was committed is a valuable guide to the true nature of that crime which may not appear so clearly from a perusal of the transcript so long after the event." 
Clearly, however, Enderby J's views do not bind me. Sub-s (10A) recognises as much and, in any event, it is clear that a judge in a <case> application is required to make his or her own findings of fact, whilst according to the views of the original sentencing judge the respect which they deserve: Cox (CCA, supra) per Gleeson CJ at pp 15-19. Moreover in this case, as in all applications of this kind, I have the benefit of considerable hindsight from evidence of the applicant's progress over the many years since he was originally sentenced.

The seriousness of the crimes cannot be gainsaid, particularly as they involved a sustained attack upon police officers acting in the execution of their duty. I have referred to the victim impact statement on behalf of the family of the deceased Const Quinn. I am mindful also of the serious wounding sustained by Snr Const Borland and the terror which he and the other officers, who fortunately were not wounded, must have undergone. However, as the summary of his Honour's remarks earlier in this judgment makes clear, the need to protect society from a man considered, because of his psychiatric condition, to be a continuing danger loomed large in his Honour's reasoning. His Honour adopted the view of Dr Milton that the applicant should be seen "more as an afflicted and ill person than a bad person." 
The matter which disturbs me is his Honour's reference to the applicant's "long standing history of aggressive and violent behaviour", emanating, apparently, from the Bloomfield Hospital material. Whatever material his
Honour had is not before me, presumably because the original file is lost.
However, Dr Ahmed's report of July 1992 gives brief details of an admission to
Parramatta Psychiatric Hospital in 1967 and four admissions to Bloomfield, two in 1971 and two in 1985. There may well have been other admissions. Dr Ahmed's summary appears to come from hospital records rather than the applicant's own account. It sets out the reasons for the admissions, but not how the applicant behaved while at the hospital. On one occasion only (the last) was he violent, but the nature of the violence is not explained. The other admissions were the result of behaviour which was bizarre or inappropriate, but could not be described as violent.

Accordingly, the evidence before me of any history of violence on the part of the applicant is entirely unsatisfactory. Certainly, whatever that history might be, there is nothing to suggest that he had ever previously exhibited violence anything like that which he meted out to the police officers on the occasion in question. By his pleas of guilty, the applicant abandoned any claim to self defence in law. Nevertheless, he was intercepted by a number of police in dramatic circumstances and I accept that, in his disturbed state of mind, he did believe that he was threatened in some way. It is not to be forgotten that he himself was shot a number of times. The account of the incident which he has maintained over the years is no doubt influenced by the need for self justification common to all human beings, but I think it is, in broad terms, what he believes happened. In the result, this case is markedly different from a case such as Veen No 2, where the offender had killed a second time in circumstances chillingly similar to the first.

In any event, in terms of any continuing threat to society, the applicant is now able to make out a case significantly more favourable than he could before
Enderby J. However reluctant he might have been to take it, he has had the benefit of regular medication over an extended period of time. His "advancing years" are a factor which Dr Westmore saw as significant in itself, and it is heartening that that experienced forensic psychiatrist appears to have accepted that his anger towards the police has subsided. He will probably never acknowledge the culpability of his behaviour, but I believe that the expressions of remorse referred to earlier, begrudging as they are, demonstrate some appreciation of the harm he caused. Given his lack of understanding of his psychiatric illness and his resentment of the necessary medication, there remains some risk of violent behaviour on his part when at liberty, but I do not think it is as great as that envisaged by Enderby J.
Certainly, I doubt that he would ever resort to violence of the order of that which he exhibited on 30 March 1986. Given his capacity to achieve a settled and productive lifestyle, it is unlikely that the occasion or the means to do so would ever arise.

For these reasons I respectfully differ from the conclusion of Enderby J. I am not satisfied that the case calls for the maximum sentence. Nevertheless, having regard to the criminality of all the offences, whilst recognising that they arise out of the same incident, a heavy sentence is called for. The appropriate term is 22 years.

The Minimum Term 
I should record that, for the determination of both minimum and additional terms, Mr Nicholson referred me to Reg versus Evers (CCA, unreported, 16 June ) and Reg versus Glesic (Slattery AJ, unreported, 20 March 1992). In Evers the Court of Criminal Appeal upheld a sentence of 25 years, comprising a minimum term of 18 years and an additional term of 7 years, in respect of five convictions for manslaughter. Twenty-five years was the maximum for manslaughter at the time that sentence was passed. Evers, who suffered from an untreatable psychiatric illness, shot five people dead in the course of one incident.

Glesic was a <case> application in respect of charges of murder and wounding with intent to murder, the victim in each case being a police officer. At the time he was originally dealt with Glesic had also pleaded guilty to two unrelated charges of armed assault with intent to rob, each of them being a separate incident. The circumstances of the murder and wound with intent to murder were that the two police officers were attempting to apprehend the applicant and two accomplices who had broken into a club, carrying firearms.
The applicant shot one officer dead and his accomplices wounded the other officer. In the <case> application there was some evidence of mental disorder, but this does not appear to have influenced the commission of the crimes, and it was not suggested that Glesic was a continuing danger to society. Slattery
AJ imposed a sentence of 251/2 years, comprising a minimum term of 151/2 years and an additional term of 10 years.

There are some parallels between those cases and this, just as there are some differences, and they are of limited assistance in my sentencing task. I have referred earlier to the observations of Hunt CJ at CL in Leaver (CCA, supra) at p 5, that the minimum term must reflect the criminality of all the offences. In that same passage his Honour went on to refer to the relevance of the protection of society, so that the risk of reoffending must also be taken into account. Although the applicant is now in his advanced middle age, the whole of the circumstances require a substantial minimum term. Equally, a lengthy additional term would benefit him and would serve the interests of the community. The appropriate minimum term is 16 years.

Accordingly, the application for the determination of minimum and additional terms is granted. On the charge of manslaughter the applicant is sentenced to penal servitude for 22 years, comprising a minimum term of 16 years to date from 30 March 1986 and to expire on 29 March 2002, and an additional term of 6 years to commence on 30 March 2002.
 * * * 
