

Regina versus Chu Matter No Cca 60232/98 [1998] NSWSC 568 (16 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
REGINA versus WAI TUNG CHU 
CCA 60232/98 October 1998 
Spigelman CJ, McInerney J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
HEADNOTE 
The applicant seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed of seven years, with a non-parole period of four and a half years, for importing a trafficable quantity of heroin contrary to s233B of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) . The trial judge reduced a nine year sentence by two years to seven years, for assistance given by the Applicant 
Held: 
The fact that the applicant would have little if any support from friends or family while serving his sentence is to be given minimum weight. Ferrer-
Esis [(1991) 55 ACrimR 231], 239.
Although the pattern of sentences imposed for this particular offence suggests that sentences have tended to be lower than the range of sentences indicated in Ferrer-Esis supra (see Bernier NSWCCA 19 May 1998; Lawson
NSWCCA 12 December 1997; Doan NSWCCA 27 September 1996), in the absence of a plea of guilty, his Honour's use of the range identified in Ferrer-Esis was not inappropriate, nor was his starting point of nine years excessive.
An English guideline judgment on sentencing reductions for assistance indicates that the reduction in a case of significant assistance would vary from one half to two thirds: King [(1985) 82 CrAppR(S) 120.]
This is higher that the discount customarily given in New South Wales, which ranges from 20 percent to 50 percent. It may be appropriate in another case to review the numerous authorities in which Cartwright and Gallagher have been applied, with a view to identifying an indicative range for a discount for assistance, together with a list of relevant factors. The State and
Commonwealth Directors of Public Prosecutions should consider whether a guideline judgment is appropriate because of inconsistency in the approach of trial judges or to bring together existing authority and identify the range from actual decisions. However, as the existing practice has not been put before the Court in any substantial way, this is not an appropriate occasion on which on which to formulate any guidelines.
There is no fixed tariff for assistance given to authorities: Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243], 255G; Gallagher [(1991) 23 NSWLR 220], 234C.
The discount is over a significant range, varying with the particular circumstances of the case and the assistance actually provided. His Honour's exercise of discretion miscarried by failing to make a discount for assistance within the range appropriate to the circumstances of the case in view of the value of the assistance given by the applicant and the large discount afforded to the recipient of the heroin: cf Carroll NSWCCA 15 November 1996.

ORDERS
Leave to appeal granted.
Sentence below quashed
Substitute therefor a term of six years and a non-parole period of three years and nine months.

REGINA versus Wai Tung CHU 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The Applicant seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed on 17 April 1998 of seven years, with a non-parole period of four and a half years, to date from 8 May 1997, for importing 851.9 grams of heroin contrary to s233B of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) . I set out and incorporate in this judgment pars2-11 of the Crown's Outline of Submissions slightly amended: "2. The applicant was born in Hong Kong and holds Canadian citizenship. He lives in Canada. On 8 May 1997 he arrived in Australia on a flight from
Singapore. His luggage was found to contain 2 bottles of scotch whisky which contained heroin. The quantity of pure heroin was 851.9 grams. The trafficable quantity is 2 gms. The commercial quantity is 1.5kg.
The applicant was taken to Australian Federal Police offices and interview. The applicant said that he had entered into an arrangement in
Canada with a person by the name of Kent whereby he would fly to Singapore via
Phnom Penh. He would be given an air ticket from Singapore to Australia. He would meet Kent in transit who would give him 2 bottles of alcohol containing an illegal substance. On arrival with the bottles in Australia he was to book into a hotel, telephone a number in Cambodia and give the name and room number of his hotel so that someone could contact him.
After the delivery of the bottles the applicant was to return to Cambodia where he would receive $10,000 Canadian.
The applicant said he had been told that the bottles contained "chemical alcohol". He said that he knew the substance was not legal.
During the record of interview the applicant agreed to assist in effecting a controlled delivery. To this end the applicant rang a number in
Cambodia and with Federal Police agents went to a room at the Southern Cross
Hotel where the applicant received a telephone call. Shortly thereafter a male (David Rozic) attended and collected the bottles.
As a result Rozic was arrested and charged with attempting to obtain a trafficable quantity of heroin. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 3 years imprisonment with a non-parole period of 2 years, after the learned sentencing judge had taken into account a reduction of 2 years under s21E of the
Commonwealth Crimes Act for future assistance. Rozic was sentenced on 21
November 1997.
Prior to the applicant being sentenced he provided the police with a statement dated 19 March 1998 which was before the sentencing judge together with a Federal Police Statement of Assistance.
The learned sentencing judge found that the applicant had shown no contrition but found that the applicant had assisted the authorities, and discounted the sentence on that basis.
The learned sentencing judge sentenced the applicant to 7 years with a non-parole period of 4 1/2 years, taking into account a reduction of 2 years due to the assistance the applicant gave to the authorities leading to the arrest of David Rozic.
The learned sentencing judge took into account the Statement to police dated 19 March 1998 but concluded that there should not be any further reduction (for future assistance)." 
Four grounds of appeal are propounded on behalf of the applicant. Firstly it is submitted that the sentencing judge gave no weight to the circumstance that the Applicant had spent time in custody prior to sentencing in protective custody and would continue to serve his sentence in protective custody. I reject that submission. His Honour expressly stated on p2 of his reasons on sentence of 17 April 1998: "I recognise that his assistance may lead to the prisoner serving at least part of his sentence on protection." 
There is no reason to believe that his Honour did not have regard to the fact that some part of his custody had already been so served and that he took that into account in exercising his final discretion.

Secondly, it was submitted that his Honour gave no weight to the circumstance that the Applicant would have little if any support from friends or family while serving his sentence.

His Honour recited the Applicant's personal history. He was a Chinese National born in Hong Kong. He migrated to Canada. His sister came from Hong Kong to give evidence for him and gave evidence about his family history. His Honour recited that his sister said expressly: "The prisoner has got no friends or relatives in Australia to visit him." 
His Honour went on to explicitly state: "I realise that to serve the sentence will be harsher for that reason but no reduction can be allowed for it because the prisoner chose to import prohibited drugs into this country." 
I agree with his Honour's rejection of this suggestion in the circumstances of this case. At best this matter is only ever entitled to minimum weight. A foreigner who has deliberately chosen to commit a crime in Australia is not entitled to a lesser sentence than an Australian would receive.

As Hunt CJ at CL said in Ferrer-Esis [(1991) 55 ACrimR 231] at 239: "The fact is that any person who comes to this country specifically and quite deliberately to commit a serious crime here as did the respondent has no justifiable cause for complaint when, as the inevitable consequence of the discovery of his crime, he is obliged to remain incarcerated in this country with this language foreign to him, isolated from outside contact." 
I do not understand his Honour to say that the matter is never entitled to some weight, but other authorities indicate that the weight is generally small.

The third submission was that the sentence imposed was excessive. His Honour referred to Ferrer-Esis supra where Hunt CJ at CL indicated that, after adjustment pursuant to s16G of the Crimes Act (Cth), the recognised pattern of head sentences for couriers of a trafficable quantity of heroin was between eight and a half and eleven years. His Honour determined that the appropriate sentence was nine years from which he deducted two years by reason of assistance.

The relevant authorities since Ferrer-Esis have recently been reviewed again in this Court in Bernier NSWCCA 19 May 1998.

One of the authorities there referred to is Lawson NSWCCA 12 December 1997.
James J reviewed the pattern of sentencing that had occurred since the decision of Ferrer-Esis. In a judgment, with which Hunt CJ at CL and Levine
J agreed, his Honour said: "However, since Ferrer-Esis the pattern of sentences which have been imposed on couriers who have not provided assistance has tended to be rather lower than the range of sentences indicated by his Honour." 
His Honour went on to refer to a schedule of cases annexed to a judgment of
Hunt CJ at CL in Doan NSWCCA 27 September 1996. James J also referred to
Judicial Commission statistics and concluded: "The great majority of sentences for offences under s233B of the [Customs
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) involving a trafficable quantity of heroin, where the offender had pleaded guilty and had no prior convictions, were less than eight years." 
It is noted that most of the cases contained in the schedule in Doan involved pleas of guilty. It is not clear to me whether or not Hunt CJ at CL in Ferrer-Esis was concerned with setting down a range for cases involving pleas of guilty only. In Lawson Hunt CJ at CL acknowledged that almost all of the cases in his schedule in Doan involved pleas.

The extent to which a discount is appropriate for a plea of guilty is a matter of discretion for the sentencing judge. In this case there was no plea of guilty. Notwithstanding his Honour's use of the range identified in Ferrer-
Esis, where this Court in Lawson has indicated that subsequent sentencing patterns suggest a somewhat lower range, at least in the context of pleas of guilty, in the absence of a plea of guilty, I am not satisfied that his
Honour's starting point of nine years was excessive.

The fourth challenge to the exercise of discretion was that the sentencing judge gave insufficient weight to the assistance given by the Applicant. This was based on the fact that his Honour reduced a nine year sentence by two years to seven years.

His Honour identified the assistance in the following part of his reasons for judgment: "The prisoner volunteered to assist the police in a controlled delivery of the whisky to the intended recipient. He phoned contacts in Cambodia and was told the recipient would arrive in thirty minutes to collect the bottles. As a result of the prisoner's assistance David Rozic was arrested when he attempted to collect the bottles...Rozic was sentenced by his Honour Judge Bellear on 21
November 1997 for the offence of attempting to obtain the possession of the drugs, he pleaded guilty to that offence. He provided a great deal of assistance to the authorities and in particular to the NCA. Judge Bellear reduced an intended sentence of six years with a non-parole period of four years to one of three years with a non-parole period of two years because of the assistance which included an undertaking to give evidence.

In addition after his conviction the prisoner provided a statement to police on 19 March 1998 providing information about a person named Joe Mach who had been arrested in Melbourne on 8 May 1997 also and in identical circumstances as the prisoner.

The prisoner's statement set out his knowledge of Mach detailing the same circumstances as his own and the names of persons Mach introduced him to. Mach is intending to plead guilty on 4 May 1998. The prosecuting authorities assessed the prisoner's information as being of little significance as they had already established such matters from other sources." 
It is common ground that the significance of the assistance was very high in the case of Rozic and also it appears that, but for the assistance that the applicant gave in the controlled delivery, the apprehension of Rozic may not have occurred.

It is particularly significant to note as his Honour did in the extract that I have quoted that the discount in the case for Rozic for assistance was 50 percent. This Court has often emphasised that there is no fixed tariff. (See
Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243], 255G;
Gallagher [(1991) 23 NSWLR 220], 234C.) 
On some occasions the fifty per cent discount which was allowed in
Cartwright itself has been treated as if it was a tariff. Coincidentally it is one that Judge Bellear applied in relation to Rozic. However it should not be so regarded. The discount is over a significant range, varying with the particular circumstances of the case and the assistance actually provided.

There is an English guideline judgment on sentencing reductions for assistance
King [(1985) 82 CrAppR(S) 120], , where the Court of Appeal said: "The quality and quantity of the material disclosed by the informer is one of the things to be considered, as well as its accuracy and the willingness or otherwise of the informer to confront other criminals and to give evidence against them in due course if required in court. Another aspect to consider is the degree to which he has put himself and his family at risk by reason of the information he has given; in other words the risk of reprisal. No doubt there will be other matters as well." 
The English guideline judgment indicated that the reduction in a case of significant assistance would vary from one half to two thirds. This is higher than the amount customarily given in New South Wales which with a few exceptions, appears to range from 20 percent to 50 percent.

On Monday of this week in the case of Jurisic NSWCCA 12 October 1998, this
Court indicated a preparedness to issue guideline judgments. It may be appropriate in another case to review the numerous authorities in which
Cartwright and Gallagher have been applied, with a view to identifying an indicative range for a discount for assistance. Although there is no warrant to review the principle that there is no fixed tariff, a range may be identifiable, together with a list of relevant factors. A number of cases were collected in the judgment of Hulme J in this Court in Carroll NSWCCA 15
November 1996. However his Honour dissented in the result in Carroll.

The matter has arisen in all criminal jurisdictions (see eg R versus Accused [(1992) NZLR 316]; Perrier (No. 2) <case>; [(1991) 1 VR 717]; [(1990) 59 ACrimR 164]; and
Thompson [(1994) 76 ACrimR 75], an appeal to the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of Queensland.) 
The identification of an appropriate discount for assistance must take into account a large range of factors, including the difficulty that the prosecuting authorities have in establishing particular offences. The State and Commonwealth Directors of Public Prosecutions should consider whether or not there is sufficient inconsistency in the approach of trial judges to require a guideline judgment. Alternatively, a guideline judgment may be appropriate to bring together existing authority and to identify the range from actual decisions. However, the existing practice has not been put before us in any substantial way. This is not an appropriate occasion on which to formulate any guidelines.

If the Crown were, in future, to seek a guideline judgment, the Court would be assisted by evidence from the police on the significance of the practice of
Courts in New South Wales in this regard. When I say "significance" I mean significance to the further conduct of investigations by police and the difficulty of establishing particular offences.

In this case the discount was something a little more than 20 percent. It was low on what would be regarded as a normal range although, as I have indicated, in the decision of Carroll was of an unsuccessful appeal against severity in circumstances where a slightly smaller discount had been applied by the trial judge. The principle issue in this case is whether the Court should interfere with the exercise of discretion by his Honour. This is always a difficult decision to make. Whilst I have indicated that there is a range of discount which include cases in which 20 percent was regarded as appropriate, that is not the same thing as saying what the appropriate range was in the circumstances of this case.

In order to allow this appeal we would have to conclude that his Honour's exercise of discretion miscarried by reason of the fact that the appropriate range in this case was higher than his Honour in fact attributed to the value of the assistance. In this case I am satisfied that the personal risk of the controlled delivery together with the apprehension of Rozic and the significance of Rozic's further testimony, plus the special feature in this case which was not present in Carroll, namely that Rozic himself was given a discount from which the Crown did not appeal of 50 percent, that his Honour did err in his exercise of discretion and that he failed to determine a discount within the range appropriate to the circumstances of this case.

In my opinion I would reduce the head sentence by a period of 12 months from seven years to six years and the non-parole period by a period of nine months, from four and a half years to three years and 9 months.

McINERNEY J: I agree. 
SPERLING J: I also agree. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The order of the Court is that leave to appeal is granted. That the sentence below is quashed and substituted for that sentence is a term of six years and a non-parole period of three years and nine months. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: Do you understand what I have said? 
PRISONER: Yes. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: Q. The sentence is reduced from seven years to six years and the non parole period from four and a half years to three years and nine months? * * * 
