

Regina versus Spyridis Matter No Cca 60011/98 [1998] NSWSC 791 (21 December )

Last Updated: 11 February 1999 
REGINA versus NICHOLAS SPYRIDIS 
CCA 60011/98 December 1998 
Ireland J, Hulme J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and application for leave to appeal against severity of sentence imposed by Flannery DCJ. 
FILE Nos: 60011 of 1998 
DELIVERED: 21 December 1998 
HEARING DATE: 7 December 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Nicholas SPYRIDIS 
JUDGMENT OF: Ireland, Hulme and Barr JJ. 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: BT Stratton QC/GJ Jones 
Respondent: GIO Rowling 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Photios Vouroudis & Co 
Respondent: SE O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal Law and Procedure - manufacture and supply of prohibited drug - whether jury entitled to convict. Held: they were. Criminal Law and Procedure - directions to jury - four day adjournment of trial between jury's question and trial judge's answer. 
Held: no miscarriage of justice.

NO. OF PAGES: 14 
RESERVED/EX TEMPORE: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
REGINA -v- Nicholas SPYRIDIS 
JUDGMENT 
IRELAND J: I agree with Barr J for the reasons given by his Honour. 
HULME J: In this matter, I agree with Barr J for the reasons given by His Honour. 
BARR J: The appellant appeals against convictions entered in the District Court. On 7 October 1997, after a trial of two weeks, a jury found him guilty of knowingly taking part in the manufacture of the large commercial quantity of a prohibited drug, namely methylamphetamine, and of supplying the large commercial quantity of the same drug. On 15 December 1997 his Honour Judge Flannery of Queen's Counsel sentenced the appellant on each count to imprisonment for seven years, comprising a minimum term of five years and an additional term of two years. Although in his notice of appeal the appellant applied for leave to appeal against the sentences, he has not pressed that application. 
Between 6 September and 13 November 1994 police kept watch on the activities of three men called Haeusler, Christie and Hanley. On 11 November their observations led the police to premises owned by the appellant at
Beaconsfield. On 13 November they arrested the appellant near the premises and the other three men at the premises. There they found a laboratory with all the appropriate equipment and chemicals necessary for the manufacture of amphetamines. They also found 13.58 kilograms of methylamphetamine hidden in the premises.

The case against the appellant was that he had knowingly made his premises available for manufacture, that he had knowingly suffered or permitted a step in the manufacturing process to be taken in his premises or that he had knowingly taken or caused to be taken a step in the manufacturing process. The case on supply was that the appellant knowingly had the methylamphetamine in his possession or control and that the amount of it gave rise to a presumption that he intended to supply it.

The manufacture of the drug at the appellant's premises and the presence there of the 13.58 kilograms of it were not put in issue. The defence was that the appellant did not know about the manufacture or the presence of the drug.

The first ground of appeal against conviction is that the verdicts are unreasonable or not supported on the evidence. The Court must therefore review the evidence and consider whether it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. In doing so it must pay full regard to the advantage the jury had in seeing and hearing the witnesses.
M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] per Mason
CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ at 493; Jones versus The Queen (1997) 72 ALJR per Gaudron, McHugh and Gummow JJ at 84.

The appellant made no admissions and there was no evidence directly implicating him in the offences. The Crown sought to prove its case by evidence of a series of circumstances which it submitted left no reasonable doubt about the appellant's knowingly having made his premises available for manufacture and his intentional possession of the drug found there. The circumstances may be summarised as follows. Police formed the suspicion that certain persons were involved or about to become involved in the supply of illegal drugs. Haeusler was a major suspect and Hanley was a suspect as well.
Police began to observe the activities of the two men and, in turn, of
Christie. They obtained warrants entitling them to listen to telephone conversations.

Between early September and 11 November 1994 police officers observed and noted the movements and activities of Haeusler, Hanley and Christie. They watched their vehicles and their houses. From 24 October onwards they listened to conversations on Haeusler's home and mobile telephones.

A company owned by the appellant, called Electrofix, rented mobile telephones from Optus for the appellant's use. Optus records relating to the rental were received in evidence. The appellant made those telephones available to Hanley and Christie and there was an entry in his diary recording the numbers of those telephones. Although police did not know it at the time, Hanley used his mobile telephone to call the appellant on eight occasions between 7 and 11
November 1994.

Also unknown to the police at that time was the fact that the appellant had given Hanley a key to his house at Beaconsfield.

Nothing of what the police saw or heard made them suspect the involvement of the appellant until 11 November 1994. On that day Haeusler was in the vicinity of the appellant's premises not long after midday. During the afternoon he returned to the vicinity, parked his car and walked into the rear of the appellant's premises. On the evening of the same day Haeusler and two unidentified men departed from a lane near the appellant's premises and travelled to the vicinity of Christie's residence. At the same time the appellant's panel van was parked at the rear of his premises.

On the following night, Saturday 12 November 1994, at about 10.30 pm, there was a light on in the appellant's premises and his van was parked in the driveway behind the premises.

At about 10.30 am on Sunday 13 November Haeusler's car was back at the appellant's premises.

At 5.37 pm on the same day the appellant arrived at the premises in his van.
Hanley's car was parked in the carport. The appellant entered the premises.
Three-quarters of an hour later he left the premises in his panel van and not long afterwards was pulled over and arrested by the police. When he was asked who was at the premises he said, "Look, I don't know. I only just called in."
And, "Look, I can't say". The police took him to the premises and the appellant handed over a set of keys to the back door of one of the houses comprising the premises, 516 Botany Road, Beaconsfield. The keys did not work, so police knocked on the door. Christie opened the door and the police arrested him. They entered the premises and arrested Hanley and Haeusler.

The premises comprised two adjoining single-storey terrace houses. There was an interconnecting door. There was a strong smell of chemicals in the premises and in both houses, but principally in number 518 Botany Road, were various kinds of utensils appropriate to make methylamphetamine by the red phosphorus method. When the equipment was removed it filled two cages each 64 cubic feet in volume.

Mr Judd, a chemist, and Detective Sergeant Cook, a police officer with approximately 14 years' experience in drug law enforcement, gave evidence. Mr
Judd's unchallenged opinion was that the preparation of methylamphetamine by the red phosphorus method was done by a number of processes which might be divided into three stages. In the first stage the raw materials are heated in a flask. That process takes a minimum of three hours and a maximum of 24 hours. The yield in methylamphetamine is 10% of the material in the flask.

According to Detective Sergeant Cook, who was not challenged on this part of his evidence, it is the practice only to half fill the flask to allow for expansion and the effects of boiling. Haeusler, Christie and Hanley used a 10 litre flask. Each "cook" would therefore have yielded 500 grams of pure methylamphetamine. That process took place in the storeroom of 518 Botany Road
Beaconsfield.

The next stage begins after the liquid has cooled and comprises a series of about five processes to filter, extract and purify the methylamphetamine base and convert it into a crystalline powder. According to Detective Sergeant Cook those processes were done in the lounge.

In the third stage the powder is "cut", that is, mixed with other powders such as glucose and sucrose. That process was done in the kitchen.

The 13.7 kilograms or so of methylamphetamine found at the house was 8% pure and contained impurities which show that it had been made from the materials of the kind found there. It followed that no less than about 1.1 kilograms of pure methylamphetamine, requiring about two "cooks" using the 10 litre flask, had been manufactured at the premises.

When police entered the premises, no chemical process was in progress and the reagent vessels were all at room temperature.

Detective Sergeant Cook estimated that to set up such a large amount of apparatus would have taken between 10 and 12 hours and that the reaction would have taken between 36 and 48 hours. Cooling, filtering, extracting, drying and cutting would have taken time as well, and Detective Sergeant Cook estimated that the whole process of setting up and manufacturing, as well as bagging, would have taken not less than 72 hours. It seems to me, notwithstanding the submissions of the appellant, that the jury were entitled to accept that estimate as realistic.

After the appellant was arrested he was taken through the house and shown the apparatus. He said that he had nothing to say about it.

He was taken to the police station and took part in a formal interview. In the course of it he said that he had not seen any of Haeusler, Christie or Hanley in the last couple of days and that although he had been home at times during the last four days he had been working every day.

His clothes were taken and tested and traces of methylamphetamine were found on his jeans, belt and shoes. The appellant's contention at trial was that that material had been deposited when the police conducted him through the premises after his arrest. Mr Judd said that that was possible but I do not think that the Crown Prosecutor abandoned that circumstance, as was contended for the appellant in this Court.

The appellant gave evidence. He said that he had been to school with Christie and had done electrical work for him occasionally. He met Haeusler at
Christie's house on two occasions but did not know his surname. Hanley was
Christie's uncle, and the appellant had engaged Hanley as a casual labourer.
That was why he had given Hanley a key to the premises. It was intended that
Hanley should pick up spare parts from the storeroom there from time to time.

It was Hanley who had asked him to obtain two mobile phones for himself,
Hanley and Christie. Hanley had done so so that he could obtain the phones more cheaply, using a corporate rate of rental through the appellant's company.

The appellant had no record of his employment of Hanley because, he said, he paid him only in cash.

He said that he had bought the premises as an investment with his wife in 1988 or 1989 and only went to live there when they separated in about 1992. He spent a substantial amount of time away from the premises. He worked five or six days a week in his business as an electrician and regularly stayed with his son at his mother's house in Redfern on Friday and Saturday nights. He said that he often stayed with his girlfriend.

He said that on 11 November 1994 he was going to his girlfriend's place and on the way parked his panel van at the premises because there was no off-street parking available where his girlfriend lived. He did this because he thought that his van would be safer at his residence. He stayed with her overnight and during the following day. They spent the day together and he stayed with her again the following night.

The appellant's girlfriend, Georgia Jabagi, and his brother, Efstathios
Spyridis, gave evidence supporting that version of events.

On 13 November 1994 the appellant left his girlfriend's house and went to the premises at Beaconsfield at or before 9 am, picked up the panel van and spent the day out. He did not return until about 5.30 pm. He remained in the garage, however, and did not enter the house, cleaning out the van for that period of time. Then he entered the premises to put a toolbox in the laundry. He heard voices and caught sight of a barrel and powder in the kitchen and realised something was wrong. He immediately left the premises and did not see anybody there. He drove down Beaconsfield Lane unsure of what to do and was stopped shortly afterwards by the police.

He denied knowledge of the activities of Haeusler, Christie and Hanley in the premises and said that Hanley had tricked him.

I have read the transcript of evidence of the accused and of the Crown witnesses. It seems to me that this was a strong circumstantial case. The jury were entitled to accept that the manufacture of methylamphetamine had been going on for at least 72 hours before the evening of Sunday 13 November 1994 and that the appellant was aware of what was happening.

The jury were entitled to treat with some suspicion the appellant's reason for giving Hanley the key to the premises, there being no record of his being an employee of the appellant's business, and for giving him a mobile telephone.

The jury were entitled to be impressed by the fact that the mobile telephone was furnished to Hanley only a few days before the process of manufacture began.

The jury were not bound to accept the evidence of the appellant, which appears implausible, explaining why he parked his van at the premises in order to visit his mother in Redfern and his girlfriend in another suburb. The jury were entitled to reject the supporting evidence of Miss Jabagi and Mr
Spyridis.

They might have treated with the same circumspection the appellant's evidence that on Sunday 13 November, while he was at the premises for about three- quarters of an hour, he spent most of the time cleaning out the van and only a short time inside the premises.

A strong circumstance in the Crown case was the manner in which the appellant behaved after he left the premises immediately before his arrest. His evidence was that he was surprised to hear voices and see unfamiliar objects in the house and left only 10 seconds after entering. If that were true, the jury were entitled to wonder why the appellant did not get in touch with the police. Instead, the police arrested him.

In my opinion it was open to the jury on all the evidence to come to the verdicts which they returned.

The second and third grounds of appeal may be taken together. They were that the learned trial judge failed adequately or properly to direct the jury on the question of circumstantial evidence and that his Honour erred in permitting a four-day break in the deliberations of the jury after a question had been asked by the jury concerning directions on circumstantial evidence.

Since this was a circumstantial case it was necessary that proper directions be given to the jury about the drawing of inferences and about the use the jury might make of inferences they might care to draw. The trial began on 22
September 1997 and his Honour began summing up on 2 October 1997. His Honour said this:- 
The case really is circumstantial. What that means really is that there is no witness who says: I saw the accused commit this crime. It is very hard to see knowledge. There is no admission that he actually knew that that drug was there or that it was being manufactured there, being at the premises at Botany
Road, Beaconsfield, so there is no direct evidence of knowledge. It is a circumstantial case which means that the Crown seeks to prove certain circumstances, that is facts and events, which the Crown says prove beyond reasonable doubt that he is guilty because there is no other reasonable explanation.

Circumstantial evidence ladies and gentlemen is not necessarily any less reliable than the direct evidence of an eyewitness. Indeed, in some cases, it can be more convincing. An example away from this case. The history of the criminal law and the British system has shown that identification evidence can be mistaken. Identification evidence would be, in effect, that I saw X produce a knife at an armed robbery. There have been a number of cases in the annals of the criminal justice system in the English speaking world where people have been killed, judicially killed, executed and subsequently found out that the identification was wrong. That is direct evidence. I mention that because sometimes people say circumstantial evidence. It is not necessarily any less reliable than direct evidence and identification evidence is an example of a type of direct evidence which can be mistaken. However, before you can find an accused person guilty of a crime on the basis of circumstantial evidence, you must be satisfied that such a finding is not only reasonable but it is the only reasonable finding to make. If there is another finding that is reasonably open, that is if there's another reasonable explanation which is consistent with innocence, it is your duty to find the accused not guilty.
When you consider circumstantial evidence you do so in the light of all the other material in the case including the material placed before you by Mr
Spyridis.

Later on the same day the jury were asked to retire and consider their verdicts. Deliberations continued on the following day, Friday 3 October. On that day the learned trial judge was obliged to attend a funeral. The jury retired again to consider their verdict at 9 am, but sent back a question in the following terms:- 
We understand what circumstantial evidence is but could you please clarify the full legal ramifications of circumstantial evidence? When considering the big picture, how relevant is our own judgment of the overall scenario based on our understanding of pieced-together facts? 
His Honour realised that more time was likely to be needed than was available on that day if he were to attend the funeral and he put the problem to the jury, asking them whether they would prefer to be excused immediately and come back on the following Tuesday (the Monday was a public holiday). The Foreman replied that Tuesday would be preferable and his Honour accordingly adjourned the matter until that day. No objection was raised by counsel for the Crown or the appellant.

When the Court resumed on Tuesday 7 October 1997 his Honour gave the jury further directions in answer to their question. It is unnecessary to repeat those directions here because, notwithstanding the terms of the second ground of appeal, counsel for the appellant conceded that the directions were appropriate. The submission was simply that the jury ought not to have been required to wait from Friday 3 October to Tuesday 7 October to hear the answer to their question.

In my opinion his Honour took the preferable course in giving the jury further directions immediately before they recommenced their deliberations. The directions were fresher in the minds of the members of the jury than they otherwise would have been. There was no danger that individual jurors would discuss the case over the weekend, lacking complete and final directions, because his Honour made a point of directing them not to do so.

After the further directions the jury retired again at 10.42 am on 7 October
At 10.46 am they returned to be given further directions at the request of counsel.

Later on the jury asked further questions, and at 2.45 pm his Honour recalled them and gave further directions on an unrelated matter. They retired again at .51 pm and returned their verdicts at 3.51 pm.

In my opinion his Honour dealt in an appropriate manner with the timing of the directions concerning circumstantial evidence. No criticism could be made about the adjournment from Friday morning until Tuesday morning in all the circumstances, or about the time at which his Honour answered the jury's question.

I think that these grounds of appeal should fail.

I would dismiss the appeal against conviction.
 * * * 
