

Stojanovski versus Gheiti [1996] NSWSC 126 (14 May 1996) 
STOJANOVSKI versus GHEITI /95 CLD 16690/91 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, SHELLER JA, COLE JA 
CATCHWORDS:DAMAGES - PERSONAL INJURY - CHALLENGE TO 
TRIAL JUDGE'S FINDINGS ON FACT AND CREDIBILITY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
DAMAGES - personal injury - challenge to trial judge's findings on fact and credibility - judge relying on in-court observations of appearance and demeanour of witness - denial of natural justice - procedural fairness. 
Motor vehicle accident - plaintiff's car struck by another car, although stationary at the time of the accident - defendant driver admitted liability - trial judge had to decide between competing and contradictory views of the plaintiff's state of health and state of mind of plaintiff - claim by plaintiff, supported by psychiatrist, that he was suffering post-traumatic stress disorder including depression and organic brain dysfunction - other view, represented by oral evidence and professional medical reports argued plaintiff embellishing his disability.

Appeal - appellant's counsel argued judge had committed an error of perception within one of the Devries exceptions - second argument claimed trial judge's in-court observations of plaintiff led to unfair trial.

Held: (1) On the questions of the resolving of contradictory factual findings and the credibility of the plaintiff, there was no appellable error by the trial judge. The rule is an appeal court will disturb findings made wholly or partly on the observation of witnesses and opinions concerning their reliability, only if the trial judge has palpably misused the advantage of seeing and hearing the witnesses or has acted on evidence glaringly improbable or inconsistent with incontrovertibly established facts. Devries versus The Australian National Railways Commission <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 472], the rule adopted in that case is not to be regarded as rigid and inflexible. In the present case, the trial judge did not infringe the rule. In respect of his in-court observations, the trial judge was not drawing any decisive conclusions concerning the plaintiff's credibility and such observations could not be said to have significantly influenced his decision. There was no denial of natural justice or infringement of procedural fairness.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: This appeal is brought from the judgment of a judge who had to decide between two competing views of the state of health and the state of mind of a plaintiff who was before him claiming damages for the injuries he suffered when the car he was driving, which was stationary at the time, was run into by another car. The case was heard by Hulme J. The defendant driver of the other car admitted liability. 
One view of the state of health and mind of the plaintiff was presented in his own account of himself before and after the accident and by some medical opinion which was formed on the assumption that the plaintiff's account of himself was truthful. On this evidence the plaintiff had suffered and was continuing to suffer severely as a result of the accident. Put shortly his case was, as Dr Younan, a psychiatrist called in support of his claim said, that he was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder including depression and organic brain dysfunction. In his own evidence the plaintiff elaborated on those general ways of stating his overall condition giving many particulars.

The other view was presented by the evidence, oral and by report, of expert professional and medical witnesses. Stated shortly, their view was as exemplified by what Dr Mitchell said in a report dated December 1989, "The plaintiff in examination indicated a gross degree of embellishment in the disability claimed to the extent that it rendered the examination meaningless", and by Dr Shand, a psychiatrist, in a report of 25 October 1994, "From the accumulated information, including results of urine testing, I consider that this patient is either fabricating disorder or grossly exaggerating his complaints on a conscious basis whether physical, psychiatric or cognitive".

The trial judge saw and heard the plaintiff giving evidence as well as other witnesses. The rule in trials such as this, where a fact-finder acting on behalf of the community has to decide which of contradictory views of the one basic situation should be accepted, is that the trial judge is the fact-finder and although there is an appeal to this Court from the judge's findings the appeal court will nor ordinarily disturb those findings where in making them the judge has based them wholly or partly on observation of witnesses and opinions formed about their truthfulness or reliability. Only when the trial judge has palpably misused the advantage of seeing and hearing the witnesses or has acted on evidence glaringly improbable or inconsistent with incontrovertibly established facts will the appellate court interfere, see for example Devries versus The Australian National Railways Commission, <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 472] at 479.

Subject only to one argument raised for the appellant plaintiff this case in my opinion falls squarely into the Devries category.

That argument referred to with some appropriateness by counsel for the appellant as a window, is based on what the judge said at p 469 of the appeal papers, this was that the plaintiff "appeared in the witness box and in court for much of the time miserable and one might say somewhat pathetic. On the other hand I think I glimpsed on a number of occasions, six to ten, an appearance of alertness in manner and of the giving of attention from which appearance there was a sudden retreat to the usual hangdog look".

I understood counsel to have meant by his reference to the window, which this part of his Honour's reasoning was said to open, was that it gave the appellant an opportunity to criticise a judgment based entirely on consideration of factual matters otherwise impregnable because of the rule I have mentioned about the primacy of the trial judge as fact-finder.

There was little basis for any suggestion that the trial judge had committed any of the errors of perception which I mentioned earlier and which were listed in Devries. The appellant was in the difficult position in the appeal that he was facing factual conclusions against which no tenable attack could be mounted. The passage I have read, being the one criticised by counsel, was said to show that his Honour was in breach of a regular approach of the Court which was discussed in Government Insurance Office versus Bailey, [(1992) 27
NSWLR 304.] That case dealt with a situation where a judge had noticed a witness' demeanour in the witness box and outside the witness box and the
Court had to consider whether in the circumstances of that case what the judge had done gave an appellant a good ground of appeal on the basis essentially of denial of natural justice in that it was said the judge had acted on material which a party had had no opportunity of dealing with. It is the same ground which is relied on here.

In Bailey the President, then Kirby P, was a dissenter and stated the rule, as he understood it, in stronger terms than the majority, Clarke JA and Hope
AJA, thought correct. The majority view is the one which binds this Court unless on some occasion there should be a successful attempt to have the matter re-argued, something which has not been suggested today and which I am not suggesting should have been done.

The appropriate rule appears at p 323 of the report where there is a citation from a South Australian case which in turn referred to an earlier South
Australian case where the full court of the South Australian Supreme Court had said that although they agreed with a still earlier statement in the South
Australian courts that in general when a judge acted on observations of a witness out of the sight of counsel it would be wrong to draw any conclusions as a result of those observations without having given counsel an opportunity to take whatever course counsel wished in dealing with such observations, they nevertheless went on to say that they wanted to guard themselves against being understood as laying down any absolute rule on the subject, and that they thought that it was a matter of what should be regarded as fair play and common sense.

In the judgment, which was expressly approved in this Court by the majority,
King CJ, having referred to the observations I have just summarised, went on to say "The rule, as appears from the passage cited, is not to be regarded as absolute in the sense that it must be applied rigidly to every observation which a judge might make of a party during the course of a trial outside the witness-box. Something will depend, no doubt, on the circumstances of the particular case and upon the significance of the particular observations. It is clear, however, that where the judge makes observations of the actions or demeanour of a party, which actions and demeanour are not observable by counsel, and makes use of those observations in a way which has a significant influence upon his decision of the case, he is required in justice, before making such use of those observations, to make those observations and the possibility of his using them in the course of his judgment known to counsel at a stage of the hearing at which counsel still has an opportunity of dealing with them in a proper and effective way." (as cited in 27 NSWLR at 323-324) 
In the present case Hulme J, after stating his observation of the plaintiff before him which I have earlier quoted, went on "I would not on the basis of these incidents alone have been prepared to conclude positively that the plaintiff's usual demeanour before me was an act.
There were enough, however, particularly when combined with my views of some aspects of his evidence, to lead me to the view that I should hesitate before accepting any of his evidence which was not corroborated. My suspicions concerning the plaintiff were confirmed when medical reports were tendered particularly by the defendant".

When the whole of his Honour's judgment is read and when the rule as stated by
King CJ and adopted by Clarke JA is borne in mind, it does not seem to me that the rule as described by King CJ was infringed in the present case. One matter of primary importance is that his Honour was referring to the plaintiff's appearance both in the witness box and in court. It follows from that that the appearance of the plaintiff to which he was referring was observable by counsel and that the appearance of the plaintiff out of the witness box was precisely of the same kind. No distinction was drawn between the way he looked in and out of the witness box for much of the time.

The judge's qualification immediately after the passage relied on indicating that he was not drawing any decisive conclusions concerning the plaintiff's credibility simply from his observation of him seems to me also to be one of the circumstances of the particular case tending to support two complementary views, of the use that his Honour made of his observation.

The first of these is that the whole of his judgment indicates that it was the opinion of the medical witnesses and his own observation of what the plaintiff said and did in the witness box which were the primary reasons for his forming the adverse view of the plaintiff's credibility that he did. The particular observation that he made that I have quoted would not, in my opinion, be fairly counted as a significant influence upon his decision of the case when the mass of material before him in the way of the doctors' reports and the quite lengthy observation he had of the plaintiff in the witness box and his answers and demeanour in the witness box are also remembered.

The other and complementary conclusion I would draw from this particular passage, in light of the whole of the material before his Honour, is that in regard to what King CJ referred to as the significance of the particular observations it is quite apparent that they can have formed only a very minor part of the total input the judge had towards arriving at his conclusion on the primary issue in the case.

The result, in my opinion, is that the matter relied upon by the appellant's counsel is not at all persuasive in drawing the Court to a conclusion that there was any denial of natural justice or infringement of rules of fairness in what was indicated by the particular passage. That ground of appeal, in my opinion, fails.

That leaves the case one as I described in the beginning where there were contrasting bodies of evidence on one basic factual situation and in resolving the contradictions the judge had to arrive at decisions concerning the credibility of the plaintiff. There being no appellable error in the way in which he approached that task this Court is bound to accept his conclusions concerning credibility and to deal with the appeal on that basis.

On that basis there can be no question but that the trial judge's conclusion should not be disturbed. In my opinion, therefore, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SHELLER JA: For the reasons given by the presiding judge I agree that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

COLE JA: I also agree.

PRIESTLEY JA: The Court's order, therefore, is appeal dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
