

Langdon versus The State of NSW [1996] NSWSC 497 (18 October 1996) 
Langdon v. The State of New South Wales /95; WCC12318/92 October 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Mahoney P, Meagher JA, Powell JA 
CATCHWORDS: Courts and Judges - Statement of reasons for decision - Duty to give reasons - Extent of duty - Sufficiency of reasons.

Words and Phrases - "Permanent brain damage" 
Workers Compensation - Compensable injuries - Permanent brain damage 
Ex tempore/Reserved: Reserved 
Allowed/Dismissed: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: The facts are detailed in the judgment of Powell JA which I have had the advantage of reading. 
His Honour's judgment enables me to go directly to the issues which require consideration.

This is an appeal by way of rehearing. Accordingly, this Court is required to form its own opinion upon the evidence tendered at the trial and is, in doing so, to have regard to, inter alia, the advantages which the trial judge had in assessing the evidence and arriving at his conclusions.

At an earlier stage, the respondent questioned the genuineness of the appellant's complaints. The trial judge accepted that his complaints and his evidence were essentially genuine. I am of the same opinion. I see no reason to differ from the conclusions arrived at by the trial judge.

It was necessary for the appellant to establish that he had suffered "permanent brain damage" within the terms of the Table to which reference is made in, inter alia, [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). It is not sufficient that the appellant establish that, because of the injury he has suffered, his mental capacity has been reduced or his mental functioning has deteriorated. It is necessary that he show that there has been "permanent brain damage". In principle, that is both necessary and sufficient to establish his claim to compensation. The effect produced upon his mental functioning may be relevant for, for example, the purpose of proving the existence of permanent brain damage. Thus, with the assistance of expert evidence, the tribunal of fact may feel it proper to infer that, because of the deficit in mental functioning, he has suffered brain damage. And the extent of the deterioration in his mental functioning may warrant an inference as to the extent of the brain damage and accordingly may assist in determining what proportion of a most severe case exists.

There was expert evidence to the effect that what had occurred was not merely a reduction in mental functioning but actual brain damage. There was evidence suggesting that there had been no neurological damage. His Honour preferred those witnesses who opined that permanent damage had occurred. Dr Bell was one of these. It was, in my opinion, proper for the judge to accept such evidence.
There was nothing in the evidence generally which would require that the judge accept the contrary evidence. Considering the evidence as it is before this
Court, I would come to the same conclusion. Accordingly, having regard to the advantage which the trial judge had in assessing the expert evidence: see generally Public Trustee versus Commonwealth of Australia (Court of Appeal, 20
December 1995, not yet reported); I do not differ from the judge's conclusion in this regard.

The judge assessed the percentage of permanent brain damage as twenty per cent. It was necessary for the judge to make an assessment of this kind. The percentage chosen by him, twenty per cent, does not correspond to a consensus of a particular body of witnesses before him. In substance it is, I think, a choice which the judge made, not because a particular group of witnesses had opted for that percentage, but because it was the percentage which, considering all the evidence, he felt it proper to adopt.

The trial judge had the advantage of seeing the appellant in evidence before him and hearing the lay witnesses to whom, in his judgment, he referred. It was necessary for the judge, in dealing with this aspect of the matter, to determine what the appellant could and could not do and how far his capacity in this regard had been affected by the injury. In making the former determination, the judge was required to assess the evidence of the appellant and of those lay witnesses. It was, I think, upon the basis of that assessment that his Honour reached his conclusion. As I infer, he concluded that the degree of damage was twenty per cent influenced by what the appellant, since the injury, could and could not do.

In the circumstances I see no error in what the judge did. Considering the evidence as it is before this Court, I would come to a conclusion of the same order.

The appellant has submitted that his Honour erred in adopting such a percentage. I appreciate the seriousness of the matter from the point of view of the appellant and I am conscious of the effect which apparently the injury has had upon him. However, in the circumstances I do not think it has been shown that the trial judge has erred in any of these matters. Accordingly, for the reasons generally given by the trial judge and by Powell JA, I am of opinion that the judge's conclusion on these matters was correct.

I agree with Powell JA that the reasons given by the judge for his conclusions are sufficient.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Powell JA.
 
POWELL JA: The principal question which arises for determination upon this appeal from a Judgment delivered, and Award made, by Davidson CCJ on 16 December 1994 in an application made by the Appellant for compensation pursuant to the provisions of [ss. 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html), 67 of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) ("the [1987 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/)") is: what is comprehended by the phrase "permanent brain damage (being an injury which is not or is not wholly an injury otherwise compensable under this Table)" appearing in the Table of Compensation for Permanent Injuries in [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/index.html#p3),
Division 4, of the Act ("the new Table").

The other questions which arise for determination on the appeal are: - whether his Honour's finding that the Appellant had suffered 20% permanent brain damage was against the evidence and the weight of the evidence; and whether his Honour had failed to give reasons, or failed to give sufficient reasons, for finding that the Appellant suffered 20% permanent brain damage and that the Appellant was entitled to one third of the maximum amount payable pursuant to the provisions of s.67 of the Act for pain and suffering.

Although the hearing of the application proceeded over six days between June and March 1994, and although the evidence tendered on the hearing included a considerable amount of specialist evidence from highly regarded medical practitioners - two neurologists (Dr. Teychenne and Dr. Somerville), three psychiatrists (Dr. Heiner, Dr. Bell and Dr. Revai) and two specialists in rehabilitation medicine (Dr. Speldewinde and Dr. Ganora) - two clinical psychologists (Dr. Ballinger and Dr. Langeluddecke) a speech pathologist (Ms.
Zucker) and an occupational therapist (Ms. Barry) together with the evidence of a number of lay witnesses - including the Appellant's wife - as to their observations of the Appellant both prior to, and after, the accident which gave rise to the Appellant's claim for compensation, it is, I believe, not necessary to examine in any extended detail the evidence of these various witnesses. I say this since, despite the fact that, in the evidence tendered on the hearing, there were significant conflicts between the views expressed by the witnesses called on behalf of the Appellant and those called on behalf of the Respondent, there was evidence before his Honour which was open to him to accept, and upon which he relied for his conclusion, that the Appellant had suffered permanent brain damage as a consequence of the accident in which he was involved.

So to say, however, does not necessarily advance the matter very far, as it is still necessary first to determine what is comprehended by the phrase "permanent brain damage" when used in the Table.

Before turning to consider that question, it is necessary that some historical matter be recorded.

The Appellant is now 37 years of age, having been born on 29 April 1959.
Although the evidence as to his education is rather sketchy, it would appear that the Appellant had a conventional education until the end of Year 12 at which time he was awarded the Higher School Certificate, but that, in the following year - but, on this occasion, as a student at Technical College - he again undertook the examinations for, and was again awarded, the Higher School
Certificate - on this second occasion, so it would seem, the Appellant attained a Tertiary Entrance Ranking in the top 5% in the State.

It would appear that, thereafter, the Appellant attended the University of
Sydney where he was awarded the degree of Bachelor of Arts with Honours - his major subjects being History and English - and a Diploma of Education, the latter being awarded in 1982. Although there is a suggestion in the evidence that the Appellant was later awarded the degree of Master of Education, the better view of the evidence seems to be that, in 1987 and 1988, the Appellant completed two year's study towards that degree, but that, following his transfer from the metropolitan area to Nowra, the Appellant discontinued his studies. Although the evidence does not appear to contain any formal assessment of the Appellant's intellectual ability beyond that which I have set out above, it would seem reasonable enough to assume that, prior to the accident which ultimately gave rise to the Appellant's claim for compensation, he was of above average intellectual ability.

The evidence would also tend to indicate that, prior to the accident, the
Appellant had a wide variety of interests and that he undertook a variety of different activities. Thus, it would appear, that, at some stage, he had been involved in the Scouting movement and had become a Queen's Scout. Further, it would seem that the Appellant was interested in music and that, in addition to singing in the University Choir, he also played the cello. Further still, it would seem that, while at University, the Appellant had played for the
University at rugby and field hockey. Finally, it would seem that the
Appellant, at some time, became interested in the martial arts and acquired qualifications which enabled him to teach Tai Chi and Tae Kwon Do.

It would appear that, for a time following his graduation, the Appellant undertook some casual teaching and, as well, worked as a librarian for the
Sydney Youth Orchestra. Thereafter, and until March 1991, the Appellant worked full-time as a teacher in a number of High Schools, some in the metropolitan area, and thereafter in the Wollongong and Shoalhaven area. The Appellant's last posting prior to 1991 appears to have been at Kanahooka High School near
Wollongong, where he taught for two years and he commenced teaching at the
Shoalhaven High School at the beginning of the school year in 1991.

Meantime, in 1985, the Appellant had married his wife, whom he had met while at University. The Appellant and his wife - who appears to have qualifications as a teacher, a journalist and script writer - appear to have had three children of their marriage, those children now being aged approximately 8, 6 and 4 years.

The accident which was to give rise to the Appellant's application for compensation appears to have occurred at about 7.00 p.m. on 21 March 1991, at which time, so it would seem, the Appellant was on his way to supervise a school dance. Although the detail of the accident is less than clear, it would appear that, while the Appellant was seated in his car waiting for traffic lights to change, his car was struck on the right-hand side mudguard and his car was spun around a number of times during the course of which the
Appellant's head struck parts of the car's body in a variety of places.
Although it would seem that the Appellant has no recollection of having lost consciousness, it would appear at least likely that he did so, for, when the ambulance attended he was found lying on the footpath, and was complaining of pain in the right temple - which was abraided - the right side of the neck, his nose and his right lower leg.

The Appellant was then conveyed by ambulance to the Accident and Emergency
Department of the Shoalhaven District Memorial Hospital where he seems to have been kept for observation for a time before being discharged to home. On admission to the hospital it was noted that the Appellant had grazes to the right temple and right scapula, that he was tender in the temporo-mandibular joint region and that he had a painful neck. The Appellant returned to hospital on the following day when X-rays were taken of his skull and cervical spine, no abnormalities being revealed by the X-rays which were then taken.

Although the evidence is less than clear, it would seem that the Appellant did not return to work for a week or so following the accident.

The Appellant appears to have consulted his general practitioner, Dr. Jameson, on 25 March 1991, at which time he complained of a sore neck and a painful right knee, the diagnosis then made by Dr. Jameson being soft tissue injuries to the cervical area and knees and the Appellant being referred for physiotherapy.

In the course of the following five weeks, the Appellant consulted Dr. Jameson on five occasions, the dates of those consultations, the complaints noted and the action taken being as follows: - .91 - complained of confused thinking, knee pain and neck pain. Diagnosis - post concussion syndrome treated by rest.
.91 - still complaining of slow thinking and pain on squatting.
.91 - complained of slow thinking, neck pain, back pain, knee pain.
.91 - complained of light headedness - CT scan of head ordered, no abnormality found.
.91 - complained of painful right Temporo Mandibular Joint and light headedness.

Despite the various matters of which the Appellant complained, it would seem that he had not taken any further time off after he had returned to work, albeit that he seems to have had difficulty in coping.

The Appellant appears to have consulted Dr. Jameson on 2 and 16 May 1991 complaining of dizziness, headaches and nausea. On the latter occasion, the
Appellant appears to have taken the day off work.

On 12 August 1991, the Appellant consulted Dr. Jameson complaining of a right- sided headache and mental confusion. This consultation appears to have coincided with a period of some five days off work.

On 21 August 1991, the Appellant appears to have been given time away from work because he was continuing to suffer pain and discomfort and was "disorientated". On the following day, Dr. Jameson noted that the Appellant was not coping at school and he referred the Appellant to Dr. Speldewinde at the Nowra Community Hospital.

Dr. Speldewinde appears to have seen the Appellant for the first time on 29
August 1991. At that time, the Appellant gave him a history (inter alia) of appearing confused to his students, of being told that he wrote "nonsense words" on the blackboard, and that his memory was poor and that he was unable to concentrate for long. The provisional diagnosis which Dr. Speldewinde seems to have made was (inter alia) that the Appellant was suffering from a post- traumatic stress disorder and that he might have significant sequelae of his closed head injury. For that reason, Dr. Speldewinde referred the Appellant to
Dr. Ballinger for both a detailed neurological assessment and for assessment for stress management.

The Appellant appears to have been examined by Dr. Ballinger on 28 November , the results of the tests then carried out by Dr. Ballinger, in her view, "(pointing) to a profound deterioration in intellectual functioning in the light of the his pre-morbid academic achievements". Although there is a body of opinion in favour of the view that IQ scores give a very limited, and often biased, perspective of a person's abilities, some idea of the nature of those test results is given by the fact that Dr. Ballinger recorded that the
Appellant's verbal IQ was 101, that his performance IQ was 81 and that his full scale IQ was 92, the full scale IQ indicating that the Appellant was then low average and approaching the border line of mental retardation.

In the formal report (Appeal Book pp. 230-233) which she was to provide on 24
January 1992, Dr. Ballinger concluded: - "SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS: 
The results of this testing battery are strongly indicative of diffuse axonal injury. Such injury often occurs when the brain is subjected to a sudden change of velocity in more than one direction, such as in a motor vehicle spinning or overturning. The effect of this injury is that, although Mr. Langdon's crystallised or long term intelligence is intact, his fluid intelligence is significantly impaired. In other words, he has trouble whenever he has to handle more than one train of thought at a time. This problem with multiple tracking in cognition means that he is unable to move flexibly between ideas or to handle multiple input simultaneously. Because multiple tracking is such an effort, he will tend to tire easily when under such demands and it will become increasingly difficult for him to think coherently until he has a rest. He is likely to function much better in efforts of short duration than during sustained, complex mental activity.
 
The prognosis for full recovery of fluid intelligence is not good since it is now 11 months since the accident and the major part of recovery tends to take place in the first 12 months. However, a slow return of some functioning has been described in the literature over the second year. It will therefore be important for neuropsychological testing to be repeated in another 12 to 15 month's time.
 
These cognitive problems will clearly have a profound effect on his ability to teach English at a senior level to secondary school students. It is likely that he will require extensive rehabilitation and retraining in a programme which specialises in brain injury." 
Meantime, in a report dated 10 December 1991 (Appeal Book pp. 207-208), Dr. Speldewinde had written (inter alia): "It is quite apparent that Chris Langdon's injuries and disabilities are consistent with the accident as described. The treatment I have instituted has been after some period of clarifying the status with DIO, finally obtaining detailed neuropsychological assessment to measure his functional brain capacity, and also an assessment for Stress Management counselling with a view to ongoing treatment. I have also prescribed a low dose of Amitryptiline of 10 mgms at night and this has substantially helped his headaches.
 
It is not possible, at this stage, to outline future treatment, but following upon completion of his neurophsychological and stress management counselling assessments I anticipate moving on to a return to work programme which will require detailed liaison with his workplace and supervisors.
 
His prognosis at this stage is guarded but I would imagine over the next substantial period of time of possibly 1-3 years he will make considerable improvements in his day to day abilities to cope as a school teacher and return to reasonable Tai Che instruction.
 
I await further evaluations, particularly with respect to comparison with pre morbid status before making more substantial statements.
 
Overall my working diagnoses are - . Significant closed head injury.
 . Hyperextension-accelerated neck injury.
 . Post traumatic stress.
 . Soft tissue injury right knee." 
On 28 January 1992, Dr. Speldewinde, when commenting on Dr. Ballinger's report, wrote (Appeal Book p. 211): "As it is now some 10 months since his accident, his prognosis for significant gains in function is very guarded as most gains occur in the first year. However, I am making attempts to refer him to the Lidcombe Hospital Head Injury Unit for assessment for cognitive remediation." 
At the beginning of the school year 1992, the Appellant, who appears to have been on leave since August 1991, commenced what appears to have been described as a Cognitive Remediation Programme through the Occupational Therapy Department of the Shoalhaven District Memorial Hospital, the objective sought to be obtained by that programme seemingly being to fit the Appellant for what was described as a "work trial" scheduled to commence in the second week of the second school term 1992 - the "work trial" which was contemplated seems to have involved, at first, one class per week - each class having five English lessons per week - ultimately building to three or four classes per week. 
Despite this, when reporting to Dr. Jameson on 27 February 1992, Dr.
Speldewinde wrote (inter alia) (Appeal Book p.214): "Recent initial conversations with his school principal, Mr. Bill Bailey, and the Wollongong Human Resources Manager for the Department of Education, Mr. Cook, indicated poor likelihood of him returning to teaching duties. I will need to pursue the Department of Education Rehabilitation Co-ordinator to ascertain other available duties and although I think we should wait several months to see whether there are improvements in his cognitive performance, I feel his prognosis is poor." 
It would appear that, although the Appellant commenced his "work trial" as planned, it soon became apparent that he was having difficulty coping. That this was so is made apparent by the following passage in a letter which Dr. Speldewinde wrote to Dr. Jameson on 15 May 1992 (Appeal Book p.217): "He has received information that his work trial which he recently commenced and was threatened by his pending termination has been allowed to proceed for a short period longer subject to his appeal continuing." 
However, on 29 May 1992, Dr. Speldewinde was to write to Dr. Jameson (inter alia) (Appeal Book p.220): "He has abandoned his work trial and is seeking medical retirement as offered. I will refer him onto the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service for an assessment of his general vocational capabilities, but I am not optimistic that there is a lot that can be offered him." 
The search for evidence of organic brain damage which would explain the Appellant's cognitive dysfunction continued. A further CT scan had been conducted on 27 May 1992, which scan revealed no evidence of intra-cranial haemorrhage and no other focal intra-cranial abnormality. Thereafter, on 17 June 1992, the Appellant was examined by a Dr. Serisier, who appears to have been a neurophysican. When reporting to Dr. Speldewinde, Dr. Serisier wrote (inter alia) (Appeal Book p. 227): "I reviewed the two CT scans that he had done approximately 12 months apart and really they are normal and there is no change between them. He had an EEG this morning and it does show a little bit of slow wave activity but it is not particularly marked. By and large therefore these tests are reasonable and probably within acceptable limits. I therefore really have nothing further to add to the comments of the original letter and I believe that he has suffered a diffuse axonal injury. I think it is unlikely that he would ever return to his former occupation." 
Yet another CT scan and an MRI scan appear to have been carried out on 24 September 1992, neither scan revealing any lesion. The absence of any evidence of lesion however is said not to exclude the possibility of lesion "as both these investigations have been shown to miss the presumed axonal shearing and tearing and other changes that occur with head injury of the rapid acceleration/deceleration type. CT scans are very poor at demonstrating this type of injury, and although MRI scans are better, even those done as soon after the injury as possible, often fail to show a lesion. (The Appellant's) MRI was done 18 months later and it would have been surprising if it had recorded any changes." (Appeal Book p.248).

The Appellant appears to have been examined by Dr. Heiner on a number of occasions in August, September and October 1992. In the report which he was to prepare in March 1993 (Appeal book pp. 245-250) Dr. Heiner wrote (inter alia) as follows: "PERCENTAGE IMPAIRMENT 
I really do not know how to assess this. Mr. Langdon was a bright, intelligent, highly motivated teacher with an energetic humour and interested personality. He achieved honours in his studies, and enjoyed his life greatly. He is now a shadow of his former self. He is not suffering greatly due to a marked lack of personal insight into his condition, but he is nothing like his old self. He will never be able to teach again and will possibly be unable to work again ... unless he obtained employment at some manual task such as cleaning or labouring. There is nothing to indicate his life will be shortened, although that is all that is good about his condition. I would rate his Percentage Impairment at 70-75%. I rate it so highly because, although he is physically intact, all that made Chris Langdon what he was has been destroyed ... this man is Chris Langdon in name only. The old Chris Langdon is all but dead.
 ..........
 
CAPACITY FOR WORK 
Mr. Langdon will never work as a teacher again. Perhaps some form of `Structured work can be found' ... but it would be on a level with that performed by individuals with intellectual impairment. (i.e. involving repetitive, unhurried work that does not involve to great a need for decisions or flexible thought).
 
IS MR. LANGDON'S CONDITION `SIGNIFICANT' 
Perhaps it is because I am a psychiatrist and hence tend to see peoples personalities and their capacity to lead a rich and fulfilling life as important, but I consider Mr. Langdon's losses as very significant. His wife no longer has a husband who is a functional, responsible partner and his children no longer have a father ... his is a present in body but not in spirit. They will miss out greatly. He will lead a life of isolation and solitude, unable to cope with anything but the minimum of stress and responsibility. His lack of insight into how he has changed protects him from the depression that would surely follow such an awareness, although there are times when his past expectations of his abilities are unrealised and he fails to achieve even simple tasks. In his case acquired ignorance is bliss.
 
I hope that this provides a clear picture of his condition from a psychiatric point of view." 
At about the same time, the Appellant was examined by Dr. Ganora who, in the report which he wrote on 15 October 1992 (Appeal Book pp. 242-244) wrote (inter alia) as follows: "OPINION 
There is substantial historical and clinical evidence of a significant cognitive impairment consistent with closed head injury. The abnormalities of memory and cognitive function are clinically obvious and of such severity as to indicate a marked degree of disability with respect to work tasks and daily activities. The neuropsychological testing performed in November 1991 revealed widespread cognitive impairment. The neuropsychological testing should be repeated and further comment on his progress and future work capacity reserved until those results are available and can be compared to the previous testing.
 
There is also evidence of persisting strain to the cervical spine which interferes with activities such as gardening, lifting and other upper limb manual handling tasks. The problem of the right knee is not major, but is consistent with persisting injury to the cruciate ligament and may require further evaluation in future. The possible injury to the right temporomandibular joint requires dental evaluation.
 
It is my clinical impression that he is severely handicapped in relation to future employment, but would like to reserve judgment and specific measurement of impairment until after completion of follow up neuropsychological testing.
 
He requires ongoing psychological and supportive counselling as well as rehabilitative supervision. The opinion of his rehabilitation specialist should be obtained in relation to his prognosis.
 
Upon receipt of the completed future neuropsychological review and testing, I will be happy to provide further comment." 
These proceedings were commenced on 15 October 1992 when there was filed on behalf of the Appellant an Application for Determination (Appeal Book pp. 1-4) which, so far as is relevant, contained the following: - "6. Nature of Injury  a.
 b.
 c.
 d.
 e.
 f.
 g.  
Significant closed head injury.

Severe hyperextension accelerated neck injury.

Injury right knee (severe musculo ligamentous strain injury thereof).

Severe shock.

Grazing to right temple, right scapula.

Injury tempero mandibular joint region.

Diffuse axonal injury.  ---|---|---|---  ..........
 . Payment, allowance or benefit received from employer during the period of incapacity: 
Workers' compensation payments are being made by the insurer.
 ---|---|---|---  .Particulars of compensation claimed: (vary or add to as necessary; delete what is inapplicable)  a.
 b.
 c.
 d.
 e.  [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) lump sum for 30% permanent brain damage s.67 claim.
 
Interest pursuant to [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and s.67 claims 
Declaration for [s.60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s60.html) expenses.
 
Costs [(Part 29)."](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s29.html) 
The figure of 30% appearing in Item 11A of the Application for Determination would appear to have been derived from a report (Appeal Book p.222) written by
Dr. Speldewinde on 18 August 1992, which report was (inter alia) as follows: - "I would judge his percentage impairment of permanent brain damage as per the guides to the evaluation of permanent impairment of the American Medical Association to be of the order of 30% of the whole person with respect to disturbances of complex integrated cerebral function.
 
As regards my opinion as to his capacity for work he is unlikely to be able to return to classroom teaching. However he may be able to procure as a private tutor (sic), carry out clerical duties, possibly where supervision is available, or even be gainfully employed carrying out light manual duties in a safe working situation, although these latter two forms of work are not related to his previous training." 
The figure of 100% now contended for on behalf of the Appellant seems to be derived from Dr. Heiner's statement that "the old Chris Langdon is all but dead" (see p.12 (above)). 
The Appellant appears to have been examined by Dr. Bell on 12 March 1993. In the report which he wrote on 26 March 1993, Dr. Bell wrote (inter alia) as follows (Appeal Book p.314): "I have pointed out to you that this is an unusual case. Despite the fact that he did not have obvious disturbance of brain function immediately after the accident, now he clearly has severe disability. The pattern of that disability points to the effects of brain damage. The outstanding features have been the slowness of thinking and the excessive fatiguability, but to my mind he also has a considerable degree of linguistic disorder affecting the spoken word, the comprehension of speech and the written word and the impairment of the abstract attitude.
 ..........
 
I saw him at two years after the accident, when most of the likely improvement would have come to its end. The state I observed then will remain much as it is for the rest of his life." 
The Appellant appears also to have been examined on 12 March 1993 by Dr. Somerville on behalf of the Respondent. In the report which he wrote on 12 March 1993, Dr. Somerville expressed the following opinion: "This man's presentation does not impress me as genuine. He behaved as though feigning an intellectual impairment. Whether this is occurring at a conscious level or whether he has a genuine psychiatric illness (.e. a conversion disorder), I do not know. This would be a matter for psychiatric opinion, provided the psychiatrist was prepared to accept that there was no neurological abnormality. However his somewhat theatrical manner suggested the former possibility. His neurological examination and investigations are normal and I do not believe that there is any evidence that any permanent brain damage occurred in the accident described." 
The Appellant appears also to have been examined at about the same time by Dr. Teychenne. In a report dated 19 March 1993, Dr. Teychenne concluded (Appeal Book p.303): "From my assessment of the patient these deficits are permanent and I doubt that this patient could ever be usefully employed in any form of activity which required even a minimal to moderate amount of cognitive ability. The combination of frontal lobe damage, intellectual decline and memory damage has caused too much of an intellectual handicap for this patient to function effectively in a cognitive environment. The patient does appear to be able to write down concepts but apparently he has to write these down three or four times before he can correctly express all the concepts. There may be some ability for limited intellectual capacity such as simple tutoring at a lower than High School standard.
 
It is difficult to indicate a percentage impairment but I would have suspected that this patient was probably within the upper 10% of the population in regard to intellectual ability prior to the head injury and he is now within the lower 30% category. Thus one could probably estimate a 60% deficit in intellectual function as a result of the head injury." 
The Appellant was examined by Dr. Langeluddecke on behalf of the Respondent on 13 April 1993. In a report dated 19 April 1993, Dr. Langeluddecke provided the following summary and expressed the following opinion: "Mr. Langdon may have sustained a very mild closed head injury in a motor vehicle accident on the 21st March, 1991, although there was no loss of consciousness or abnormal neurological signs. He was apparently unable to cope with his duties as a school teacher subsequent to this accident, and was retired on medical grounds from the NSW Department of Education in May 1992. Psychometric testing two years after his accident reveals very gross deficits in attention/concentration, immediate-short term memory, learning, visuospatial functions and mental speed. These cognitive deficits are well in excess of those which one would expect given a neurological syndrome as a result of a closed head injury of mild severity. Furthermore, they are inconsistent with: i) Mr. Langdon's accounts of his daily functioning - he is totally independent with respect to activities of daily living, is able to travel independently on public transport, is currently undertaking studies at Technical College, and is able to assist with parenting and domestic duties; and ii) neuroradiological evidence, including Magnetic Resonance Imaging, which fails to indicate gross brain damage.
 
There does not appear to be an adequate psychological explanation for Mr. Langdon's cognitive deficits, such as significant anxiety or depression. The possibility that the deficits noted at psychometric testing represent a deliberate attempt on Mr. Langdon's part to feign cognitive impairment should be considered." 
The Appellant seems to have seen Ms. Zucker on 30th April, and 6th May, 1993 with a view to having his speech, and language, capacity assessed. In the report (Appeal Book pp. 192-197) which she later prepared, Ms. Zucker wrote (inter alia): "
 ..........
 
SPEECH AND LANGUAGE DIAGNOSIS 
Mr. Langdon presents with impaired communication in both the receptive and expressive language areas. His major communication difficulties are: * a delay in processing information, both in conversation and on formal tasks; * difficulty in the comprehension of high level, complex language; * impaired reading comprehension beyond the paragraph level; * word finding difficulties, both in conversation and on testing; * impaired association naming, ie naming items within a category; * verbosity, both in conversation and on formal language tasks; * reduced syntactic complexity in connected speech.

Aphasia or dysphasia is `an acquired language disorder caused by brain damage, resulting in partial or complete impairment of language, comprehension, formulation and use of communication.' Shames and Wiig 1982. Mr. Langdon scored well on the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination. His problems become evident on the Mount Wilga High Level Language Test which was specifically designed to probe those language areas that break down following head injury. It is generally accepted in the Speech Pathology profession that the syndrome that affects language following closed head injury is a language disorder other than aphasia.
 
Mr. Langdon's communication impairment is consistent with that associated with a closed head injury and frontal lobe damage.
 
OPINION 
Mr. Langdon presents with a significant language disability. As it is now more than two years since his accident, major improvement would not be expected. His receptive and expressive difficulties would seriously impair his ability to function as a teacher or in a related field." 
Finally, the Appellant appears to have been examined by Dr. Revai on behalf of the Respondent on 27 May 1993. In the report of that date which he provided to the Respondent's solicitors, Dr. Revai wrote (inter alia): "In view of the fact that Dr. Bell suggested that Mr. Langdon should have further neuropsychological testing, I feel that it would be of benefit if some other opinions were canvassed, especially those with a broader scope of testing. I also must state that Mr. Langdon presented differently to me today than he did to Dr. Bell, in that he did not appear to be a `simpleton' or have a `sing-song' voice, or lapse into periods of silence during which he would simply stare. Apart from the occasional answer of `yes', which was early in the interview, he did not preface his answers with this word. He did not grope for words, and his sentence construction was normal. I could not pick up any evidence of any speech disturbance.
 
It is my understanding, that in frontal lobe damage, there can be disturbance of curiosity, abstraction in judgement and I noted that with Mr. Langdon, curiosity was quite intact in that he has commenced courses of horticulture, indicating an ability to learn new tasks. He also had no difficulty in abstraction with me. He is also quite creative in building up his vegetable garden and planting fruit trees. This also shows some initiative. There has also been no disinhibited behaviour and he did not strike me as being apathetic. It is also my understanding that deficits in behaviour only arise after bilateral injury to the frontal lobes and this must be commented on by your neuropsychologist.
 
It is also essential to obtain some background history of what Mr. Langdon was like before this accident, from the school principal and others who have worked with him at other schools. It is to be noted that he could not cope with a head teacher at Fairfield High School and this aspect of the history may be worth investigating.
 
Having said this, I must repeat that it is essential that Mr. Langdon be assessed by another neuropsychologist, to confirm Pauline Langeluddecke's results with a wider selection of tests. However, from this history that I obtained today, it is quite possible that Pauline Langeluddecke is correct in her assessment, as on the history that was made available to me, I was unable to obtain any background history of any neurotic disturbance which could have been a pointer to the development of a conversion disorder." 
The extracts from the various reports which I have set out above provided but a small part of the detailed medical evidence that was tendered on the hearing, the additional material including not only the oral evidence of some of those who had examined the Appellant but, as well, learned papers to which reference was made either in the reports or in the oral evidence. Although it is not necessary to reproduce that additional evidence, it is perhaps desirable - since it bears on the ultimate questions to be decided on the this appeal - that I record what I understand to be the substance of that material. 
As I understand it, the nervous system is one of the body's major co- ordinating and integrating mechanisms. What might be called the primary building block of the nervous system is the neuron or nerve cell. As I understand it, a neuron has three main structural features, a cell body, an axon and a number of dentrites, the function of the axon being to carry information away from the cell body and the function of the dentrites being to receive information from outside and to carry that information to the cell body. Further, as I understand it, the nervous system has two main subdivisions, the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system, the central nervous system consisting of the brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral nervous system consisting of all the other nerves that connect the brain and the spinal cord to the cells in the sensory organs (receptors) and the cells in the muscles and glands (effectors) - the autonomic nervous system which is commonly thought of as being the automatic part of the body's mechanism is an important part of the peripheral nervous system.

The brain contains by far the greater part of the nervous system's neurons.

The most conspicuous parts of the brain are the two hemisphere shaped masses of folded grey matter which together form the cerebral cortex which is divided into four lobes, the frontal lobe, the parietal lobe, the temporal lobe and the occipital lobe. It seems to be accepted, at least in a general way, that there is an association between certain intellectual or bodily functions and particular areas of the cerebral cortex. The areas of the cerebral cortex where messages from the sense receptors register are called sensory projection areas - the auditory projection area seems to be contained within the temporal lobe while the visual projection area seems to be contained within the occipital lobe - and the areas of the cerebral cortex where response messages start their trip down the brain stem to tell the muscles and glands what to do are called motor projection areas - the motor strip which students of psychology at the university about 50 years ago will recall used to be illustrated by the "motor homunculus" is regarded as being located in the frontal lobe just forward of the central fissure. There are, however, large areas throughout the cerebral cortex that are neither completely sensory nor completely motor, those areas being called association areas. The association areas are involved in all of the activities commonly attributed to the brain, that is, learning, thinking, remembering and the like. The largest of the association areas is thought to be located in the frontal lobe and is regarded as the location of the higher mental processes of abstract thinking and problem solving.

The consequence of this "cortical localisation" is that, at least in general terms, the sequelae of damage to the brain will vary according to the locality of the damage. Thus, damage to association areas around the motor area will be likely to affect the memory of skilled movements or the ability to organise the sequence of movements making up of particular skills, while damage to one or other of the two major cortical areas for language - Broca's area and
Wernicke's area - is likely to produce varying degrees of language loss, in the case of Broca's area, language production, and in the case of Wernicke's area, an inability to comprehend speech or writing.

What I have written above will, I believe, make clear that the questions which, relevantly, Davidson CCJ was called upon to determine on the hearing of the application were: what was comprehended by the words "permanent brain damage (being an injury which is not or is not wholly an injury otherwise compensable under this Table)" appearing in the Table in [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/index.html#p3)
Division 4 of the Act; whether the Appellant suffered any, and, if so, what, injury as the result of the accident; if so, whether that injury, or its sequelae, constituted "permanent brain damage"; if so, what percentage of the maximum amount payable reasonably represented the severity of the Appellant's injury or its sequelae; what percentage of the maximum amount payable for pain and suffering reasonably represented the degree and duration of the Appellant's pain and suffering.

In his Judgment, Davidson CCJ, after recording, and examining in some detail, the evidence of both the lay and expert witnesses, and after recording what were the submissions of counsel concluded (Appeal Book pp. 352-355): "There obviously are two schools of medical opinion in the case, and somewhere in the literature which is appended to one or other of the applicant's exhibits, that is reasonably well documented. As I perceive the situation, the medical world is much divided on the question of disproportionate consequences of a very minor head injury.
 
This case deals with the complexity of the brain, and obviously, the evidence hardly scratches the surface of what is a very detailed subject understanding the brain.
 
The evidence of Dr. Teychenne and Dr. Heiner demonstrates that. As do, more particularly, the various extracts from texts on this type of case. I have read those thoroughly, and have endeavoured to gain assistance from them.
 
Initially, after long deliberation in this case, I was attracted to the medical evidence presented in the respondent's case, principally that of Dr. Sommerville, whom I found to be fairly clear and concise, and also to that of Dr. Langeluddecke. Obviously a choice had to be made in the resolution of the case between their evidence and the imposing evidence of Dr. Ballinger and Dr. Bell, supported as it is by other evidence in the case.
 
If one were to rely solely on objective matters, it seems to me that the respondent's case has a great deal of merit. I have, however, given due regard to the lay evidence both in the applicant's case, and also that in the respondent's case, the latter being confined to the ambulance officer.
 
Not without a great degree of indecision at times in my review of this case over a long period, I am finally persuaded to adopt the applicant's experts in preference to the respondent's. I have done so despite the fact that I considered that there was the possibility that the opinions in support of the applicant's case expressed by the experts called in it may have been self-perpetuating based on blind adherence to Dr. Ballinger's tests.
 
What has finally persuaded me to accept the applicant's medical thesis is the fact that it is consistent with the lay evidence presented in the applicant's case. If it had been only the evidence of the applicant's wife and his mother, that may have caused me some disquiet, and it may have been dangerous to have been persuaded by it alone. However, despite what is probably a human tendency to want to help the applicant, the fact remains that each of the other lay witnesses called in the applicant's case support the end result argued by the applicant that he has brain damage consequent upon his injury.
 
I am not prepared to conclude that those lay witnesses, including the wife and the mother, have falsified their evidence to support the applicant as a malinger (sic) a person who is faking. I have taken into consideration also, in accepting the applicant's medical opinions, that Dr. Speldewinde saw the applicant some 24 times and says that the applicant has had consistent symptoms. He, as well as a number of the other witnesses, including someone in the respondent's camp, make the point that the lay observations are of great value. If I recall it correctly, Dr. Sommerville made that point for the respondent.
 
I have come to the view that the evidence provided, principally by Mr. Bailey and also by Mr. Popper, and to a lesser degree, Mr. Wilson, as well as that of the applicant's wife and mother, indicates that the applicant falls within the small subsection of persons with minor head injury with seemingly disproportionate impairment.
 
Dr. Bell gave evidence of that small subgroup of affected persons, and I am particular (sic) impressed by the literature provided as an appendix to Dr. Heiner's report in exhibit J. There is a document which is called reference number 3: `Neuropsychological Deficits in Symptomatic Minor Head Injury Patients after Concussion and Mild Concussion'. I do not propose to reproduce it, however, there are sections in that, particularly at the first of the pages there which is number 292, and again at the top of the last of the four pages in that article, which to me go a long way to explaining what has occurred in this case.
 
One such quote is: 
The results indicate that minor head injury patients who report post-concussive symptoms possess measurable neuropsychological deficits, and the severity of these deficits is independent of neurological status immediately following injury.
 
Further quote: 
The last few years have witnessed continuing controversy over the incidence and duration of minor head injury and resultant cognitive impairment.
 
Further quote: 
As far as minor head injuries are concerned, however, the occurrence or non-occurrence of a traumatic loss of consciousness does not seem to distinguish persons at greater or reduced risk for neuropsychological consequences.
 
As Dr. Bell said in his evidence: 
A simple injury can lead to the brain damage, and all that can be said by the medical profession is that we simply know it can happen. You have to depend on assessment of outcome, not investigation.
 
Referring to this as an unusual case, he said that: 
Despite no obvious disturbance of brain function immediately after accident, now he has severe disability.
 
It also seems to me that Dr. Bilios was prepared to acknowledge that what was involved in the casualty ward for the four hours that the applicant was there on the evening of the accident was not inconsistent with the end result of there being brain damage from a minor head injury which did not appear to have objective factors at that time.
 
Further, I believe Dr. Langeluddecke also acknowledged that if there was a major change in behaviour which started immediately after the accident, it would lend support to the view that the accident was responsible. I believe there was.
 
I am particularly impressed by the evidence which I quoted from Mr. Bailey that he observed changes very soon after the injury.
 
I find therefore that the applicant has suffered permanent brain damage as a result of the injury. I reject the alternate proposition that he has been suffering a psychiatric condition. I believe the probability on the evidence leads to that view, it being almost the common opinion of the medical witnesses in the case, with perhaps one exception.
 
The question is, what is the degree of permanent brain damage? Certain assessments have been given of 30% of the whole person by Dr. Speldewinde; 70% to 75% of Dr. Heiner; 60% by Dr. Teychenne; and a most extreme case in one part of Dr. Bell's evidence, and agreement that it might be, on an organic basis, as little as 10% or less.
 
The task that I have to perform is in accordance with [section 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html), and I keep in mind Note (a) to the Table, which requires that the maximum percentage is payable only in a most extreme case, and the percentage payable in this case must be reasonably proportionate to that maximum percentage, having regard to the severity of the matter.
 
I have assessed the whole of the evidence, and am assisted to some degree, but do not rely on it solely, by the percentages given in the medical evidence, and doing the best I can in a most difficult case I have determined the permanent brain damage in this instance to be 20%. I have come to that view, despite the fact that the applicant appears to be incapable of returning to his full level of teaching, as I believe that he still obviously retains a greater proportion of the function of his brain.
 
Dr. Speldewinde, for instance, says there are some forms of work he may be able to do. He is able to participate in singing, to some degree. He appears to be able to successfully teach two forms of martial arts, and with some restrictions, including not driving for safety reasons, he appears to follow a reasonably active life.
 
The maximum sum at the time of the injury was $96,750; 20%, therefore, is $19,350. I make an award for that amount.
 
He is entitled to an award under section 67. There is very little direct evidence from the applicant to assist in this instance to assess the section 67 sum. I have gleaned, therefore, from the medical and lay evidence in the case, evidence which assists me in determining the figure. I have kept in mind again, in similar terms to Note (a) to the [section 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) table, the provisions of subsection (3) of section 67, and in assessing the amount under section 67, will determine it having regard to the reasonable proportionality to a most extreme case.
 
The applicant submitted that this was a most extreme case in respect of an award under s.67, mainly because of the age of the applicant, the disruption of his life and the bitter blow that he has had to his love of teaching. There is also implicit a claim that he has suffered, if not actual pain, certainly a great degree of anxiety.
 
It seems to me that it is in that area of anxiety that he is entitled to a monetary sum under section 67 rather than for the pain.
 
Again, weighing all the evidence, I have determined in this instance that the proportionality to a most extreme case is one as to three. The maximum sum at the time was $48,400. The resultant sum if $15,133. Of that I ascribe $7,000 for the past pain and suffering from 21 March 1991 to date." 
In the Notice of Appeal which was filed on behalf of the Appellant on 11 January 1995, the only grounds of appeal taken were: - there was no evidence that the Appellant suffered 20% permanent brain damage; his Honour's findings that the Appellant suffered 20% permanent brain damage was (sic) against the evidence and the weight of the evidence; his Honour failed to give reasons or failed to give sufficient reasons for finding the Appellant suffered 20% permanent brain damage or that the
Appellant was entitled to one-third of the maximum amount under s.67.
 the principal orders sought being:
Order for a lump sum equivalent to 100% permanent brain damage.
Order for a lump sum equivalent to the maximum available under s.67 of the [Workers Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).

When the appeal came on for hearing, Mr. G. J. McCready appeared for the
Appellant, while Mr. P.M. Morris appeared for the Respondent.

Although one would have thought that it would be obvious that a critical question to be determined on the appeal was the question of what was comprehended by the phrase "permanent brain damage" in the Table, that question was not addressed in the written submissions filed on behalf of either of the parties. Nor, although, on the hearing of the appeal, the Court made it clear that it sought the assistance of the parties as to that question, was any real assistance provided - the Appellant's submission appeared to be little more than that it need only appear that there was some organic brain damage, while the Respondent's submission appeared to be no more than that what is in issue is the question whether there has been any diminution in general brain function (see Transcript p. 7).

The "Table of Maims" which formed part of s.16 of the Workers Compensation Act ("the 1926 Act") made no provision for the payment of a lump sum in respect of any organic injury to the brain or for the loss or impairment of intellectual function or bodily function controlled by the brain.

However, when the [1987
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) was passed, there was included in the Table to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/index.html#p3)
Division 4 of the Act provision for "loss of mental powers". Regrettably, although the Second Reading speech of the Minister in the Lower House contains a passing reference to the inclusion of that item in the new Table, none of the speeches on the Second Reading debate in either the Lower House or the
Upper House, and none of the discussion when the Bill was in Committee in each
House, casts any light upon the reason for the inclusion of that item in the new Table of Maims, or upon the meaning intended to be attributed to it.

So far as is relevant, the [1987
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) in its original form provided as follows: - "65. (1) In this Division - `loss', in relation to a thing, means - the loss of that thing; or the permanent loss of the use, or of the efficient use, of that thing.
 ...........
 . (1) A worker who has suffered the loss of a thing mentioned in the Table to this Division as the result of an injury is entitled to receive from the worker's employer by way of compensation for the loss, in addition to any other compensation under this Act, the amount equal to the percentage of $80,000 set out opposite to that loss in that Table.
 
A worker who has suffered more than one of the losses mentioned in the Table to this Division as a result of the same injury is not entitled to receive as compensation under this section more than $80,000 in respect of those losses.
 
Where by the operation of Division 6 the amount of $80,000 is adjusted, the compensation payable under this section shall be calculated by reference to the requisite percentage of the amount in force at the date of injury.
 . (1) A worker who has suffered a loss mentioned in the Table to this Division (or 2 or more of any such losses as a result of the same injury) is entitled to receive from the worker's employer by way of compensation for pain and suffering resulting from the loss or all those losses, in addition to any other compensation under this Act, an amount not exceeding $40,000.
 ..........
 
The maximum amount of compensation under this section is payable only in a most extreme case and the amount payable in any other case shall be reasonably proportionate to that maximum amount having regard to the degree and duration of pain and suffering and the severity of the loss or losses.
 .........
 
Where by the operation of Division 6 the amount of $40,000 is adjusted, the compensation payable under this section shall be calculated by reference to the amount in force at the date of injury.
 
In this section - `pain and suffering' means - actual pain; or distress or anxiety suffered or likely to be suffered by the injured worker, whether resulting from the loss concerned or from any necessary treatment.
 (1) If a loss suffered by a worker consists of the loss of a proportion (but not all) of a thing mentioned in the Table to this Division, a percentage of the compensation payable for the total loss of the thing equal to the percentage lost by the worker is payable as compensation under section 66.
 
TABLE 
COMPENSATION FOR PERMANENT INJURIES 
Nature of injury  
Percentage of maximum amount payable  ---  
Speech loss - 
Loss of power of speech    
Sensory loss - 
Loss of sense of smell 
Loss of sense of taste    
Hearing loss - 
Loss of hearing of both ears 
Loss of hearing of one ear    
Loss of vision - 
Loss of sight of both eyes 
Loss of sight of an only eye 
Loss of sight of one eye, together with serious diminution of the sight of the other eye 
Loss of sight of one eye    ..........
 
Loss of mental powers - 
Incurable loss of mental powers resulting in total inability to work    ---  ..........
 
NOTES: 
Where a range of percentages is provided by the Table, the maximum percentage is payable only in a most extreme case and the percentage payable in any other case shall be reasonably proportionate to that maximum percentage having regard to the severity of the matter. The amount payable in any particular case shall, in default of agreement, be determined in accordance with this Act by a commissioner." 
The Table in the [1987 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) was amended by the Workers Compensation (Benefits) Amendment Act 1989 ("the 1989 Act") by omitting the material: "Loss of mental powers - 
Incurable loss of mental powers resulting in total inability to work 100" and by inserting in lieu thereof: "Brain damage: 
Permanent brain damage (being an injury which is not or is not wholly an injury otherwise compensable under this Table) 0-100" 
None of the Second Reading speeches in either the Lower House or the Upper House, and none of the discussion when the Bill was in Committee in each House, referred to this particular amendment, substantially the whole of the debate in each House being directed to the provisions of the 1989 Act intended to give effect to the new Government's promise to restore to workers the common law rights of action which had been withdrawn by the provisions of the [1987 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).

Despite the linguistic difficulties caused by the juxtaposition of the concepts of "injury" and "loss of a thing", it seems to me to be tolerably plain that what was intended by the inclusion in the new Table in the [1987
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) of the item "loss of mental powers" was the conferring upon a worker who, by reasons of a work related "injury" - whether that "injury" be a frank injury or a "disease" injury - had had his higher intellectual functions so impaired that he was totally incapable of work, a right to receive lump sum compensation.

Although, in the absence of any guidance to be found in the debate on the
Second Reading or in the discussions when the Bill was in Committee, there must be some doubt that this was so, it seems to me that what was intended to be achieved by the amendment effected by the 1989 Act was to extend the range of circumstances in which a worker who had sustained a work related "injury" to his brain, might be entitled to lump sum compensation in two respects: so as to include among those so entitled to receive some form of lump sum compensation those who, by reason of consequential impairment of their higher intellectual function, while still able to engage in some form of work, were no longer able to work in their prior employment; and so as to enable those who by reason of a work related "injury" to the brain had lost, either in whole or in part, some faculty or the efficient use of some bodily part, which faculty or the use of which bodily part, was controlled by the brain, and the loss of which faculty, or the loss of the efficient use of the which bodily part, was not already provided for in the new Table of Maims.

The reasons which have led me to this conclusion are: the change in language between the former, and the new, provision; the provision of a range of percentages instead of a single percentage; the fact that some of the items - as, for example, speech loss - already included in the new Table of Maims may be brought about by a number of causes as, for example, by a frank injury to the organs of speech, or by brain injury affecting the motor area of the brain, or by brain injury affecting the association areas of the cerebral cortex.

If this be so, then, the question with next arises is whether, if the findings of fact made by Davidson CCJ are to be accepted, the Appellant has suffered permanent brain damage within the meaning of that phrase as so construed.

The diagnosis favoured by Dr. Bell, whose approach was accepted by Davidson
CCJ was that the Appellant had sustained diffuse axonal shearing, which diagnosis I understand to mean that the twisting movement of the Appellant's brain brought about by his car spinning following the collision tended to disrupt the neuronal axons in an indiscriminate way in various places within the cerebral hemisphere thus impeding, or interrupting, the transmission of neural impulses to the parts of the brain affected, the consequence being the impairment of higher intellectual function, the loss of memory and the impairment of both receptive and expressive speech. Such a result, brought about in the manner suggested by Dr. Bell, in my view, constitutes permanent brain damage within the meaning of that phrase as it appears in the new Table.

The question then is, whether, as the Appellant would have it, the impairments which he has suffered as the result of that injury are such as to entitle him to be regarded as a most extreme case and, thus, entitled to receive the maximum amount provided for by s.66 of the Act.

It seems to me, with respect, that the Appellant's submission in this regard should not be accepted. It is to be observed that, prior to the amendment made by the 1989 Act, no amount was payable pursuant to the provisions of s.66 in respect of the loss or impairment of higher intellectual function unless the consequence of that loss of impairment was a total inability to work, in which event the maximum amount provided from time to time pursuant to s.66 of the
Act was payable. The effect of broadening the range of circumstances in which a worker who, by reason of a work related injury has suffered an impairment to his higher intellectual functions, or has lost or suffered an impairment of some faculty or bodily function controlled by the brain, might claim compensation pursuant to s.66 of the Act, and the provision of a range of percentages of the maximum amount payable, which might, in any particular case, be awarded, in my view, was, at the least, not to reduce the degree of loss or disability which must be shown before that loss or disability might properly be regarded as "a most extreme case". Although I do not consider it necessary, for the purposes of disposing of this appeal, to express a concluded view on the matter, it seems to me that there is much to be said for the view that, in determining whether or not, in a case such as this, a loss or disability constitutes "a most extreme case", that loss of disability is to be measured, not against the particular brain function which has been lost or impaired, but against the totality of brain functions. The reason why I have said that I do not regard it as necessary to express a concluded view upon that question is that, while the evidence would appear to demonstrate that the
Appellant was, and remains, unfit to work as a secondary school teacher, he is far from totally unfit to work - as witness the fact that he continues to teach martial arts - and that he is able to and does, for the most part, engage in a wide range of activities without supervision, and is able to lead a reasonably active life.

The question, then, is, whether the amounts awarded by Davidson CCJ pursuant to ss. 66, 67 ought, nonetheless, to be regarded as having been inadequate. It seems to me, with respect, that the approach which should be taken to that question is akin to that which, so the authorities (see, for example, Wilson v. Peisley 1; Precision Plastics Pty. Limited ats Demir 2; Gamser v.
The Nominal Defendant 3) direct, is to be taken when a challenge is made to an award of damages for personal injuries made by a judge, that is, that where it has not been shown that the judge acted on any error of principle, or misapprehension of the facts, an appellate court should only intervene if satisfied that the judge has made a wholly erroneous estimate of the damages suffered. The reason for that approach being directed in the case of challenges made to awards of damages for personal injuries is that, as there is generally so much room for individual choice as to the facts to be brought into account, and as to the weight to be accorded to such facts as are brought into account, the assessment of damages is more like an exercise of discretion than an ordinary act of decision and, thus, may only be challenged successfully upon grounds akin to those upon which a discretionary judgment may successfully be challenged. The determination required of a judge when called upon to determine an application for an award pursuant to ss. 66, 67 of the Act, is as it seems to me, very much of the same kind, for what is called for is the evaluation of the reasonable proportionality between the loss or impairment in question and a most extreme case, and the reasonable proportionality between the pain and suffering suffered or likely to be suffered by the applicant by reason of the loss or impairment which has been sustained and a most extreme case. (see, for example, Jones Bros. Bus
Company Pty. Limited v. Baker; Wyong Shire Council v. Graham 4).

I am far from satisfied that the awards made by Davidson CCJ have been shown to be wholly erroneous. The task which faced his Honour was, to say the least, a very difficult one, faced as he was with the widely varying views as to the nature and extent of the loss or impairment from which the Appellant suffered, and the limited evidence which was available to his Honour to enable him to form an assessment of the pain and suffering which the Appellant had suffered or was likely to suffer by reason of his loss or impairment. It seems to me, with respect to those who may be of a different view, that the assessments made by Davidson CCJ were open to him, and that they cannot be said to have been wholly erroneous.

So far as the third ground of appeal - that is the alleged failure of Davidson
CCJ to give reasons, or to give sufficient reasons, for making the awards which he did - is concerned, I will say no more than that there is no substance in it, as the concluding passage in his Honour's Judgment which I have set out above, in my view, more than adequately exposes the process of reasoning which his Honour adopted in coming to make the award which he did.

For these reasons, I would propose that the appeal be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
