

Z versus New South Wales Crime Commission (No. 2) [2005] NSWSC 1388 (22 March )

Last Updated: 9 May 2008 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Z versus New South Wales Crime Commission (No. 2) <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 10439/2005  
HEARING DATE{S): 2 March 2005  
JUDGMENT DATE: 22/03/2005  
PARTIES: 
Z (Plaintiff) 
New South Wales Crime Commission (Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Johnson J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr A Howen (Plaintiff) 
Mr I Temby QC; Mr P Singleton (Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Bolzan & Dimitri (Plaintiff) 
New South Wales Crime Commission (Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
EVIDENCE - private hearing of New South Wales Crime Commission  refusal by plaintiff to answer questions  plaintiff directed by Commissioner to answer questions  application for review of decision under s.19(2) [New South Wales Crime
Commission Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/nswcca1985355/)  whether plaintiff had reasonable excuse under [s.18(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/nswcca1985355/s18.html) of Act  claim that disclosure would reveal the identity of an informer  claim of fear of reprisal  held that plaintiff did not have reasonable excuse for refusing to answer questions  decision of Commissioner affirmed  
ACTS CITED:  [New South Wales Crime Commission Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/nswcca1985355/)  [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/)  [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/)  [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/)  
DECISION: 
Summons dismissed.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
JOHNSON J March 2005 of 2005 
Z versus New South Wales Crime Commission (No. 2) 
JUDGMENT JOHNSON J: The Plaintiff, who is referred to by the pseudonym Z, seeks a review pursuant to [s.19(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s19.html) [New South Wales Crime Commission Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/nswcca1985355/) ("NSWCC Act") of decisions of the Defendant, the New South Wales Crime
Commission ("the Commission") made on 2 February 2005 requiring the Plaintiff to answer questions so as to reveal: the name of X, a former client of Z; and the name of Y, a "mutual friend" of Z and X.
 The Plaintiff also seeks a declaration that he had a "reasonable excuse" pursuant to s.18(2) NSWCC Act to refuse to comply with the direction by the
Defendant to answer the questions referred to above.
 The Plaintiff contends that "reasonable excuse" arises in this case by way of: application of the principles of public interest immunity, specifically the "informer rule"; and/or fear of reprisal which the Plaintiff entertains for his family and himself in the event that he is required to reveal the identity of X and Y.

Factual Background On 1 September 2003, pursuant to s.25(1)(a) NSWCC Act, the Management
Committee of the Commission granted to the Commission a reference code-named "Tenterfield" to investigate the attempted murder of M on 28 November 2002.
 On 19 September 2003, the Commission served on the Plaintiff a summons under s.16 NSWCC Act requiring him to attend before the Commission and give evidence pursuant to the reference.
 The circumstances giving rise to the Commission's summons to the Plaintiff, and his response to certain questions directed to him by the Commission, have been the subject of earlier proceedings in this Court where it was held that legal professional privilege could not be relied upon to refuse to reveal X's identity: B versus N (Grove J, 5 February 2004, unreported) and Z versus N <case> For present purposes, part of the background may be obtained from the judgment of Grove J at paragraphs 4-5: "4. The plaintiff is now a practising barrister. Of relevance are events which occurred when he practised as a solicitor. At social functions hosted by a friend [Y] of the plaintiff, the plaintiff made acquaintance of a person whom I will refer to as 'X'. In about October 1998 X made an appointment to see the plaintiff, saying that he or she had found out that the plaintiff was a lawyer through the host of the social function. The gender of
X is undisclosed and to avoid repetition of the alternative I will hereafter use the masculine form of pronoun to include either gender.
 . X said that he had observed things at the home of M and wished information to be passed to police without disclosing X's own identity. He sought advice as to how this could be done and what consequences might follow.
On X's instructions the plaintiff telephoned various law enforcement agencies eventually speaking to a police officer to whom he indicated that a person who was not prepared to be identified wanted to supply information which may be of interest. The officer responded that he would receive the information. X was present with the plaintiff who conveyed to the officer that at M's house X had recently seen him 'showing off' a quantity of drugs, that M had a gun and that he had two children of approximately primary school age." Having regard to the matters which I have to determine, it is appropriate to set out the Plaintiff's account of the conversations which he had with police officers in about October 1998 (Affidavit of Z affirmed 19 November 2003, paragraphs 11-13): "11. I then telephoned the police with X in my presence. To the best of my recollection I telephoned the Australian Federal Police and what was then known as the Drug and Organised Crime Strike Force, Crime Agencies, NSW
Police Service. To the best of my recollection I was eventually assisted by officers at Campsie Police Station. In total I made approximately 5 telephone calls (together these telephone calls are referred to as the 'First
Occasion').
 . I had a conversation to the following effect with each police officer to whom I provided information: 
Z: 'A person who does not wish to be identified has approached me with information which the police might be interested in. Whether that impedes you from taking action is a matter for you, but the person is not prepared to provide the information if the person's identity is to be disclosed'.

Police: 'We can protect the person's identity'.

Z: 'I know. However, despite that, the person is not prepared to disclose the person's identity. The question then is: Do you still want the information?' 
Police: 'Yes'.
 . To the best of my recollection, in my opinion at the time, attempts were made by police with whom I spoke to elicit information from me which could assist the police in later identifying X. For example, I was asked to the effect: 'How does X know M?', 'How well does X know M?' and 'Why is X giving this information?'. I refused to answer those questions because (i) in some cases, I had specifically raised with X before the telephone calls the possibility of being asked such questions and X had instructed me not to answer and (ii) in other cases, I refused to answer because in my opinion the answers could assist to identify X".
 Acting on the basis of the information received from Z, on 1 October 1998 police obtained and executed a warrant authorising the entry into and searching of M's home. A search of M's home was undertaken, but no illegal drugs or firearms were found.
 On 9 October 1998, M, his wife and his father, accompanied by a solicitor, a relative of M, attended Ashfield Police Station and surrendered 414.7 grammes of cocaine (with 43% purity) and a silver semi-automatic .32 calibre pistol.
They advised that M's wife had found these items in a wardrobe in an upstairs bedroom of their house whilst she was cleaning.
 On or about 16 March 1999, X again attended upon Z. On X's instructions, Z passed on information to an Australian Federal Police officer that M was said to be in possession of one kilogram of heroin and a handgun.  On 18 March 1999, police executed a second search warrant at M's home. They found 281 grammes of heroin (7.9% purity) and a Colt .45 calibre pistol. M was charged with offences arising from his possession of the heroin and pistol.
 On 13 March 2000, M was discharged with respect to these charges after a committal hearing before Ms Sweeney, Magistrate, at the Downing Centre Local
Court.
 On 28 November 2002, M entered his motorcar which was parked outside his house. He discovered that one of the tyres had been cut and damaged. He proceeded to change the wheel, and whilst he was so engaged a car drove past and an occupant fired three shots at him from a .22 calibre weapon. Two projectiles entered M's body, respectively in the head and shoulder, and the third projectile struck his vehicle. M survived the attack.
 On 12 March 2003 detectives spoke to Z and, after confirming that he had made the calls above described, they asked whether he could put them in touch with X. On 30 April 2003, Z advised that he could not assist, stating that he felt bound "not to reveal a protected confidence or protected identity information".
 Once again, having regard to the issues argued before me, it is appropriate to set out Z's account of the conversation which he had with police on 12
March 2003 (Affidavit of Z, 19 November 2003, paragraph 18): "On 12 March 2003 following a telephone call in the days before, I met
Detective Sgt Chris Powell and Detective Davey by appointment outside Redfern
Local Court where I had appeared that morning. We then went to a nearby cafe.
We had a conversation including to the following effect: 
Detective: 'Do you know the name of M? 
Z: Yes. That's a name I thought I would never hear again. What are you investigating? 
Detective: M had been shot twice in the head. But he is expected to make a full recovery.

Z: Ouch. What can I do for you? 
Detective: Did you make a telephone call to the police in relation to M back in 1998? 
Z: I couldn't tell you the date, but yes. As I said to you on the telephone, there is probably very little I can tell you because of privilege. I had no personal knowledge of the information I provided and I am obliged to protect the privilege of the person who provided me with the information. There may be some things I can tell you, though, which are not privileged, which might be able to assist your investigation. What do you want to know? 
Detective: Did you at the time use mobile number [xxx] at about that time? 
Z: Yes.

Detective: Did you make a further telephone call to the police in relation to
M a few months later? 
Z: Yes.

Detective: Was the person who provided information to you on the second occasion the same person as months earlier? 
Z: Yes. What happened after the telephone calls were made? Did the police find anything at M's house? 
Detective: They found a large quantity of drugs.

Z: Was M charged? 
Detective: Yes, but he got off at committal.

Z: Lucky man.

Detective: We would like to investigate whether you may have been used by this person back in 1998 to get at M. There may be a link to the recent attempt of M's life.

Z: I would be surprised if the person who provided me with the information is involved, but I guess you have to follow everything up.

Detective: Can you tell us where the person is so we can contact him or her? 
Z: Even if I could, I would be obliged not to provide that information to you without first asking the person if it was OK. The most I can probably do for you is to try to contact the person to ask that. I am not even sure if I can still contact the person.

Detective: If you can, could you tell the person that, if the person is willing to provide information to us, any such information would be treated with the utmost confidence. The information would not go beyond us and the
Commissioner. We are of the opinion that other police may have been involved in the shooting and there are strict controls within the Police Service as to whom this information can be disclosed to - just me, Detective Davey and the
Commissioner. If the person wants to meet us somewhere we will come to wherever that is and listen to what the person has to say, in confidence.

Z: I doubt that the person would be willing to do that. If you want to achieve anything, you should probably consider some alternative means to get what you want which involves the person preserving anonymity.

Detective: The person could talk to us on the telephone, anonymously.

Z: Although, if you are suspicious of the person, I doubt I would advise the person to do even that. Just thinking aloud, if you had a list of questions you want to ask, I could see if the person is willing to answer some or all of them. But you might want to be on [sic] control of asking the questions and
I don't know if I would be willing to do that.

Detective: Yes.

Z: On the other hand, if I can find the person, he or she might be happy just to come in and speak with you. In any event I will need to take time to consider what my obligations are and what I am willing to do. As you will appreciate, we lawyers have to tread very carefully in relation to matters of privilege. I don't even know if I can contact this person. If I d try to contact the person, I want your undertaking that I will not be followed. If I do, it may be in the next few days or it may be in a few weeks time. In either case, I wont leave it too long before getting back to you".
 On 30 April 2003, Z sent an email to police in the following terms: "I refer to our meeting on 12 March 2003 (along with Detective Davey) and to your recent telephone message.

I have considered your request for assistance. Having discussed the matter with my colleagues, I am not willing to provide the assistance you requested.

I am bound not to reveal a protected confidence or protected identity information. Further, in light of the apparent attempt on M's life, to assist you with this line of inquiry would necessarily expose me and my family to risk of harm, in addition to stress that would be placed on my family.

I do, however, wish you success in your investigation.

Please contact me by telephone or email if you would like to discuss this matter further".
 In answer to the summons issued on 19 September 2003, the Plaintiff attended on 24 September 2003 and gave evidence at a private hearing of the
Commission. In the course of that evidence, he was asked to identify X, but he declined to do so, relying upon legal professional privilege. The Commissioner overruled the Plaintiff's objection and directed that he answer the question.
In the course of the Commission hearing on 24 September 2003, the Commissioner said to Z (Transcript, pages 17-18): "I am not prepared to say that the name will not be disclosed to a police officer in any circumstances. It is not the purpose of the exercise at the moment to give the name so that it can be conveyed to a police officer, the purpose of the exercise is to get the name so that we can know where to go with the investigation. As I mentioned earlier, there is at least a suspicion that the information was provided to you for the purpose of you providing it to the police so the police would take action, contrary to the interests of M, - in circumstances where the action by police was not justified on the basis of the facts, but only on the basis of the allegation and that with an allegation that M may have been set up, loaded or whatever.

However, I will give you an undertaking that we will act responsibly in relation to the information and it may be that having got the name we need to speak to whoever the person is. But it may also be, having got the name, it would be better that we should not in the interests of advancing the investigation, because it may be that this person is a person who, if notified of our interest or whatever, may take steps to compromise the investigation.
So really, what I need first is the name and then to make a decision about what to do with that information." The proceedings before Grove J, and then the Court of Appeal, involved an application for an order of review under s.19(2) NSWCC Act with respect to the
Commissioner's decision concerning a claim of legal professional privilege.
Grove J held that the communications in question were not privileged communications, but that even if they were, that s.18B(4) enabled the
Commission to require Z to reveal the name and address of X. His Honour dismissed the Plaintiff's summons. On 19 November 2004, the Court of Appeal dismissed with costs an appeal from the decision of Grove J.
 On 29 November 2004, the Plaintiff attended the Commission's premises pursuant to a s.16 summons. At that time, an adjournment of the hearing was sought by him and granted.

Commission Hearing on 2 February 2005 On 2 February 2005, the Plaintiff attended once again the Commission's premises pursuant to the summons. A continuation of the private hearing ensued at which Z was represented by Counsel. At that time, the Plaintiff again declined to answer questions seeking the names of X and Y. The Plaintiff declined to answer these questions, asserting a "reasonable excuse" based upon the principles of public interest immunity and a claim of fear of reprisal if he was required to answer the questions.  The Commissioner heard submissions concerning the first ground of "reasonable excuse" (the public interest immunity ground), and gave the following decision (Transcript, page 22): "Now, on the public interest immunity ground, based on what I've said, unsurprisingly, I suppose, I accept the submissions of Mr Singleton and for the sake of brevity, I don't propose to repeat those, except for one qualification. I think there is also some old law that says that the categories of public interest immunity are not closed, and I think that issues about risks to even intermediaries or conduits is one that might be taken into account, and if it were found that that was an appropriate matter to be taken into account, I don't think it would tip the balance in favour of non- disclosure to this Commission. Therefore, based on that public interest immunity objection, I would direct the witness to answer the two questions that were put to him. But, as I understand it, at least from the witness, there are other grounds of objection to answering those questions and you no doubt know what they are and perhaps you could tell us".
 Z then gave evidence in support of his second ground of "reasonable excuse" (the fear of reprisal ground). Z gave the following evidence commencing with a reference to his email of 30 April 2003 which is set out in paragraph 16 of this judgment (Transcript, page 22-24): "As stated in the email which is Annexure 'B' to Exhibit 1 that's in front of me, I fear for the safety of my family, my wife and two children and also for myself. As I understand it, the hope of the investigating officers is that if I give the name and address of Mr 'X' that that will assist their inquiries in that Mr 'X' might be the person who pulled the trigger against M or associated with other persons who pulled the trigger and perhaps information which was provided back in I think, 1998, is consistent with an adverse motivation towards M, if indeed I do provide the name and/or address or other information by which Mr 'X' could be identified. If I provide that information to the Commission, then a number of consequences are then likely to follow.

One is that if indeed the hopes of the Police are found to be true, then
Mr 'X' and/or persons associated with Mr 'X' could want to seek retribution against me or my family or extended family for providing information to authorities which was given to me in confidence and in the circumstances outlined elsewhere in my evidence. And secondly, the motivation might not only be retribution but could also be to prevent any further disclosure which might be seen by Mr 'X' or persons associated with him or her, to be within my mind that I could provide.

It also extends to, as my counsel has pointed out, to the fear arising from the comments made to me by the investigating officers, as set out in my affidavit, as to their investigations with respect to other police officers that those police officers are no doubt well-resourced to carry out retribution and/or other harm to me to prevent any further disclosure that might be available.
 
Mr Bradley: But did you - I'll just stop you there for a moment.

A: Yes.

Q. Are you suggesting that you have information about the identity or corrupt acts of corrupt Police? 
A. No, only to the extent of ...

Q. Thank you.

A. ... of what's been intimated to me by the police officers investigating this matter.

Q: Yes. Go on.

A: In relation to those fears, there's one matter which ... there was a question which you asked, Commissioner, of my counsel earlier, which I noted down, and that was whether or not the retainer was created for the purpose of preserving anonymity. The answer that my learned counsel gave was 'no'. Although I do note that in my affidavit, I've referred to legal advice which I gave to Mr 'Z' and I won't be disclosing the substance of that legal advice unless compelled to do so, but the answer given by my learned counsel shouldn't preclude the possibility that that advice included advice as to the preservation of Mr 'X's' anonymity.

Now I say that because it is theoretically possible that Mr 'X' had knowledge that M was involved in Police corruption, had links with the Police, and that therefore I was approached to provide information to the Police without providing Mr 'X's' identity. Now that's a theoretical possibility, but it might explain why the investigating officer said to me that other Police are being investigated. Perhaps they pulled the trigger and there was some other game that M was involved in. I don't know what the situation was, but certainly my fears arise in relation to other Police, Mr 'X' and/or persons associated with Mr 'X' based upon those two factors, and that is either that, as a matter of retribution, or that it might be retribution in the nature of criminals shooting a dog as they would refer to it or in ... or through their own fears that I might say something else, which they might fear that I know.
That's a summary of my concerns. If I thought about it more, I could probably better express them, but that's a summary of my concerns." The Commissioner's decision with respect to the fear of reprisal ground was in the following terms (Transcript, page 29): "As I said earlier, there's no question about the reality of Z's subjective concerns, but it's not for him to make the determination as to whether that excuse is reasonable or not, whether or not he's been comforted or by what he's heard from the Commission or other officers. There's no evidence of substance to support the assertion that there is an actual threat, but there's a reasonable apprehension for the circumstances because of circumstances that you've outlined.

I accept the interpretation of 18, put forward by Mr Singleton. I note also in that context the unambiguous terms of Section 18B(1). We're here involved in an investigation. Part of that investigation will be to determine the identity of the persons who shot M. That seems to be absolutely critical.
There's evidence before the Commission, of which you're not aware, that makes the identity of 'X' even more critical to the advancement of the investigation. That in one sense doesn't influence the decision about whether or not there is a reasonable excuse before it, because of what I said about the interpretation of Section 18 and 18B. I don't think that there is a reasonable excuse made out here and therefore I would direct Z to answer the two questions that were put to him earlier. Now, in fact, I formally do that".
 Following the Commissioner's formal requirement to answer the questions, Z continued to decline to do so upon the claimed grounds of "reasonable excuse". The private hearing was adjourned to allow Z an opportunity to seek a review of the Defendant's decisions under s.19(2) NSWCC Act.
 On 9 February 2005, the Plaintiff filed a summons in the present proceedings seeking a review of the decision of the Commissioner requiring him to answer these questions. The hearing of that summons came before me as duty judge on 2 March 2005. Given the subject matter of the litigation, both parties sought that the hearing proceed in closed court and I acceded to that application. Mr A S Howen appeared for the Plaintiff and Mr I D Temby QC and
Mr P F Singleton appeared for the Defendant. The only evidence placed before me was the affidavit sworn on 18 February 2005 by Shauna Lindsey McPherson,
Senior Intelligence Analyst employed by the Commission and the documents exhibited to that affidavit. There was no additional evidence from the
Plaintiff before me. Following the hearing, the parties provided additional written submissions on 7 and 8 March 2005.

Nature of Review under s.19(2) NSWCC Act Section 19 NSWCC Act relevantly provides: Applications to Supreme Court 
Where: a person claims to be entitled to refuse to furnish information or produce a document that the person is required to furnish or produce pursuant to a notice under section 10, 
Repealed.
 a person claims to be entitled to refuse to answer a question put to the person, or to produce a document that the person was required to produce, at a hearing before the Commission, the Commission shall decide as soon as practicable whether in its opinion the claim is justified and notify the person of its decision. 
If the person is dissatisfied with the decision, the person may apply to the Supreme Court for an order of review in respect of the decision. ...

On an application for an order of review in respect of a decision of the
Commission under subsection (1), the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, make an order: affirming the decision, or setting aside the decision. ... 
An order of the Supreme Court under subsection (4) is, subject to any appeal from that order, conclusive for the purposes of any other proceedings.
 ...

An application by a person under subsection (2) must: be made in such manner as is prescribed by rules of court, and set out the grounds of the application, and be lodged with the appropriate Registry of the Supreme Court within the period of 5 days (excluding days on which the Registry is closed) immediately after the date on which the Commission notified the person of the decision to which the application relates. 
The Supreme Court has jurisdiction with respect to matters arising under this section. 
In this section, unless the contrary intention appears: 'appropriate officer' means the officer of the Supreme Court prescribed by rules of court as the appropriate officer for the purposes of this section. 'appropriate Registry' means the Registry of the Supreme Court prescribed by rules of court as the appropriate Registry for the purposes of this section. 'document' includes any thing. 
Where a decision of the Commission under subsection (1) relates to 2 or more questions, or to 2 or more documents, the decision shall, to the extent to which it relates to a particular question or document, be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to constitute a separate decision relating to that question or document only. ...".
 Mr Howen, for the Plaintiff, submits that, in undertaking a s.19(2) review, the Court is conducting a de novo hearing upon the question of "reasonable excuse". Mr Temby QC, for the Defendant, submits that the role of the Court is to review the correctness of the decision-making and not the decision per se. He submits that the process is not a merits review, and that the Plaintiff must establish that the Commissioner's decision was infected by some error.
 In Rohatgi versus Medical Tribunal of New South Wales (Court of Appeal, 20
April 1994, unreported, BC9402485), Mahoney AP (Meagher and Powell JJA agreeing) said at page 24: "The word 'review' is a word, which, in my opinion, does not have an ordinary meaning which is fixed. The content of it, in the sense of what it requires to be done, will vary with the context in which the term is used. It may require only an examination of what has been done, to ascertain whether, on the face of it, the Tribunal concerned has done what it was required to do: compare generally Coalcliff Collieries Ltd versus Campbell <case>; [(1964) 38 ALJR 180.] The term may, at the other extreme, involve a de novo examination of the material on which the original order was made, the testing of the process by which the decision was reached, and an assessment of the correctness of that decision: see, eg, Appliance Holdings Pty Ltd versus Lawson [(1983) 1 NSWLR 246] at 249. And it may, I think, involve an examination of what has taken place which is between these two extremes: see Smith versus New South
Wales Bar Association <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 256] at 264 and 265; Boston Clothing Co Pty Ltd versus Margaronis [(1992) 27 NSWLR 580] at 586. It is necessary to examine the context of the present provisions in order to determine what in this case the duty to review the removal decision required." In Rohatgi, above, Mahoney AP said at page 20: "In considering the meaning of 'review' it is of assistance to follow the procedure suggested by Lord Coke and now adapted as the purpose mode of construction: see Metal Manufacturers Pty Ltd versus Lewis [(1988) 13 NSWLR ]
at 325 and 326. This procedure involves: determining the problems which the statute sought to solve: identifying the remedy which it chose for solving them; and determining how the remedy was applied in the solution of them".
 The Commission is an investigative, not a judicial, body: Mannah versus State
Drug Crime Commission [(1988) 13 NSWLR 43] at 52;
Ganin versus New South Wales Crime Commission [(1993) 32 NSWLR 423] at 431; cf Balog versus Independent Commission Against Corruption <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 625] at 636. Where a claim is made by a person under s.19(1)(a) or , the Commission is required to decide whether, in its opinion, the claim is justified and notify the person accordingly. If the person is dissatisfied with the decision, s.19(2) provides a statutory avenue of review of the decision by the Supreme Court. On such an application for an order of review, the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, make an order affirming the decision or setting aside the decision: s.19(4). An order of the Supreme Court under s.19(4) is, subject to any appeal from that order, conclusive for the purposes of any other proceedings: s.19(7).
 The nature of a "review" under s.19(2) NSWCC Act was touched upon in
Ganin, above. Although other provisions of the NSWCC Act which were considered in Ganin were amended in 1996, s.19(2) and (4) have not been changed. Kirby P (Meagher JA and O'Keefe AJA agreeing) said at 439E: "For the Commission it was put that, if the Court came to this conclusion, it should not substitute its own opinion for that of the decision maker. The proceedings in the Court being by way of review, and not a merits appeal, the Court should identify the error and return the matter to the
Commission for its decision. For a number of reasons, I think that is the correct course to take. It accords the proper relationship between the
Commission and the Court".
 Kirby P said at 437E: "For the Commission it was urged that the Court should not permit Mr
Ganin to expand the assertions of his 'reasonable excuse' beyond those stated by him before the primary decision-maker, that is, Mr Briese. I do not agree.
As stated, the issue is not whether the objecting witness expressed a reasonable excuse, but whether he or she had a reasonable excuse at the time of the refusal or failure to answer a question. In the nature of things, some witnesses will be without legal representation. They may not then be able to express, or even conceive, the lawful grounds upon which they have a 'reasonable excuse' to refuse or fail to answer a question. If Parliament had intended to confine them to the 'excuse' expressed at the time, it would have so provided. For the reasons already given, I would decline to adopt a narrow construction of the excuse provisions in section 18(1) and section 18(2). To do so would defy the plain words of the Act".
 Kirby P observed at 439G: "As well, the Commission, as a body constituted to perform investigatory functions, is likely to have more knowledge of the reasonableness or otherwise of the appellants' now submitted excuses than this Court could muster from its own experience. Where parliament establishes a specialised body, such as the
Commission, it is appropriate for this Court to accord great weight to the decision of the Commission, given the knowledge and experience available to it: R versus Ludeke; Ex parte Queensland Electricity Commission <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 178] and 184. This is not to forfeit the Court's duty to perform the review contemplated by parliament in S.19(2) of the Act. The powers of the
Commission are so drastic and exceptional that it is unsurprising that parliament should have provided for such review. But it is to insist that, at least in the first instance, this specialised body be afforded the opportunity of making the primary decisions."  Section 19(4) enables the Supreme Court "in its discretion", to make an order affirming or setting aside the decision of the Commission. The statutory reference to the Court exercising a discretion in this respect tends to support the view that the function being carried out by the Court is not a narrow one. Likewise, the observation of Kirby P in Ganin, above, that the
Court may consider whether the person had a "reasonable excuse" at the time when the person appeared before the Commission, whether that head of "reasonable excuse" was advanced at that time or not.
 In the event, I do not consider that it is necessary to explore this question further to determine the present application. The only evidence which is before me is the material which was before the Commission at the time when it made its decisions on 2 February 2005. There is no additional evidence from the Plaintiff. The arguments which have been advanced to this Court as to "reasonable excuse" involve the same heads of claim as those made before the
Commission on 2 February 2005, although more elaborate legal argument has occurred both in writing and orally before me.
 In the circumstances of this case, the function which I am undertaking under s.19(4) NSWCC Act will require a decision, on the material before me, as to whether the Plaintiff had a "reasonable excuse" for the purposes of the
NSWCC Act, on the grounds advanced before me, which entitled him to refuse to answer the questions put to him on 2 February 2005.

Sections 18 and 18B NSWCC Act Section 18 NSWCC Act is in the following terms: "18 Failure of witnesses to attend and answer questions etc 
A person served with a summons to appear as a witness at a hearing before the Commission shall not, without reasonable excuse: fail to attend as required by the summons, or fail to attend from day to day unless excused, or released from further attendance, by a member. 
A person appearing as a witness at a hearing before the
Commission shall not, without reasonable excuse or except as provided by section 18A or 18B: when required pursuant to section 16 either to take an oath or make an affirmation--refuse or fail to comply with the requirement, refuse or fail to answer a question that the person is required to answer by the member presiding at the hearing, or refuse or fail to produce a document or thing that the person was required to produce by a summons under this Act served as prescribed. 
A witness who without reasonable excuse fails to comply with a condition to which the release of the witness under section 18AA (5) is subject, is guilty of an offence.

Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both".
 Section 18B of the Act provides: "18B Privilege concerning answers and documents 
A witness summoned to attend or appearing before the Commission at a hearing is not (except as provided by section 18A) excused from answering any question or producing any document or thing on the ground that the answer or production may incriminate or tend to incriminate the witness, or on any other ground of privilege, or on the ground of a duty of secrecy or other restriction on disclosure, or on any other ground. 
An answer made, or document or thing produced, by a witness at a hearing before the Commission is not (except as otherwise provided in this section) admissible in evidence against the person in any civil or criminal proceedings or in any disciplinary proceedings. 
Nothing in this section makes inadmissible: any answer, document or thing in proceedings for an offence against this
Act or in proceedings for contempt under this Act, or any answer, document or thing in any civil or criminal proceedings or in any disciplinary proceedings if the witness does not object to giving the answer or producing the document or other thing irrespective of the provisions of subsection (1), or any document in any civil proceedings for or in respect of any right or liability conferred or imposed by the document or thing, or any answer made, or document or thing produced, by a corporation at a hearing before the Commission, or any answer, document or thing in a proceeding for the falsity of evidence given by the witness. 
If: a legal practitioner or other person is required to answer a question or produce a document or thing at a hearing before the Commission, and the answer to the question would disclose, or the document or thing contains, a privileged communication passing between a legal practitioner (in his or her capacity as a legal practitioner) and a person, the legal practitioner or other person is entitled to refuse to comply with the requirement, unless the privilege is waived by a person having authority to do so. However, the legal practitioner must, if so required by the member presiding at the hearing, furnish to the Commission the name and address of the person to whom or by whom the communication was made. 
The member presiding at the hearing may declare that all or any classes of answers given by a witness or that all or any classes of documents or other things produced by a witness will be regarded as having been given or produced on objection by the witness, and there is accordingly no need for the witness to make an objection in respect of each such answer, document or other thing".
 I note that s.18 was amended, and s.18B was inserted, by the New South
Wales Crime Commission Amendment Act 1996 No. 104. In certain respects, the present NSWCC Act differs from the Act considered in Ganin. In particular, s.18B(1) provides that a witness is not excused from answering any question on the ground that the answer "may incriminate or tend to incriminate the witness, or on any other ground of privilege, or on the ground of a duty of secrecy or other restriction on disclosure, or on any other ground". The
Defendant did not contend before me that this provision operated to exclude the grounds asserted here from being a "reasonable excuse" for the purposes of s.18(2) of the Act.  "Reasonable Excuse" in s.18 NSWCC Act In Taikato versus The Queen <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 454], Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ observed at 464 that what is a reasonable excuse depends not only on the circumstances of the individual case, but also on the purpose of the provision to which the offence of "reasonable excuse" is an exception.
 There may be a reasonable excuse without a legal justification for the conduct in question: Poole versus Wah Min Chan <case>; [(1947) 75 CLR 218] at 232; Taikato, above, at 470, 491; Bank of Valletta plc v National Crime Authority <case>; [(1999) 164 ALR 45] at 36 (Hely J.). In Ganin, above, Kirby P said at 436B: "There is no apparent reason to read down exemptions for 'reasonable excuse' in Section 18 (2) of the Act. On the contrary, there is every reason to give the words used their ordinary construction. They simply ask whether the refusal to answer the question was 'without reasonable excuse'. As Ireland
J rightly pointed out, the question is not whether the excuse stated or subjectively conceived was reasonable. It is whether, at the relevant time of refusal to answer the question as required, there was, or was not, a reasonable excuse. In accordance with orthodox canons of construction these words would not be given a narrow meaning. They appear in a provision which imposes a criminal sanction for its breach." Kirby P observed at 436D that the "reasonable excuse" must be "one relevant to the refusal or failure to answer a question". His Honour continued at 437C-D:  "It is not even confined (as other like legislation is) to whether the witness has a 'lawful excuse'. The criterion is solely whether the refusal complained of occurred 'without reasonable excuse'. By those very wide words, attention is directed to a broader frame of reference." Kirby P said at 439C-D:  "All that is required, in the terms of S.18(2), is that the resisting witness should have a 'reasonable excuse'. It is undesirable that different "formulae" should be substituted for that which parliament has enacted.

Nevertheless, in judging whether a 'reasonable excuse' exists, it was clearly appropriate for the decision-maker to put out of mind imaginary and insubstantial fears or those which, in the practical world, are so remote as to be safely ignored or over-ruled as unreasonable. In each case, a judgment must be made." Section 18(2), as amended in 1996, now provides that a witness shall not refuse or fail to answer a question "without reasonable excuse or except as provided by section 18A or 18B". It is necessary to read the abovementioned passages from Ganin with these statutory changes in mind. The term "without reasonable excuse" is no longer the sole criterion used in s.18(2). It has not been argued before me that this amendment to s.18(2) has any impact upon the grounds of "reasonable excuse" which are said to exist in this case.

Some Relevant Provisions in the NSWCC ACT Given the grounds of "reasonable excuse" which are advanced in this case, it is appropriate to refer to provisions of the NSWCC Act to ascertain the statutory context in which s.18 operates. Section 3A describes the objects of the Act in the following terms: "3A Objects 
The principal object of this Act is to reduce the incidence of illegal drug trafficking. 
The secondary object of this Act is to reduce the incidence of organised and other crime".
 The principle functions of the Management Committee include referral of matters relating to relevant criminal activities to the Commission for investigation: s.25(1)(a). The term "investigation" means an investigation by the Commission of a matter referred to it under s.25(1)(a) or (a1) by the
Management Committee: s.3(1).
 The terms "relevant criminal activity" and "relevant offence" are defined in s.3(1) of the Act. In the present case, it is noteworthy that the
Management Committee has referred to the Commission for investigation the attempted murder of M on or about 28 November 2002, the Management Committee being satisfied, inter alia, that the investigation by the Commission of the offence is "in the public interest" (see clause (b)(i) of the definition of "relevant offence" in s.3(1) of the Act).
 The principal functions of the Commission include the investigation of mattes relating to relevant criminal activity referred to the Commission by the Management Committee for investigation: s.6(1)(a).
 For the purposes of an investigation, the Commission may hold hearings: s.13(1). A hearing before the Commission shall be held in private and the
Commission may give directions as to the persons who may be present during the hearing or a part of the hearing: s.13(5). Section 13(9) of the Act provides as follows: "(9) The Commission may direct that: any evidence given before it, the contents of any document, or a description of any thing, produced to the Commission or seized pursuant to a search warrant issued under section , any information that might enable a person who has given or may be about to give evidence before the Commission to be identified or located, or the fact that any person has given or may be about to give evidence at a hearing, shall not be published, or shall not be published except in such manner, and to such persons, as the Commission specifies, and the Commission shall give such a direction if the failure to do so might prejudice the safety or reputation of a person or prejudice the fair trial of a person who has been or may be charged with an offence".
 Section 13(12) is in the following terms: "(12) A person who: is present at a hearing in contravention of subsection (7), or makes a publication in contravention of a direction given under subsection (9), is guilty of an offence punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding 100 penalty units or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 2 years, or both".
 The evidence reveals that a direction under s.13(9) has been made with respect to the private hearings at which Z has been called to give evidence. I should proceed on the basis that such a direction will be made at any future private hearing at which Z is called to give evidence.
 Section 16(1) enables persons to be summoned to appear before the
Commission at a hearing to give evidence. Section 29, a statutory secrecy provision, is in the following terms: "29 Secrecy 
This section applies to: a member of the Commission, and a member of the staff of the Commission, and a member of a police task force assisting the Commission in accordance with an arrangement under section 27A, and a person to whom information is given either by the Commission or by a person referred to in paragraph (a), (b) or (c) on the understanding that the information is confidential. 
A person to whom this section applies who, either directly or indirectly, except for the purposes of this Act or otherwise in connection with the exercise of the person's functions under this Act, and either while the person is or after the person ceases to be a person to whom this section applies: makes a record of any information, or divulges or communicates to any person any information, being information acquired by the person by reason of, or in the course of, the exercise of functions under this Act, is guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction, by a fine not exceeding 50 penalty units or imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year, or both. 
A person to whom this section applies shall not be required to produce in any court any document that has come into the person's custody or control in the course of, or by reason of, the exercise of functions under this Act, or to divulge or communicate to a court a matter or thing that has come to the person's notice in the exercise of functions under this Act, except where the Commission, or a member in the member's official capacity, is a party to the relevant proceedings or it is necessary to do so: for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act, or for the purposes of a prosecution instituted as a result of an investigation conducted by the Commission in the exercise of its functions. 
In this section: 'court' includes any tribunal, authority or person having power to require the production of documents or the answering of questions. 'produce' includes permit access to".
 Finally, s.29A NSWCC Act imposes restrictions upon the recipient of a summons to give evidence from disclosing any information about the summons that is likely to prejudice the investigation to which it relates.
 In summary, the NSWCC Act creates an investigatory body which is empowered to conduct hearings for the purposes of an investigation of serious crime. In a case such as the present, the Commission's substantial coercive powers are invoked only after the Management Committee is satisfied that investigation by the Commission of the offence is "in the public interest". Hearings before the Commission are in private and statutory secrecy provisions apply which are intended to restrict publication of evidence given at a hearing and to protect the integrity of investigations.
 There is a fundamental difference between the position of the Commission and the position of courts. The open justice principle applies to courts, subject to the ability to close the court or to make other orders pursuant to express, implied or inherent powers having regard, inter alia, to public interest immunity principles: John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd versus District
Court of NSW  <case> at paragraphs 18ff, 45ff; s.56 [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/); [s.130](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s130.html) [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/); [s.80](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s80.html) [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/).

Claim of "Reasonable Excuse" - The Public Interest Immunity Ground The Plaintiff contended that public interest immunity was capable of constituting a "reasonable excuse" for the purposes of [s.18(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s18.html)
NSWCC Act. The Defendant accepted that, in an appropriate case, public interest immunity could be relied upon as a "reasonable excuse". However, the Defendant submitted that it could not be availed of in the circumstances of this case.
 Relying upon the informer rule, Z argued that he should not be required to reveal the identity of X in circumstances where X provided Z with information and instructed him to pass it on to the police upon a condition that X's identity would not be revealed. Mr Howen argued that there was an agreement in between Z and the police that the identity of X would not be sought, and that it would constitute a form of breach of agreement or breach of trust for
Z to be required now to reveal the identity of X.
 In my view, this submission does not accurately reflect the evidence concerning the conversation between Z and the police in 1998. I have incorporated in this judgment Z's own version of this conversation (see paragraph 7 of this judgment). Z offered to provide the information to police without revealing his source. The police received the information from Z.
There was no express or implied agreement between the police and Z that no further action would be taken by police, let alone a body such as the
Commission, to ascertain the identity of X. In my opinion, the evidence concerning the disclosure of the information by Z to the police does not demonstrate any agreement which bears upon resolution of the present question.
 What is left is the fact that Z, then a solicitor, passed on information to police upon the instructions of X, then a client of Z. In the exercise of its important public function of investigating crime, the Commission seeks from Z the identity of X. It does so in the context of a private hearing in aid of an investigation where statutory secrecy obligations arise with respect to any evidence which Z gives.
 It has been said that public interest immunity is a doctrine that protects the public interest and, in particular, "requires a dimension that is governmental in character": R versus Young <case>; [(1999) 46 NSWLR 681] at 693, 721. It protects especially "the executive arm of government and of the public service": Young, above, at 694, citing
Sankey versus Whitlam <case>; <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 604] at 619.
The notion of governmental function is very broad in nature: Mok versus New South
Wales Crime Commission  <case> at paragraph 19. In my view, the important public functions of the Commission, reflected in the statutory provisions referred to earlier in this judgment, attract these principles. There is a powerful public interest in the
Commission receiving answers to the questions posed to Z to allow the
Commission to further its statutory functions of investigating serious crime.
 In Cain versus Glass (No. 2) [(1985) 3 NSWLR 230], McHugh JA said at 247C: "The justification for the exalted position of the informer rule in the spectrum of public interest immunity is that, unless the anonymity of informers is protected 'the flow of intelligence about planned crime or its perpetrators' will stop: D versus National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children <case>; [(1978) AC 171] (at 232) per Lord Simon of Glaisdale. Although the need to protect the safety of informers may have played a part in creating the principle, the existence of a threat to the informer is not a condition precedent to its operation".
 In R versus Smith [(1996) 86 A Crim R 308] at , the Court of Criminal Appeal (Gleeson CJ, Clarke and Sheller JJA) observed with respect to the informer rule: "The fact that one person provides information to another in confidence does not of itself mean that disclosure of such information may not be compelled in legal proceedings. The private interest in confidentiality yields to the public interest in the due administration of justice. However, in certain circumstances the law recognises that a more important public interest is served by protecting information, or the identity of an informant, from disclosure in court. One such circumstance is involved in the practice, which has long since hardened into a rule of law, that the identity of police informers will be protected from disclosure: see D versus National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children <case>; [[1978] AC ] at .

The rationale of this form of public interest immunity is that, if it were not extended, sources of information would dry up and the prevention and detection of crime would be hindered".
 The Plaintiff relies upon the judgment of the South Australian Court of
Criminal Appeal in R versus Mason (2000) 74 SASR 105 where the informer rule was considered and applied. The statements of principle in Mason do not appear to be controversial. Rather, the question is what those statements have to do with the circumstances of the present case.
 The Plaintiff contends that he ought to be allowed to withhold the identity of X because X provided him with information to be passed on to the police, upon the basis that X's identity not be revealed. It seems to me that cases such as Cain versus Glass (No. 2), Smith and Mason may provide support for a refusal to name X publicly in an open court. "Disclosure in a court of law" is the usual context in which the informer rule applies: D versus National
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children <case>; [[1978] AC ] at 218;
Attorney-General for NSW versus Stuart [(1994) 34 NSWLR 667] at 674-5;
R versus Abdullah  <case> at paragraph 21. It is the "public disclosure by police of their sources of information" which is guarded against by the informer rule: Cain versus Glass (No.2) above, at 242G per Priestley JA. It is true that public interest immunity is not confined to judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings: Jacobsen v Rogers <case>; [(1994-1995) 182 CLR 572] at
However, the questions which are posed to Z in this case arise in the context of a private hearing of an investigatory body with statutory secrecy provisions supported by criminal sanctions. In my view, it would require a most exceptional case before the informer rule could constitute a "reasonable excuse" for refusing to answer a question at a private hearing of the
Commission.
 The Plaintiff contends that it may constitute an abuse of process for authorities to require a person to answer a question contrary to an express undertaking. In this respect, he refers to Registrar, Court of Appeal v
Craven (No. 1) [(1994) 126 ALR 668.] The
Plaintiff submits that, in asking the subject questions, the Commission has required answers to questions contrary to an express undertaking, the undertaking said to have been given by police in 1998.
 For reasons already expressed (in paragraph 58 of this judgment), I do not consider that this is an accurate portrayal of the circumstances in which Z gave information to police in 1998. Properly understood, these circumstances rose no higher than a willingness on the part of the police to receive information from the Plaintiff without him revealing his source. That is a far cry from a form of undertaking or agreement that no steps would be taken to identify X. The police received the information that was passed on by the
Plaintiff. On the Plaintiff's own account (see paragraph 7 of this judgment), the police did not give an assurance that they would refrain from taking steps to identify the source of the information. Indeed, according to Z, the police asked him questions with the apparent intention of identifying the source of the information.
 In my opinion, the principles of public interest immunity as reflected in the informer rule do not constitute, in the circumstances of this case, a "reasonable excuse" for Z refusing to answer the questions posed by the
Commission.

Claim of "Reasonable Excuse" - the Fear of Reprisal Ground I have set out in paragraphs 16 and 22 of this judgment the entirety of the material which the Plaintiff has advanced in support of the claimed "reasonable excuse" arising from his fears of reprisal in the event that the identity of X is revealed to the Commission. The Defendant submits that such a form of "reasonable excuse", even if conceptually or theoretically available, is not made out factually in this case. The Defendant contends that it would require a most extreme case to constitute "reasonable excuse" under s.18(2) NSWCC Act upon the ground of fear of reprisal. There must be an objective foundation to constitute "reasonable excuse".
 The Plaintiff has provided no evidence concerning the sex, background or occupation of X. In effect, the claim is based upon: the fact that X provided information to Z concerning M's alleged possession of drugs and a firearm; the fact that M was shot in an apparent attempt to murder him; the fact that one theory being investigated by the Commission is that
X intended harm to M and that information was provided by X to Z for the purpose of it being passed on to police to harm M; arising from the matters referred to in paragraphs (a) to (c) above, Z apprehends that X may wish to do him harm if, contrary to his instructions, Z revealed X's identity to the Commission.
 Mr Howen relies, by analogy, upon Young versus Quin [(1985) 4 FCR 483] in support of the proposition that Z ought not be required to provide additional evidence in support of his claim. I do not consider that the analogy is apt. It is a matter for Z to adduce such evidence as he sees fit in support of his claim of "reasonable excuse". I do not think that Young versus Quin assists the
Plaintiff in this case.  It is noteworthy that, when informed by police in March 2003 of the attack upon M, Z said "I would be surprised if the person that provided me with that information is involved but I guess you have to follow everything up" (see paragraph 15 of this judgment).
 The Defendant submits, correctly in my view, that fear of reprisal cannot be a "reasonable excuse" for refusing to answer a question in a private hearing protected by statutory secrecy provisions unless, at the very least, the fear could ground a refusal to answer a question in public proceedings.
The protections surrounding a Commission hearing may be seen in ss.13(5), (9) and (12) and 29 NSWCC Act, to which reference has already been made.
 It is useful to refer to the principles applicable where a person is charged with contempt of court by reason of refusal to be sworn or to answer questions at a trial. In Registrar of the Court of Appeal versus Gilby (Court of
Appeal, 20 August 1991, unreported, BC9101644), the Court of Appeal (Mahoney,
Priestley and Clarke JJA) said at pages 22-23: "Many persons who give evidence in criminal proceedings would prefer not to do so. It is not uncommon for witnesses to have a general apprehension that those on trial might in some way cause harm to them. In some cases, the reason for apprehension of this kind goes further. Threats may be made, general or specific, that harm will be done to a person if he gives evidence. In some cases, threats may be made to other persons and that fact may provide a basis for apprehension by the particular witness. But such circumstances do not, in general, constitute duress in the sense of relieving the witness of the obligation to give evidence when properly called upon so to do.

In order to constitute duress in the sense relevant to an offence of the present kind, it is necessary that there be, in the sense to which we shall refer, elements of immediacy, directness and fear in respect of what has been done. It is not necessary for present purposes to attempt to detail exhaustively the elements of duress for this purpose, or to discuss such elements in abstract terms. It is the nature of what Mr Gilby felt in this case which is at the heart of the matter. It is sufficient to conclude that, these elements being absent, we are not satisfied that Mr Gilby did what he did because of duress".
 The Court observed in Gilby, above, at pages 24-25 that a mere subjective fear is not of itself sufficient to constitute duress. The Defendant submits, correctly, that Gilby establishes that a mere fear of adverse consequences provides no justification for a witness refusing to answer questions at a trial, and that such a fear would not constitute a defence to a charge of contempt of court if questions were not answered upon that basis.
 The present question is whether the asserted fear constitutes a "reasonable excuse" for the purposes of s.18(2) of NSWCC Act. It seems clear that it could not give rise to a defence of duress if a charge of contempt of court was brought against the Plaintiff for refusing to answer questions in an ordinary court. The concept of "reasonable excuse" requires a clear objective component. This objective element has been emphasised in cases where the meaning of "reasonable excuse", in various statutory contexts, has been considered: Taikato, above, at 466-467; Mark versus Henshaw [(1998) 85 FCR ]
at 559-562.
 In Ganin, above, Kirby P said at 439 C-D: "Nevertheless, in judging whether a 'reasonable excuse' exists, it was clearly appropriate for the decision-maker to put out of mind imaginary and insubstantial fears or those which, in the practical world, are so remote as to be safely ignored or over-ruled as unreasonable. In each case, a judgment must be made." In approaching this ground, once again it is necessary to keep in mind the nature of the Commission hearing. It is a private hearing of an investigatory body exercising statutory powers concerning the detection of serious crime.
Statutory secrecy provisions surround the hearing in which the questions are asked. In my view it would be a rare case where fear of reprisal could constitute a "reasonable excuse" for refusing to answer a question in such a protected forum.
 The Defendant submits that this head of "reasonable excuse" has not factually been made out as being reasonable in the circumstances of this case.
I agree with this submission. The degree of risk of harmful consequences is entirely incapable of measurement in the circumstances of this case. In his decision on 2 February 2005 rejecting this part of Z's claim, the Commissioner acknowledged the nature of Z's "subjective concerns" but pointed to an absence of "evidence of substance to support the assertion" (see paragraph of this judgment). I do not consider that the evidence before me lifts the
Plaintiff's fears above the level of subjective concern only. I do not consider that the evidence of his fears constitutes a "reasonable excuse" for him refusing to answer. The fact that the questions are posed to the
Plaintiff at a private hearing of the Commission, with the statutory protections already adverted to, fortifies the conclusion that the circumstances do not give rise to a "reasonable excuse" within the meaning of <case> NSWCC Act .

Conclusion I conclude that the Plaintiff does not have a "reasonable excuse" under s.18(2) NSWCC Act for refusing to answer the subject questions upon the grounds advanced by him.
 For the purposes of <case> NSWCC Act, I make an order affirming the decisions of the Defendant requiring the Plaintiff to answer the questions which are the subject of these proceedings.
 I conclude that the Plaintiff is not entitled to relief. The summons is dismissed.
 In the ordinary course, costs would follow the event. I will hear the parties before making any order as to costs.
 I note that Grove J made orders in paragraphs 35 and 36 of his Honour's judgment of 5 February 2004 to maintain confidentiality of the transcript, judgment and contents of the file in those proceedings. I note that the judgement of the Court of Appeal in Z versus N <case> was published electronically, although only after the parties had an opportunity to consider its contents to assess issues of confidentiality.
Given the contents of this judgment, I am prepared to make orders to maintain confidentiality. I will hear the parties as to the form of such orders.
 
LAST UPDATED: 12/02/2008 * * * 
