

David Murphy versus Robert Wickenden [1996] NSWSC 94 (6 May 1996) 
David MURPHY versus Robert WICKENDEN /96 
MONDAY 6 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter I have before me a case as stated by Mr Morahan of the Local Court and dated 18 March 1996. The case stated reveals that on 18 March 1995 in proceedings between the plaintiff and the defendant the learned magistrate entered judgment in favour of the defendant against the plaintiff. The plaintiff/appellant obtained a stated case from the learned magistrate. The proceedings are before me against that background.

It appears that by an amended statement of liquidated claim the plaintiff/appellant claimed from the respondent under two different causes of action. One was for monies owing being $2,000.00 by the defendant to the plaintiff/appellant under a loan agreement allegedly entered into on or about August 1990 between the plaintiff/appellant and one Martin Comer, a practising accountant allegedly agent for and on behalf of the respondent.

Pursuant to the loan agreement the plaintiff/appellant alleges that on 20
August 1990 he drew a cheque in the sum of $12,000.00 in favour of the defendant, and that on the same date he gave the cheque to Martin Comer for the purpose of Martin Comer in turn delivering the cheque to the defendant.
The cheque was duly presented.

The plaintiff/appellant alleges that on or about September 1992 he allegedly requested the defendant to repay him the above loan, but the defendant declined to do so.

Further or alternatively, the plaintiff/appellant claimed, on the basis of monies had and received by the defendant, to the use of the plaintiff/appellant.

At the hearing before the learned magistrate certain additional grounds of defence were raised by the defendant.

It appears that at all times the matters in dispute were whether or not there had been a loan, whether there had been a loan made by the plaintiff/appellant to the defendant, and whether or not further or alternatively the plaintiff/appellant could sustain his claim upon the basis of monies had and received by the defendant to the use of the plaintiff/appellant.

A certain number of facts were found by the learned magistrate and they are set forth in the case stated. Included in the facts found were findings that the plaintiff/appellant had dealings with Martin Comer, a bankrupt accountant, whereby he advanced monies for the making of loans to a third party and, (ii) that the money advanced by the plaintiff/appellant through Mr
Comer was caught, in any event, by <case> of the Credit Administration Act and could not be enforced. The money was advanced by way of cheque and became
Exhibit 4 in the proceedings and a copy of that cheque is annexed to the case stated.

There were a number of other findings of fact, including: that there was no contract between any of the parties, or any agreement as to terms of the loan, that there was no contract either in accordance with the Credit Act or otherwise, and that the plaintiff/appellant did not act under any mistake of faith at the time he was advancing the money. It was also found that the plaintiff/appellant was not a licensed credit provider as described by the
Credit Act.

On behalf of the plaintiff/appellant it is submitted that there is no evidence to support, in particular, certain findings of fact in par 2(i) and (ii). In other words, it is submitted that there was no evidence on which the facts could be found that the plaintiff/appellant had dealings with Comer, a bankrupt accountant, whereby he advanced monies to Mr Comer for the making of loans to a third party, nor was there any evidence to support the finding that monies were advanced by the plaintiff/appellant as a loan in circumstances set forth in par 2(ii) of the case stated and to which I have made reference.

Indeed, it was submitted that, in any event, the learned magistrate should have made a finding that even if there was no relevant loan as had been alleged by the plaintiff/appellant, the plaintiff's case had been made out upon the basis that there had been monies had and received by the defendant to the use of the plaintiff/appellant.

The difficulty the appellant is faced with in these proceedings is that there are findings of fact which do not support the plaintiff's contentions. With respect to the submission that the learned magistrate was bound to find that there was a case for money had and received, or, alternatively, that there had been monies paid under a mistake of facts, it is appropriate to point to the facts as found by the learned magistrate, which I have already referred to. I repeat in particular the facts as found in par 2(iii), (iv), (v), and (vi) of the case stated. The learned magistrate made a specific finding of fact in par (xvi) that Mr Comer did not act as agent of the respondent. When one reads the case stated it appears to me that the thrust of the plaintiff's case is to the effect that the magistrate really erred in holding that the defendant should have been Mr Comer rather than the named defendant, Mr Robert
Wickenden.

It seems to me in the circumstances the findings of fact were open to the learned magistrate. It is extremely difficult for a litigant such as the plaintiff/appellant in the instant case to suggest that the findings of fact that were made were either erroneous or alternatively that there was no evidence to support them.

Reading through the case stated and having regard to the findings of fact made in respect of the plaintiff's claim, it seems to me that the submissions of the plaintiff/appellant to the effect that there was either a loan, or, alternatively, that there is an entitlement to recover on the basis of monies had and received is not a submission that should be accepted. The submissions are not supported by the findings of fact made by the magistrate. Nor in my view has it been shown that the magistrate's determination was erroneous in point of law.

In my view, the plaintiff's appeal in these proceedings should be rejected.
The firm answer to the question asking the case stated is that the learned magistrate's determination was not erroneous in point of law.

I order the plaintiff/appellant to pay the defendant/respondent's costs of these proceedings.
 * * * 
