

Whiteman versus Bailey and Anor Matter No 3372/98 [1998] NSWSC 605 (10
September 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 December 1998 `LEONARD ARTHUR WHITEMAN versus LESLEY-ANNE BAILEY & ANOR` `3372/98` `10 September 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a motion to cross-vest these proceedings to the Family Court of Australia. The plaintiff is the father-in-law of the first defendant. 
The plaintiff's case is that by agreement effective from 19 August 1991 he, together with his son and daughter-in-law agreed that they had made contributions in set proportions to extensions to the plaintiff's home at
Longueville and that should there be a disagreement between the parties then they would be deemed to have an interest in those proportions.

The plaintiff is eighty-five, he resides in a nursing home and has had the property valued at $850,000. He is willing to pay the first defendant her portion and wants to put an end to the whole matter.

The first defendant says that she was a person who never received any independent advice, did not understand what was happening and asks that the whole agreement be set aside as against her. She then asks the court, presently the Family Court of Australia, to make a remedial constructive trust order or an order for equitable charge over her father-in-law's property. What jurisdiction the Family Court of Australia would have to do that has never been explained to me and it is also significant that in the documents in the
Family Court there is not one hint of offering to do equity.

The first defendant says that the whole dispute should be heard in the Family
Court because otherwise there will just be two courts dealing with the same dispute. The plaintiff says that is not so. I do not have to decide that matter because if the plaintiff wishes to take that risk, so be it. The issues in the Family Court do appear to be far wider than the issues in this Court, including questions of maintenance and custody.

The plaintiff has properly commenced his proceedings in this Court and I cannot see, if he resists an application for transfer, there is anything to be gained by transferring the matter to the Family Court when one looks at all the factors involved.

Of course there are some factors in favour of a transfer, but it seems to me that the general balance of convenience is that the matter remain here, so I dismiss the notice of motion for transfer with costs.

I fix the matter for hearing on 2 and 3 November 1998 and direct that any cross-claim and affidavits in support are to be filed no later than 24
September 1998 and the matter will be in my list for mention on 6 October , so if there has been a successful mediation or the parties have come to an arrangement I can reuse the dates.

I make directions in accordance with the document completed by myself and counsel.
 * * * 
