

Elica Georgevska versus State Rail Authority [1997] NSWSC 157 (24 April 1997) 
Elica GEORGEVSKA versus STATE RAIL AUTHORITY 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES /87 April 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SIMPSON J 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: On 19 November 1996 I delivered judgment on the plaintiff's claim against the State Rail Authority ("SRA") for damages for personal injury she sustained as consequence of SRA's negligence when, on 19 April 1985, she tripped and fell on a timber walkway on SRA premises.

At the time of her injury the plaintiff was employed by the Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital ("RPAH"), and the circumstances of her injury were such that
RPPAH became liable to make payments to her under the provisions of the
Workers' Compensation Act 1926.

The damages I awarded included a component, $52,164.00, for financial losses incurred to the date of hearing by reason of loss of earning capacity attributable to SRA's negligence. Added to that figure was a total sum of $45,788 representing interest on this component of the award.

By notice of motion dated 13 December 1996 the SRA now seeks a variation of the judgment, such as to exclude the amount ordered to be paid by way of interest to the plaintiff. The basis for this application is explained in an affidavit sworn by the plaintiff's solicitor, the factual content of which is not in contest. Prior to the hearing of the plaintiff's claim in this Court, she had received from RPAH the payments of compensation to which she was entitled pursuant to the Workers' Compensation Act, and had ultimately (in May ) exercised her rights under that legislation to accept a redemption of
RPAH's liability to make those payments. She received a lump sum of approximately $35,000. As a consequence of the award of damages, and the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act, the plaintiff is obliged to repay to RPAH those sums in the award of damages representing compensation for her economic loss. Necessary arrangements have been made for the repayment. The plaintiff has not in fact, since the date she received the payment, been out of pocket to the extent of the payments. She was, the SRA argued, therefore not entitled to the award of interest: Batchelor versus Burke <case>; [(1981) 148 CLR 448:] Haines versus Bendall <case>; [(1981) 172 CLR 60.] This is at least partly, and possibly entirely, correct.
Certainly the plaintiff was not entitled to interest on those sums from the date when they were paid to her. That is, she was not entitled to interest on the $35,000 from May 1991, although that was a significant component in that part of the award of interest. Nor was she entitled to interest on weekly payments from the dates she received them.

In making its application the plaintiff relies upon "the slip rule" (SRC Part Rule 10). Of this rule, McHugh JA (as he then was) said in Storey &
Keers versus Johnstone [(1987) 9 NSWLR 446:] "If the proposed variation of an order relates to a matter which was in issue in the proceedings or to something which was incidental to such a matter, the court, in my opinion, has power to amend its order if the need for the variation is the result of an accidental omission or mistake. Matters such as costs or interest on a judgment, for example, are almost always incidentally involved in proceedings, and the court has power to deal with them even though they are not specifically raised at the hearing provided, of course, the omission was accidental. No doubt in some cases there will be difficulty in determining whether or not the subject of the proposed variation relates to a matter which was in issue or whether it is to be regarded as a separate and distinct matter which is not in issue" 
In paragraph 11 of the statement of claim which initiated the proceedings, a claim for interest was made. Interest was, therefore, always in issue, although it at no time assumed any prominence. Indeed, on my recollection, no reference was made to it by either party, and certainly it was not drawn to my attention that the plaintiff had received such payments and was therefore not entitled to an award of interest in respect of those amounts, although that circumstance is now abundantly clear. It is plain that both parties were conscious of the fact that some workers' compensation payments had been made, since one of the components in the award of damages was an agreed figure representing income tax paid thereon. It is clear that nobody really paid any attention to the question of interest. Following ordinary practice in the absence of any specific reservation of the question of interest, I awarded interest on the sum allowed for past economic loss.

The slip rule extends to the correction of an omission resulting from the inadvertence of a party's legal representative: E.L. Shaddock and
Associates Pty Limited versus Parramatta City Council <case>; [(1982) 151 CLR 590] at 594-5.

In the circumstances I can see no justification for permitting the plaintiff to retain a sum of money to which she was never entitled, and which was awarded to her by reason of what was plainly an accidental slip or omission.

It is therefore appropriate to vary the award of damages to delete that amount of interest to which the plaintiff was not entitled. I do not have sufficient information before me to determine that precise figure. It will be necessary for the parties to agree upon that figure, or in the absence of agreement, to put before me material from which I am able to make the appropriate calculation.

I propose to make orders generally in accordance with the notice of motion filed on behalf of the defendant.
 * * * 
