

The State Bank of New South Wales Limited versus Vecchio and Anor Matter No /93 [1998] NSWSC 546 (10 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 December 1998 
THE STATE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES LIMITED versus JOSEPH ROBERT VECCHIO & ANOR /93 November 1998 
David Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
KIRBY J: The State Bank of New South Wales (the State Bank) (the plaintiff) seeks an order that Joseph Robert Vecchio and Angelina Rosina Vecchio (the defendants) give possession of 84 Boundary Street, Liverpool, which they own as joint tenants. The action arises out of a mortgage in favour of the State Bank executed by Mr and Mrs Vecchio, and bearing date 20 February 1989. The defendants, in a cross-claim, seek to have the mortgage set aside upon three bases: * First, under the provisions of the [Contracts Review Act, 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). * Secondly, under the general law relating to contracts which are unconscionable. * Thirdly, by reason of the "defence" recognised in Garcia versus National Australia Bank Limited <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 1243.] 
To deal with these issues, it is necessary to examine the circumstances in which Mr and Mrs Vecchio executed the mortgage.
The Loan Application 
A company, Vero Coffee Pty Limited (Vero Coffee), carried on business marketing coffee. The directors of Vero Coffee were as follows: * Antonio Vecchio, the father of Joseph Vecchio, the first named defendant. * Ferdinando Giusti, the son-in-law of Antonio Vecchio (and the brother-in-law of Joseph Vecchio). * Antonio Navarro * Juan Latorre 
At some time before 14 October 1988, the directors of Vero Coffee decided to pursue a venture of a different kind. They purchased a shelf company, Rincart
Pty Limited. It was to be the vehicle for a land development project. Each became a director of Rincart Pty Limited on 14 October 1988. The shareholding within that company was as follows: * Castre Holdings Pty Limited (two shares), being a company owned by Messrs Navarro and Latorre. * One share jointly owned by Mr Ferdinando Giusti and his wife. * One share owned by Mr Antonio Vecchio. 
The project involved Rincart Pty Limited purchasing Lot 22 Lyn Parade,
Prestons for $500,000. The land was zoned industrial. The land was then to be developed as twelve commercial units at a cost of approximately $1 million.
There would be certain "front-end charges" (interest and bank charges) which were estimated at $137,219, making a total cost for the project of $1,637,219.
Once the units had been completed, they were to be marketed for $2,494,000.

Rincart Pty Limited exchanged contracts to purchase the land. It appears that the exchange took place on 30 November 1988, although the precise date is not free from doubt. What is clear is that contracts were exchanged before Rincart
Pty Limited had obtained finance. The contract contained a clause which made "time of the essence".

In December 1988 Rincart Pty Limited approached the State Bank at
Campbelltown. It did so having been referred by Mr Occhiuto of Philip Occhiuto and Associates, accountants. Mr Occhiuto is described in the submission prepared by the bank as "personally known to Snr. Manager Owen". Mr Owen, in his affidavit, said this: "In 1988 I was personally acquainted with an accountant who practiced in the local area, Philip Occhiuto of Occhiuto and Associates." 
Mr Occhiuto was not called as a witness. This was surprising. He was, unquestionably, capable of throwing light upon the events which I am about to describe. It was suggested by the plaintiff that you would have expected the defendants to have called Mr Occhiuto since he was the accountant for Rincart
Pty Limited and became briefly (after this transaction) the personal accountant for Mr and Mrs Vecchio (Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298).] However, it is clear that Mr Occhiuto was also well known to
Mr Owen. I am inclined to think he was potentially a witness for both parties.
No inference, one way or the other, should be drawn from his absence.

The approach by Rincart Pty Limited to the State Bank was apparently made in late 1988. On 16 December 1988, the Bank ordered a search of that company.
Nothing much appears to have been done to process the application before late
January 1989. By then the matter was urgent. There was concern that the vendor's solicitors would serve a notice to complete.

On 19 January 1989, Mr Williams, the Interviewing Officer at the Campbelltown branch, sent an urgent fax to the Securities and Legal Branch of the State
Bank. The fax required the branch to draft a number of documents. They included an "urgent equitable mortgage and floating charge over the assets of
Rincart Pty Limited". Loan particulars were provided in these terms: "Loan: $610,000 Total Bank Liability 
NB $100,000 Overdraft Existing $500,000 Commercial Bill Finance 
Purpose: Assist purchase vacant land at Lot 22, Lyn Parade, Prestons, $500,000 (Applicants will thence approach bank for $1.2 m to construct 12 factory units/estate.

Total Bank Overdraft Liability $2 m approx.

Security: 7 real estate properties 
Charge over T/Dep 
Directors' guarantees 
Equitable mortgage & floating charge 
Approval: Under Snr Manager's delegation.

Application currently in the process of being typed.

The solicitor dealing with the matter, Mr Venga, responded the following day.
His memorandum (20 January 1989) indicated that he had spoken to Mr Williams.
Mr Venga then included these words: "I note that the Bank has approved an existing overdraft and commercial bill loan in the amount of $610,000.00 to the abovenamed customer for the purpose of purchasing vacant land. I note, however, that at the present time no formal approval/submission has been made. I therefore make the reservation that my advice is limited to the information you have supplied to me over the telephone, together with my perusal of the scant material contained in the facsimile transmission." 
The documents which Mr Williams had requested were provided by Mr Venga. They related to the four directors and shareholders of Rincart Pty Limited. They, therefore, did not include the defendants Mr Joseph Vecchio and his wife,
Angelina. The transaction at this point did not concern Mr and Mrs Vecchio.
The Involvement of Mr and Mrs Vecchio 
However, that was to change. At some point shortly after 20 January 1989, the
Bank must have assessed the security on offer from the directors of Rincart
Pty Limited, and determined that it was inadequate. It was in these circumstances that Mr Joseph Vecchio was approached. Who approached Mr Joseph
Vecchio? Mr Vecchio, in his affidavit of 9 February 1998, stated that he knew
Mr Owen. Mr Owen would occasionally visit his father's bakery. According to Mr
Joseph Vecchio, Mr Owen rang him. The conversation was as follows: "Owen - `Your Dad and others are going into the building of factory units. They haven't got enough collateral. You want to get into it because it is a good proposition. The Bank has done all its feasibility studies.' 
Vecchio - `Who's interested in it?' 
Owen - `Your Pop, Fred Guisti, Manual La Torre and Tony Navarro. They're going to build twelve factory units in Lyn Parade, Liverpool. I'll send our valuer for valuation if you are interested.' 
Vecchio - `Sounds good. I'll talk to Pop.'" 
Mr Owen, then the Senior Manager of the Campbelltown branch of the State Bank, in an affidavit of 23 June 1998, denied that he telephoned Mr Vecchio. He also denied knowing that Mr Antonio Vecchio (the father) had a bakery, adding that if he did have a bakery, "I never visited it".

The issue was not further explored during the course of evidence, although Mr
Vecchio consistently identified a phone call from Mr Owen as the trigger for his involvement in the transaction. He said this: (T112) "Q. How do you know when you became a part of Rincart? 
A. It was at the time when I received a phone call from the bank from Bernie
Owen suggesting that I was going to put my, put our house on the line - sorry, we were going to put our house for collateral ... " 
Elsewhere, Mr Joseph Vecchio said this: (T121) "Q. When did you first decide that you wanted to be a part of Rincart? 
A. I had a phone call from Bernie Owen from the bank saying that they had a short fall in collateral for the loan and that if I was interested in becoming part of what they were setting up." 
Although the evidence is spare, I accept the substance of Mr Vecchio's account. I accept that Mr Owen telephoned Mr Vecchio, and said that the proposal was a "good proposition". I am, however, not satisfied that Mr Owen made any reference to feasibility studies undertaken by the bank. I have reached this view for a number of reasons. First, Mr Vecchio was generally a credible witness. He acknowledged a number of matters which were important, and adverse. Reference will be made to these concessions below. It would not have been surprising had a person in his position, with his house at stake, sought to deny such matters.

Secondly, although it is a detail, it seems to me unlikely that Mr Joseph
Vecchio would make up the account concerning his father's bakery. On the other hand, it is surprising that Mr Owen denied having ever been to the bakery without first inquiring where it was located. It is entirely possible that Mr
Joseph Vecchio knew Mr Owen, being a local bank manager, whilst Mr Owen may not have appreciated who Mr Vecchio was.

Thirdly, there is no competing version as to the way in which Mr Vecchio became involved in the transaction. No bank memorandum was produced to suggest that he was introduced to the bank in some other manner. No-one from the bank gave evidence, based upon recollection, as to the way in which Mr Vecchio came to be involved in the enterprise. An obvious alternative hypothesis is that Mr
Vecchio was approached by his father, and thereafter went to the bank.
However, you would have expected in these circumstances, Mr Joseph Vecchio to attend the bank with his father, and for there to be a note. I do not find it surprising in view of certain other evidence to which I will refer shortly, that the bank, rather than Mr Vecchio's father, should have taken the initiative in approaching Mr Joseph Vecchio, although plainly Mr Vecchio senior must have volunteered his son's name as a possible source of additional security. As will emerge below, it is clear that the bank was anxious that the project should go ahead. Indeed, the memorandum of the solicitor (Mr Venga), to which I have already made reference, suggested that, at branch level at least, the bank had already determined that it should approve the purchase of the land. The bank saw significant commercial advantages for itself in the proposal. They were later identified in a submission to head office when the branch sought approval for the loan. I will refer to these aspects when dealing with that submission.

Mr Joseph Vecchio, having been invited to participate, then spoke to his father. His account of that conversation was in these terms, quoting his father: "'We're building units. Why don't you get into it? It's good for the family.
The Banks giving the money. They said it all stacks up, its family and my partners in Vero Coffee.' `If we don't get someone else the whole deal goes off. We will all make some money on it.' 
Vecchio: `I'll talk it over with Lina.'...." 
Mr Antonio Vecchio had been involved in one previous land development venture some years before. Factory units had been constructed at Powdrill Road, Hoxton
Park. The land used in the venture had been owned by a family trust, Ramosa
Pty Limited. The factory units were then leased. The precise role of Mr
Antonio Vecchio was not clear. However, the factory units were part of the security offered for the proposed venture at Prestons. One infers, therefore, that the venture had been successful. It was also experience relevant to the proposed enterprise.

Mr Vecchio, having spoken to his father, then discussed the proposal with his wife. He recounted the conversation in these terms: "'Pop told me he's building factory units. He said it's a good prospect. The
Bank has looked at it and its all okay but they need some more collateral. I'm interested, what do you think?' 
Mrs Vecchio: `Why not. If it's going to make money and we can look at buying one of the units as an investment.'" 
Mr Joseph Vecchio understood that, by joining the venture, and lodging the
Title Deeds "his house was on the line". If Rincart Pty Limited were to default in paying back the loan, he understood that he could lose his house.
He believed that his wife had a similar understanding. Mr Vecchio has since separated from his wife. They are now divorced. Their divorce, one gathers, was a by-product of their involvement in this venture, and the worry which it created.

Mrs Vecchio certainly understood that she was entering into a "partnership" with a number of others with a view to making a profit. Her recollection of her conversation with her husband, Joseph, was as follows: "'My father and brother-in-law are going to build factory units. It would be a good idea if we went in with them. Do you want to go into partnership with them?' 
I was not aware of any problems with this arrangement and the conversation continued as follows: `Okay.' 
First Defendant: `They need more collateral for the loan to be approved by the Bank.'" 
Mrs Vecchio knew that "collateral" meant security for the loan. She said this: "A. We were putting our house up so they could borrow money to build the factories.

Q. And you knew that by putting your house up, there was a risk you could lose the house if the debts weren't paid? 
A. I never thought that." 
Mrs Vecchio plainly appreciated that there was a degree of risk. She said this: (T141) "Q. ...Now you may have been expecting the others were putting up equal amounts of security, but regardless of that - I mean what sort of enquires then did you make in relation to the securities being put up by the other parties? 
A. I didn't, I was told that Mr Vecchio, Antonio Vecchio, was putting up his factories, Mr Fred Giusti was putting up his home, I wasn't told that they had second and third mortgages on those properties, I thought that they were going into it with the same sort of risk that we were." 
However, I accept that Mrs Vecchio did not believe that there was any material risk that she might lose her home.

Mr Joseph Vecchio asserted that, having discussed the venture with his wife, he telephoned Mr Owen at the bank. Their conversation, according to Mr
Vecchio, was as follows: "'We're interested in it.' 
Owen: `If you are it will depend upon a valuation. I'll now arrange for a valuation.'" 
Mr Owen denied any such conversation. He acknowledged, however, that the bank arranged a valuation. Instructions for the valuation were given on 23 January
I have already accepted that Mr Owen telephoned Mr Joseph Vecchio and invited him to consider joining the venture. It was, therefore, appropriate that Mr Vecchio should communicate his decision directly to Mr Owen. I therefore accept Mr Joseph Vecchio's version.

At some time before 1 February 1989, Mr Owen telephoned Mr Joseph Vecchio and said words to the following effect: "You have to become part of Rincart because that's who the money is being lent to. Go and see Philip Occhiuto he will draw up the necessary papers. We're lending to Rincart and you are not a Director of Rincart." 
This is an important conversation. First, Mr Owen may be taken to have acknowledged having had such a conversation, since (unlike other paragraphs in
Mr Vecchio's affidavit) it is not denied. Secondly, the conversation demonstrates Mr Owen's involvement in putting together the venture. There was no formal partnership agreement between Mr Joseph Vecchio and the others involved in the enterprise. They had an informal understanding based, it appears, upon a number of casual conversations (and then only with Mr Antonio
Vecchio and perhaps, briefly, Mr Giusti). The bank was, no doubt, concerned lest it appear that Mr Joseph Vecchio was a volunteer.

Mr Owen plainly communicated his requirement to the accountant said to be acting for Rincart Pty Limited, Mr Occhiuto. Mr Occhiuto telephoned Mr Joseph
Vecchio. He asked that he and his wife attend his office. They did so. Mr
Occhiuto said words to the following effect: "These are the papers that the Bank wants. They are to become a shareholder." 
No other explanation was provided. According to the share register, the documents were signed on 1 February 1989. Mr Joseph Vecchio and his wife were issued with one share, which they held jointly. Mr Joseph Vecchio was also made a director of the company.
The Loan Submission 
On 30 January 1989, a submission was signed by Mr Owen, as Senior Manager at
Campbelltown, and by the senior interviewing officer, Mr Williams. It provided a detailed analysis of the transaction (twelve pages). It had obviously been prepared over some time, and amended as the transaction evolved. The applicant was Rincart Pty Limited. The directors of that company were identified as Mr
Antonio Vecchio (the father), Mr Giusti, Mr Latorre and Mr Navarro. Mr Joseph
Vecchio is not named. He did not become a director until two days after the submission was made.

In the body of the document, under the heading "Consortium", the directors were again identified. Brief notes were provided in respect of their background in each case. Again, the reference was to the original four directors. All were described as being directors of Vero Coffee. Again, Mr
Joseph Vecchio was not named. He was not a director of Vero Coffee Pty
Limited.

The loan application included a statement of assets and liabilities in respect of each director. That material was provided by the original four participants in the transaction. There was no reference to Mr Joseph Vecchio, nor any statement as to his assets and liabilities.

However, under the heading "Security", there was a reference to the property of Mr Joseph Vecchio and his wife at 80 Boundary Road, Liverpool. Even in respect of that item, however, there was no reference to Mr Joseph Vecchio.
The application appears to refer to Mr Antonio Vecchio. It said this: "d) Registered 1st/3rd Party mortgage over house and land at 84 Boundary Road,
Liverpool NSW 2170. (Deed to be lodged).

Registered Proprietor: Vecchio: A. Third Party mortgagors con(sent) to be obtained." 
Mr Williams, and the manager, Mr Owen, identified a number of advantages to the bank in financing the venture. First, they saw the prospect of substantial future business. The submission included the following, referring to the
Directors other than Mr Joseph Vecchio: "11. In addition to the above, the Directors also approached the Bank via this office, for a joint venture project to purchase vacant land at "Fairview
Estate" Fox Valley Road, Liverpool. This project was to construct 45
Residential blocks (min. 1 ha) for a total cost of $7-63M. The selling price for these blocks totalled $11-91M on today's prices, provide an estimated profit of $4-28M. The branch referred this proposal on to Merchant Banking, however, a satisfactory agreement could not be seriously considered as settlement was within 3 days.
The businessmen appear to be concentrating on large developments within the Campbelltown/Liverpool district. As this area is argued to be the fastest growing community within Australia the potential for various development along the lines of this application is considerable." 
Elsewhere the submission said this: "7. It is considered that this application is a test case for the bank. The consortium has a number of projects in mind and is `shopping around' for a suitable financier. It should be noted that the NAB have failed the test (because of stringent lending margins and disinterest shown by branch management)." 
The manager's recommendation included the following: "Branch will be given first opportunity to quote on further investments to be undertaken by the group which we believe may be substantial." 
Secondly, there was the lure of substantial funds, thought to be available through Castre Holdings Pty Limited, the private company of Messrs Latorre and
Navarro. The submission included: "The company, Castre Holdings Pty Limited (see associated accounts) currently has reportedly $2M credit funds in money market accounts with the
Commonwealth. A general opinion was sought, in particular to confirm these funds. Whilst the option was acceptable they were unable to confirm the investment." 
The submission continued: "9. Whilst Castre Holdings Pty Limited investment could not be substantiated, it is considered that this company is the prime entity of the three companies.
... By providing finance for this proposal, it will stand us in good stead in luring Castre Holdings away from the Commonwealth." 
Thirdly, the bank saw the prospect of obtaining the personal accounts of each of the directors.

Finally, the bank would, of course, earn fees through its involvement in the venture. The fees were substantial. On a loan of $1.64 million dollars, the capitalised interest, and bank charges, were assessed at almost $140,000, paid in advance ("front-end charges").

Seven matters were identified as constituting the security for the proposed loan of $1.64 million. They were: * First, the proposed development itself, including the land at Lyn Parade, Prestons. * Second, the five factory units previously constructed by Ramosa Pty Limited, the family trust company of Mr Antonio Vecchio. * Third, the home of Mr and Mrs Giusti, at Cowpasture Road, Hoxton Park. * Fourth, the home at 84 Boundary Road, Liverpool, of Mr and Mrs Joseph Vecchio (although they are not mentioned by name). * Fifth, a charge over a term deposit of $200,000 which Rincart Pty Limited had with the State Bank. * Sixth, a registered equitable mortgage and charge over the assets of Rincart Pty Limited. * Finally, joint and several guarantees. 
The loan application assigned values to each item of security. The factory units (item 2) and the home of Mr and Mrs Giusti (item 3) were each subject to first and second mortgages. The bank, therefore, was taking a third mortgage.
The term deposit (item 5) of Rincart Pty Limited already secured the overdraft of Vero Coffee ($70,000). Neither Mr Joseph Vecchio nor his wife had an interest in Vero Coffee. The last two items (the equitable mortgage and the guarantees) had no value in the bank's eyes, or rather their value was simply the control which they enabled the bank to exercise over the operations of
Rincart Pty Limited. In mathematical terms, the security being offered was as follows (taking the values assigned by the bank which were calculated after applying different lending margins, depending upon the nature of the security): 
The development proposal $1,200,000 
The combined value of the factory units of 
Ramosa and Mr and Mrs Giusti's home after taking account of the 1st and 2nd mortgages $136,278 Boundary Road, Liverpool (the home of 
Mr and Mrs Joseph Vecchio) which was unencumbered $187,000 
That part of the term deposit not securing the overdraft of Vero Coffee $110,000 $1,633,278 
The amount to be lent was $1,637,219, so that there was a shortfall, on these figures, of $3,941. Expressed in another way, the total security provided to the bank, leaving aside the proposed development, amounted to $433,278. Mr and
Mrs Vecchio, by including 84 Boundary Street, Liverpool amongst the security ($187,000), were contributing approximately 43% of that amount. Neither Mr
Latorre nor Mr Navarro contributed any monetary security, apart from their share of the term deposit of Rincart Pty Limited (presumably 25% each of $110,000). Mr Joseph Vecchio and his wife had no understanding of the security being provided by other members of the venture. Mrs Vecchio assumed, not unreasonably, that each would provide approximately equivalent security.

The finance was to be provided by way of commercial bills over one year. The submission of the Branch to its Regional Manager indicated that "two units and the shop are virtually sold". Elsewhere it was said that contracts had not been exchanged, since the land had not been purchased, and could not be purchased until finance was provided.

Nonetheless, it is apparent from the submissions that the bank was optimistic that the development would succeed. It suggested the following condition: "g) Draw downs to be on Building Inspector's & Regional Manager's recommendation. Initial draw down $600,000 to purchase land and allow construction to commence on Regional Manager's recommendation. Prior to release of second PP, Senior Manager to confirm that unconditional contracts for sale of at least nine units/shop have been exchanged." 
The submission also included the following: "p) Bank's Building Inspector to verify costing and be satisfied that project can be completed by applicants within budget & time. Valuer to comment on saleability of project." 
The Senior Manager and Mr Williams recommended the loan. Their recommendation went to Mr J B Egan, the Regional Lending Manager, who gave his approval on 1
February 1989. It then went to the Regional Manager at Liverpool. He gave his approval on 2 February 1989.

A valuation was provided to the bank on 6 February 1989. The valuation ($1.85 million) had, no doubt, been communicated to the branch at the time it was compiling its submission. The valuer thought the units would prove readily saleable. He estimated that the selling period would be six to eight months.
The valuation also included the following: "Costs and quantities appear adequate, however, factory design and materials to be used have now changed, therefore cost increases will occur." 
Mr Williams, the Interviewing Officer at the bank, later spoke to "Tony" (presumably Mr Navarro) on this aspect. He was told that any cost increase would be met by Rincart Pty Limited from its 60 day account.
When did the Settlement take place? 
At some point the bank officers and members of the consortium assembled in Mr
Owen's office in Campbelltown, and executed the documents required for the loan. Two aspects of the settlement were controversial: * First, when did it take place? Was it on 2 February 1989, or 20 February 1989? * Secondly, did Mr Owen administer a warning to Mr and Mrs Vecchio that they may lose their house? Did he invite them (and others) to seek independent advice? Mr Owen (supported by Mr Williams) asserted that Mr and Mrs Vecchio were warned, and invited to seek advice. Mr and Mrs Vecchio denied any such warning or invitation. 
The date of the settlement is important. The plausibility of Mr Owen's assertion that he invited those present to seek independent advice depends, in part, upon when the offer was made. If the settlement was on 20 February 1989 then, realistically, there simply was not enough time to obtain legal advice.
A notice to complete had been served upon the purchaser's solicitors on 6
February 1989. It was due to expire at 3.00 pm on 20 February 1989.

Naturally the parties, a decade later, had no particular recollection of the date of settlement. One must infer the likely date from contemporaneous documents, and the surrounding circumstances. There were a number of documents signed by Mr and Mrs Joseph Vecchio which were dated 2 February 1989. There were others (including the mortgage) which were dated 20 February 1989. There were still others where the date, 20 February 1989, had been crossed out and 2
February 1989 substituted.

In resolving this issue, I should identify the common ground. First, all witnesses agreed there was only one meeting at which all parties assembled and signed documents. They did not individually attend the bank to sign documents on other occasions.

Secondly, the parties both signed documents and produced whatever security documents they were obliged to hand over. In the case of Mr and Mrs Joseph
Vecchio, the certificate of title for 84 Boundary Road was handed to the bank on the same day as the defendants executed the documents.

Thirdly, the parties simply signed the documents. They did not date them. The dates were inserted in the handwriting of bank officers.

Fourthly, there was one document with the title "Authority To Fill In Blanks
In Security Documents". It was used by the bank at that time. Documents were signed by customers, leaving the date (and other aspects) blank. Bank officers, acting upon that Authority, would later complete the documents, as they did on this occasion. A number of such authorities were signed as part of the settlement. The Authority To Fill In Blanks signed by Mr and Mrs Joseph
Vecchio was dated 2 February 1989.

At first that document (and similar documents) suggested to my mind that the meeting must have been on 2 February 1989. I assumed that the bank thereafter completed the transaction once final approval had been given, and did so on 20
February 1989 in the absence of the parties. Bank officers, upon completion, inserted the date 20 February 1989. Hence, the mortgage signed by Mr and Mrs
Vecchio was dated 20 February 1989. There would be no point in having the parties complete an Authority To Fill In Blanks unless there were a gap between the execution of documents, and the completion of the transaction.

However, no such inference can be drawn. It is plain from the evidence of Mr
Williams that the bank, as part of its procedure, required the execution of the Authority To Fill In Blanks, even if the matter was to be finalised upon the one day.

I have formed the view, as a matter of probability, that the meeting at which the documents were executed took place on 20 February 1989, and not 2 February
I have taken that view for a number of reasons. First, the meeting involved Mr Antonio Vecchio, Mr and Mrs Joseph Vecchio, Mr and Mrs Fred
Giusti, Mr Navarro, and Mr Latorre, as well as bank officers. Each was required to execute multiple documents (mortgages, authorities, guarantees, etc). The process took at least thirty minutes, and perhaps more. Now, the submission by the branch to its regional office of 30 January 1989 included the following: "(ii) Mortgages to be prepared at branch and to be forwarded to Securities & Legals for perusal." 
Ordinarily that task, according to Mr Williams, would take one week to ten days. It is unlikely, therefore, that the mortgage documents would have been available for signature by Mr and Mrs Joseph Vecchio, and other parties, by 2
February 1989, given that the regional office did not give its approval until February 1989. Even had the documents been prepared sooner, it is unlikely that a settlement could have been arranged for the same day as the approval was ultimately given. Arranging the settlement required considerable organisation. There were many parties involved, and they were required to produce security documents.

Secondly, as mentioned already, Mr and Mrs Joseph Vecchio, when they executed the mortgage and other documents, produced their certificate of title. It had been held in safe custody by their local bank. It was provided to the State
Bank at the settlement, as required. One would imagine that the records of the bank used by Mr and Mrs Vecchio, and of the State Bank itself, would record the withdrawal and deposit of that document. However, neither the plaintiff nor the defendants produced evidence of that kind. The matter was left to inference. One contemporaneous document of the State Bank, composed by Mr
Williams on 17 February 1989, included the following paragraph (which was the subject of much cross examination): "All documents have been signed. However, in the strict sense we are not in a position to settle as we do not have the relevant Deeds for each real estate security." 
I will return to the suggestion that all documents had been signed by 17
February 1989 shortly. That passage suggests that Mr and Mrs Joseph Vecchio produced their certificate of title after 17 February 1989. One would infer, therefore, that the settlement must have taken place on 20 February 1989, not February 1989 (since producing the Deed and signing the documents occurred at the same time). The passage was drawn to the attention of the manager, Mr
Owen. He said this: (T28) "Q. It is true to say that as at 17 February 1989 Mr and Mrs Vecchio had not delivered to the bank the certificate of title in respect of the property 84
Boundary Road, Liverpool, do you agree with that? 
A. I don't know, it appears that way sir." 
Mr Owen later changed his view. He insisted that the date of execution of the mortgage was 2 February 1989 (T29). He did so, notwithstanding the terms of his affidavit, which included the following: "9. On 20 February 1989, Mr and Mrs Vecchio attended the Campbelltown branch of the Bank to sign the required mortgage over their property at 84 Boundary
Road, Liverpool. A copy of the mortgage which was signed on that day is annexed hereto and marked with the letter `H'." 
The memorandum of Mr Williams, however, contained a further statement. It was not drawn to the attention of Mr Owen when he gave evidence. The statement, in my view, puts the matter beyond doubt. Mr Williams made the following note on
Friday 17 February 1989, referring to the property of Mr and Mrs Joseph
Vecchio at 84 Boundary Road, Liverpool (Security 4): "(iii) Security 4 is unencumbered & applicants will get document to us by
Monday." 
Monday was 20 February 1989. I infer that Mr and Mrs Vecchio produced their certificate of title on that day. Since they executed the documents at the same time as the Deed was produced, it follows that the settlement took place on Monday 20 February 1989.

Before leaving this matter, I should deal with the evidence of Mr Williams, the other bank officer involved in the transaction. He dealt with the issue of the date of the meeting at some length. He, like Mr Owen, originally nominated February 1989 as the date of the settlement in his affidavit (2 July 1998).
Indeed, he went further. He specifically applied his mind to the confusion arising from the different dates upon various documents. He said this: "6. I note that annexures `D' and `E' were signed by both Mr and Mrs Vecchio and that annexure `F' was signed by Mr Vecchio. It also appears to me from the writing on the bottom right hand corner of these documents that they were in fact executed on 20 February 1989 rather than 2 February 1989 as might first appear." 
However, when Mr Williams gave evidence, he sought to correct his affidavit.
He asserted that the documents were in fact signed by Mr and Mrs Vecchio (and others at the settlement) on 2 February 1989. He identified the memorandum of February 1989 as the reason for the change in his evidence. Specifically, he drew attention to the following statements in that document, which suggested to his mind that the security documents had already been executed prior to 17 February 1989 when he wrote the memorandum: "(i) Security documents for all securities have been signed & are held in security pack." 
He especially relied upon the statement later in the same memorandum, which has already been quoted, and which I repeat for convenience: "All documents have been signed. ... " 
Mr Williams gave the following evidence: (T65) "A. This document, looking at it from now, clearly shows that all documents had been signed prior to the 20th or prior to the dating of this memorandum which was 17 February, so where I have said before that the document was signed on the 20th, that couldn't have been right." 
Mr Williams was asked the following questions: (T103) "HIS HONOUR: Q. Do you have a recollection now as to what it was you were referring to when you said `All documents have been signed'? 
A. It would be .....

Q. Sorry, do you have a recollection first of all of what you meant as opposed to an interpretation? 
A. Yes.

Q. You do have a recollection? 
A. Yes I do.

Q. What is your recollection? 
A. My recollection is that all of the necessary documents required for this transaction to go to settlement had been signed and were in the security pack and that would have included everything from the mortgages to guarantees, equitable mortgage etc and all the ancillary necessary internal bank documents." 
I do not accept that Mr Williams recollected which documents had been signed.
I believe, rather, that he was interpreting his memorandum of 17 February
As it happens, I believe his interpretation was wrong. The memorandum of February 1989 does not specify which documents had been signed. The participants were each required to sign a considerable number of documents.
The bank, likewise, was required to execute the same documents. The standard bank mortgage alone runs to twenty-four pages. There were a number of such mortgages. It was the practice of the bank to sign each page of the mortgage (although not to call upon the mortgagor to sign each page). I believe the reference to the documents being signed is a reference to the bank officer having already undertaken the laborious task of having signed all the documents on behalf of the bank. Having completed that task, all that remained was for Rincart Pty Limited, and its directors, to subscribe their signatures to these documents. This they did at the same time as the title documents were produced, on Monday 20 February 1989.
 What was Said at the Meeting 
Mr Joseph Veccho recalled the settlement meeting. There were four bank officers present. One said words to the following effect: "Mr and Mrs Vecchio you've got to sign these papers here at the bottom." 
Mr Vecchio elaborated as follows: "Whilst he said these words he indicated a large number of pages where my wife and I signed our names next to pencilled crosses on the pages. My wife and I did not have an opportunity to read the papers and the Bank Officers who were present did not explain what documents we were signing or their effect. My wife and I were not informed about the level of borrowing, or the amount of repayments. We did not know what if any other security was provided in addition to our own property and we were not asked to seek legal advice about the documents." 
Mr Vecchio said that the bank "seemed to be in a bit of a rush to get the papers signed". He described the scene in these words: (T128D) "A. Basically what it was was we were presented a lot of papers with at the bottom of the pages there were little crosses in pencil and basically what we were sort of told to do, you can imagine there was all up in the room, there would have been about eleven people and all these masses of paper to sign and each one sort of started on one end and went round and where it was your signature you put your name down. So that is how it was done." 
Mrs Vecchio told much the same story. In her affidavit she said: "During the meeting the terms of the documents were not explained to me and I did not have an opportunity to read them. I only signed the pages where shown by the Bank Officer. The First Defendant also signed the documents where shown at the same time." 
When giving evidence Mrs Vecchio said this: (T148) "A. I didn't really look at the documents I was signing on that day, unfortunately.

Q. Did you ask to read them on the day? 
A. No, I didn't.

Q. The reason being, I presume, is you had already made up your mind that these were documents to complete this deal? 
A. Yes, because we went in they pretty much showed us where to sign. We didn't know what they were for or what we were signing." 
Mr Owen, the Senior Manager, denied these assertions. Specifically, Mr Owen denied that: "... they were not given any explanation about the terms of the documents before they signed and that they were not given the opportunity to seek legal advice." 
Mr Owen said that he could recall the day the mortgages were signed. He gave his recollection as follows: "I remember Mr and Mrs Vecchio were waiting outside my office prior to execution of the mortgage. I clearly remember going out to Mr and Mrs Vecchio prior to them signing the mortgage and saying to them both, with particular emphasis on Mrs Vecchio, words to the following effect: `Now you understand that if you mortgage your house to secure these borrowings of Rincart Pty Limited, then you are putting your house on the line. If there is a default by Rincart, and the Bank has to realise its security, you may lose your house. You must understand this before you sign.'" 
When giving evidence, Mr Owen remembered (although he had not included this detail in his affidavit) that Mrs Vecchio responded by rolling her eyes (T62).
His account of the meeting continued as follows: "I then escorted Mr and Mrs Vecchio into my office for the signing of the mortgage. I recollect that prior to any documents being signed, I said to the people present in my office including Mr and Mrs Vecchio, words to the following effect: `If anyone would like the opportunity to obtain independent legal advice before signing these mortgages or guarantees, please do so.'" 
Mr Owen had some support from Mr Williams, whose affidavit included the following: "I can recall that, before any documents were signed, Bernie Owen made a comment to those people present who were giving mortgages over their homes, which to the best of my recollection was Mr and Mrs Vecchio and Mr and Mrs
Giusti. Bernie said to them words to the following effect: `You appreciate that by signing these mortgages you are putting your houses on the line. If Rincart fails to pay back the money you have borrowed, you may lose your houses.'" 
Mr Williams, when giving evidence, went further. He said this: (T84) "Q. I suggest to you that as you sit there today you simply have no recollection as to whether or not anything about independent advice was said? 
A. No, I would say I can recall that there were a number of transactions being settled at the time, Rincart, Vero Coffee, being transactions carried out and there were a number of documents being signed by various people and Bernie
Owen, who was leading the meeting, said collectively to the group, `You will have the opportunity to take documents away and review them', and he said independently to Mr Joseph Vecchio, Mr Vecchio senior, the older Mr Vecchio, that he suggested he actually take the documents away and get advice on those documents he was signing independently, along this sort of line, but as to whether each individual person actually did that, that certainly was not the case." 
I believe, as a matter of probability, that the version of Mr and Mrs Vecchio is accurate. No warning was given. There was no invitation to consult a lawyer. I take this view for a number of reasons. First, the occasion, for Mr and Mrs Vecchio, was unique. You would expect them to remember it. For Mr Owen it was just another settlement in a thirty year career. For Mr Williams, although a younger man, it was the consummation of yet another transaction. It would be surprising if either Mr Owen or Mr Williams had more than a vague recollection of what happened. Neither purported to give evidence of a practice they invariably followed.

Secondly, it might be said that Mr and Mrs Vecchio had a motive to lie.
However, it may equally be said that the bank officers had the same motive.
The transaction was a failure. The bank had lost money. The present action would ameliorate that loss. In my view, an examination of possible motives does not add much to the picture, one way or the other. However, Mr Vecchio did acknowledge that he was in no need of a warning from Mr Owen. He knew by signing the mortgage his house was "on the line". Indeed, he assumed that his wife knew as well. I have accepted already, however, that Mrs Vecchio did not fully appreciate the extent of the risk.

Thirdly, it will be noticed there are differences between the account of Mr
Owen and that of Mr Williams concerning what was said, and where it was said.
That does not necessarily mean that either is mistaken or is lying. Indeed, after a decade, one would be entitled to be suspicious if their recollections matched precisely. Having said that, the differences are significant. Mr Owen recalled administering the warning before the meeting outside his office. He addressed Mr and Mrs Vecchio alone. Mr Williams, however, remembered the words being said at the meeting itself, and to Mr and Mrs Vecchio as well as Mr and
Mrs Giusti. No doubt at some time, at some settlement meeting, and probably more than once, Mr Owen has administered a warning to persons who are about to sign mortgage documents. I am equally sure that Mr Williams has heard such warnings. However, I am not satisfied that such a warning was given to Mr and
Mrs Vecchio at the meeting on 20 February 1989. Indeed, as I have said, I believe it probable that it was not given, and that Mr Williams and Mr Owen are mistaken in their recollection.

Fourthly, I do not accept that any explanation was given of the documents being signed. I accept Mr Vecchio's description of the settlement. The mortgage document was in two parts. The first part was the document required to be registered under the [Real Property Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). In common with most bank mortgages, it did not specify the amount secured. Mr and
Mrs Vecchio signed that document. They each knew it was a mortgage, and that it was security for an advance to Rincart Pty Limited. The second part of the mortgage was a lengthy (24 page) memorandum of terms and conditions (marked
X208233). Only the bank signed that document. Mrs Vecchio said this, referring to that document: (T148): "Q. Do you remember ever seeing that document? 
A. No.

Q. Was it ever shown to you? 
A. No.

Q. Was there ever any explanation given for it? 
A. No." 
I accept this evidence. I do not believe it likely that Mr Vecchio saw that document either. Neither Mr Vecchio, nor his wife, understood that the mortgage would secure "all monies" advanced from time to time to Rincart Pty
Limited.

Finally, as a matter of probability, I find that no invitation to take legal advice was extended. I have found already that the meeting took place on
Monday 20 February 1989. It is common ground that the meeting was scheduled for 9.30 am or 10.00 am. The settlement was originally planned for 24 February
It had then been accelerated to 20 February 1989 because of a deadline imposed by a notice to complete. That notice required completion by 3.00 pm on February 1989. It was, therefore, urgent that the transaction be consummated that morning. Having all assembled, there was simply no time for the mortgagors to suspend the operation whilst they took independent advice. I therefore cannot accept that Mr Owen made such an offer.

Moreover, there are significant differences between the account given by Mr
Owen, and that of Mr Williams, on this aspect. Mr Owen remembered making the offer before the documents were signed. Mr Williams did not refer to the issue in his affidavit. However, when he gave evidence, he remembered Mr Owen saying to the whole group: (T84) "You'll have the opportunity to take the documents away and review them." 
The offer to review the documents, once executed, is quite different from the opportunity to review documents before a signature is subscribed, and a legal obligation created.

There is a further aspect of the meeting about which there was controversy. Mr
Vecchio's affidavit included the following: "After the conclusion of the signing I recall having a conversation with one of the Bank employees who I do not know during which he said words to the following effect: `Your share is worth $50,000.00'" 
Mr Vecchio added: "By this statement I understood that my wife and I were responsible for $50,000.00. I then said to the Bank employee words to the following effect: `If anything does go bad we can cope with $50,000.00.'" 
When giving evidence Mr Vecchio sought to amend his affidavit. He asserted that the words were said whilst the signing process was being undertaken, rather than after it had concluded.

There is no support for Mr Vecchio's evidence in the testimony of his former wife. Mr Owen responded to Mr Vecchio's affidavit with these words: "I certainly did not say to Mr Vecchio words to the effect of `Your share is worth $50,000.' Nor did I hear Tim Williams nor anyone else on that day telling Mr or Mrs Vecchio anything to this effect. As the Bank's documents make it clear, the mortgage given by Mr and Mrs Vecchio was not limited in any way and nothing was said at the meeting on 20 February 1989 which would have given that impression." 
Mr Williams, likewise, denied having said these words, or having heard them said. According to some evidence (although not all), two other bank officers were present during the meeting. The officers were identified by name.
However, they were not called. It is possible one of those officers may have said something to Mr Vecchio. However, it seems to me improbable that anyone from the bank made a statement that Mr Vecchio's liability was limited to $50,000. It is an unlikely statement, given the terms of the mortgage. I think it likely that Mr Vecchio's "recollection" is, in truth, a reconstruction based upon a belief he formed as to the extent of the risk he was undertaking.
Applications for Further Funds 
Within six weeks the consortium approached the bank for further funds. It was finding it difficult to provide "working capital to continue construction".
There had been delays due to wet weather, and difficulties in registering the transfer of land at the Registrar General's. This had effected sales. No-one would exchange before registration of the transfer. The second progress payment was dependent upon the exchange of contracts for nine units, and the shop. The condition was incapable of being met, and the progress payment had therefore been delayed. The company sought, first, an additional $200,000, and secondly, a release from the condition tying progress payments to the sale of units.

The loan application required approval by the regional office. The Branch, therefore, prepared a further memorandum. The memorandum referred to the cash flow problems in these terms: "They have attempted to fund the project by drawing cheques on Vero Coffee Pty
Limited. However, we are dishonouring these cheques, with the answers `arrangements incomplete'. They can understand the Bank's position but feel that we are stifling project with quote `Red Tape'." 
The bank again saw the prospect of further business. The memorandum included the following: "There are apparently 3 projects of a similar nature in the pipeline. Details of these are unknown, but it appears they are in millions of dollars." 
The memorandum continued: "In conclusion, it is felt that whilst the accounts are in no danger of being lost, we may miss out on the future projects. We realise that these projects are only hearsay at this stage but it is remembered that the applicants seriously approached the Bank, via this office, for a joint venture project of $7m." 
Approval was given, subject to all parties executing appropriate authorities.

On 13 April 1989, Mr and Mrs Vecchio executed a further document. They acknowledged the advance, and consented to its being secured in the same manner as the original advance.

In June 1989, Rincart Pty Limited was in default under its loan. It needed yet more money to continue with the project. A memorandum of 14 June 1989, prepared by Mr Owen, the Branch Manager, analysed the problem in these words: "... between 2-6-89 and 8-6-89, the Company Principal (Mr Navarro) was contacted on no less than 4 occasions seeking confirmation of costing and details of inter-company borrowings referred to in the memoranda above. Each time he was contacted he promised to forward, on that day by FAX, the information sought. To date, we have had a negative response." 
The memorandum continued: "Mr Occhiuto also confirmed that Rincart Pty Limited did in fact lend approximately $100,000 of building funds to another company, Vero Coffee Pty
Limited, in two amounts. Approximately $40,000 between 24-2-89 and 28-2-89 to allow a settlement with National Australia Bank and finance company I.C.L.E.
on behalf of Giusti to proceed. In this case, Branch had arranged finance to payout the Giusti debts. However, usual enquiries revealed that instead of one debt totalling $16,000 to I.C.L.E., Company Principal, Mr Giusti, in fact had three debts totalling some $53,000 which were not revealed to Branch earlier.
Settlement in this matter was held up pending further advice from Giusti." 
Mr Giusti's debts were paid in cash from funds advanced by the bank to construct the project. The bank undertook a bankruptcy search in respect of each of the directors, as part of its routine enquiries before approving the original loan. In respect of Mr Giusti, the search (24 January 1989) revealed that there was a bankruptcy petition pending (dated 17 August 1987; number /87). The bank documents do not otherwise refer to this aspect. It was not something revealed to Mr and Mrs Vecchio.

The same memorandum (14 June 1989), included the following commentary upon the cost increases which the bank's valuation of 2 February 1989 had foreshadowed: "Report dated 2-2-89 indicated costs and quantities appeared adequate but that factory design and materials to be used changed and that cost increases would occur. Mr Navarro was contacted by a Valuer on 6-2-89 who was advised any cost increases would be met by Rincart Pty Limited. Valuer's report also indicated that Plans and Specifications were forwarded to Building Inspectors,
Hurstville, for progress payments and detailed costing analysis, but it is now known after contacting Building Inspector, Mowle, at Hurstville, that this did not eventuate. I understand the costing was not carried out due to staff shortages at that time, and that Valuer's comments on report 2-2-89 were accepted on approval of advance sought." 
By October 1989 the project had again stalled. Further money was required to complete construction. The bank advanced an additional $500,000. The bank again required Mr and Mrs Vecchio to execute a further acknowledgment. Mr
Vecchio, in his affidavit, said this, referring to the acknowledgments of
April and October 1989: "I do not recall the nature of the documents that were signed by my wife and
I. I do however recall that we did not receive any explanation about the documents that we signed." 
However, it is plain that, by this time, Mr Vecchio knew what he was signing.
The documents themselves, unlike those of 20 February 1989, were short and explicit. They stated how much money was being advanced, in contrast to the usual bank mortgage. Further, in respect of the acknowledgment on 31 October , the bank wrote to Rincart Pty Limited on 23 October 1989 in these terms: "We are pleased to make available the loan facility as shown in the enclosed
Loan Details provided that the Terms and Conditions applying to the loan are satisfied.

Should there be any aspect you wish to clarify, then please do not hesitate to contact us. Alternatively, you may wish to obtain advice from your solicitor or accountant and have them speak to us on your behalf." 
The loan document was attached to the letter. The bank was concerned, on this occasion, to apprise those to whom moneys would be lent of the terms of the loan. It was also concerned to remind them of their right to seek independent advice. The bank's approach in both respects stands in contrast to the approach taken when the original agreement was made. The directors of Rincart
Pty Limited, including Mr and Mrs Vecchio, saw a solicitor in Campbelltown, Mr
Vincent Parisi. Mr Parisi completed a certificate certifying that he had explained the documents to the parties. Indeed, in relation to the discussion with Mr Parisi, Mr Vecchio said this: (T134) "Q. Do you remember anything about this occasion where you saw Mr Parisi? 
A. Yeah, your Honour. What happened was it was virtually put to us you either sign these papers or the whole thing comes to a stop. If everything comes to a stop, it means we couldn't get the units finished, which, if we couldn't get the units finished, then we couldn't have the end result of having them sold and that's briefly how it was explained to us, `You either sign or that's it, walk out the door', and we can't even finish the project off, so we were sort of put like a gun to our head to say, `Well, you must sign it', so we did." 
Mr Vecchio made the following statement in his affidavit: "Neither my wife or I have taken part in any of the management or the development of the commercial units at Hoxton Park on behalf of Rincart Pty
Ltd. I was not involved in any management decision, communications between
Rincart Pty Ltd and the Bank nor have I received any reports or correspondence from the bank about the progress of the development." 
Nonetheless, the loan having been transacted, Mr Vecchio thereafter took an interest in the progress of the development. He attended directors' meetings of Rincart Pty Limited from time to time. He was, no doubt, aware of the need for more funds.

By the time the project had been completed, the market had changed. The company was in default under its loan arrangements with the bank. The interest payable, in those circumstances, was 23.25%. By 23 July 1990, the level of indebtedness of the company was $1,014,468.00.

A default notice under [s57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) of the [Real Property Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), was served on Mr and Mrs Vecchio on 9 October 1992, claiming $1,038,370.86.
Meetings were held in which the bank moderated its demands to the value of the security which it held from Mr and Mrs Vecchio, namely $210,000.
The Background of Mr and Mrs Vecchio 
Mr Vecchio was born in Sicily on 25 October 1951. His family migrated to
Australia in 1955. He completed the Higher School Certificate in 1970. In 1976 he qualified as a Health and Building Surveyor. He worked for various local councils earning a salary, in 1989, of approximately $35,000 per annum. He was thirty-eight years old at the time he executed the mortgage.

Mrs Vecchio was born in Australia on 2 November 1954, of Italian immigrant parents. She completed the School Certificate. Mr and Mrs Vecchio married in
January 1975. They had two young children at the time the mortgage was executed. Mrs Vecchio at that point was thirty-four years old. The property, Boundary Street, Liverpool, was the family home. It had been purchased with the aid of a mortgage, which had since been repaid. Mrs Vecchio was described at this time as a housewife. Mr Vecchio said this: "Apart from the loan for the purchase of the property my wife and I have not borrowed any other money or entered into any mortgages with any other financial institution until in or about 1989." 
Mr Owen, the Branch Manager, gave the following evidence: (T43) "Q. Certainly you had no reason to believe that Mr Vecchio had himself been involved in the carrying out of any commercial enterprise at that time? 
A. No, sir.

Q. You knew that neither Mr nor Mrs Vecchio had any experience at all in property development? 
A. No, sir, I didn't.

Q. You didn't have any reason to think that they had had such experience, did you? 
A. No, sir." 
The bank understood that the security offered was the family home. It also understood that real estate investment was highly speculative, depending upon the market, weather, and a number of imponderables.

These, then, are the facts. I will now turn to the arguments put on behalf of the defendants.
 [Contracts Review Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) 
The Court, under [s7(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), is given the power to set aside a contract, or the provision of a contract, which it finds to be unjust. The injustice must arise at the time the contract was made. The term "unjust" is defined to include the following [(s4(1)):](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s4.html) "... unconscionable, harsh or oppressive; and `injustice' shall be construed in a corresponding manner." 
In reaching a view as to whether a contract, or its provisions, are unjust, the Court is obliged to consult the public interest, and the circumstances of the case [(s9(1)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html)
More specific guidance is given by [s9(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), which is in these terms: "[Specific matters] Without in any way affecting the generality of subsection , the matters to which the Court shall have regard shall, to the extent that they are relevant to the circumstances, include the following: whether or not there was any material inequality in bargaining power between the parties to the contract; whether or not prior to or at the time the contract was made its provisions were the subject of negotiation; whether or not it was reasonably practicable for the party seeking relief under this Act to negotiate for the alteration of or to reject any of the provisions of the contract; whether or not any provisions of the contract impose conditions which are unreasonably difficult to comply with or not reasonably necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of any party to the contract; .....
 where the contract is wholly or partly in writing, the physical form of the contract, and the intelligibility of the language in which it is expressed; whether or not and when independent legal or other expert advice was obtained by the party seeking relief under this Act; the extent (if any) to which the provisions of the contract and their legal and practical effect were accurately explained by any person to the party seeking relief under this Act, and whether or not that party understood the provisions and their effect; whether any undue influence, unfair pressure or unfair tactics were exerted on or used against the party seeking relief under this Act - by any other party to the contract; .....
 ....
 the commercial or other setting, purpose and effect of the contract." [Section (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) is also relevant. It is in these terms: "[Reasonably foreseeable circumstances] In determining whether a contract or a provision of a contract is unjust, the Court shall not have regard to any injustice arising from circumstances that were not reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was made." 
In respect of the indicia of possible injustice, identified in [s9(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), the position is as follows: * There was material inequality in the bargaining power between the parties. The bank was a seasoned player. It had money to lend. Mr and Mrs Vecchio were not unintelligent. They had some education. However, they had no relevant commercial experience (cf [s9(2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html); s[9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html)(2)(f)). * There was no negotiation of the terms and conditions of the loan at any stage (cf [s9(2)(b)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) The agreement was the standard bank mortgage (cf [s9(2)(c))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), lengthy, and difficult for a lay person to follow (cf [s9(2)(g).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) * Mr and Mrs Vecchio had no independent legal or expert advice (cf [s9(2)(h)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) * No explanation of the legal and practical effect of the document was provided. Both Mr and Mrs Vecchio understood that they were signing a mortgage, and that their home was security. The certificate of title was produced. Mr Vecchio, though not Mrs Vecchio, understood that if the venture failed, they stood to lose their home. Neither understood the "all monies" clause, that under the loan document they were liable (jointly with the other directors, who executed similar documents) for all monies advanced from time to time to Rincart Pty Limited (cf [s9(2)(i)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) * Neither Mr Vecchio nor Mrs Vecchio was subject to undue influence, unfair pressure or unfair tactics by the bank (cf [s9(2)(j).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) There was no misrepresentation by the bank. The bank, nonetheless, did play a role (as described below) in inducing Mr Vecchio to enter the transaction. 
Notwithstanding the inequality between the parties, the absence of negotiation, the absence of independent advice, and the absence of explanation, there may yet be no injustice in either the contract or its terms. What, then, is the unfairness suggested in the circumstances in which
Mr and Mrs Vecchio's loan was contracted, given that the bank has advanced (and lost) money on a venture in which everyone, including Mr and Mrs Vecchio, set out to make a profit? A number of matters were identified. In substance they amount to three matters: * First, the disproportionate security provided by Mr and Mrs Vecchio compared to the other partners; * Secondly, the predictability of the venture requiring additional money to complete construction, and comply with the terms of the loan; * Thirdly, the role of the bank in inducing Mr and Mrs Vecchio to become involved. 
I will deal with each matter in turn. So far as the first matter is concerned,
I should, for convenience, recite the relevant findings of fact. Mr and Mrs
Vecchio were late arrivals in the venture. They were introduced in circumstances where the security offered by the other four directors was insufficient. Most of the security for the advance came from the project itself. In respect of the balance of the security, Mr and Mrs Vecchio provided %. That was known to the bank. It was unknown to Mr and Mrs Vecchio. The bank also knew that they were unrepresented. It is instructive to ask what might have happened had they been represented by a lawyer or an independent accountant? It is possible that, properly advised, Mr and Mrs Vecchio would not have entered the transaction at all. However, assuming that they did enter, you would have expected their adviser to have insisted upon at least four things: * First, that the security contributed by each party be approximately the same. Insofar as there was disparity, there should be some limitation upon the extent to which the property of Mr and Mrs Vecchio could be used as security, so that all parties were in an approximately equivalent position. * Secondly, alternatively (if Mr and Mrs Vecchio were agreeable) that if they were to provide 43% of the security, they should have a commensurate share of the profits (presumably through their shareholding in Rincart Pty Limited). * Thirdly, that they should have a say in the management of the project, presumably through becoming a director of Rincart Pty Limited. * Fourthly, that there should be a cash flow analysis to ensure that sufficient funds would be available to complete construction, and meet loan commitments. 
The last aspect is relevant to the second suggested matter of unfairness. I will return to it in that context.

The bank dealt with Mr and Mrs Vecchio directly. They knew that they had not sought to protect themselves in the manner above. It must have been obvious, therefore, that they had not been given independent advice. It was, indeed, Mr
Owen, the Branch Manager, who directed Mr and Mrs Vecchio to attend Mr
Occhiuto to sign documents which would make them a shareholder of Rincart Pty
Limited (twenty percent), and, in the case of Mr Vecchio, a director of that company. I do not believe, in taking that course, the bank was protecting Mr and Mrs Vecchio. Rather, it was protecting itself. Once Mr Vecchio was a director, and he and his wife shareholders, any suggestion that they were volunteers would thereby be removed.

There was a further aspect relevant in this context. The other four directors were all directors of Vero Coffee Pty Limited. Mr and Mrs Vecchio had no association with that company. Part of the security was a term deposit by that company. That term deposit secured the overdraft by the bank to Vero Coffee.
Shortly before the loan (17 February 1989), the current account of Vero Coffee
Pty Limited stood at $125,826 debit, against a limit of $70,000 debit. To the extent that the bank permitted Vero Coffee to exceed its overdraft limit, the security for the venture which Mr and Mrs Vecchio were entering was diminished. That may have been acceptable to the bank, and the other directors. However, it increased the exposure of Mr and Mrs Vecchio's property, if there were a problem with the venture. A potential for a conflict of interests between Mr and Mrs Vecchio, on the one hand, and the other directors, who were also directors of Vero Coffee, on the other, was foreseeable (cf [s9(4)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html)
Such a conflict in fact arose. Inter-company loans were apparently made to
Vero Coffee to rescue Mr Giusti from his creditors. Mr and Mrs Vecchio, at the time they agreed to become involved, plainly did not recognise that there was this potential. It should have been recognised by the bank. It was another reason why it was important that Mr and Mrs Vecchio should have had independent advice.

Moving to the second suggested unfairness, the problems with cash flow were predictable. It was likely that the funds advanced on 20 February 1989 would not be sufficient to complete construction. The original estimate of construction costs, according to the bank memorandum of 19 January 1989 (supra p3), was $1.2 million, whereas the bank advanced $1 million for this item in the $1.64 million provided on 20 February 1989. Further, the valuation obtained by the bank (dated 2 February 1989) (supra p16), indicated that materials to be used in construction had changed, and "therefore cost increases will occur". Mr Williams, the bank's Interviewing Officer, said this: (T90) "Q. As at the time you were present when the documents were signed by Mr and
Mrs Vecchio you knew, didn't you, there was a real likelihood that the $1.64 million being lent to Rincart would not be enough to complete the development? 
A. That would be right." 
Mr Williams was not surprised by the application for further funds made within six weeks of the original advance, although he was surprised by the amount asked for (T91). Mr and Mrs Vecchio, on the other hand, were not told that the amount advanced would be insufficient, and that cost increases had already been foreshadowed. Further, there would almost certainly be no funds available to Rincart Pty Limited until the end of the project. It was possible that units may be sold in advance of construction, or as construction progressed.
However, the deposits taken would be held in trust. Funds would not flow to the company until completion. The time for construction, on the evidence, was uncertain. However, it would obviously take months. The estimated selling period, according to the bank valuation (2 February 1989), was put at "approximately 6-8 months".

No thought was given by anyone, including the bank, surprisingly, to cash flow. The bank accepted that the directors could fund cost increases from their own assets, based upon a conversation with a person "Tony" (Tony
Navarro). The bank had made an investigation of the assets of all directors other than Mr and Mrs Vecchio. The bank did not investigate whether Mr
Vecchio, from his income and assets (the bank now having the certificate of title to his family home), could fund his share of monies that may be payable before funds flowed from sales. The bank loan, it should be mentioned, included significant penalties (23.25 percent interest) should the borrowers fail to meet its terms. In the absence of an explanation or assistance, the capacity of Mr and Mrs Vecchio to appreciate the financial implications of the loan, as the project progressed, was limited (cf Elders Rural Finance
Limited versus Smith [(1996) 41 NSWLR 296], per
Mahoney P at 298/9).

Turning to the third and final aspect, the bank's role was more than that of money lender. The bank was anxious to ensnare a group which it believed may be able to provide significant commercial business. It saw significant advantages to itself, were it to fund the project (cf Elders Rural Finance Limited v
Smith (supra) Mahoney P at 300). When the project faltered, due to insufficient security, Mr Owen (no doubt with the encouragement of the other directors) examined an alternative. He rang Mr Vecchio. He said that, in his belief, the proposal was a sound proposition. Mr Vecchio was, no doubt, free to consult whomsoever he pleased before signifying his consent. However, it must have been plain to Mr Owen, when Mr Vecchio personally communicated his consent without insisting upon conditions to safeguard his position, that Mr
Vecchio had not taken advice. The bank's apparent endorsement of the project was important to Mr Vecchio. Mr Vecchio gave the following evidence, which I accept: (T121) "Q. ... I suggest to you that Mr Owen never urged you over the telephone or any other occasion to become effectively a part of Rincart because it was a good deal? 
A. That is incorrect.

Q. I suggest to you that you decided it would be a good deal from your consultation with your father and other members of Rincart? 
A. No, that is not correct.

Q. I would suggest to you at that stage you would have paid far more attention to your father's opinion that you would have a bank manager's? 
A. Not really, no.

Q. And I would suggest to you that it was from discussions with your father that you made up your mind you would like to become a part of Rincart? 
A. No that is not correct." 
Mr Vecchio, when cross examined, also gave the following evidence, which I accept: (T133) "Q. You have already said in your evidence that you went into this deal, if I can put it that way, with an expectation of making a profit at the end of the day? 
A. That's correct." 
The examination continued: (T133) "Q. Certainly the bank gave you no such figures, did it? 
A. The bank gave us the inclination that we were going to make a profit.

Q. The bank gave you no figures, did it? 
A. No.

Q. You received no valuations from the bank? 
A. No.

Q. And no figures of any kind from the bank? 
A. None whatsoever.

Q. Therefore none of your expectations about what sort of profit you may or may not have been hoping to receive could have come from any material provided to you by the bank? 
A. That is correct." 
The fact that the bank had, to a degree, induced Mr and Mrs Vecchio to become involved, sets this case apart from cases such as West versus AGC (Advances) Ltd & Ors [(1986) 5 NSWLR 610.] In that case McHugh JA (as he then was), in determining that the contract was not unjust, said this: (at 626) "Nor is it suggested that AGC in any way sought to induce Mrs West to enter into the deed or mortgage or applied any pressure to her." 
In dismissing the appeal, McHugh JA added: (at 631) "The deed and mortgage were ordinary commercial documents containing no unfair or unjust terms. AGC was guilty of no unfair conduct towards her. Mrs West's predicament is a sad one. But it is the consequence of the financial failure of Quiche. The primary responsibility for her predicament lies with those who induced her to provide her house as security for the obtaining of a loan of money four-sevenths of which was to go to Quiche." 
In Elders Rural Finance Ltd versus Smith (supra), Handley JA made the following observation about the borrowers in that case, which might equally describe Mr and Mrs Vecchio in this matter. His Honour said: (at 307) "The Smiths `were utterly out of their depths in making a projection of this kind', and had no `appreciation overall of its commercial implications'." 
His Honour then drew attention to the distinction, often made in the context of the Contracts Review Act, 1990, between the contract and the transaction.
It is the contract which must be unjust, not the transaction (West versus AGC
Ltd & Ors (supra), McHugh JA at 621). Handley JA, in
Elders Rural Finance Ltd versus Smith, said this: (at 309-310) "The distinction drawn in West versus AGC (Advances) Ltd between the transaction or investment on the one hand, and the contract on the other, was important in that case where the lender played no part in the investment decision, and was not involved in the wider transaction. No such distinction can be drawn in this case.

Elders, unlike AGC, was not a mere financier, lending money on reasonable terms and proper security. It played a far more significant role. It, or an associated company, was the agent for the vendor and it was asked to provide percent finance for the purchase. It was closely and directly involved in the compilation of the financial projections which were crucial to its decision to lend. To its knowledge it was the only party who ever evaluated those projections, or was in a position to do so. In any event the judge found that it was unjust that Elders ever entered into this transaction. In such a case the distinction between the contract and the transaction is meaningless." 
I believe that there is substance in each of the defendant's complaints of unfairness. These matters, in combination, lead me to the view that the contract was unjust, in the circumstances, at the time it was made. This was a case in which it was fundamental that Mr and Mrs Vecchio receive independent advice if injustice were to be avoided. In AGC (Advances) Ltd versus Smith
McHugh JA said this at 627: "Whether or not a person has obtained independent legal or other expert advice is simply one factor to be taken into account. In some cases the absence of such advice may be decisive. In other cases it may be irrelevant. The presence of expert advice is relevant in considering whether a contract is unjust because it makes it likely that a person has an informed appreciation of the effect of the contract." 
Here, I do not believe Mr and Mrs Vecchio had an informed appreciation of the effect of the contract. They neither had independent advice, nor were they given an explanation by the bank of matters which the bank knew, and they did not know or may not have known. Specifically, they were not informed: * First, of the disparity in respect of the security provided by the other parties. * Secondly, the probable insufficiency in funds and the need for cash (both to complete construction and pay bank interest and charges) before money flowed back to Rincart Pty Limited. * Thirdly, the potential for a conflict of interests arising out of the association of the other four participants with Vero Coffee Pty Limited, given Mr and Mrs Vecchio had no connection with that company. 
Having found the contract unjust, within the meaning of the Act, what relief is appropriate? Relief is discretionary. Kirby P (as he then was) in Baltic
Shipping Co versus Dillon [(1991) 22 NSWLR 1] said this at 20: "By the terms of s7(1) the court is called back to what `it considers it just to do'. This provision permits the court to fashion an order `for the purpose of avoiding as far as practicable an unjust consequence or result'. The legislation is remedial. It should be given a liberal interpretation: see
McHugh JA in West (at 631)." 
Here, there are a number of matters which suggest that it would be unjust to the plaintiff to simply avoid the contract altogether. They are: * First, the bank advanced money to the venture. * Secondly, the defendants were not volunteers, simply providing a guarantee. They hoped to secure a profit. They each knew there was a risk. In the case of Mr Vecchio, he knew that his "house was on the line". Had the venture succeeded, no doubt Mr and Mrs Vecchio would have claimed their share of the profits. * Thirdly, although I rejected the suggestion, made by Mr Vecchio, that the bank had said to him that his liability was limited to $50,000 (supra p 29), I have inferred, as a matter of probability, that the reference to $50,000 was, in truth, a reconstruction based upon Mr Vecchio's belief as to the amount which he had at stake. Simply to set aside the mortgage would be to ignore that Mr Vecchio undertook a risk, and was prepared to gamble up to $50,000 on the success of that risk. * Fourthly, Mr and Mrs Vecchio did not take precautions to safeguard their interests. They simply trusted Mr Antonio Vecchio (the father), and the bank. Before entering the mortgage, they did not determine what may be thought to be basic facts concerning the proposed venture, such as the nature and extent of the security provided by others in the consortium. * Fifthly, Mr Vecchio executed further acknowledgments of debt in April and October 1989. At the time he did so, he had a far greater appreciation of the position than before 20 February 1989. However, by the time each of these documents was executed, the defendants had little choice. They had executed the mortgage on 20 February 1989. It was essential that the units be completed, and sold in order to minimise whatever loss may be associated with the project. 
It is possible, had the defendants received advice from a solicitor or an accountant before the mortgage was executed, that they would have refused to become involved. If one could say, as a matter of probability, that they would not have gone ahead, then the appropriate order may be to refuse to enforce the mortgage, or to declare it void. Here, had appropriate advice been taken, there are two possibilities, and they are both real. One is that Mr and Mrs
Vecchio would have refused to have gone ahead. Another is that the deal would have been restructured to reflect their larger contribution.

In all the circumstances, I believe that the appropriate order should be that the mortgage should be varied to give effect to the following: 
That the liability of the defendants should be limited to the sum of $50,000 principal.

That interest on the principal sum should be payable at the rates fixed from time to time by the Supreme Court Rules, commencing from the date of the demand (9 October 1992), and that such interest should be simple interest, rather than compounding.
The Allegation of Unconscientious Conduct 
In Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd versus Amadio <case>; [(1982-83) 151 CLR 447], Mason J (as he then was) identified the two conditions which must exist before the Court will set aside a transaction as being unconscientious. He said: (at 462) "... whenever one party by reason of some condition or circumstances is placed at a special disadvantage vis-a-vis another and unfair or unconscientious advantage is then taken of the opportunity thereby created the court will set aside the transaction." 
Kitto J in Blomley versus Ryan <case>; [(1954-1956) 99 CLR 362] at , defined "special disadvantage" in these terms: "It applies whenever one party to a transaction is at a special disadvantage in dealing with the other party because illness, ignorance, inexperience, impaired faculties, financial need or other circumstances affect his ability to conserve his own interests, and the other party unconscientiously takes advantage of the opportunity thus placed in his hands." 
In the same case, Fullagar J said this: (at 405) "The circumstances adversely affecting a party, which may induce a court of equity either to refuse its aid or to set a transaction aside, are of great variety and can hardly be satisfactorily classified. Among them are poverty or need of any kind, sickness, age, sex, infirmity of body or mind, drunkenness, illiteracy or lack of education, lack of assistance or explanation where assistance or explanation is necessary. The common characteristic seems to be that they have the effect of placing one party at a serious disadvantage vis- a-vis the other." 
In Amadio, Mason J (at 462), stressed that inequality of bargaining power, by itself, was insufficient. The disparity between the position of the bank, and Mr and Mrs Amadio, however, was described as "gross inequality of bargaining power". In the same case, Deane J found that Mr and Mrs Amadio were at a special disadvantage, which he described in these terms: (at 477) "The result of the combination of their age, their limited grasp of written
English, the circumstances in which the bank presented the document to them for their signature and, most importantly, their lack of knowledge and understanding of the contents of the document was that ... they lacked assistance and advice where assistance and advice were plainly necessary if there were to be any reasonable degree of equality between themselves and the bank." 
The position of Mr and Mrs Amadio was different from that of Mr and Mrs
Vecchio in this case. Mr and Mrs Vecchio spoke English, were quite well educated, and were mature without being old. What they lacked was commercial experience. In that respect they were no differently placed to many people who approach a bank for a loan. What they required, in the particular circumstances of this case, was not so much explanation or assistance, as independent advice from either a solicitor or an accountant.

I doubt, therefore, that Mr and Mrs Vecchio could be described as suffering from a special disadvantage for the purposes of the equitable rule. Nor do I believe it is appropriate to describe the bank's conduct as exploiting a disadvantage of Mr and Mrs Vecchio, of which they knew or ought to have known (Amadio, per Mason J at 462).

The [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) was intended to set a less onerous standard than the equitable doctrine (Elders
Rural Finance Ltd versus Smith (supra), per Mahoney P at 302). I have held that the defendants meet the standard under the Act. However, I am not satisfied that the mortgage was unconscionable, so far as the bank was concerned, so as to be capable of being set aside under the equitable doctrine.
The Defence under Garcia versus National Australia Bank Limited 
The defendants also relied upon the principles enunciated by the High Court in
Garcia versus National Australia Bank Limited <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 1243.] In that case, the majority (Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and
Hayne JJ) said this: (at 1247) "In his reasons for decision in Yerkey versus Jones ((1939) <case>; [63
CLR 649)], Dixon
J dealt with at least two kinds of circumstances: The first in which there is actual undue influence by a husband over a wife and the second, that dealt with in Mueller, in which there is no undue influence but there is a failure to explain adequately and accurately the suretyship transaction which the husband seeks to have the wife enter for the immediate economic benefit not of the wife but of the husband, or the circumstances in which her liability may arise." 
The defendants sought to bring themselves within the second class of case.
Elaborating upon that class of case, the majority in the High Court said this: (at 1247) "The latter case is not so much concerned with imbalances of power as with lack of proper information about the purport and effect of the transaction." 
However, their Honours added: (at 1249) "Yerkey versus Jones begins with the recognition that the surety is a volunteer: a person who obtained no financial benefit from the transaction, performance of the obligations of which she agreed to guarantee." 
In respect of the second class of case, the majority said this: (at 1249) "And what makes it unconscionable to enforce it in the second kind of case is the combination of circumstances that: in fact the surety did not understand the purport and effect of the transaction; the transaction was voluntary (in the sense that the surety obtained no gain from the contract the performance of which was guaranteed); the lender is to be taken to have understood that, as a wife, the surety may repose trust and confidence in her husband in matters of business and therefore to have understood that the husband may not fully and accurately explain the purport and effect of the transaction to his wife; and yet the lender did not itself take steps to explain the transaction to the wife or find out that a stranger had explained it to her." 
These principles seem to me to have no application to the facts in this case.
Mr Vecchio applied no pressure to his wife to execute the mortgage. Mrs
Vecchio could not be described as a "volunteer". She, like her husband, hoped to secure a financial benefit from the transaction.
Order 
The order I propose is to stand the matter over for the preparation of Short
Minutes which should include orders pursuant to [s7(1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), varying the mortgage in the following manner: 
That the liability of the defendants should be limited to the sum of $50,000 principal.

That interest on the principal sum should be payable at the rates fixed from time to time by the Supreme Court Rules, commencing from the date of the demand (9 October 1992), and that such interest should be simple interest, rather than compounding.

I will reserve costs. The parties may agree upon an appropriate order for costs in the light of these findings. In the absence of agreement, I will hear submissions on the question of costs.
 * * * 
