

Campbell and Ors versus Metway Leasing Limited and Ors Matter No 21338/95 [1997] NSWSC 407 (17 September 1997) 
Campbell & Ors versus Metway Leasing Limited & Ors /95 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /95 - Campbell & Ors versus Metway Leasing Limited & Ors 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The defendants move the Court for various forms of relief. The relief includes a setting aside of default judgment and a stay of proceedings. On the plaintiffs' side, inter alia, a stay of proceedings is sought. 
Strictly speaking, the plaintiffs are not represented before me. Mr Campbell is present in Court and he has been permitted to assist the Court in the role of amicus curiae. The process filed on his behalf has been struck out. He is not entitled to appear on behalf of either the second plaintiff or the third plaintiff.

Default judgment for the first and second plaintiffs was entered following the filing of an Amended Statement of Claim. Leave had been given to the second and third plaintiffs to file an Amended Statement of Claim. The document actually filed was filed on behalf of the first and second plaintiffs.

The first plaintiff is bankrupt. The second plaintiff is bankrupt. The third plaintiff is in liquidation. The default judgment was purportedly entered at a time when both the first and second plaintiffs were bankrupt.

The alleged cause of action is one of harassment. It may or may not be what has been described as a mixed claim, having a personal injury component. The official receiver has indicated that he does not intend to prosecute the claim which both the first and second plaintiffs seek to litigate.

I am further informed that the default judgment was entered in circumstances when none of the defendants had any prior notice of the application for judgment. In the circumstances, it seems that for a number of reasons, the default judgment cannot be allowed to stand (inter alia, it was irregularly obtained and the circumstances in which it was entered would suffice to justify the Court setting it aside).

In the course of submissions made, I have mentioned to Mr Campbell the difficulties that his side face in holding the default judgment and I understand from the exchanges that have taken place that he accepts that the judgment cannot be allowed to stand.

Accordingly, I set aside the default judgment. The first plaintiff did not have leave to file an Amended Statement of Claim. If it is necessary to order a stay, such an order is clearly justified. It is an order sought by all parties. Accordingly, I order that the proceedings be stayed.

Mr Gregg, on behalf of the defendants, has asked the Court to dismiss the proceedings. I have not been prepared to deal with such an application in the light of the present circumstances. There is material which indicates that
Counsel had been retained to appear today on behalf of, at least, Mrs Campbell and that, at a late stage, he has not been able to attend because of personal reasons. Whilst the Court may be entitled to have some considerable suspicion about the bona fides of his non attendance today, I do not feel that I should proceed to the next stage and deal with an application for the ultimate disposition of these proceedings.

It seems to me that what I have done will preserve the status quo and may ultimately be sufficient for the determination of proceedings.

SEPARATE TRANSCRIPT - 17/9/97 
GREGG: I think it is clear, but would you just indicate that for those reasons you decline to entertain the application to strike out. I just want it clear on the face of the record that I did not make the application to strike out, that I wanted to proceed with it, but you declined in the circumstances to entertain it.

MASTER: At the request of Counsel for the defendants, I will do my best to make it clear that I have not heard the application to dismiss the proceedings. I have in fact declined to hear it. I have said that I did not consider that it was necessary for me to take that course at this time and I was loath to do so because I took the view that legal questions of some complexity may be involved and, as things stood, there was no legal representation on the plaintiffs' side of the record.

GREGG: We seek costs against the plaintiffs. At the very least, against Mrs
Campbell.

CAMPBELL: May I say at this stage, as this matter will be proceeding further,
I believe, with the cross-vesting, could costs be stood over until the final hearing of the cross-vesting application? 
MASTER: They are costs in another Court. I think I should deal with the costs of the applications dealt with by this Court.

CAMPBELL: They will be in this Court. I think next week there is a hearing for the cross-vesting to be set down. As I understand it, we have to seek leave of the Federal Court to accept it and for the Supreme Court to have leave to move up to it.

MASTER: This is a discrete application which really can be differentiated from the other aspects of the litigation and I do not think other members of the
Court would appreciate my passing the burden on to them. If I do not deal with it now, someone else has to deal with it later and it would be harder for them because they have not been here and have not heard the matter.

I take it, Mr Gregg, you want me to reserve your right to make application to have the proceedings dismissed at another stage? 
GREGG: Yes. In fact, we would ask for a date to keep these motions on foot and proceed on that aspect of the motion.

MASTER: I am not going to give you a date. I cannot. I do not think I should at this stage.

GREGG: We would ask that the motion stay on foot. Could it be listed before the Registrar for the purpose of getting a date? 
MASTER: I have already made the orders for the setting aside of the judgment and a stay of the proceedings. It is to be noted that I am not today dealing with the application for relief which is set forth in paragraph 4 of the
Notice of Motion filed by the defendants in August 1997. The plaintiffs are to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion relating to the application to set aside the judgment and the stay of the proceedings.

GREGG: There is also a motion filed by Blake Dawson Waldron and I seek to file an Amended Motion. All the defendants are seeking the same relief.

CAMPBELL: I have no objection to that.

MASTER: The Amended Motion may be filed in Court. I give the defendants liberty to apply for the relief sought in paragraphs 4 and 5 respectively in each of the Notices of Motion. That liberty can be exercised by approaching the list clerk for the purpose of getting a return date before the Registrar taking the motions' list.

GREGG: We are content with that, Master. There is a Notice of Motion which Mr
Campbell has filed which is returnable next Tuesday in this Court, seeking a stay of these proceedings. It was filed on 15 September 1997 and there is an affidavit in support.

CAMPBELL: I was going to ask what happens with that now. It has been filed.

GREGG: The relief it seeks would now appear to be redundant.

MASTER: I dismiss the Notice of Motion filed by Mr Campbell on 15 September and take the matter out of the Registrar's list on 23 September 1997 and
I make no order as to the costs of that Notice of Motion.

GREGG: The liberty that you have given, could that be in respect of paragraphs , 4 and 5? 
MASTER: Yes, that is in respect of paragraphs 3, 4 and 5.
 * * * 
