

Clegg versus Henwood and Anor Matter No Ca 40692/95 [1998] NSWSC 338 (17 April )

Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
CLEGG versus HENWOOD & ANOR 
CA 40692/95 April 1998 
Mason P, Meagher JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: APPEAL FROM BRYSON J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40692/95 
DELIVERED: 17 APRIL 1998 
HEARING DATE: 12 MARCH 1998 
PARTIES: CLEGG versus HENWOOD 
CORAM: MASON P MEAGHER JA STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: I Wales 
Respondent: J Ireland QC 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: S A TEEN 
Respondent: NICHOLAS EDDY & CO 
CATCHWORDS: 
Sale of Business - standard form of contract - construction special condition in contract to protect goodwill.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 9 
CLEGG versus HENWOOD & ANOR 
FACTS 
The appellants were purchasers of a business from the respondents. The sale agreement contained, inter alia, clause 13 which sought to protect the goodwill of the business by the Vendor's agreeing they would not open another business in competition to that business the subject of this sale. The
Vendor's subsequently acted to create competition to the appellant's business.
At first instance, clause 13 was construed as effecting the conferral of goodwill, not as affecting its scope.

HELD
By Meagher JA, Mason P and Stein JA agreeing: The general law prevents the active solicitation of former customers: Trego versus Hunt [[1896] AC 7.] It permits the vendor to open in competition with his purchaser. It is this itself which clause 13(b) is aimed at restricting. It prohibits behaviour which would otherwise be lawful. It increases the protection which the general law gives to the purchaser. In this regard, acting to create competition to a next-door business must be a breach of that promise.

ORDERS
Appeal allowed.
Orders below be set aside.
In lieu thereof (a) Declare that the respondents Mr and Mrs Henwood committed a breach of clause 13(b) by leasing shop four and part of shop three to Mrs Lett, (b) order that the matter be remitted to the Master in Equity for the assessment of damages.
Order the respondents to pay the appellant's costs both below and on the appeal, but the respondents should have a certificate under the Suitor's Fund
Act in respect of the costs of the appeal.

CLEGG versus HENWOOD & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: This is an appeal from Bryson J by the disappointed purchaser of a business (Mrs Clegg, the appellant). 
For many years before July 1986 Mr and Mrs Henwood (the respondents, the vendors) were the owners of certain commercial premises situate on the Hume
Highway in the village of Berrima, in New South Wales. Those premises consisted of a complex of four shops. From one of those shops (shop three) Mr and Mrs Henwood conducted a business of retailing jams and preserves under the business name "Mrs Oldbucks Pantry". It was the only specialist jam shop business in Berrima.

By July 1986 Mr and Mrs Henwood had the business up for sale, and Mr and Mrs
Clegg were interested in buying it. They investigated it carefully and decided that Mrs Clegg would buy it. One feature which appealed to them in particular was the fact that it was the only specialist jam business in Berrima.

The sale of the business from Mr and Mrs Henwood to Mrs Clegg was effectuated by a contract made 22 July 1986 and settled on 30 July 1986. The business was described as "Retail of jams and preserves". The contract was in a printed form, of the kind approved by the Law Society of New South Wales and the Real
Estate Institute of New South Wales. The purchase price was $143,950 made up of $140,000 for goodwill and $3,950 for "plant, fixtures and chattels". Rent was to be $400 per week, adjustable for inflation.

Clause 13, which is the crucial clause in this case, was in the following terms: "13. (a) The Vendors or any one of them will not directly or indirectly and whether solely or jointly with or as director, manager agent or servant of any person or corporation carry on, or be engaged or interested in, any business of the nature of the business hereby sold, or any significant component thereof, or permit their names or the names of any of them to be used in connection with any such business within the area set out in O(a) of the Particulars, and for a period set out in O(b) of the Particulars.

Except to the extent otherwise agreed the Vendors shall not after completion of this agreement during the period referred to in sub- clause(a)(ii) engage in conduct derogating from the Purchaser's right to obtain the full benefit of the goodwill of the business.
 c) The area and period are acknowledge by the Vendors to be no greater than reasonably required to protect the goodwill sold to the Purchasers." 
Special conditions 27, 28 and 29 were as follows: "27. This Contract is subject to and conditional upon and interdependent with the purchasers entering into an agreement with the Vendors to purchase items of furniture at a purchase price of $12,050.00 from the Vendors. That
Agreement is interdependent with this Agreement and exchange and settlement of that Agreement will be simultaneous with the exchange and settlement of the within Agreement.

In the event that either Agreement does not proceed for any reason the other
Agreement will be at an end.
 "28. The Vendors agree that the Purchaser will obtain the benefit of all current agreements with suppliers to the business and will do all things necessary to introduce the Purchasers to the suppliers.
 "29. The Vendors will prior to or on completion hereof assign to the Purchaser the benefit of any registered Trade Name which they hold in respect of the business. The parties nevertheless agree that the Vendors shall be at liberty to continue to use the name "Mrs Oldbucks" in respect of the sale of any products other than food products and it is expressly agreed that this clause shall not merge in or be extinguished by completion of this Contract." 
Special condition no. 27 was complied with by an agreement made on 22 July .

A condition of the sale of the business was that the purchaser would enter into a lease of the premises. This she did by a Deed of Lease made 24 July , Mr and Mrs Henwood being the landlords and Mrs Clegg being the tenant.
The lease was for a term of three years, with two options to renew, each option to be for a term of three years. Under the lease the only purpose for which the premises could be used was the following: "The sale of Jams, Jellies, pickles mustards, chutney, sauces, and packaged biscuits and confectionary. The purchaser shall not sell take away food, or establish refreshment rooms, a restaurant or sell drinks of any kind." 
The use by Mrs Clegg of the trade name "Mrs Oldbucks Pantry" was sanctioned by the landlords.

As a practical matter, the selection of "nine years" in clause 13 by the sale agreement was probably influenced by the fact that the length of the initial term of the lease coupled with the two option periods (if the options were exercised) amounted to nine years. However, the terms of clause 13 were not further inter-related to the times stipulated in the lease. It was not provided that the restrictions imposed by clause 13 were inapplicable if an option was not exercised, or became applicable only in some modified form. As a matter of legal construction, it is clear that clause 13 operated whatever happened to the lease.

This is important because the appellant, Mrs Clegg, did not exercise the second option in 1992, although she did exercise the first option in July
Instead, in July 1992 Mrs Clegg left the premises and moved to another set of premises not far from the original premises (either 100 or 200 metres away). She continued to sell jams and to use the trade mark "Mrs Oldbucks
Pantry".

On 6 December 1992 Mr and Mrs Henwood let shop four to a certain Mrs Leet, an ex-employee of the Henwoods. The rent was $250. per week. It prohibited the use of the premises for any purpose other than "confectionary and jam shop".
In February 1993 the area of the lease was adjusted (together with the rent) by extending it to a portion of shop three. Mrs Clegg complained that letting shop four (and later part of shop three) to Mrs Leet (who conducted a jam- selling shop thereon under the name "Little Hand Stirred Jam Shop") created competition which adversely affected the business, and that in permitting (or, rather, causing) it to happen Mr and Mrs Henwood were guilty of breaches of both clause 13(a) and clause 13(b). The allegation of breach of clause 13(a) was withdrawn, but that concerning clause 13(b) was strongly maintained both at first instance and on appeal. Mrs Clegg lost at first instance and is now appealing.

I must confess it seems to me self-evident that the appellant, Mrs Clegg, should succeed. The concept of goodwill is all about the maintenance of custom. If there are two shops next door to each other carrying on the same services each must share the volume of custom instead of having it exclusively itself. If shop four had been let to, let us say, a butchery, Mrs Clegg would have obtained the patronage of many people who in fact went to Mrs Leet instead of Mrs Clegg. It is hardly curious that even the Henwood's realized this; in his evidence Mr Henwood stated that he realized the grant of the Leet lease would injure Mrs Clegg financially.

Why, then, did Bryson J come to a different conclusion. The core of his reasoning would seem to be: "Clause 13(b) is ancillary to other provisions of the Agreement which confer the right to goodwill on the purchasers. It spells out what would be implied under Trego versus Hunt [[1896] AC 7] at 19-21; see too pp24-25. See the observations and citations relating to Trego versus Hunt by Hope JA in Castlemaine Tooheys
Limited & Anor versus Carlton and United Breweries Limited & Anor [(1987) NSWLR 468] at 484-485. Its effect is to make the conferral of goodwill fully effective, not to increase the rights conferred; the vendors are obligated not to derogate from them, they are not obligated to increase them, and the rights must be found elsewhere than in cl.13(b)." 
This analysis is, with respect, misleading, as Mr Wales, learned counsel for
Mrs Clegg, pointed out. Under Trego versus Hunt, the general law prevents the active solicitation of former customers. That is all. It permits the vendor to open in competition with his purchaser. It is this itself which clause 13(b) is aimed at restricting. It prohibits behaviour which would otherwise be lawful. It increases the protection which the general law gives to the purchaser. In this regard, acting to create competition to a next-door business must be a breach of that promise.

Mr Ireland QC, learned senior counsel for the Henwoods, put it slightly differently. He emphasized the physical separation of the two premises, submitting (as I understand him) that what might have been a breach if both businesses were under the same roof ceases to be a breach if they are housed in physically separate buildings. I regret to say I cannot see the logic in this.

In my view the following orders should be made:
Appeal allowed.
Orders below be set aside.
In lieu thereof (a) Declare that the respondents Mr and Mrs Henwood committed a breach of clause 13(b) by leasing shop four and part of shop three to Mrs Lett, (b) order that the matter be remitted to the Master in Equity for the assessment of damages.
Order the respondents to pay the appellant's costs both below and on the appeal, but the respondents should have a certificate under the Suitor's Fund
Act in respect of the costs of the appeal.

CLEGG versus HENWOOD & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Meagher JA. 
CLEGG versus HENWOOD & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: I agree with Meagher JA. * * * 
