

Grattan and Anor versus Simpson and Anor Matter No 3074/98 [1998] NSWSC 575 (14
October 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 December 1998 `JULIA ANNE GRATTAN & ANOR versus BARBARA ISOBEL SIMPSON & ANOR` `3074/98` `14 October 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are proceedings under [s 88K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s88k.html) of the [Conveyancing Act 1919](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) for an order that the first defendant grant an easement to the plaintiffs, who claim to be the trustees of the estate of James Simpson. 
The first defendant is the registered proprietor of 740 acres of land, which adjoins to the east 310 acres of land owned by the estate. Originally the two parcels constituted one holding, which historically was known as "Netherleigh".

Both properties front the Grenfell/Young Road, although the frontage that the plaintiffs' land has to that road is far greater than that of the first defendant. The plaintiffs' land is split up into five paddocks, counting the homestead as one paddock, the top paddock is by the Grenfell/Young Road and there is a middle paddock behind it, each paddock being 80 acres. There is then the house which is currently occupied by the testator's widow and two paddocks to the south of 70 acres each which extend to the west to the
Arramagong Road where the western most block has a considerable frontage.
There are paths, tracks and roads marked on the plan, but the evidence suggests that the road that is shown on the plan from the widow's house to the
Arramagong Road is not a road that is in the best state of repair.

When the properties were all run as one, the main access road to the house in which the widow is now living, extended from the Grenfell/Young Road in a southerly direction on the 740 acres, which is now vested in the first defendant. Up until earlier this year the first defendant not only held the acres, but she also had a lease on the balance of 310 acres.

As a result of bad relations between the parties, the plaintiffs purported to terminate that lease and have now entered into some verbal arrangement with the husband of the first plaintiff whereby he has a lease over the 310 acres subject to the widow's rights over the homestead's ten acres. Evidence that was primarily presented in the Family Provisions Act proceedings 3133/97, which were heard in conjunction with these proceedings, suggests that it is a very real possibility that the top and middle paddocks will need to be sold.
Alternatively, the two rear paddocks will have to be sold so as to be able to preserve the widow's right to reside in the house and to pay the estate's debts including the costs of the large amount of litigation the parties have inflicted on each other. There was no problem about the family, if I can use that term, using the roads over the 740 acres until the lease over the 310 acres was terminated. At that time, the first defendant made it quite clear that she had no objection at all to the widow and her invitees in private cars using the roads for domestic purposes, but objected strongly to its use by commercial vehicles, and in particular heavy farm machinery. She did this because she says she fears that they may bring on to her land deleterious substances which she would rather be without. The parties, or at least their solicitors, exchanged correspondence over this issue between 16 January and 21
July 1998. Although the correspondence indicates that the first defendant has no objection to the widow's invitees using the land, as a result of the interim apprehended violence order made by Magistrate Gould in the Cowra Local
Court on 16 July 1998, in fact, Mrs Grattan, Mrs Toomer and Mrs Grattan's husband are not permitted to enter at all onto the 740 acres. That really has nothing to do with me because no matter what easement I grant, the learned
Magistrate's order will stop the land being utilised, at least until he rescinds the order.

Up until recently, excepting the provision for quarter session roads, the courts were not empowered to actually grant easements over a defendant's property. However, by s 88K, which was inserted into the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) by Act No of 1995, the court is granted limited power to grant an easement. The conditions which must be established before the court can exercise that power are set out in the section itself. [Section
K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s88k.html) and (2) are as follows: "(1) The Court may make an order imposing an easement over land if the easement is reasonably necessary for the effective use or development of other land that will have the benefit of the easement.

Such and order may be made only if the Court is satisfied that: use of the land in accordance with the easement will not be inconsistent with the public interest, and the owner of the land to be burdened by the easement and each other person having an estate or interest in that land that is evidenced by an instrument registered in the 
General Register of Deeds or the Register kept under the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) can be adequately compensated for any loss or other disadvantage that will arise from imposition of the easement, and all reasonable attempts have been made by the applicant for the order to obtain the easement or an easement having the same effect but have been unsuccessful." 
It will be observed that a person seeking on order under the section has to establish four things:
That the easement being sought is reasonably necessary for the effective use or development of other land.
That the use of that land will not be inconsistent with public interest.
That the grant of the easement can be adequately compensated for.
All reasonable attempts have been made by the applicant to obtain the easement by negotiation.

It is the first of these requirements that is really the main problem in the instant case. The section has been reviewed in judgments of this Court on quite a few occasions over the last two years, although neither counsel nor myself has yet come across a case where rural land is involved. Mostly the cases seem to deal with very closely situated urban land, particularly where someone wants to gain access over someone else's land for the purpose of erecting a building.

Reasonableness has been dealt with in several recent cases. In 117 York
Street Pty Ltd versus Proprietors of Strata Plan 16123 [(1998) 43 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281998%29%2043%20NSWLR%20504 "View LawCiteRecord" ); [98 LGERA 171](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=98%20LGERA%20171 "View LawCiteRecord" ), Hodgson CJ in Eq considered the term "reasonably necessary" and held that the use or development of the easement must be at least substantially preferable to the use or development without the easement and that although the cases also show that whilst the word "absolute" must not creep into the vocabulary, there must be a necessity that goes beyond mere desirability.
Hamilton J considered the cases and discussed them in Tregoyd Gardens Pty
Ltd versus Jervis <case>; [(1997) 8 BPR 15,845] especially at 15,855.

The cases show that the mere fact that there is some other means of access to the property does not of itself preclude an order being made under this particular section. However, where there are alternate means of access the evidence must show that in order to appropriate someone else's property there must be a considerable advantage in obtaining the easement rather than developing an alternative access.

In the present case there are, in addition to the old road, two possible paths for the plaintiffs to gain access to their land. One is over the path called the "old roadway" that leads from the homestead to the Arramagong Road. The other is by a path which would run parallel to the existing road, although on the eastern side of the top paddock and middle paddock. Both of these would cost money to put in, but it would seem to be only money to the extent of $10,000 or so.

In view of these other means of access, and the amount that would need to be spent to develop them, and indeed the considerable frontages that there are for the 310 acres abutting both the Grenfell/Young Road and the Arramagong
Road, I do not consider that the plaintiffs have made out a case that it is reasonably necessary that they have the benefit of an easement over someone else's land. As I pointed out in Hanny versus Lewis - 27 August 1998, unreported, the court should not interfere with the property rights of land owners especially where, as in the instant case, the land owner says she has an objection to the easement because it would affect some right which she considers to have. (See also judgment of Hulme J in O'Mara versus Gascoigne - December 1996, unreported).

Therefore, for these reasons the claim must fail.

In case the matter goes further, I should also note I have difficulty in seeing how the current plaintiffs are necessarily the people who have the right to ask for this order, but as the only other possibilities are the first plaintiff and second defendant, Mrs Doris Simpson, that probably is of little moment. This is another case where the plaintiffs have taken the view that they should preferably gain an easement without having to pay compensation, although they have indicated that if the court were to order compensation as a condition of granting the order they would, of course, comply. As I pointed out previously, this is not usually a course which assists plaintiffs in this sort of litigation.

A further point that arises is whether the proposed easement must be reasonably necessary for the whole of the relevant land or any part thereof. I believe it is the latter. However, this question was not argued, and, as the plaintiffs must fail no matter what its answer, I need not pursue it.

One other matter I should note. The solicitor for the first defendant was on his client's property taking photographs to be used in these proceedings when, it would seem to me, he was deliberately impeded by the first plaintiff. My attention is being drawn more and more often to incidents like this and the court needs to protect its officers on occasions of this nature. It has been urged that I should take that sort of conduct into account on the question of costs. I do not think I can, but it is unnecessary to determine in the present case. However, in an appropriate case I think that that sort of conduct will, in the future, be referred to the Court of Appeal to see whether it should be dealt with as a contempt of court.

I order that the proceedings be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
