

Regina versus Ronald Terrance Stepto [1996] NSWSC 206 (18 June 1996) 
REGINA versus Ronald Terrance STEPTO /95 
TUESDAY 18 June 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, ABADEE J, LEVINE J 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I will ask Abadee J to give the first judgment.

ABADEE J: The applicant seeks leave to appeal against sentences imposed by McGuire DCJ in the Gosford District Court on 25 August 1995, consequent upon the applicant being convicted by a jury on three counts of indecent assault.

On 21 August 1995 the applicant was arraigned upon three counts each in identical terms: "Between the 1st January 1993 and the 8th August 1993 at Chittaway Bay in the
State of New South Wales, did in circumstances of aggravation, assault
Christine Anne Conaty and at the time of such assault did commit an act of indecency on the said Christine Anne Conaty she being then under the age of 10 years namely 9 years".

It is not necessary to deal at length with the quality of the drafting, however, it is appropriate to observe that its form is open to criticism.

On 22 August 1995 the applicant was convicted on each count.

On 25 August 1995 his Honour imposed a sentence of four years in relation to the first count. That sentence consisted of a minimum term of imprisonment for three years commencing on 22 August 1995 and an additional term of one year.
Concurrent fixed terms of imprisonment for three years were imposed on the other counts.

As his Honour observed when sentencing, the applicant at the trial made an unsworn statement in which he flatly denied any misconduct whatsoever. There was no challenge to the evidence that had been earlier led by the Crown that the complainant was born on 8 August 1983. She was thus aged nine at the time of each offence. The complainant gave evidence that the last offence took place before her tenth birthday. That evidence was uncontested. As the indictment shows, the period in which each of the offences were alleged to have occurred appears as the Crown submits to have been deliberately chosen to ensure that the complainant was under the age of ten. Indeed, the period referred to in the indictment terminated on her tenth birthday.

The applicant submits that in the instant case it is not clear from the terms of the indictment whether the charge was brought under either <case> or s
M(2). The significance of this is to be found in the fact that a conviction for an indecent assault contrary to the provisions of <case> carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment of seven years, whereas the maximum penalty for an offence contrary to the provisions of <case> carries a maximum penalty of ten years.

In each of the three counts there is reference to the words "in circumstances of aggravation". Section 61M(3) sets forth the various circumstances of aggravation.

The applicant submits that on sentence his Honour treated the charges as having been brought pursuant to <case> which carries a maximum sentence of ten years, whereas it is said that his Honour had summed up to the jury upon the basis that each of the offences involved offences against the provision of s 61M(1) and carrying a maximum penalty, as I have said, of seven years imprisonment. It should be, however, noted that the back sheet of the indictment refers to "Indictment for Aggravated Indecent Assault (X3)" under
Act No 40, [1900, Sec 61M(2).] The back sheet itself provides some indication that the
Crown's intention was to prove an offence under <case>.

However, it is submitted that his Honour presented the case to the jury on the basis that the provisions of <case> applied. He directed them as follows at p 8 of the summing up: "What the Crown does have to prove are the essential elements which go to make up the crime charged, and those elements are exactly the same in relation to each of the charges. What the Crown has to prove beyond a reasonable doubt is that during the periods mentioned in the indictment before you that the accused assaulted that child; secondly that at the time of such assault he committed an act of indecency upon her; thirdly that she was under the age of sixteen and that she was under his care and control. Now as to the latter part, there is no issue. Clearly she was under sixteen, that is not disputed.
And clearly she was under the care and control of her stepfather at the time of the incidents that she describes." 
The Court was taken to observations appearing at p 11 of the summing up. Those observations included observations and directions to the jury that the Crown had to prove the three matters in the indictment beyond reasonable doubt and that before the jury could find the accused guilty of those three counts they had to be satisfied as to the elements which his Honour had previously described to them. The third element or matter in the indictment was that the alleged victim was under the age of ten. On one view it might be thought that what his Honour said at p 8 of the summing up was corrected at p 11. It is proper also to observe that at the conclusion of his Honour's summing up no point was raised in respect of any of the directions given by his Honour.

It is appropriate now to turn to the statutory provisions. Section 61M(1) provides: "Any person who assaults another person in circumstances of aggravation, and, at the time of, or immediately before or after, the assault, commits an act of indecency on or in the presence of the other person, is liable to imprisonment for 7 years".

Sub-section 61(3) defines circumstances of aggravation as including situations where the victim is under the age of sixteen years or the victim is under the authority of the offender.

Section 61M(2) provides: 
Any person who assaults another person, and, at the time of, or immediately before or after, the assault, commits an act of indecency on or in the presence of the other person, is liable to imprisonment for 10 years, if the other person is under the age of 10 years." 
The applicant has submitted that his Honour was bound to sentence in accordance with the findings of the jury applying the directions that had been given to them. Thus it was said that his Honour erred in treating the maximum penalty in the instant case as being ten years.

The Crown submits, and I consider correctly so, that the indictment charged every necessary element and one more element than was necessary. It argues that the words "in circumstances of aggravation" should have been ignored.
Thus it was said the additional words were in effect a mere surplusage, that the inclusion of the words was immaterial to the indictment which was in truth one for an offence against <case>. As such, it was submitted that the additional words could simply be treated as surplusage or if necessary the count could have been amended to delete the words. The Crown relied upon the decision of Regina versus Smith & Anor [(1990) 47 A Crim R 43] as considered and applied by this court in Regina versus McKinney & Anor (CCA 6 September 1993, unreported) per Wood J at 5 in support of its contentions.

The primary rule is that the judge must sentence a prisoner for the offence of which he has been convicted. The indictment normally informs the court of the offence which is alleged to have been committed: The Queen versus De Simoni <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383] per Wilson
J at 395. No one should be punished for an offence of which he has not been convicted. However, despite the summing up, the question still remains as to the identity of the offence of which the applicant has been convicted. It is to be noted that there is no appeal against conviction. Further, the introductory remarks of his Honour on sentence would suggest that his Honour was clear in his own mind that there had been a conviction for offences under s 61M(2).

In my view the offences of which the applicant was convicted, despite his
Honour's directions, were offences charged under <case> of the Act. It was for such offence that the applicant fell to be sentenced. My reasoning is as follows. Both a charge under ss 61M(1) and 61M(2) involve an "aggravated" indecent assault. In respect of the offence under <case> the relevant circumstance of "aggravation" is that the child in fact was under the age of ten years. This was what was alleged in each count of the indictment. On the other hand <case>, when dealing with the circumstance of "aggravation" generally relates such to the type of victim including a victim under the age of sixteen years (see <case>(b)). However, excluded from the under sixteen years victim class is the child under ten years who falls within a special class or type of victim dealt with exclusively by <case>. Thus for the purposes of <case> the circumstance of "aggravation" is that the child be under the age of ten years. Such an interpretation accords with and gives effect to the statutory intention reflected in the provisions. Were it otherwise one cannot see the purpose of having the specific provision of s
M(2) to a victim under ten years, since such a victim would otherwise fall within the category of the victim under the age of sixteen years referred to in <case>(b). The point to be made is that the circumstance of "aggravation" referred to in <case> and in particular in <case>(b) whilst including a victim under the age of sixteen does not include the type of victim who is a child under the age of ten. It is that circumstance which constitutes the circumstance of "aggravation" for the purposes of <case>. Further, in my view, the Crown is correct when it submits that his Honour's summing up introduced an element which the Crown did not need to prove under <case> namely that the victim was under the applicant's "care and control". This matter was one that did not need to be proved in proving an offence under s
M(2). The need for proof that the victim was indeed under the age of sixteen was a misstatement or misdirection of what the Crown needed to be proved. In the instant case the jury must have found that the complainant was under the age of ten years at the time of the offences. The age was uncontested. On the facts there can be no other finding. Further, each indictment alleged (as was required by <case>) that she was under the age of ten years at the time of each offence.

In my view the trial judge, despite his summing up, sentenced the applicant for the offences of which he had been convicted by the jury. I consider the directions at p 8 in any event were corrected by his Honour at p 11. His
Honour did not punish the applicant for offences of which he had not been convicted (see De Simoni supra). The directions at p 8 did not in my view alter the fact that the offences of which the appellant was convicted were under <case>, despite the form of and content of each count and the directions of his Honour. Indeed each of the elements of an offence against s
M(2) were in my opinion proved. I should add that there is nothing to be found in the transcript to indicate that when counsel addressed on penalty that the matter the subject of this appeal was raised with his Honour. In his reasons for sentence his Honour referred to the complainant as being a girl aged nine years at the time of the commission of the offences. He did not in terms refer to the circumstances that at the time of each offence the complainant was under his authority or in his care and control. There can be little doubt that his Honour perceived the sentence to be one to be imposed for offences committed under <case> and in respect of which there had been convictions by the jury. I am reinforced in this view by the fact that at the conclusion of the sentencing reasons trial counsel did not raise with his
Honour any matter pertaining to the maximum penalty or whether his Honour's reference to it in the reasons for sentence was otherwise than an accurate reference.

It is common ground that the jury were provided at some stage with a copy of the indictment. They would have known that the complainant was under the age of ten years as charged in the indictment. In my view the jury's verdict established that the applicant committed an offence under <case>.

His Honour did not in the circumstances err in treating the maximum penalty that could be imposed upon the appellant as being imprisonment for ten years.

However, it appears to me appropriate to consider the matter upon an alternative basis. The Crown has submitted that even if his Honour was wrong in identifying the maximum penalty for each of the offences as being ten years and not seven years it does not follow that the sentence imposed did in fact otherwise than reflect the serious criminality involved in the offences.
Indeed, I would conclude that the sentences were otherwise within the range of sentences appropriate to the offences, even were they to be regarded as offences only against <case>. His Honour was correct in regarding the offences as gross assaults upon a small child and as being most serious and requiring the imposition of meaningful penalties. Upon any view the indecent assaults were of a most serious nature. There was a rubbing of the penis up and down on the vagina, with ejaculation taking place. The applicant told the young complainant on the occasion of the last offence that "she loved it". The offences occurred without the complainant's consent. The offences, the subject of the charges, were not the only occasions on which the complainant was sexually assaulted by the applicant, a matter relevant to whether the offences charged were isolated acts. Finally, the applicant received the benefit of his
Honour's view that despite the fact that he was deserving of a cumulative penalty for separate and distinct offences, his Honour did not propose to impose cumulative sentences. Thus in my view even if his Honour was in error in identifying the maximum penalties, in the result the sentences imposed were not excessive.

Nevertheless, taking into account the additional material touching upon the applicant's conduct since conviction I would not consider it necessary, even assuming error on the part of his Honour, to re-sentence in the circumstances of this case.

For all these reasons I would propose that leave to appeal against sentence be granted but that the appeal be dismissed.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree. The argument for the applicant depended on the contention that the Crown case was presented to the jury on the basis of <case>. I do not think that this was so. The indictment in my opinion, although it contains some words of surplusage, made it quite clear that the charge in each of the three instances was one under <case>. The argument for the applicant depends upon this court's being persuaded that the passage in his Honour's summing up to the jury, which has been read by Abadee J, shows that the judge presented the case to the jury as one under <case>. The passage relied on looked at in isolation may give some support to that contention; however, when various other features of the trial are considered I do not think that passage can be understood as having the effect contended for. Those features are, first, the one already mentioned, that the indictment clearly mentioned the age which the Crown was undertaking to prove as an element of the offences charged. Next, there was never any issue at the trial about the age of the complainant. She was under the age of ten at the time of the offences charged and in my view there are two aspects of that which are relevant; one is that it can only have been obvious to the jury at all times that the age referred to in the indictment was the age of the complainant at the relevant times; the other is that there was simply no issue about that age element in the trial, - the only contested issue at the trial was whether the applicant had committed the acts of indecency charged. Next, after the passage in the summing up relied upon by the applicant there was a later passage in which his Honour again referred to the three matters in the indictment which the Crown had to prove beyond reasonable doubt. His last words in this passage were "...but remember those three matters on the indictment are the ones to be proved..." In the circumstances the third matter referred to can only have been the age stated in the indictment, about which, as I have said, there was never any issue or any doubt. The court understands that the jury had the indictment in the jury room when considering their verdicts.

These matters all seem to me to lead irresistibly to the conclusion that there was never any question at the trial about the particular provision of the
Crimes Act under which the charges were brought. As Abadee J mentioned, counsel never raised this particular matter either at the conclusion of the summing up or at any stage in the sentencing proceedings.

In my view the applicant is not in a position in any way to complain of any unfairness in the sentencing procedure. I agree that leave to appeal should be granted but that the appeal should be dismissed.

LEVINE J: I agree with the orders proposed by Abadee J and with his reasons therefor. I agree with the observations of Priestley JA.

PRIESTLEY JA: The order of the court is leave granted, appeal dismissed.
 * * * 
