

Gem Plastics Pty Limited versus Satrex Maritime (Pty) Limited trading as South
African Express Line and Ors No. 50013/1995 Exclusive Jurisdiction Clause [1995] NSWSC 89 (19 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
ROLFE J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 25 August 1995 #DATE 31:8:1995 #ADD 19:10:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff:      Mr J.B. Whittle 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff:    Levingstons 
Counsel for Second
Defendant:    Mr S.J. Gageler 
Solicitors for Second Defendant:   Mallesons Stephen Jaques 
Counsel for Third Defendant:
Ms L. Guinan 
Solicitors for Third Defendant:   McCourt Charlton 
Counsel for Fourth Defendant:    Mr McDonald 
Solicitors for Fourth Defendant:   McCulloch and Buggy
ORDER
Motion dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
Introduction
ROLFE J On June 1995 I dismissed a Notice of Motion, which had been filed on 28 April 1995, whereby the second defendant sought a declaration that the
Court had no jurisdiction over it in respect of the subject matter of these proceedings, and orders that the Court decline, in the exercise of its discretion, to exercise jurisdiction over it, and that the proceedings against it be permanently stayed. One essential basis upon which the second defendant made the application was that the policy of insurance it issued contained a provision:- "This insurance is subject to South African jurisdiction."
For the reasons I gave I concluded that the clause constituted an exclusive jurisdiction clause. The question then arose whether I should, in the exercise of my discretion, stay the proceedings, it being submitted that the existence of the exclusive jurisdiction clause was a powerful reason why I should. I add that whilst jurisdiction is committed by the agreement to the
Courts of South Africa, the parties are agreed that the applicable law is
English law.
I took the view that the test to be applied, once the jurisdictional nexus had been established, as I found it had, was that stated by the High Court in
Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited and Anor [(1990) 171 CLR 539.] That test, of course, is that the defendant must persuade the local Court that it is "a clearly inappropriate forum" for the determination of the dispute. At p.21 of my reasons I set forth the passage from the majority judgment at p.
, which stated that the test should be applied alike to applications to set aside service on inappropriate forum grounds, applications for leave to serve process outside the jurisdiction, and applications for a stay on inappropriate forum grounds.
I stated that this part of the decision followed a consideration, inter alia, of decisions concerning exclusive Jurisdiction clauses. It seemed to me, in those circumstances, that the High Court was laying down a universal test in all cases where, relevantly for present purposes, an application for a stay was made, even where the application was based wholly or in part on an exclusive Jurisdiction clause. Certainly there is nothing in the reasons of the High Court, which would indicate that exclusive Jurisdiction clauses should be treated in some different way and, if I may say so with respect, I would find it surprising if there was bearing in mind that their Honours were seeking to lay down definitively the test to be applied when applications of the type to which I have referred are made. This, of course, was against the background of prior conflicting decisions and Voth was intended to remove that area of difference in the views adopted previously by various members of the
High Court.
I refer also the following passage from the judgment of Toohey J at pp.580-581:- "Again, whatever the test, it should be of equal application, whether a court is faced with an application for leave to serve outside the jurisdiction, an application to set aside an order for service outside the jurisdiction (as in this case), or a
situation in which a defendant has been served within the jurisdiction but seeks to obtain a stay of those proceedings.
The judgment of Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ demonstrates the unreality of asserting a different test for each situation. Once there has been a challenge to the exercise of jurisdiction by the 'local' court, the issues are the same, no matter what form of application is used to bring the matter before the court. In the end, however the principle is expressed, the matter turns on either the appropriateness or inappropriateness of the selected forum. That is not to say that the onus of proof will necessarily be resolved in the same way; that is a matter to which I will turn later in these reasons."
The particular decision to which the High Court had made reference before the passage I quoted from p.563, and which is the one referred to as "this judgment" in the opening words of that passage, is Lewis Construction Co Pty
Limited versus M Tichauer Societe
Anonyme <case>; [(1966) VR 341.] The exclusive jurisdiction clause in that case could hardly have been framed more widely, providing:- "In case of litigation the Commercial Court of Lyon is the only competent Court; even in the case of recourse on the guarantee or in case of multiple defendants."
Notwithstanding the existence of this clause Hudson J held that the more appropriate forum was Victoria and dismissed a motion for a stay.
In the course of so doing his Honour referred to Huddert Parker Limited v
The Ship "Mill Hill" <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 502] He did so in the context of stating that the effect of a stipulation of the type with which he was dealing was that it was treated as equivalent to an agreement to refer the disputes within its ambit to arbitration as though it were a submission under s.5 of the [Arbitration Act 1958](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/aa1958137/). He continued:- "And if an application is made to stay proceedings the Court, before allowing the action to proceed, must be satisfied on good grounds that it ought not to stay .. or approach the question with a strong bias in favour of maintaining the special bargain and holding the parties to their contract: see Dixon J in Huddert
Parker versus The Ship 'Mill Hill' .. pp.508-9."
The majority decision of the High Court paid particular attention to the facts of Lewis Construction at p.563 and, immediately before the passage I quoted in my judgment, their Honours said:- "The case was one in which the plaintiff, a Victorian company, sued the defendant, a French company, for damages for breach of a contract made in Victoria for the supply of cranes to be manufactured by the defendant in France and shipped to Melbourne.
The contract provided that the Commercial Court of Lyon was to have exclusive jurisdiction in case of litigation."
Their Honours quoted two passages from the judgment of Hudson
J and then continued with the passage to which I referred. In these circumstances, and with respect to those who take a different view, it seems to me the High Court must have been having regard to cases involving exclusive jurisdiction clauses when the principle in Voth was established. That was the view I took in my judgment.
At the time I gave that judgment my attention was not drawn to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Akai Pty Limited versus The People's Insurance
Company Limited (28 April 1995 - as yet unreported).
In that case there was an exclusive Jurisdiction clause and the majority of the Court, Sheller JA with whom Meagher JA agreed, considered, in the context of an application to stay proceedings, the weight a Court should attach to a clause referring disputes arising under the contract to a foreign Court and, at p.16 of the judgment of
Sheller JA, referred to the decision of Beazley J in Leigh-Mardon
Pty Limited
V PRC Inc <case>; [(1993) 44 FCR 88.], as authority for the proposition that the discretion should be exercised by granting a stay unless strong cause for not doing so is shown, the burden of proving such strong cause being on the plaintiff. His Honour considered further authorities, including Oceanic
Sun
Line Special Shipping Co Inc versus Fay <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 197], Huddert Parker and
Compagnie des Messageries Maritimes. At p. 18 he continued:- "In Leigh-Mardon Pty Limited versus PRC Inc it was argued that the test to be applied on an application for a stay of proceedings which required service outside the jurisdiction, whether or not there was a foreign jurisdiction clause, was that laid down by the High Court in Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills .. and that the test laid down in The Eleftheria was no longer applicable."
Sheller JA referred to what the majority said in Voth at pp.564-5 and to the fact that in Leigh-Mardon Pty Limited versus PRC Inc Beazley J concluded there was no decision binding on her as to the appropriate test to apply in the case where there was a foreign jurisdiction clause. He continued, p.19:- "Of
Voth she said that the Court was not dealing with a foreign jurisdiction clause. She was of opinion that the traditional rule expounded in The Eleftheria, The El Amria and The 'Mill
Hill' was correct and that there were sound policy reasons which supported it. I agree with this conclusion. Furthermore it seems to me that until such time as the High Court says expressly that the well established principles expounded in these cases do not apply in Australia this Court should apply them.
 .
With the utmost respect I do not agree that the High Court in Voth did not lay down the principle to be applied when the Court was dealing with a foreign jurisdiction clause. I have stated my reasons for coming to that conclusion.
An application was made in the present matter to the Court of Appeal for leave to appeal against my decision. As I understand it, when that application came before the Court of Appeal their Honours were informed that I had not been referred to Akai, and that Akai was, or may be, relevant to a determination of the application for the stay. It was not sought to submit that Akai was incorrect or distinguishable. In those circumstances, and without argument, the matter has been remitted to me for consideration in the light of the principles set forth in Akai. The effect of that decision is to alter the position substantially. If the Voth test is the proper test to apply it was incumbent on the defendant to show that New South Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum, as to which I was not satisfied. If the
Akai test, which incorporates tests previously laid down, is to be applied the second plaintiff must establish a strong cause for not granting the stay.
Mr Whittle of Counsel, for the second plaintiff, did not seek to submit, even for the purpose of reserving the point for possible further argument, that Akai was not decided correctly. However all that may be there is a decision of the
Court of Appeal, which is clearly binding on me, that the test to be applied in these circumstances is that the plaintiff must show a strong cause for resisting the application for a stay. My view is, for present purposes, beside the point because of the doctrine of precedent, which was clearly laid down by Moffitt P in Proctor versus Jetway Aviation Pty Limited [(1984) NSWLR 166] and because no such submission was made in any event.
The course I must take is to follow the majority decision in Akai and,
I should note, that in this respect there was no disagreement on this point, as
I understand it, by Kirby P, who was in the minority.
Accordingly, the matter must be determined on the basis as to whether the second plaintiff can establish a "strong cause" for refusing to grant the stay.
 
Matters For Consideration
The Effect Of The Exclusive Jurisdiction Clause
It seems to me that the effect to be given to the exclusive jurisdiction clause is that it requires the second plaintiff to show that it has a strong cause, which requirement arises by virtue of that clause. The exclusive
Jurisdiction clause, having achieved that result, does not, so it seems to me, have any further work to do.
 
The Matters In Issue So Far As the Second Defendant Is Concerned
The second defendant has stated that it proposes to defend the proceedings on the bases that:- there was a material non-disclosure in that it was not advised that the goods were second hand; and at the time of the loss, the insurance cover had terminated as the goods were not in the ordinary course of transit for the purposes of the Institute Cargo Clauses (A).
The written submissions continued:- "It is submitted that neither of these defences would more conveniently be heard before the Courts of New South Wales.
There is no dispute as to when the goods were placed into storage and there may be no issue as to when the damage to the goods was sustained. In these circumstances, in relation to the second defendant's proposed second defence, it is only a question of what legal interpretation is to be placed on these events in the light of the application of the
Institute Cargo Clauses (A) and it is not envisaged that any witnesses of fact would need to be brought from New South Wales for these purposes, by the second defendant, if the claims were to proceed in South Africa."
However, there is another issue for determination, namely the amount of the indemnity and the claims for damages to which the second plaintiff asserts it is entitled. It was originally submitted on behalf of the second defendant that the issues arising from loss occasioned by actual physical damage to the insured goods caused by tort, or breach of contract or of the terms of a bailment, on the one hand, and arising from a claim for damages arising from the breach of the contract of insurance, on the other hand, were "severable" and that "the separate issues may conveniently be disposed of in separate jurisdictions". This submission acknowledges, as must be the fact, that in New
South Wales proceedings the issues as to how, where and to what extent the goods were damages will have to be litigated, and, further, that if the proceedings against the second defendant are stayed the same issues will have to be litigated in South Africa. The fragmentation of the proceedings in such a way is, obviously enough, to be avoided, if that is possible. In Goliath
Portland Cement Co Limited v Bengtell and Anor [(1994) 33 NSWLR 414] at p.418
Gleeson CJ said:- "On the face of it, the proceedings against them ought, in the interests of justice, to be dealt with if possible in the one forum and the one action."
His Honour was there concerned with a case where the same cause of action may have to be litigated against different defendants in different jurisdictions. At p.420 his Honour said:- "Australian jurisprudence on the topic of forum non conveniens has developed upon somewhat distinctive lines; our law is different from that of England and different again from that which applies in the United States. The time may come when it is necessary for the High Court to develop a comprehensive set of principles to deal with all the issues that may arise where there are multiple defendants."
A robust view about such a fragmentation of proceedings was put forward by the English Court of Appeal in Continental Bank NA versus Aeakos Compania
Naviera SA and Ors (1994) 1 LLR 505. That case involved an exclusive jurisdiction clause in wide terms, which committed the jurisdiction to English
Courts "Irrevocably". Proceedings were commenced in a Greek Court and the
Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal restraining their continuance. Steyn LJ said, at p.508:- "If the appellants' contention is accepted, it follows that the two claims might have to be tried in different jurisdictions.
That would be a forensic nightmare."
His Lordship adopted authority which held that a Court should be slow to conclude that a reasonable person would have an intention that there should be proceedings on the same issue in two different courts. However, that authority does not apply with quite the same force in the present case for two reasons.
So far as the second defendant, which has the benefit of the exclusive jurisdiction clause, is concerned it will only have to fight any issue in one court. There will be no fragmentation of the proceedings as between it and the second plaintiff. Secondly, it has been drawn into the present proceedings as one of a number of defendants. It has done nothing itself to lose the benefit of the exclusive jurisdiction clause. It can complain, legitimately, that because of the way the proceedings have been structured it has become more convenient, in a general sense and so far as the other parties are concerned, that it should be a party to the New South Wales proceedings but, notwithstanding, that has not occurred in consequence of any conduct on its part. Perhaps in the light of the decision in Akai, and having regard to the matters to which I have referred, the time has now come for the development of the comprehensive set of principles to which the Chief Justice adverted.
 
Further Discretionary
Considerations
When the matter was referred back to me it was submitted on behalf of the second defendant, firstly, that there is no claim in estoppel now brought against it and that "it is important to note" that the only contract pleaded is between the second plaintiff and it, that both are South African corporations, and that all the events giving rise to the contract occurred in
South
Africa. So much is not in issue.
The submissions continued that the first two discretionary matters I identified at p.22 of my earlier judgment were, firstly, that the cause of the damage and loss resulting therefrom will be determined in this Court; and, secondly, that it is clearly inappropriate that similar issues should be litigated in two different countries and in two different proceedings.
It is submitted that neither of these factors amount to a strong cause and, the submissions remind that Sheller
JA pointed out that:- "The Court must be careful not just to pay lip service to giving full weight to the prima facie desirability of holding Akai to its agreement and then failed to give effect to it because of a mere balance of convenience."
I do not regard the matters identified in the submissions as being a "mere balance of convenience" point. In my view the fact that litigation will be duplicated, although to be determined according to the one law, with the expense and inconvenience that that will necessarily entail and with the possibility of conflicting judgments is a most important factor to be taken into account in determining whether there is a reason to stay proceedings. The question is whether the factors which militate against the taking of that course, and to which I have referred, preclude these circumstances amounting to a "strong cause". I have come to the conclusion that the fragmentation of the proceedings remains a strong cause. Of necessity the second defendant will become involved, from time to time, in litigation involving a multitude of parties. This has occurred in the present case. The commencement of the proceedings in New
South Wales is unexceptional from the point of view of the issues raised against the other defendants. There can be no suggestion that any of the other parties have been joined to give the proceedings a nexus with
New South Wales, which the facts would not otherwise
Justify. Clearly the evidence relating to loss and damage, and the possibility of contribution between parties in New South Wales, will be determined in New South Wales on evidence which is in New South Wales. This will, in turn, mean that any issues of subrogation will be determined essentially by findings made in New South
Wales and, as the matter presently stands, against parties within New
South
Wales. It is reasonably strongly arguable that the second defendant may wish to join, either directly or pursuant to subrogation rights, a party in the New
South Wales proceedings. When the pleadings, as they presently exist, are fully appreciated the nexus with New South Wales, so far as the evidentiary matters which will impact on issues between the second plaintiff and the second defendant, is in my opinion sufficiently strong to maintain the "strong cause", notwithstanding the other considerations to which I have given full weight.
The matter in Lewis Construction appealed to Hudson J in the same way.
His Honour, at pp.348-349, considered the necessity to call witnesses from various countries and balanced the competing conveniences and inconveniences, before arriving at the conclusion that the questions to be litigated "are much more closely connected with Victoria than with France and that the action is one which properly belongs to the Courts of this State". In my respectful opinion that points up the essential discretionary nature of the jurisdiction to be applied to the facts as they emerge.
The submissions on behalf of the second defendant then enumerate the non-exhaustive list to which Brandon J referred in The Eleftheria [(1970) P 94] at p.99.
Firstly, his Lordship considered the country where the evidence is situated, or more readily available, and the effect of that on the relative convenience and expense of the trial. In the present case some of the evidence is in South Africa and some is in Australia and, on any view, the question of damages will have to be determined by reference to evidence in New South Wales as will the question as to how the goods were damaged. Against that the second defendant submits that it will have to call evidence of material non-disclosure and as to the contention that the goods were not in the ordinary course of transit. The latter point, so it seems to me, will depend upon evidence given in the New South Wales proceedings, which will establish where the damage occurred and whether, as a matter of law, it was "in the ordinary course of transit." That leaves for determination the questions as to whether there was a non-disclosure and, if there was, whether it was material.
On any view that gives rise to a relatively small evidentiary issue, to be determined by reference to English law.
When regard is had to the first test propounded by Brandon J it seems to me that the answer favours the determination of the proceedings in New South
Wales, where the preponderance of evidence is.
The second test his Lordship suggested is the applicable law and, as I have indicated, the parties agree the applicable law is English law.
Accordingly, in my opinion, the New South Wales Court will be in as good a position as the South African Court to determine that issue, or, perhaps more accurately, the South African Court will not enjoy an advantage over the New
South Wales Court in that regard. While it was suggested this was a neutral factor, it certainly does not derogate from the force of hearing the proceedings in this State.
Thirdly, his Lordship refers to the "connection" with the various countries and, in this regard, there is no doubt that the greater connection so far as the residence of the second plaintiff and second defendant is concerned is with South
Africa. However that does not apply in relation to the evidence to be adduced.
The fourth matter is whether the second defendant genuinely seeks trial in South Africa or is only seeking a procedural advantage. There is no reason to think there is not a genuine desire for trial in South Africa, but the strength of that desire is indicated by the submission, which suggests:- "It" (the second defendant) "is understandably uncomfortable with litigation in foreign courts. While it recognises, that this will inevitably happen from time to time, it has inserted an exclusive jurisdiction clause in its contract to mitigate this possibility.
There is nothing illegitimate about foreign jurisdiction clauses which are a common incident in international trade." .
The reason the second defendant is said to be "understandably uncomfortable" is not elaborated upon, although the submission does acknowledge that it does not expect a more favourable hearing from the South
African Court, which will apply English law in any event, and that the defences upon which it proposes to rely are not peculiar to South Africa and are well known features of international marine insurance law. In the light of this submission, and subject to the matters to which I have referred, the matter does come down to a balance of convenience, and these considerations do not detract from the otherwise strong case for not granting the stay.
The fifth ground upon which Brandon J relied were matters of prejudice arising from suing in the foreign court which, for the reasons to which I have
Just referred, do not apply in the present case.
I disagree with the submissions that there will be no overlapping of the proceedings if proceedings are heard in both New South Wales and South Africa.
As I have said on the question of damages there will be a total overlapping of the issues to be determined. The same situation will apply in relation to the "ordinary course of transit" defence.
The second defendant does not assert either a jurisdictional or juridical advantage if the proceedings are brought in South Africa. Nor, for the reasons to which I have referred, does it assert an advantage in relation to the appropriate law to be applied. Similarly, and the onus is on the plaintiffs, they are unable to 
Conclusions
In the result I have come to the conclusion that there is a strong cause for not granting a stay. I have had to consider then whether there are any matters which militate against that conclusion by reducing the "cause" below a "strong cause". It is submitted, at that stage, that many of the matters are either neutral or can be applied either way depending upon whether one is applying the Voth test, as I was originally, or the Akai test, as I am now. If that be correct, which I think it is, I conclude, in the exercise of my discretion, that such matters do not militate against the over-riding strength of preventing a situation which would necessitate a determination of the same, or essentially the same, issues in two jurisdictions, and having regard to the circumstances of this case to which I have referred.
I have, in formulating these reasons, kept two specific matters in mind in addressing the issues. Firstly, I am bound not to pay "lip service" to the test and, secondly, I must not, even unconsciously, seek to reach the same result as that to which I came originally. I have re-considered the matters to which I have referred in the light of the "Akai test", and I am satisfied that the proper exercise of my discretion demands that the second defendant's motion be dismissed with costs.
 
Orders
I order that the second defendant's motion for a stay be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/89.html  
