

P G Kelly versus The Licensing Court of NSW and Ors [1996] NSWSC 272 (15 July )

PHILLIP GEORGE KELLY versus THE LICENSING COURT OF NSW and ORS /94 
MONDAY 15 JULY 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal pursuant to <case> [Liquor Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) from a decision of the Full Bench of the Licensing Court refusing an application for conditional grant of an Off-Licence (Retail) to the plaintiff, in respect of premises at 22 Fox Street, Walgett. The Licensing Court filed a submitting appearance and the other defendants were objectors in the proceedings for the application of the licence. They were Mr Watson on behalf of the Payless Supermarket which already conducts a liquor store in the town pursuant to an Off-Licence (Retail), Mr Fisher, the Director General of Education in respect of the Walgett Public School located nearby; the fourth defendants were representatives of the Aboriginal Medical Service and other related persons, and the fifth defendant, Superintendent Scarr, is the Superintendent of Licences.

The plaintiff, who already conducts a rural supplies business in Fox Street,
Walgett sought to alter his premises to provide a drive-in liquor retail facility. The grounds on which objection to the grant of a licence may be made are set out in the [Liquor Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) (the
Act) [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s45.html) and include: (i) that the premises to which the application relates are in the immediate vicinity of a public school (subs (3)(d)), (ii) that the quiet and good order of the neighbourhood in which are situated the premises to which the application relates will be disturbed if the application is granted (subs (e)), (iii) that the needs of the public in the neighbourhood to which the application relates can be met by facilities for the supply of liquor existing in or outside the neighbourhood (sub-s 2), and (iv) that it would not be in the public interest to grant the application [(s (1)(c)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s45.html) [Section (i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s47.html) provides that notwithstanding a finding by the Court that a ground of objection to an application within [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s45.html) or (3) has been made out the Court has nevertheless a discretion to grant the application.

A number of objections were taken but ultimately they were dealt with by the
Licensing Court under four main headings, namely (a) the needs of the neighbourhood, (b) the suitability of the premises, (c) the quiet and good order of the neighbourhood having regard to the immediate vicinity of the public school, and (d) the public interest, having regard particularly to the problems of alcohol abuse in Walgett.

In relation to the needs of the neighbourhood the Licensing Court examined the facilities already available for the supply of liquor in the Walgett district, namely the Payless Supermarket store, the two hotels in the town and a couple of clubs. It found the club facilities very restricted and the conditions in the hotels quite disgraceful. In relation to the Payless Supermarket the Court found that its unpaved car park had until recently been difficult to traverse in wet weather and not really satisfactory even in dry weather, that until recently Payless had been reluctant to assist customers carrying goods to their cars whether parked in the car park or in Fox Street, and been reluctant to provide any form of liquor delivery service.

The Court found that there was no need for a drive-in service as such and there was no need for any further facilities for townspeople to have their liquor delivered by Payless as they could pick it up themselves, but the Court was of the opinion that on a very fine balance the applicant had established there was a need for a liquor facility of the type proposed essentially to provide a service for the rural people of the Walgett district so that they could purchase liquor when purchasing rural supplies and/or have liquor delivered to their properties.

In relation to the premises objection the Court found that, in the light of amended plans substituted during the hearing, the premises were suitable and that the conditions proposed by the plaintiff would, if adopted by the Court, ensure that there would be no liquor advertising visible from Warrena Street or Fox Street, or from the public school.

In relation to the quiet and good order of the neighbourhood and the immediate vicinity of the public school, the Court found that alcohol abuse in Walgett at the time was such that the quiet and good order in the neighbourhood was regularly disturbed and the public school in particular deleteriously affected on a regular basis.

The Court found that the plaintiff had genuinely attempted to meet concerns expressed both by alterations to his premises and by conditions offered at the outset and amended during the course of the hearing. The applicant had made it clear that he was not aiming for the single bottle market or pedestrian customers, and he volunteered conditions to ensure that the liquor sales would always remain attached to the rural supply business.

The Court found that presently much alcohol abuse takes place in Fox Street and near the school in daylight hours, that there is a propensity on the part of consumers, particularly Aboriginals, to drink near the point of sale and to this extent the provision of alcohol to pedestrians in daylight hours could be seen to exacerbate a problem that already exists and which would not be overcome by a ban on the sale of liquor to pedestrians after 6 pm. The Court was not satisfied that the best efforts of the plaintiff would be sufficient to ensure that no difficulties would arise in the vicinity of the school from such sales.

Ultimately the Court said: "It may be possible by limiting the sale of liquor even further than as proposed by Mr Kelly that the premises could operate without disturbance of the quiet and good order of the neighbourhood. For example if sales were limited only to those designed for rural customers and/or to people travelling in motor vehicles the potential for disturbance may be considerably reduced.

Accordingly whilst we hold that these grounds of objection have been established we do not find that constitutes an absolute barrier to the grant of a licence at these premises." 
Finally the Court dealt with the public interest objection relating to alcohol abuse in Walgett, noting that it had some connection with the quiet and good order and immediate vicinity objections. The Court referred to evidence from the police indicating a gross level of street offences including large scale blood brawls occurring on almost a regular basis and evidence of the terrible social cost of alcohol abuse and the very significant health problems that have arisen in Walgett, more particularly in the black community.

There was also evidence referred to in the written submissions to that Court on behalf of the present fourth defendants (Exhibit 3) of the problems associated with alcohol particularly within the Aboriginal community including juvenile drunkenness, street disputations, family violence, nutritional and health problems, and the by-product of racial tension, and reference was made to the report of the Community Youth Support Task Force and its recommendation that objections be made to the grant of new licences.

There was also evidence of community initiatives in Walgett of attempts to do something about alcohol abuse and other social problems besetting Walgett. In particular the police had brokered a "curfew" on the various liquor outlets in
Walgett so that bottled packaged liquor was not sold after 6 pm by the hotels or Payless, and after 10 pm by the clubs, and not sold before 9.30 am. The
Court noted the views of the Task Force that adults must be encouraged to minimise their consumption of alcohol as it is virtually impossible to change the behaviour patterns of young people when their role models were maintaining their behaviour pattern which they are told is unacceptable.

The Court noted the submission that attempts being made in Walgett to overcome the alcohol problems, in particular the efforts being made by the Aboriginal community elders in trying to develop strategies to restrict alcohol use in the community, would be undermined by the granting of a new licence and that to allow a further liquor outlet to open directly opposite the school grounds would fly in the face of the various programs designed to make students aware of alcohol abuse and the dangers of alcohol, and said that the grant of such a further outlet in close proximity would give children confusing and negative signals.

Ultimately the Court came to the conclusion that, although in other cases community concerns about the provision of another liquor outlet have been considered, but generally addressed by the imposition of appropriate conditions, in this case they considered the strength of the public interest objections which they found established were such that no matter what conditions were applied to the licence the grant of another Off-Licence facility in Walgett at the time would be against the public interest, and it refused the application.

A number of grounds of appeal were referred to in the Notice of Appeal and in the Plaintiff's Submissions. The first ground was that the Court was in error in holding that a public interest objection having been established it had no discretion to grant a licence. The Court made no such ruling and this ground was not pursued.

The second ground was that the Court failed to exercise its discretion in relation to the discretionary considerations relating to the public interest objection and erred in law in relation to the purported exercise of the discretion. It was firstly submitted that the Court's finding that whatever conditions were applied the grant would be against the public interest at this time amounted to an abandonment of the Court's discretion and was therefore a failure to exercise its discretion.

Where a power to decide is conferred by statute and the context (including the subject matter to be decided) provides no positive indication of the considerations by reference to which a decision is to be made, a general discretion, confined only by the scope and purposes of the legislation will ordinarily be implied and this is so particularly when the statute refers to "the public interest". In the case of legislation relating to the distribution and location of facilities for the supply of liquor the subject matter has traditionally been seen as permitting the exercise of a broad and general discretion to grant or refuse an application by reference to public interest considerations: O'Sullivan versus Farrer <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 210] at 216-7.

In my opinion, the Court's view that no conditions could overcome the public interest objection was not a refusal to exercise its discretion but was itself an exercise of such discretion, and did not constitute an error of law.

In my opinion, the Court's view that no conditions could overcome the public interest objection was not a refusal to exercise its discretion but was itself an exercise of such 
As I point out in considering the next submission, the Court took into account a number of relevant considerations and ultimately came to the conclusion that, notwithstanding those factors which favoured the grant of the licence, the strength of the public interest objection based on the problems of alcohol abuse in Walgett were such that it was not in the public interest for the licence to be granted at this time.

Then it was submitted that if the Licensing Court had in fact exercised its discretion, there had been an error in such exercise which justified the intervention of this Court in that the Court had failed to take into account all relevant considerations, had taken into account irrelevant considerations, or the result was so plainly unjust that this Court may infer that the discretion had not been exercised at all: House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] at 504-5; Australasian Coal and Shale Employees' Federation v The Commonwealth <case>; [(1956) 94 CLR 621] at 627; Government Insurance Office of NSW versus Ivanoff [(1991) 22 NSWLR 368] at 377.

Firstly, it was submitted that the Court did not appear not have turned its mind to a condition which would relevantly have enabled the licence to be granted notwithstanding the public interest considerations. The plaintiff had suggested to the Licensing Court a number of conditions which he maintained would assist in preventing alcohol abuse problems by the grant of a licence to him, and in written submissions had offered to agree to any conditions which the Court might require to overcome the public interest objection, for example, sale to rural customers only.

In relation to the school objection the Court considered a condition limiting sales to rural customers and/or those travelling in motor vehicles and held that this would be sufficient to overcome that objection. It is not realistic to assume that the Court did not consider the same condition in relation to the public interest objection, and I would infer that it clearly did.

In submissions before me a further submission was made to the effect that a condition could be imposed that there be no delivery to customers including rural customers at the premises, but that sales only be conducted by home delivery. This was never a submission at the hearing, but as I read the written submissions before the Licensing Court and the judgment of that Court, a major part of the applicant's case was that rural customers should be able to browse, choose and take delivery to their vehicles when they came to town, and this was one of the major purposes of providing a "drive in" facility.

Next it was submitted that the Court failed to take into account the public interest needs which had been identified, that is for rural customers to be able to purchase liquor when purchasing rural supplies and/or to have liquor delivered to their properties, and failed to consider whether conditions might be fashioned which were capable of considerably reducing the potential for disturbance, and Re Zappia's Application [(1965) 7 FLR 405] at 406 was referred to.

The discretion conferred on the Licensing Court by the Act is a very wide one:
O'Sullivan versus Farrer supra. There was evidence to the effect that any further outlet would in the particular circumstances of Walgett exacerbate the problem and "send the wrong message" to its people, particularly those who were being helped by various organisations and to the town's children.

The Court in particular took into account a number of matters before it concluded that no conditions could be imposed which would overcome the public interest objection. These were set out in the judgment commencing in particular at p 32 and included: - A further liquor outlet opened directly opposite the school grounds would fly in the face of various programs designed to make students aware of alcohol abuse and would give them confusing and negative signals.
 - The effect that alcohol abuse has had and continues to have on the citizens of Walgett.
 - The plaintiff could better control the operation of his premises than do the proprietors of existing outlets.
 - The conditions in the two hotels were a disgrace and the service to be provided by Mr Kelly would be a vast improvement on that provided by the hotels and by the existing off-licence, Payless.
 - There was overwhelming evidence of continuing alcohol abuse in Walgett which had worsened over the last ten years, that it had only been significantly addressed in recent times and that there was still a long way to go.
 - Outlets which were providing an extremely unsatisfactory liquor facility would be protected from further competition which otherwise would be quite appropriate.
 - Alcohol is a substance, which if abused can lead to criminal and social disruption.
 - The problems of alcohol abuse in Walgett were directly related to the social conditions applicable to the town and the resolution of those problems required more than just an improvement in the provision of liquor.

The Licensing Court, as can be seen, considered the issues from a number of different aspects and had regard to a broad range of considerations. These were in my opinion all proper matters to be taken into account and I am not satisfied that the Court failed to exercise the discretion conferred upon it in accordance with law, or that any error has been shown justifying the intervention of this Court. The Court did not hold that no further licence could ever be granted in Walgett, but only that it was inappropriate "at this time".

The third ground of appeal in the Summons and the fourth, added by amendment at the hearing (Exhibit B), may be conveniently taken together. It was submitted that, having made its findings, the Court was under an obligation to give the applicant the opportunity of suggesting conditions which might meet the objection, and that the failure to do so amounted to a denial of natural justice; and I was referred to Carrall versus Moss [[1980] 2 NSWLR 473] at 482 where it was held that when there are findings in favour of an applicant of public interest and public need, the Court must consider whether those findings outweigh or are outweighed by the detriment to those who have successfully established their objections to the application, and that failure to do so will amount to an error of law. It was therefore submitted that in the present case, having found public need in favour of the plaintiff, the
Court was bound, but had failed, to weigh such need against the public interest objection which had been established, and in particular, it had failed to consider whether a condition or conditions might be fashioned which would satisfy the needs of rural customers without exacerbating the problems of alcohol abuse in the town; or to put it another way, the Court having found that there was a need established in respect of rural customers, it failed to address the issue of whether or not the plaintiff could service such rural customers without making alcohol available to people in the town. It was said that licensing proceedings are not adverse litigation, Bradley versus Fitzmaurice [[1974] 2 NSWLR 286] at 288-9, the parties do not know what the Court's findings will be, and it is common to ask parties to re-address the Court.

In this case, there were no oral submissions to the Licensing Court, the submissions all being in writing, and so there was no inter-action between
Bench and counsel during the course of argument, but in written submissions the plaintiff submitted that if the licence was granted and conducted in accordance with conditions suggested (or such alternative conditions as might appeal to the Court) it would not exacerbate the position which had been seen to exist in relation to existing liquor outlets in the town, but he did not request a further opportunity to suggest further conditions in the light of the findings.

It is apparent from the written submissions that a number of conditions were suggested, including not to supply to persons nominated by the police, the
Aboriginal Legal Service or the elders of the Aboriginal tribes. Later, though not initially, there was suggested a condition of no supply to pedestrian customers, and later still, only to rural customers.

It may be appropriate in many cases to call the parties back for further addresses, but the Court's finding here was that, although the grant of a fresh licence subject to conditions could minimise specific problems of alcohol abuse in the town, ultimately there was a more overwhelming issue, namely that the grant of any further licence would send a wrong message to the people of Walgett, particularly to the young people of Walgett, and in those circumstances it was irrelevant to consider particular conditions because no conditions could overcome the sending of the wrong message by the grant of a licence for a further outlet. That was the Court's finding and in my opinion that finding was open to the Court. It is accordingly unnecessary to consider whether any useful purpose could have been served by calling the parties back, or whether they should have been called back. In the light of the Court's finding there was nothing to call them back for.

During the hearing of the appeal it was suggested that a condition could be imposed that the licence be confined to a delivery business to rural customers only, but this was never the nature of the application, which was for a drive- in facility available to townspeople and rural customers alike with a display of the liquor, particularly wines, available for sale.

If the plaintiff and those advising him consider that a licence to supply rural customers only and on a delivery basis only, without providing a display of the liquors for sale, might satisfy the Licensing Court's concern for the public interest, and if this is the kind of business he wishes, or is prepared, to conduct, it is open to him to make a fresh application; but in my opinion this would be a totally different application to the application that was made, and a totally different application to that which was objected to, and which was argued and determined at the hearing.

A reading of the plaintiff's submissions to the Licensing Court shows that the aim of the plaintiff's application was to target those who came to Walgett and to the plaintiff's store, be they townspeople or rural customers. A delivery service was only intended as a supplementary service, and in particular the "drive in" facility was fundamental. The plaintiff was equivocal about pedestrians. Delivery sales only was not what the plaintiff was asking for, and so it was not an error of law not to grant it, or not even to consider it.

For these reasons the appeal is dismissed and I order the plaintiff to pay the defendants' costs.
 * * * 
