

Regina versus Hassan Houda Matter No Cca 60616/97 [1998] NSWSC 406 (14
September 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 October 1998 
REGINA versus HASSAN HOUDA 
CCA 60616/97 September 1998 
Grove J, Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentence imposed by his Honour Acting Judge Wall QC in the Sydney District Court following a trial at which the applicant was convicted upon sixteen counts of false pretences. There is no need presently to set out the detail of those offences. Generally they arose out of the activities of the applicant who had a business selling petrol. As is well known, the supply of petrol to retail vendors is done upon a cash basis from the point of view of the petrol wholesaling company and the evidence in this case was that this was the arrangement. 
The offences arose out of a series of cheques given by the applicant to wholesale representatives none of which was met upon presentation. It should be observed that at the time, as his Honour remarked, the applicant disposed of stocks being held by him at a discount rate in such a fashion as to cause queues of vehicles to line up near his outlet. He also found that the applicant had made arrangements on 31 July for his family to depart for overseas on 6 August and for himself to leave on the following day. In between July and 7 August was the routine bank holiday.

His Honour also observed a circumstance which is worth noting, that at least one of the recipients of the cheques had made arrangements for special clearance and, upon that cheque being returned, he had sought out the applicant. This person eventually came into contact with the applicant shortly before 5 am on the morning, as it turned out, that the applicant was scheduled to depart for overseas.

Five dishonoured cheques were in the possession of the wholesaler and the applicant responded to inquiry by informing the inquirer that his brother had been hit by a car and that he was, therefore, very worried but that the money would be available from the bank at am. In fact, as noted, the applicant had left for overseas by 10 am on that morning.

At trial it should be noted that the departure of the applicant and his family for overseas was apparently not relied upon by the Crown as evidence of flight in respect of the offences. Be that as it may, the circumstances are as his
Honour sketched and as I have repeated.

The applicant was sentenced to concurrent terms in respect of each of the counts comprising a total of three years penal servitude which his Honour divided in each case into minimum and additional terms of eighteen months, the minimum terms commencing on 4 July 1997 when the applicant went into custody and which are scheduled to expire on 3 December next.

The grounds of appeal are stated as three. The principal argument advanced by counsel on behalf of the applicant relates to the observation on four occasions by his Honour during his remarks on sentence that he intended to weight the term in order to give effect to general deterrence. The circumstances which I have outlined would abundantly support the view that this was a case in which the element of general deterrence should play a marked role. However, there was before the sentencing judge material from a
Doctor Younan, a psychiatrist, indicating that in his opinion the applicant suffered from an illness variously described but which, for present purposes, it suffices to call an affective disorder. This has manifested itself in ways described by the doctor. The proposition advanced by behalf of the applicant is that his Honour did not direct his attention to whether or not, given the illness of the applicant, he was a suitable vehicle for weighting a sentence in order to reflect general deterrence.

There has been observation in decided cases which indicate in summary that often a person suffering from a psychiatric illness or, indeed, other illness may not be a suitable vehicle for the application of a weighting for general deterrence.

Nevertheless, the essence of those cases show that moderating a sentence which is otherwise appropriate would need to take into account some assessment of each individual case. As has been said on several occasions, if an offender acts with knowledge of what he is doing and with knowledge of the gravity of his actions, then any moderation need not be great.

In this case I have outlined some of the circumstances in order to indicate that it was well open to his Honour to view the applicant as an offender who indeed knew what he was doing and appreciated the gravity of his actions. It was contended, however, that as his Honour made no reference to the authorities or to the principles that I have adverted to then he must have overlooked them. His Honour was making remarks on sentence primarily addressed to the prisoner then before him and for my part I would not infer an error of the type asserted simply from the failure of his Honour to incant references to authorities or principle. His Honour's remarks show that he was in fact applying the appropriate principles. He specifically observed that he took into account the documentation relating to the applicant's illness and he further stated that from that material it could be accepted that the applicant was not in good health at the present time.

That observation by his Honour persuades me that he did not fall into the asserted error either of overlooking the need to assess the suitability of the applicant as a vehicle for general deterrence or the fact that the disorder need not be causally related to the offences with which he had to deal. In my view the first ground is not made out.

The second ground which was argued, in effect, in companion with ground 1 asserted that his Honour did not give sufficient weight to the hardship that a prison sentence would cause the appellant in view of his condition. It is true that his Honour made no express reference to this circumstance. Nevertheless, his Honour was a considerably experienced sentencing judge and, as was self- evident, he intended to impose a sentence of full-time custody and for my part
I would not draw the inference that he overlooked the circumstance that the applicant suffered from this illness particularly having regard to the express reference to the applicant's current condition about which I have already made observation.

The third count was expressed in general terms that the sentence was manifestly excessive. The basis for submissions in support of this ground is found essentially in the arguments addressed in respect of the foregoing grounds. The activities of the applicant resulted in a debit to those who had in apparent good faith supplied him with the materials which he sold of nearly $160,000. No part of that money has been recovered from the applicant in order to compensate the victims.

In my view, the total sentence of three years was well within the range of the sound exercise of his Honour's discretion. As can be seen, his Honour divided the sentence into minimum and additional terms to the advantage of the applicant when contrasted with what is required by [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/). It can be said in passing that some of the matters addressed in relation to the principal appeal were matters that might have been appropriate to take into account as special circumstances and such were found in favour of the applicant.

I propose that leave to appeal be granted but the appeal dismissed and the sentences below confirmed.

DAVID KIRBY J: I likewise agree with the reasons given by Grove J and the orders made. 
GROVE J: The orders of the Court therefore will be as I have proposed. * * * 
