

Francis Ivor Kelly Comptroller-General of Customs versus Jct Wong and Rizoli
Pty Ltd Matter No 12178/89 [1998] NSWSC 713 (24 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 `FRANCIS IVOR KELLY COMPTROLLER-GENERAL OF CUSTOMS versus JCT WONG AND RIZOLI
PTY LTD` `12178/89` `24 July 1998` `Carruthers AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division` 
JUDGMENT (on application for adjournment) 
HIS HONOUR: I have before me an application by Mr Graham, of Queen's Counsel, on behalf of both defendants in these proceedings for the adjournment of these part-heard sentencing proceedings until at least 3 August 1998. It is necessary that I, first, deal with a little of the background to this matter. 
It is true, as Mr Graham has already pointed out, that these proceedings were commenced in 1989 and it was not until March this year that they actually came on for hearing. Since that date a very considerable amount of the Court's time has been consumed dealing with evidentiary problems and numerous legal submissions which have arisen. This does seem remarkable bearing in mind that when the matter first came before me on 9 March this year I was told by both counsel that it would take two or three days.

In May I reserved judgment on the question of whether the plaintiff had proved the three alleged offences against each of the defendants. The matter came back before me on 1 July when I heard a notice of motion on behalf of the first defendant, Mr Wong, to stay the proceedings. For reasons which I then gave, that notice of motion was dismissed.

At the time of dismissing the notice of motion on 1 July, I informed the parties that the matter would be listed for judgment on 10 July, which was nine days hence, and that if I were to find the offences against the defendants proved, I expected the parties to be in a position to deal on that day with the question of penalty. That direction was consistent with what was declared to be the appropriate practice by the Court of Criminal Appeal in
Regina versus Majors [(1991) 27 NSWLR 624.] 
On 10 July I handed down my judgment in these proceedings and found that each of the offences had been proved against each defendant. The findings were in accordance generally with the plaintiff's case. I had already indicated on 1
July that if I were to find the offences proved, those findings would be consistent with the plaintiff's case.

It is relevant to note here that apart from one insignificant matter, no evidence as to merits of the plaintiff's case was lead by the defendants, so there was nothing remarkable about the fact that my findings were consistent with the case which the plaintiff had sought to make out.

When the matter came before me on 10 July Mr Rasmussen of counsel appeared for the defendants and applied for an adjournment until August. I note that although Mr Wong had been present in Court during all the prior argument, other than the notice of motion on 30 June and 1 July, he was not present in
Court on 10 July. Mr Rasmussen informed me that the defendants sought an adjournment so that they could obtain character evidence to support Mr Wong's good character and also to obtain accountant's evidence in relation to the financial position of each of the defendants. I was somewhat dismayed that despite what I had said on 1 July, the defendants were not ready to deal with the question of sentence.

During the course of discussion I pointed out to Mr Rasmussen that the Full
Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia in Hayes versus Weller [(1988) 50
SASR 182] had indicated that evidence of good character could only play a marginal role in the imposition of penalties involving Customs prosecutions where mandatory minimum and maximum sentences were laid down.

I also pointed out to Mr Rasmussen that I would be perfectly happy, and would expect, that if there were difficulties with character witnesses being present to give evidence, that such evidence would be presented to me in affidavit form. The relevance of evidence as to financial affairs was raised and I indicated that I had an open mind about that. However, I expressed the view that there should have been no problem about financial evidence being available, bearing in mind that one would expect that Rizoli Pty Ltd would comply with the Corporations Law, and Mr Wong would have income tax returns and the like which would disclose his financial position.

In any event I eventually agreed to adjourn the matter until 15 July indicating that I saw no reason why affidavit evidence as to character could not be available, nor why evidence on the question of the defendants' financial position could not be available. I did, however, on that occasion have the benefit of the address of Mr Tabuteau on behalf of the plaintiff regarding the issue of penalty when there were a number of offences with heavy minimum penalties as required by the Customs Act.

I also had the benefit of helpful argument by Mr Tabuteau with regard to the application of Section 19 B and Section 20 of the Crimes Act. I expressed doubt on that occasion as to applicability of those sections.

On 15 July Mr Spain, the solicitor, who has had the conduct of this matter since the commencement of proceedings before me, appeared for the defendant without counsel and without Mr Wong. He reapplied for an adjournment on the basis that the defendants were still not ready to proceed. Mr Spain indicated that his character witnesses were not available. I reasserted my view that there was no need for them to be present and that affidavits would be perfectly satisfactory. He reasserted the submission that I would obtain more benefit from them being present, a submission which I have never, and still do not, accept. Mr Tabuteau indicated that he would not anticipate asking any character witnesses any questions and, in effect, conceded that apart from the subject offences, Mr Wong was a person of good character.

No satisfactory explanation was given to me as to why the financial evidence was not available. Mr Tabuteau again addressed me on penalty and the suggested availability of Section 19 B and Section 20 of the Crimes Act and drew my attention to certain authority which held that in Custom prosecutions Section B was available, and he argued as a question of law, by inference, Section would be available.

Mr Spain at the conclusion of the address by Mr Tabuteau renewed his application for an adjournment. I adjourned the matter until today and I indicated that I would expect an affidavit from him setting out the steps which had been taken by the solicitors for the defendants to have the matter ready to proceed today.

May I say, parenthetically, that the entire argument addressed to me on behalf of the plaintiff, was directed to some lawful means whereby the impact of the minimum sentence regime could be mitigated in favour of the defendants, bearing in mind the number of offences which I held to have been proved. Prima facie, the approach of the plaintiff in seeking convictions on all offences seems reasonable in my view, although I would be happy to hear argument from the defendants in this regard.

The view which I presently hold is that irrespective of the applicability of
Section 20 to either of the defendants, there are practical problems here.
Even if I indicated that I was prepared to grant the defendants the benefit of that section, the Court could have no confidence that either of the defendants would take the necessary steps to bind themselves by the proposed recognisance. The position is made even more impractical in the case of Rizoli by reason of the fact that it would be necessary, in the light of the authorities, for an authorized agent to be appointed in order to bind the company under Section 20.

Accordingly, I have been pursuing this question, and it appeared to me that the impact of minimum penalties could be ameliorated by the Court affording the defendants the benefit of Sub-section (4) of Section 4K of the Crimes Act.
Mr Tabuteau on behalf of the plaintiff has conceded that Sub-section (4) would be applicable and the plaintiff would, in effect, invite the Court to use the benefit of that sub-section in so far as the present defendants are concerned.

This morning I considered the submissions of Mr Graham who appeared for the defendants, with instructions limited to making an application for an adjournment. He was granted leave to file in Court an affidavit dated today by
Mr Spain in accordance with the request for evidence which I made yesterday.
Basically that affidavit speaks for itself, but in relation to three character witnesses, there was some evidence as to the unavailability of one of them, Mr
Fulton, who is going to be tied up through July with lecture commitments.
There was a reference to other character witnesses, Mr Chin, Mr Elliott and Mr
Raine. However, there is nothing in the the affidavit about their unavailability, and there is certainly nothing in the affidavit as to why those three character witnesses could not have made the statement that they wish to make in favour of the character of Mr Wong in affidavit form.

As far as any evidence to be led so far as the financial position of the defendants is concerned, I am merely informed that Mr Hewitt wishes to obtain evidence as to their financial position. The evidence discloses that the registered address of Rizoli is care of the office of English, Miller and
Company Accountants, and I am still quite at a loss to know why there is any delay in this regard.

Mr McGovern who has appeared thus far on the question of whether the plaintiff has established his case against the defendants will not return to chambers until Monday 20 July and Mr Rasmussen is committed elsewhere. With due respect to the helpful submissions of Mr Graham, (as would be expected from one of his standing at the Bar)I am not prepared to adjourn the matter beyond one week.

Any date after the expiration of next week is of extreme inconvenience to me and certainly not to the convenience of the Supreme Court. If I thought that the interests of justice demanded, however, that the matter proceed beyond next week, both my own personal convenience and that of the Court would necessarily have to play a secondary role in the interests of justice.

However, I am still completely at a loss to understand why, thus far, I have still not had the benefit of any evidence or submissions on behalf of the defendants on the question of penalty, and I am still at a loss to see why the matter could not proceed so far as evidence and submissions are concerned next week.

Counsel who is only reasonably experienced could pick up in no time the difficulties which flow from the sentencing provisions of the Customs Act so far as this case is concerned, and such counsel will have the benefit of the plaintiff's argument, all of which is recorded on the transcript. Also the benefit of the views that I have expressed this morning in relation to Section
K and in relation to Section 20 and the concession that has been made on behalf of the plaintiff insofar as Section 4K is concerned.

Accordingly, what I propose to do is to accede to Mr Graham's application for an adjournment, but not for the length which he has requested. I propose to adjourn the matter until 10 am on 22 July 1998 which is next Wednesday, when I expect the matter will be ready to proceed on behalf of the defendants. May I say that if the defendants wish to call any evidence between now and next
Wednesday, because of difficulties associated with those particular witnesses,
I am prepared to hear that evidence within Court hours or outside Court hours.
Having said that, the matter will be adjourned until 10 am next Wednesday.
 * * * 
