

Sturits versus Nicholls [2011] NSWSC 599 (21 June 2011) 
Last Updated: 22 June 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Sturits versus Nicholls  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): 
Thursday 2 June 2011  
Decision Date: June 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
Associate Justice Macready  
Decision: 
Orders: 
The plaintiff receive a legacy of $150,000 out of the estate of the deceased and forgiveness of any debt she owes the estate. 
The plaintiff's costs on the ordinary basis and the defendant's costs on the indemnity basis are to be paid or retained out of the estate of the deceased. 
Interest is to run on the legacy at the rate provided in the [Probate and
Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) from three months after the date of these orders.
 
Catchwords: 
WILLS AND ESTATES - family provision claim - competing claims or interests - contributions by the plaintiff - obligations owed by deceased - relationship with the  deceased - nature and extent of estate - charges on property - deceased's daughter sole beneficiary - daughter bankrupt - deceased severed joint tenancy with plaintiff prior to death - deceased and plaintiff living separately and apart under the one roof - plaintiff provided some financial support for deceased and cared for deceased until his death - whether deceased had a moral obligation towards plaintiff.  
Legislation Cited: [Bankruptcy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) (Cth)  [Family Law Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (Cth)  [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/)  [Succession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/)  
Cases Cited: 
Daemar versus Industrial Commission of New South Wales (No 2) <case> 
Parsons versus McBain <case>; <case> 
Pevsner. Re <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1989) 24 FCR 105] at 112 and 117  
Texts Cited: 
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
Sondra Sturits (plaintiff) 
Alan Richard Nicholls in his capacity as the Trustee in Bankruptcy of the
Bankrupt Estate of Vikki Ann Sturits (defendant)  
Representation  - Counsel: 
Counsel: 
Mr RD Wilson (for the plaintiff) 
Mr BF Skinner (for the defendant)  - Solicitors: 
Solicitors: 
Wood Marshall Williams (for the plaintiff) 
McLean & Associates (for the defendant)  
File number(s): /128248  
Publication Restriction: 
Judgment 
His Honour: This is an application under the [Succession Act 2006](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) in respect of the estate the late Robert James Arthur Sturits who died on 13 July 2009 aged 65 years. His widow, Sondra Sturits, the plaintiff and his only child, Vikki Sturits, survive him. The defendant, Alan Richard Nicholls is the Trustee in Bankruptcy of the Bankrupt Estate of Vikki Ann Sturits.  
Will of the deceased 
The deceased made his last will on 18 March 2008 and he gave the whole of his estate to his daughter Vikki. Letters of Administration were granted to Sondra for the purpose of bringing her application and the defendant has recently received a grant of administration CTA.  
Assets in the estate 
The main asset in the estate is the deceased's half interest as tenant in common to a property at North Narrabeen. The property was the matrimonial home of the plaintiff and the deceased. The value of the property is described as mid to high $700,000 and is subject to a mortgage of $145,000. The parties accept that the property will have to be sold which will result in a payout of the mortgage. Allowing for selling expenses, including agent's fees and conveyancing costs, the likely amount to be received on the sale of the property would be $603,000. Therefore the estate's half share is $301,500.  
There was a 2003 Toyota Hilux motor home in the name of the deceased at date of death. According to Sondra the vehicle was purchased from the joint overdraft account on 25 February 2009 for $49,290. On 2 October 2009, Sondra transferred the vehicle into her name and on 8 October 2009, she sold it to Campervan and Motor Home RV Centre for $37,500. She paid the proceeds into her personal account and has retained them. Accordingly, she owes one half, namely $18,500 to the estate.  
There is a small amount in a building society account of approximately $4,000 and there were funeral expenses of $4,000. Sondra sold an oxygen machine used by the deceased for $2,500.  
There have been costs incurred in the matter. The plaintiff estimates her costs to be $60,000 and the defendant estimates his costs to be $74,313. After costs the amount available in the estate is likely to be half of $489,687 namely, $244,843.  
Family history 
The deceased was born in January 1944. Sondra was born in November 1946. They married on 5 March 1966 and their daughter, Vikki was born in November 1967.  
After Sondra and the deceased married, the deceased worked as a tile salesman, while Sondra completed a hairdressing apprenticeship and worked three nights a week as a waitress. The couple lived in Fairlight where Vikki went to the local primary school. Sondra then worked at a nearby hairdressing salon and some time later the deceased and Sondra purchased a hairdressing salon. At around this time the deceased had a contract to work for Streets Ice Cream. Sondra's younger sister would often stay with the couple and look after Vikki while they were working.  
The couple later purchased a unit at Dee Why although the date of purchase is unclear. During this period the deceased started a rubbish removal business with money lent to him by Sondra's relative. Around this time Sondra and the deceased lost their second child and their hairdressing salon was sold.  
In 1980 , the deceased and Sondra purchased the home at Warraba Road, North Narrabeen as joint tenants with the proceeds of sale of the two bedroom unit at Dee Why.  
In 1987, the deceased was diagnosed with emphysema and the rubbish removal business was sold. The deceased and Sondra purchased a milk bar in Narrabeen and the pair worked in the business six and a half days a week.  
Around 1990, the milk bar business was sold and Sondra spent some unspecified time in Queensland with her twin sister who had been diagnosed with cancer. Sondra stayed with her sister in Queensland until her sister's death and then returned home to North Narabeen.  
In 1993, Sondra commenced nursing as a mature age student at Mona Vale Hospital.  
In 1994, she suffered a back injury and in the same year the deceased ceased work.  
In 1995, Sondra was diagnosed with lung cancer and on 27 February 1996, the deceased and Sondra made a will together. According to Sondra, the will was made because Sondra was not expected to survive for long after the lung cancer diagnosis.  
In 2003, Sondra ceased working as a nurse at Mona Vale Hospital and was retrained as an administrative officer.  
In 2005, Sondra had a heart attack.  
As I have mentioned the deceased made his last will on 18 March 2008 and on 26 March 2008, he severed the joint tenancy in the North Narrabeen property.  
The deceased's will of 18 March 2008 replaced the will he had made in favour of Sondra. The new will and the severance of the joint tenancy resulted from a deterioration in the relationship between the deceased and Sondra. Sondra conceded that from 2005, she and deceased lived separately and apart under the one roof and it seems they had moved into separate bedrooms in 2000.  
In May 2005, there was an incident that Sondra cannot recall, which required the police to be called to the property because of domestic violence. In December 2007, there was another incident at the property and Vikki had called the police as a result of a dispute between her parents that had escalated into violence.  
At the end of 2008, the deceased gave Vikki a cheque for $20,000 drawn on the joint account for renovations to her property at Coonabarabran as he had anticipated moving in with his daughter; no doubt as a result breakdown of his relationship with Sondra.  
In March 2009, the deceased gave Vikki a cheque for $30,000 to connect electricity at the Coonabarabran property. The cheque was presented for payment a few days after the deceased died and Vikki retained the funds.  
In March 2009, Vikki and her daughter Kristy moved into the North Narrabeen property to look after the deceased. Sondra moved into the Toyota Hilux motor home located on the property and she came into the house to prepare meals and use the bathroom.  
On 14 May 2009, Vikki Sturits was made bankrupt by the filing of a debtor's petition.  
On 10 July 2009, Sondra resigned from Mona Vale Hospital to be the deceased's full time carer and the deceased died on 13 July 2009 aged 65 years.  
The proceedings were commenced within time.  
Eligibility 
Sondra is the widow of the deceased and accordingly she is an eligible person.  
In applications under the earlier [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/), the High Court in Singer versus Berghouse <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 201] set out the two stage approach that a Court must take. This approach applies to applications under the [Succession Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) . At page 209 the Court said the following:  "The first question is, was the provision (if any) made for the applicant 'inadequate for (his or her) proper maintenance, education and advancement in life'? The difference between 'adequate' and 'proper' and the interrelationship which exists between 'adequate provision' and 'proper maintenance' etc were explained in Bosch versus Perpetual Trustee Co Limited .
The determination of the first stage in the two-stage process calls for an assessment of whether the provision (if any) made was inadequate or what, in all the circumstances, was the proper level of maintenance etc appropriate for the applicant having regard, amongst other things, to the applicant's financial position, the size and nature of the deceased's estate, the totality of the relationship between the applicant and the deceased, and the relationship between the deceased and other persons who have legitimate claims upon his or her bounty.

The determination of the second stage, should it arise, involves similar considerations. Indeed, in the first stage of the process, the court may need to arrive at an assessment of what is the proper level of maintenance and what is adequate provision, in which event, if it becomes necessary to embark upon the second stage of the process, that assessment will largely determine the order which should be made in favour of the applicant. In saying that, we are mindful that there may be some circumstances in which a court could refuse to make an order notwithstanding that the applicant is found to have been left without adequate provision for proper maintenance. Take, for example, a case like Ellis versus Leeder where there were no assets from which an order could reasonably be made and making an order could disturb the testator's arrangements to pay creditors." 
Sondra Sturits 
Sondra is aged 64 years. She is in a relationship with Christopher Lamey. Her only asset is her half interest North Narrabeen property. She has a small savings account of $750. Mr Lamey has a 16 year old son who is dependent upon him. He estimates his assets at $5,000. Unfortunately his two recent businesses failed as they were affected by Government decisions. The first businesses was an insulation installation business and the second was the design and installation of solar systems. In the year ended 30 June 2009 his taxable income was $9,030 as a result of losses from his businesses and in 2010 his taxable income was nil.  
Sondra receives of workers compensation payments of $800 gross per fortnight but these will cease in November 2011. She will then begin receiving the aged pension of $758.80 per fortnight.  
Sondra owns a 2005 Mazda sedan that is valued at approximately $19,000. She owes with the estate approximately $145,000 to the Greater Newcastle Permanent Building Society and she has about $6,000 of savings. Sondra has no superannuation.  
Sondra is not in good heath. She suffers from high blood pressure, osteoporosis and an injured disc in her back.  
In 1990, the deceased sold his main business and was engaged in contract work for two or three days a week which gave him time for leisure activities. At this time Sondra was working full time and this may have created tensions.  
In 1995, Sondra was diagnosed with lung cancer, she had a lung removed and was incapacitated for approximately two months.  
As previously stated, by 2005, the relationship between Sondra and the deceased became acrimonious.  
It is clear that for many years before his death the deceased drank excessively and at the time of his death he was drinking about a bottle of whisky a day. It also seems that Sondra drank in moderation. Surprisingly she could not recall the incident in 2005 when the police called. However, she could recall the incident in 2007. In that incident she and the deceased had an argument about a meal time, after which she hit him over the head with garden spade. The deceased pushed Sondra to the floor and kicked her which resulted in a fracture to her pelvis and which left her hospitalised  
Sondra called two nurses and work colleagues, Marylyn Whitwell and Rosalea Hargraves, who had visited and at times had stayed at the property.  
Mrs Whitwell appeared dispassionate and she gave evidence of the support that Sondra gave the deceased during the last years of his life, which were difficult for everyone. She observed that as the deceased's illness progressed, he became angrier and violent towards Sondra.  
Given the state of the evidence is not possible to attribute blame for the breakdown of the relationship and I will simply accept that the relationship reached a point in 2005 where the parties were living separately and apart and that Sondra continued to care, along with others, for the deceased.  
Although there is no detailed evidence of the financial contributions of the parties in relation to the purchase of the property, the only evidence is that they purchased the property from the proceeds of sale of a unit they had jointly owned. In these circumstances, it is clear that Sondra has contributed one half of the purchase of the property. This is more than likely given the fact that she continued to work after the deceased reduced his hours and became ill.  
Vikki Sturits 
Vikki is 43 years of age and lives in a de facto relationship with Carmelo Spina. They have a daughter Kristey Spina born in December 1989.  
Vikki and her partner live in a property at Coonabarabran, which is subject to a mortgage. Their equity in the property is $39,000.  
Vikki is employed as an employment consultant earning $43,500 per annum.  
There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that Vikki did not have a good relationship with her father. From time to time in her father's later life, Vikki assisted with his care but for most of the time she did not live in Sydney.  
In about March 2009, a few months before the deceased's death, Vikki moved into North Narrabeen property with her daughter to care for her father.  
After the deceased's death, when Sondra discovered the terms of the deceased's will, there was a disagreement between Vikki and her mother and Vikki and her daughter left the property.  
I have mentioned that Vikki is bankrupt as a result of her own petition. The debts in her estate, which are mainly as a result of the use of some ten or eleven credit cards, total $130,603. By the time interest is allowed on the debts it is likely that the total amount to be paid to creditors will be $200,000. In the bankrupt estate the only assets available are Vikki's share of her father's estate and the one half share in her home at Coonabarabran having a net value of $19,500.  
If Vikki is able to obtain funds from the deceased's estate she may be able to retain her interest in her home which is at risk as it can be called for by the trustee of her bankrupt estate.  
Discussion 
It is necessary to see how Sondra has been left without adequate and proper provision for her maintenance, education and advancement in life.  
Once the property at North Narrabeen is sold and after these proceedings have been resolved, Sondra would like to purchase a property on the Central Coast which she estimates might cost in the range of $300,000-$500,000. Sondra has sought an order that she receive the whole of the deceased's estate, which would provide her with a capital sum to make this purchase, provide her with some security in life and pay for any necessary property repairs.  
If no order is made for Sondra, she is entitled to one half of the proceeds of the sale of the property, approximately $300,000, less half the proceeds of the sale of the Hilux ($18,500) and less the sale price of the oxygen machine, some $2,500. This would reduce the amount available to her to $279,000. This leaves her with insufficient funds to purchase a home outright and she would be almost entirely dependant on her pension.  
Further to this, if no provision is made for Sondra, all or most of the deceased's estate will be paid to the creditors of the bankrupt estate by operation of the [Bankruptcy Act 1966](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) (Cth) [sections 58](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s58.html) and [116](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s116.html) (see also Re Pevsner <case>; [(1983) 68 FLR 254]  
However, if Vikki receives the whole of the deceased's estate, she should be able to have the bankruptcy annulled, pursuant to [section 153A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s153a.html), if the trustee is satisfied that all Vikki's debts are paid in full. On satisfaction of those debts there would be approximately $40,000 left in the estate.  
In Metherell versus Public Trustee , the deceased left the whole of her estate to her former husband, Mr Peek, who had been made bankrupt prior to his former wife's death, with the result that his whole entitlement under the will passed to the trustee in bankruptcy. Three years later, Mr Peek was discharged from bankruptcy but the discharge did not transfer or revest title to any part of the bankrupt estate in him. It remained with the trustee in bankruptcy. The four plaintiffs, who were the deceased's children, sought orders under West Australian family provision legislation for the whole of their mother's estate. Mr Peek did not oppose those orders and the defendant made no further claims to further distribution of the deceased's estate, therefore orders were made in favour of the plaintiffs. In the current circumstances, it is unlikely the plaintiff would achieve such an uncontested outcome if the North Narabeen property were still an available asset after the bankruptcy is discharged some time next year.  
The defendant has raised the question of whether the deceased had a moral duty to make provision for Sondra, having regard to the history of the marriage and the fact that the plaintiff and the deceased had been separated under the one roof for a significant period of time. It is submitted that in reality Sondra was a former spouse of the deceased.  
In Churton versus Christian [(1988) 13 NSWLR 241] at 243-244 Mahoney JA said: "By legislation of this kind, the legislature takes power to deal with a person's property, not as he or she would wish to deal with it, but because the legislature, through those it empowers, thinks that he or she should have dealt with it differently. It has taken this power not simply because the persons who may apply under the Act are without proper means: the justification is that the deceased owed a duty to the applicant, and that duty involved that the deceased should have dealt with his property differently, and the failure of duty is to be rectified.

As the cases have shown from the commencement of the history of this legislation, this duty is a moral duty."
The defendant pointed to the decision of Young J in O'Shaughnessy versus Mantle [(1986) 7 NSWLR 142] at 147-8 as providing a non-exhaustive list of circumstances that may give rise to a moral duty upon a testator to provide for a former spouse: "Whilst again emphasising that this list is non-exhaustive and is no more than guidelines, it would seem to me that the following cases would clearly be ones where there would be factors warranting the court considering the application: 
Except where the Family Court itself gives relief, cases where there has been a divorce and a spouse has died before property matters have been resolved by the Family Court; 
Cases where the husband and wife have not finally settled all their property dealings at the time of the divorce; 
Cases where maintenance was being paid to the ex-spouse as at the date of the deceased's death and the orders for maintenance were inadequate to provide for the ex-spouse after death of the paying spouse; 
Cases where despite the divorce there was some dependency on the deceased as at the date of death. An example of this would be where some years after the divorce the present plaintiff fell grievously ill and because of a residue of affection the now deceased spouse provided moneys for medical treatment or living expenses.

A fifth class of case is rather hard to define. Under the Testator's Family
Maintenance and [Guardianship of Infants
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/goia231/) there were a series of cases where persons whose marriage had got into problems had signed separation deeds or had maintenance orders against them or had had a decree nisi made which had not become absolute by the date of death. In such cases it was consistently held that what a spouse is entitled to under the Testator's
Family Maintenance and [Guardianship of Infants
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/goia231/) cannot be concluded merely by considering whether the plaintiff would have been entitled in the spouse's lifetime to an order for maintenance: see, eg, Delacour v
Waddington <case>; [(1953) 89 CLR 117]; Re Mayo [[1968] 2 NSWR 709.] Unreported decisions where these problems have been considered include Gray versus Peil (Holland J, 11 February 1976, unreported) and Groth versus Perpetual Trustee Co
Ltd (Powell J, 16 October 1978, unreported): see also Re Howard <case>; [(1925) 25 SR 189] and Re
Clissold [[1970] 2 NSWR 619.] In almost all of these cases, despite a limited maintenance order, a more generous order was made under the Testator's Family Maintenance and [Guardianship of Infants
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/goia231/) because as was pointed out by almost all the judges, the issue in the maintenance proceedings and the issue in the Testator's Family Maintenance proceedings was different, though of course, many factors overlapped. The probability is that these cases will continue to be followed in applications under the Family 
Provision Act where the applicant is a widow or widower as opposed to being a former spouse. Apart from one type of case, it seems to me difficult to see how there are any special circumstances involved in such cases, especially where there has been an order of the Family Court of Australia in respect of property, because the [Family Law
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (Cth), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s81.html), is aimed at finally breaking all financial relations between the parties.

The one type of case in this category where there may be some special factor involved, is where there is a very small estate and whilst the parties are alive it was only possible to give a pittance to the claiming spouse because the other spouse needed funds to maintain his own life but that now one spouse is dead, the barrier to giving the other spouse the whole of the family property has vanished. However, I merely raise these matters and leave this fifth class case for decision if a case comes to the Court raising those particular problems.

Clearly on the other side of the line is a case where there has been a determination between the spouses on a final basis by a competent court, and the orders of the court or the agreement between the parties sanctioned by the court have been performed and there has been no material change in circumstances other than the death of one of the parties. Somewhere between this type of case and the other five classes of case which I have discussed, the line must be drawn in respect of applications by ex-spouses - just where, may be able to be determined with more precision after there have been a larger number of cases before the court."
Apart from the severance of the joint tenancy it seems that Sondra and the deceased had not negotiated the division of any other property nor had they negotiated any maintenance one party might receive from the other. The parties still maintained a joint account, which is where the funds to buy the Hilux were derived. The deceased appears to have been receiving a disability pension prior to his death, which was used to pay for Homecare services, however he was clearly dependant on the plaintiff for non-financial support for the duration of their marriage and after their separation. The plaintiff has given affidavit evidence (23 May 2001 at [37]) that she paid for all other household expenses.  
The deceased severed the joint tenancy on the North Narrabeen property on 26 March 2008. The defendant has submitted that it was open to Sondra to challenge the transfer of title in proceedings under the [Family Law Act 1975](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (Cth), but she did not pursue that course. The parties gave conflicting evidence on this issue. Sondra gave evidence in Court that she was unaware of the severance of the joint tenancy until after the deceased's death. Vikki contended in cross examination by Mr Wilson, counsel for the plaintiff , that she was present when the deceased and Sondra discussed a letter advising Sondra of the severance of the joint tenancy:  "Q. ... You didn't ever tell your mother, prior to your father's death, that your father had changed his will, did you? 
A. No.

Q. You weren't ever present during a conversation in which your father told your mother he was going to change his will? 
A. No.

Q. You weren't ever present when your father told your mother he was going to sever the joint tenancy on the home at North Narrabeen? 
A. No.

Q. To your knowledge, your father never told your mother that he was going to sever the joint tenancy on the property at Narrabeen? 
A. No.

Q. You are not aware of any of that, are you? 
A. No.

Q. He did discuss it with you? 
A. Not until after returning from E and A Lawyers.

Q. Just to repeat the question, you weren't ever present when your father said to your mother, "I am applying for a divorce"? 
A. No.

Q. And you weren't ever present when the topic of a letter advising your mother of the severance of the joint tenancy was discussed by them, were you? 
A. Yes, I was.

Q. I thought you said you weren't ever present when the topic of the severance was discussed by your mother and father? 
A. What I understood you to say was when he ever brought up the severance and
I have misunderstood you by meaning two situations, prior to the severance and at the stage when the letter was received in the mail. I was there when the letter was received in the mail.

Q. And how did your mother react, according to your evidence, when your father said, "I want to sever the tenancy on this house and put the property in two names"? How did your mother react to that? 
A. She didn't understand the letter and asked dad to explain it. A lot of the time she didn't believe my father.

Q. Well, let us just stop there. What words did your father use when he sought to explain it? 
A. "I am - I have applied for a divorce and I have been told by the lawyers that I need to sever the joint tenancy for this reason so that I can get my pension in full. The divorce and the - the severance of the tenancy are part of me getting my pension payments. This is why I am doing it".

Q. And according to what you have just said then, your mother didn't understand this, the severance of the joint tenancy? 
A. No, not the severance of the joint tenancy.

Q. So what did your father say about that, explaining that? 
A. He didn't - he didn't explain. He gave her the letter back.

Q. And what was your mother's reaction? What were her words? Did she say, "This is outrageous, it's my house"? 
A. No.

Q. What did she say? 
A. What did she say, she asked me to read the letter. She felt she could trust me at that time. She asked me to read the letter and please explain what it meant to her.

Q. And then what did she say? 
A. She waited until I finished reading the letter. I then told her what I thought the letter meant.

Q. And what did she say then? 
A. "That's fine. As long as your father can look after himself and pay for himself, I don't care".

Q. But this conversation didn't happen at all, did it? 
A. Yes, it did.

Q. Because when, after your father's death, your mother learnt that he had changed his will and you were going to get your dad's estate, she became outraged, didn't she? 
A. She did become outraged.

Q. Extremely outraged? 
A. She did."
Vikki's account in inherently more likely and I accept it.  
Cross versus Wasson  <case> is a case that has some factual similarities. The plaintiff, Mr Cross, sought a family provision order for his maintenance and advancement in life out of the estate of his late wife, to whom he was married for 22 years. Mr Cross owned the matrimonial home before the couple married and at some point during the marriage, the deceased was made a joint tenant of the property. The relationship was harmonious until about 17 years before the deceased's death, when there was an incident of domestic violence by Mr Cross with some apparent provocation from the deceased. There was also evidence of a deterioration of the relationship over those last years.  
The deceased was dying from cancer and at stage when her prospects looked grim, the deceased's four daughters from a previous marriage sought to have their mother sign a unilateral severance of the joint tenancy in such a way that Mr Cross would not become aware of it until the "last possible moment". Mr Cross and the deceased's daughters had cared for the deceased during her illness. Under the deceased's last will, the residue of the estate was distributed in equal shares amongst the deceased's four daughters and no provision had been made for Mr Cross in the deceased's will.  
Her Honour decided that despite the fractures in the marriage, the deceased had a moral obligation towards Mr Cross and held that the will made inadequate provision for him.  
Scott versus Scott  <case>, was another judgment by Ward J. Her Honour considered the authorities in relation to an application by the deceased's wife of about 23 years. The plaintiff and the deceased had been living separately for two and a half years prior to his death. The case provides a useful summary of the authorities that considered whether a surviving ex-spouse in family provision application has a moral claim in relation to both settled and non-settled property disputes prior to the death of a party:  "[130] In Dijkhuijs (formerly Coney) versus Barclay [(1988) 13 NSWLR 639] (at 149) that in most cases the achievement of a final property settlement in the Family Court would be seen by the parties, in current social circumstances, as terminating any moral claim of a former spouse to provision in the will of the other. Kirby P noted (at 652) nevertheless that: [P]ublic policy, important though it is, must adapt itself to the new provisions of the Act, with its reforming inclusion of a specific entitlement of a former spouse to claim. That provision contemplates there will be cases where such a claim will succeed, notwithstanding the public policy [of finality of property settlement].
 [131] Similarly, in Dijkhuijs' case, Mahoney JA said that it was inherent in the Family Provision legislation that, special cases apart, an order was only to be made if the deceased had defaulted in the performance of a duty which he owed to the particular plaintiff. His Honour said (at 657): 
That does not mean that, if the plaintiff establishes a financial need within the section and if on taking into account the consideration referred to in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s9.html) (the discretionary considerations) there be nothing to the contrary, an order must be made . The statute assumes that the deceased, in what he has done during his life and by his will, has failed to discharge a duty which he owed to the plaintiff (the moral duty). Thus, a plaintiff may be a former spouse who, on dissolution of the marriage, received what on any view she was entitled to have and there may have been no further relationship between them so that none of the factors in [s (3)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s9.html) to [s (3)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s9.html), are of relevance. But, at the deceased's death, she may have a financial need.
In such circumstances, the fact that the plaintiff has established that she was a former spouse and has a financial need would not, as such, entitle her to an order. It would be necessary for her to establish that, in some way or because of circumstances within [s (3)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s9.html), the deceased had a duty to her which involved that he should have provided for her financial need (my emphasis).
 <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 217] noted (at [22]), "According to general community standards a former spouse who has been accorded all rights under a property settlement and does not have any continuing entitlement to maintenance, adjudicated or not, is not generally regarded as a natural object of testamentary recognition. Although such testamentary recognition does occur, it is, in my understanding, regarded as altogether exceptional and remarkable when it occurs".  <case>, Young CJ in Eq (as his Honour then was) considered what he had said in O'Shaughnessy versus Mantle in relation to the effect of the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) on an application by a divorced spouse. His Honour noted (at [32]) that the ex-spouse might obtain an order under "limited circumstances" under the [Family Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) such as where the parties had not finally settled all their property dealings at the time of the divorce or where there was continued financial dependency after the divorce. [135] Here, no final property settlement orders were made, nor was there a binding financial agreement for the purposes of the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/). The parties were not divorced. Nevertheless, accepting that financial need of some degree is established by Mrs Scott, the question still remains what would be regarded as adequate provision for her in all the circumstances. Those circumstances must take into account both the fact of her separation from the deceased and the fact that, as between themselves, a division of their assets appears to have already been effected (albeit predicated on a 50:50 basis for all assets, as opposed to the 75:25 split required (in the absence of particular agreement) for the Long Jetty property). [136] What then is the position of a spouse, separated from her husband, in circumstances where an informal division of assets has taken place and where it would seem the marital relationship is to all intents and purposes at an end? [137] Considering the above authorities, it seems to me that, while Mrs Scott remained the deceased's wife even after their separation, and hence was a person for whom the community might expect the deceased to have made some provision for her continued support and maintenance in life (in recognition of the long marriage and her contribution to the building up of their joint assets and to his welfare in life), the community might also consider that a testator in the deceased's position had done "the right thing" by effecting an amicable division of their assets prior to his death and had limited, if any, further moral duty to support his widow.  <case>, White J noted (at [50]) that the bond of matrimony, prima facie, gave rise to a testamentary obligation, citing Re Clissold (dec'd) [[1970] 2 NSWR 619], Harper J in the Supreme Court of Victoria, noted (at [43]) that: [A]rrangements made by a husband during his lifetime which on his death leave his widow in comfortable financial circumstances would ordinarily discharge his moral duty to make in his will adequate provision for her proper maintenance and support. That would (again, generally speaking) only not be so if, although comfortable, her circumstances did not allow her as a widow to maintain a standard of living comparable to that which she enjoyed as a wife.
 [140] His Honour noted that a settlement reached under the [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) does not necessarily preclude a claim by a former spouse for family provision but that in those circumstances different considerations come into play. [141] In Armstrong versus Sloan , Harper J considered that Mrs Armstrong's position was as close to that of a divorcee as could be in the absence of a divorce. There, his Honour considered that Mrs Armstrong was not left by the deceased without adequate provision for her proper maintenance and support but that, if she was, he would have exercised his discretion against the claim for further provision stating (at [56]) that "by giving effect to the settlement, Mr Anderson discharged his moral duty to his wife, and thereby removed the "legislative justification to abridge freedom of testation": Grey versus Harrison [[1997] 2 VR 359] at 365 per Callaway JA. [142] On balance, I consider that Mrs Scott's position comes very close to that of Mrs Armstrong in that the marital bond had come to an end and the deceased had taken steps to effect what seems to have been an amicable and relatively fair (though not precise, having regarding to their unequal entitlements to the Long Jetty property) division of all of their assets so as to terminate any moral claim the deceased might have had to the spouse from whom he was separated (and with a degree of finality appreciated by both parties from at least six months before his death). Nevertheless, I accept that the deceased himself appeared to recognise that there was scope for Mrs Scott to regard their financial dealings as not finally resolved and I am prepared to accept that from a community perspective there was some moral claim remaining, given the length of this marriage and the subsistence of an amicable relationship between the couple for some period after their separation." 
In Benney versus Jones [(1991) 23 NSWLR 559] at 568-9, Priestley JA (with Meagher JA in agreement (at 57)) referred to the use of the word 'ought' in [section 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s7.html) of the earlier [Family Provision Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) (equivalent to the use of the word in section 59(2) of the Act) and noted as follows:  "This conclusion directly raises the question of whether the word 'ought' in [s 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s7.html) of the Act carries with it an idea of moral obligation. In answering this question some guidance may be obtained from authoritative decisions under the
Testator's Family Maintenance & [Guardianship of Infants Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/goia1916231/) (as amended), using due care to take account of the differences between the two
Acts.
 ...

It seems plain from the comparison of the two Acts, and particularly from <case> of the 1916 Act and <case> and <case> of the present Act, that language from the earlier Act has been deliberately carried into the later one. It would seem that at least one purpose of this retention of much litigated sets of words is that the benefit of the authorities on those words may be available in the construction of the present Act. The same reasoning supports the view that where the new Act uses a different word in an important operative section from the word in the corresponding section of the earlier Act, the difference is deliberate and has a purpose.

The Act draws a distinction between the eligible persons referred to in par and par (b) on the one hand and par (c) and par (d) on the other. Broadly speaking, the distinction can be seen as one between classes of people who, in the ordinary course of family life would, prima facie, be persons to whom the deceased person spoken of in <case> of the 1916 Act and <case> of the present Act would have an obligation to make provision, whereas those in the other class would, prima facie, not be regarded in the ordinary course of family life as being likely to be made the subject of provision by the deceased.

In regard to the first class, the more usual approach under the 1916 Act was that before making an order, the court needed to be satisfied that the testator ought to have made provision for the applicant, in all the circumstances of the case: see Bosch versus Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd [[1938] AC ] at -479 and Hughes versus National Trustees Executors and Agency Co of Australasia
Ltd <case>; [(1979) 143 CLR 134] at 146-147 per Gibbs J, with whom Mason and Aickin JJ both agreed. However, there was a differing view, expressed by Murphy J, in the same case when, after commenting (at 158) that 'many cases suggest that an applicant must show a moral claim ...', he went on to say that this was a gloss on the Act that was unwarranted and inconsistent with the language of the legislative scheme.

It seems to me that the introduction into <case> of the present Act of the word 'ought' in replacement of the words from <case> of the 1916 Act 'as the Court thinks fit' shows the intention of the present Act to accept the approach adopted by the majority in Hughes and to reject that of Murphy J. The word 'ought' seems to be deliberately adopted, in the present Act, from what Gibbs
J called the classical statement in Bosch . To my mind, this is a very clear indication that an eligible person within par (c) and par (d) must show a moral claim on the estate before an order can be made; I also think this is the same thing as saying that the deceased person must have had a moral obligation to that eligible person. It is hard to imagine how the one could exist without the other. It seems to me that the same reasoning is very probably applicable to applications by eligible persons within par (a) and par although it is unnecessary to decide that in this case."
Mahoney JA at 560 said:  "Whether an order should be made raises (as it has been described) the moral or normative question. That question remains, whether the application is made under the former or the present Act. The nature of that question was discussed in this Court and in the High Court in White versus Barron <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 431]; and in Goodman versus Windeyer <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 490:] see, also, Kearns versus Ellis (Court of Appeal 5 December 1984 unreported) and Gorton versus Parks [(1989) 17 NSWLR 1] 
Where the applicant is a member of the deceased's family, as referred to in the earlier paragraphs of <case> relating to eligible persons, the nature of the duty which the deceased should have fulfilled is reasonably clear."
In Walker versus Walker (New South Wales Supreme Court, 17 May 1996, unreported) Young J reviewed the question of moral duty. His Honour reviewed Gorton's case, in the context of the earlier High Court and House of Lords decisions, noting the effect of Singer versus Berghouse as follows:  "In Singer's case, a widow who had been married less than one year to a sixty-eight year old man failed in her application under this Act in this court, in the Court of Appeal and in the High Court. The majority of the court said at p 208 and following that to assess a claim under the present Act there is a two stage process. The first stage is to determine whether an applicant has been left without adequate provision and the second stage is to determine what provision ought to have been made. At p 209 the Judges point out that Re
Allen has guided past courts and has three times been approved by the Privy
Council or High Court, but that 'we doubt this statement provides useful assistance in elucidating the statutory provision. Indeed, references to 'moral duty' or 'moral obligation' may well be understood as amounting to a gloss on the statutory language'. They then say 'the determination of the first stage in the two stage process calls for an assessment of whether the provision (if any) made was inadequate for what, in all the circumstances, was the proper level of maintenance etc. appropriate for the applicant having regard, amongst other things, to the applicant's financial position, the size and nature of the deceased's estate, the totality of the relationship between the applicant and the deceased, and the relationship between the deceased and other persons who have legitimate claims upon his or her bounty."
Young J also observed:  "In Fraser's case, Kirby P at p 29 said that 'I do not consider that it would be safe for this court, or other courts in this State, to disregard the obiter dicta in Singer versus Berghouse concerning 'moral duty.' However, his Honour's decision made it quite clear that he thought that references to moral duty in the judgment under appeal really amounted to little more than a shorthand expression for the lengthier statutory provisions actually used in the Act.
His Honour made it clear that there was no drastic change in the law 'either by the observations of the majority in Singer or by the High Court's reference, in the footnote to what Murphy J said earlier (p 27).' 
Handley JA thought that the dicta in the High court in Singer should not be followed and pointed out that even as late as 1994 in Neil versus Nott <case>; [(1994) 68 ALJR 509], the High Court was itself using the words 'moral claim' in decisions under this Act.

Sheller JA again did not consider that the High Court's suggested abandonment of concepts of moral claim or moral obligation changed the task of the court.
He said, with reference to decisions of Murphy J at p 42, 'the point made in the judgments to which Murphy J referred was that the existence of a moral obligation owed by the deceased to the claimant was a necessary part of the claimant's case but not alone sufficiently to justify an order in the claimant's favour. Thus, in theory an order would not be made out of the estate of a deceased parent in favour of a child who had over many years completely cut himself or herself off from the parent, even though the child was left in need. On the other hand, a wealthy child who had cared for the parent throughout his or her life may have no claim for further provision under the legislation. The courts, in giving effect to the legislative scheme, having accepted that the bare moral claims of the sort mentioned by Stout CJ in re Allardice [(1910) 29 NSWLR 959], 970 will not alone suffice to empower the court to make an order."
The concerns expressed about any change in the law as a result of Singer versus Berghouse were put to rest by the High Court in Vigolo versus Bostin  <case> at 25, 74-75 and 121.  
In Walker versus Walker (p27) Young J noted:  "I do not consider that there is any purpose in analysing whose fault it was that the state of non-communication came into place. In family relationships, hurts are often inflicted or suffered some times consciously, some times unconsciously. ...

The important matter is not fault but whether in all the circumstances it would be expected by the community that the testator would have to make a greater benefaction than he in fact did to constitute proper or adequate provision for the plaintiff.

Accordingly, I reject the approach that all an applicant under this Act has to do is to prove that he or she is an eligible person and that he or she reasonably needs more financial assistance. The cases show that there must be a full investigation into all the facts and circumstances of the matter to see whether the community would expect that a person in the plight of this testator ought to have made provision or further provision for the applicant..."
These words were approved by Ipp J in Palmer versus Dolman; Dolman versus Palmer  <case> when he said:  "112. I agree with his Honour's remarks, although I would express the rider that, often, where an applicant is a person within paragraphs (a) or (b) of the definition of 'eligible person' in s6(1) of the Act, proof that the applicant is a person in need will be sufficient. I accept however that there must be a full investigation into all the facts and circumstances as his
Honour expounds."
Sondra and the deceased were married for 44 years but last 11 years appear to have been a particularly unhappy time that was dogged by alcohol abuse, illness and some violence. Despite this, Sondra was effectively the deceased's sole carer up until a period of approximately three months prior to his death.  
Sondra appears to have been a major contributor to the estate in both financial and non-financial terms. Throughout their life together both the deceased and Sondra worked mostly full-time. She worked part-time during periods of illness. During their early years together Sondra and the deceased had both held two jobs. When she was not working, Sondra appears to have taken responsibility for majority of the domestic duties and she cared for their daughter Vikki. Sondra also occasionally assisted their daughter by minding Kristey.  
While family provision claims entertain considerations that are different from maintenance settlements under the [Family Law Act 1975](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (Cth), the deceased's severance of the joint tenancy could be seen as a final act on his part to settle the affairs between himself and Sondra, especially in circumstances where the deceased knew his life expectancy was short and in light of the fact that he had already effectively given the majority of his other assets to Vikki by way of cheques for $20,000 and $30,000 in 2008 and 2009. Further, the deceased was aware of Vikki's impending and subsequent bankruptcy by February 2009 when she came to live at North Narrabeen property.  
Following the authorities set out above, from a community perspective, the deceased had some moral obligation towards Sondra. The method by which the deceased affected the severance of the joint tenancy was by all accounts secretive and it could be said that the plaintiff was not provided with an adequate opportunity to negotiate her property claim with the deceased before he became too ill for such discussions.  
A second issue raised by the defendant is whether the conduct of the plaintiff in transferring the registration of the Hilux is disentitling conduct under the Act. Given that the vehicle was purchased with joint funds, I do not see any conduct that should affect the result. Sondra effectively owes the estate one half of the sale proceeds.  
In view of Sondra's contribution to the welfare of the deceased and all the other factors and matters referred to above, in my view Sondra has not been left with adequate provision under the deceased's will. It is appropriate that provision should be made for her by way of a lump sum from the proceeds of the sale of the North Narabeen property. She should receive a sufficient amount so that she can purchase a house. The lump sum includes the money Sondra owes to the estate for the sale of the Hilux and the oxygen machine.  
Order 
I order that:
The plaintiff receive a legacy of $150,000 out of the estate of the deceased and forgiveness of any debt she owes the estate. 
The plaintiff's costs on the ordinary basis and the defendant's costs on the indemnity basis are to be paid or retained out of the estate of the deceased. 
Interest is to run on the legacy at the rate provided in the [Probate and
Administration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/paaa1898259/) from three months after the date of these orders.
 * * * 
