

Patsellis versus Delaveris Investments P/L [1996] NSWSC 290 (23 July 1996) 
PATSELLIS versus DELAVERIS INVESTMENTS PTY LTD /94 
MONDAY 22 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute between two people who practised in the dental profession at Enmore and Hurstville.

The plaintiff's case, in essence, is that he and the defendant were virtually partners though the plaintiff was a qualified dentist and the defendant was a company involved in servicing professional dentists. The defendant's case is, in essence, that there were dealings between the parties, there was nothing like a partnership but they used property cooperatively and there were moneys lent by the defendant to the plaintiff.

The plaintiff commenced proceedings shortly before Christmas 1994 in order to preserve the then current situation. Orders were made by Brownie J at the time the proceedings were commenced and there was then a hearing before Cohen J in vacation on 3 January 1995. Various orders were made, including an order restraining the defendant from doing anything to remove the plaintiff from possession of the first floor at 2 Butlers Road, Hurstville, and an order that the plaintiff pay an occupation fee.

Those interim orders have lasted to the present time. However, it is clear that the circumstances of the parties have changed considerably. The plaintiff has been removed from the roll of dentists by order of the Dental Board and whilst there is some possibility he may be restored in due course, at the moment he is unable to practice dentistry. The plaintiff for a while carried on business through the medium of registered dentists, but there was a programme of a "current affairs" nature telecast recently and as a consequence of that telecast the plaintiff has been unable to continue with that arrangement. The plaintiff has not been able to pay the occupation fee for about the last eight weeks. He has virtually no assets. His house is owned by his wife and his only prospect of obtaining assets in the near future would appear to be the sale of his dental practice. He has obtained a valuation of the goodwill of this practice and has told the Court that as far as he can see the Dental Board would give him the appropriate permission to sell.

The situation presently is that with the orders made by Cohen J in January neither party, in the events which have happened, can use the dental surgery at Hurstville. There is physically present on the premises equipment and other fixtures that were used as part of the dental surgery which at the moment nobody is using. The plaintiff seeks that that equipment and fixtures be removed and he will store them. He says the sale of the goodwill of the practice depends on the purchaser having access to them. The defendant says that they are its property and that the only use that can be made of them is if it re-lets the premises to a licensed dentist and earns the money. The plaintiff opposes that on the basis that such a move would destroy a considerable part of the goodwill of the dental practice, which goodwill either belongs to him alone or to the partnership.

An associated problem is that the telephone number 570 6885 has been associated with both the plaintiff and the defendant. It would seem that the defendant is the subscriber but that for many years both parties have been listed under that number. The plaintiff seeks an order that the defendant be restrained from interfering with that telephone line; the defendant seeks an order that the plaintiff give directions to Telstra so that that number may be made available to the defendant.

It seems to me that both Mr Tzovaras, solicitor, who appeared for the plaintiff and Mr McKenzie of counsel who appeared for the defendant were correct when they said that the orders made by Cohen J in January 1995 were no longer appropriate to hold the status quo. It is clear that on the defendant's
Notice of Motion the Court should make order 1 that the plaintiff vacate the premises, and order 2 that the plaintiff pay the defendant $4,600 arrears of occupation fee up to 23 July 1996. I will make those orders in due course.

The real difficulty is what should be done about the telephone number and the delivery of equipment.

So far as the telephone number is concerned, it seems to me that whatever their other arrangements the parties have agreed to deal with it as if it belonged to them both. The ordinary order that the Court makes when there is that sort of arrangement and the joint venture is no longer feasible is to order that the subscriber insert on the telephone number for a period of six months a recorded message which redirects callers who wish to contact the plaintiff to the plaintiff's number and callers who wish to contact the defendant to the defendant's number.

I would be prepared to make this order so long as both parties agree to pay one half of the Telstra charges for the use of the number in the meantime. It would seem to me that no other way can reflect the fact that they are both using this line and both have some goodwill in the number.

So far as the equipment is concerned, I cannot deal with the matter quite so simply. The equipment is that of the defendant, so that I cannot see how, at least without compensation, I can let the plaintiff take the equipment. On the other hand, the equipment was part of the dental surgery operated by the plaintiff and I would have thought that the defendant is unable to carry on a dental practice at the same place using the equipment without compensating the plaintiff for the loss of the goodwill. That is merely a temporary arrangement. In due course it may very well be that the defendant's case will be established that there was no partnership and the goods are the defendant's alone. If that is so then there will be some liability under the plaintiff's undertaking as to damages. I know that there is great uncertainty as to the plaintiff's ability to meet any undertaking as to damages, but it would seem to me that for the moment anyhow there should be an injunction in the form of para 2 of the amended Notice of Motion.

I can now briefly deal with the other matters in the Notices of Motion. The plaintiff seeks an order that the defendant do all things necessary to obtain the consent of the lessor to the defendant for a sublease to anybody to whom he sells the dental partnership. This order is premature. If and when a purchaser is found doubtless there will have to be some consideration as to the commercial worthiness of the sub-lessee. Accordingly, this matter should be postponed. Doubtless if the defendant wishes to put in some tenant then again it will have to approach the Court by motion for the appropriate order.

The defendant asks that the plaintiff's summons be dismissed. There is nothing to show that the plaintiff's suit is vexatious or that there should be summary judgment for the defendant and that application should be rejected.

Accordingly, the Court will make orders 1 and 2 in the defendant's Notice of
Motion of 11 July 1996 substituting the figure $4,600 for $3,450 in order 2, and the Court dismisses the claims made in paras 3 and 4 of that Notice of
Motion.

The Court makes order 2 in the plaintiff's amended Notice of Motion of 22 July on the assumption that the plaintiff gives to the Court the usual undertaking as to damages, which I note the solicitor for the plaintiff gives.
I stand over para 1 of that Notice of Motion to a date to be fixed.

The Court also orders that the plaintiff and the defendant each authorise
Telstra Corporation at their joint expense to have a recorded message on telephone number 02-570 6885 in the following terms: "If you wish to contact Mr Patsellis please telephone (plaintiff's new number). I repeat (plaintiff's new number). If you wish to contact Mr
Delaveris or his company please telephone (defendant's new number). I repeat (defendant's new number)." 
As each party has been partially successful on the motion the costs of the motion should be costs in the cause.

The Court also discharges the order made by Cohen J on 3 January 1995. It notes that Mr Patsellis' non-compliance with the order was not contemptuous but was a result of impecuniosity and that order 2 made on the defendant's motion satisfies any shortcoming, thus the Court will take no action with non- compliance of that order in respect of the non-payment of the occupation fee.

The plaintiff's motion will stand over to the Registrar's list on Monday 5
August 1996 at 9.30 am.
 * * * 
