

Arabic Community Business Directory P/L versus Arabic Australian Business
Directory P/L [1996] NSWSC 53 (21 March 1996) 
ARABIC COMMUNITY BUSINESS DIRECTORY PTY LTD versus ARABIC AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS
DIRECTORY PTY LTD /96 
THURSDAY 21 MARCH 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a motion for contempt of court brought by the plaintiff against the defendants and the solicitor for the defendants. The [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) in [s 48(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s48.html) makes it quite clear that apart from procedural contempts and contempts in the face of the court questions of contempt of court are to be dealt with by the Court of Appeal.

The case, as it was first presented, appeared to be one of procedural contempt. At the heart of the allegations are that the defendants published a notice in Arabic which could only be interpreted as a complete misrepresentation of the order by Windeyer J in this matter, and that the solicitor for the defendants on his letterhead published a misleading account of what had happened before the court.

One of the aspects of the charges was that the first defendant had been restrained from using the words "Arabic Australian Business Directory" for its business and the publications I have referred to breach that order. I am very doubtful whether that is so, and if it were, whether the publications were for its business. However, the main thrust of the complaint is that the court's order was misrepresented. That may be a contempt of court; see Tobacco
Institute of Australia Ltd versus Australian Federation of Consumer Organisations
Inc (No 2) <case>; [(1993) 41 FCR 89], 92. There is, however, considerable doubt about that proposition and the only authority that appears to support it is R v
Lawley (KB) (1731) unreported, referred to in Fox's Contempt of Court at p 144.

I discussed the matter in a note "Misrepresenting Judgments of the Court" in [(1993) 67 ALJ 487], and pointed to the problem that ordinarily for a contempt of court one has to find an interference with the administration of justice.
Ordinarily, where there is a bench trial, a misleading publication of an interlocutory order of the court will not cause a problem with the administration of justice. However, it may be that the doctrine of libelling a court being a contempt is, as Sheppard J says in the Tobacco case, a live one, but if it is, it is for the Court of Appeal to decide, not me.

Accordingly, I will refer the whole of this motion to the Court of Appeal. If that is not an order that I can make, then I will refer the question of the contempt raised in the notice of motion to the Registrar of the Court of
Appeal.

However, I should say this, that had I been trying this matter and had I found the facts established, it would seem to me not to be a case that would be calling for anything more than a reprimand. Particularly is this so because the solicitor's publication was partly in response to a publication of the plaintiff, which might have been better thought out than it was. None of the persons involved in this case are particularly wealthy and it may very well be that they would prefer to spend their money getting on with the real litigation rather than these penal proceedings.

Accordingly, I refer the matter to the Court of Appeal, provided that within fourteen days the plaintiff might choose to withdraw the motion, in which case there will be no order as to costs.
 * * * 
