

Bearns versus Bearns-Hayes [1997] NSWSC 35 (17 February 1997) 
BEARNS versus BEARNS-HAYES (RE ESTATE OF ERIC NOEL BEARNS) /95 
Wednesday 4 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I originally took this case into my list when the Master's list dealing with [Family Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) applications became overloaded on 26 July 1996. It appeared at first sight to be a straightforward application under the [Family Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/). However, there soon appeared to be a series of complications, which I must confess I have not struck in an application like this for many years.

The first complication is that there needs to be proper construction of the
Will of the testator before one can see what it is that the plaintiff was left under the Will so that one can work out whether the plaintiff has been left without proper provision.

The case as originally framed did not name as defendants the testator's grandchildren, who had a very real interest in the proper construction of the
Will. During the hearing on 26 July 1996 the grandchildren were added as defendants. However, this really did not assist me very much because although the Court had before it all the parties who were likely to be affected by the
Court's decision, the Court did not have any argument on behalf of the grandchildren as to what was the meaning of the Will. The interest of Mr
Rundle's client, the first defendant, daughter of the testator and one of the executrices, and the interests of the grandchildren are not necessarily the same.

The second problem was that no one would tell the Court what was in the estate. The problem mainly centred over what might be called a treasure trove.
It was obvious that there was a very real issue between the parties as to whether there was buried in the testator's home or workshop at Riverwood kerosene tins of coins and valuables.

The Court, I think, forced the defendant daughter into the witness box. She indicated she had authorised the removal of some of this treasure trove. The
Court then made suggestions, which were taken up, and the solicitors for the parties then attended at the premises and, as I understand the evidence, a further $218,000 worth of assets were uncovered. I put the matter back into the list on 20 August 1996 to deal with that and other aspects of the case. I pointed out that I still had not been told what the net value of the estate was. I had not been told as to the expenses that would be paid out of the estate and I thought it was extraordinary that in a case where the plaintiff, the widow, was a co-executrix with the defendant daughter, and they both had solicitors and both had resort to the estate papers, that the Court would be left in ignorance of a matter which under the statute was required to be put before the Court.

I then also raised the point that the evidence on the question as to whether the plaintiff should be given an extension of time to make an application was skimpy in the extreme, and even made some derogatory comments that solicitors who sit down and do nothing for some time can only expect to be sued by their clients. I was hoping that these comments would produce the reaction that I would be given more evidence as to how the plaintiff came to make her application so long out of time. However, there was no reaction to what I said and I reserved my decision.

After thinking about the matter further it seemed to me that I should have asked the plaintiff when she was in the witness box some questions to flesh out her equivocal statement in her affidavit. She said in paragraph 19 of her affidavit of 13 October 1995: "Until I saw the solicitor I did not know I only had a limited time to make a claim and in fact for some time I was led to believe by my daughter Noelene that I had been adequately provided for from my husband's estate." 
I should have asked the plaintiff when she saw the solicitor and what were the primary facts which led to that belief. I did not do so because of reluctance that Judges have to supply evidence where none is there, but on more mature consideration I thought that there was a duty on me to ask questions to make plain whether that statement was that the plaintiff had seen the solicitor before or after the time expired and what it was that led to that belief, whether it be reasonable or otherwise.

I had my Associate send a memorandum to both counsel indicating that I would re-list the matter today for the purpose of asking those questions and suggested that an affidavit might be prepared to save time. An affidavit was prepared of the plaintiff of 29 August 1996 and given to the legal representative of the defendant executrix, who objects to its use.

Today there are two matters before the Court. The first is the objection of counsel for the defendant executrix to the Court asking the questions that I have indicated. The second is a belated application by the plaintiff to reopen her case to read the affidavit.

Mr Rundle objects to both matters, though his objection was not as strong or vociferous with respect to the application to reopen, provided that proper terms were put on the reopening.

The application for reopening is an unusual one. Ordinarily one expects that the Court will be given the first time round the evidence which is available which the lawyers for the plaintiff think should be put before the Court in support of their case, and it is usually only if the evidence is not then available, or is available but is overlooked, that an application is made.
However, the principle is wider than this and, as Sheppard J said in Joyce v
GIO 21 July 1976, unreported but noted in Ritchie's Supreme Court
Practice Volume 2 case [13028], the prime consideration is the due administration of justice.

The present case is not a usual case. I have already mentioned three of the unusual features about it and how there has been a reluctance on both sides to give the Court the necessary material and assistance. I think that the standard that I should apply to an application of this nature at this stage, in the absence of any real prejudice to the defendants, is that I should lean towards finding the truth of the matter and the due administration of justice.
Accordingly, I will grant the application to reopen subject to terms that can be discussed shortly.

This makes the other application otiose because the Court does not interfere where the parties have taken the matter on themselves. However, I should say something about it.

Mr Rundle relied on cases such as Titheradge versus The King <case>; [(1917) 24 CLR 107] at 116-117; Commercial Union Assurance Company of Australia
Ltd versus Ferrcom Pty Ltd [(1991) 22 NSWLR 389], 418;
Whitehorn versus The Queen <case>; [(1983) 152 CLR 657] at 681-2 and Bassett versus Host [[1982] 1 NSWLR 206] at 207.

There is no doubt that the basic principle in litigation is that it is for the parties to put evidence before the Court and for the Court to adjudicate.
Again, if a party does not put evidence before the Court on an issue the Court is entitled to infer that it does not want to put evidence before the Court on that issue or, alternatively, that the Court should infer that no evidence that could be produced on that issue could assist the party. However, as Hope
JA said in Bassett versus Host at 207 "a trial is not a game". Some of the passages that I have been referred to by Mr Rundle suggest that the Court's aim is not to produce a just result, but rather to try the issues tendered by the parties. In my view that philosophy is so out of date with modern community thinking that so far as it has been able to do so this Division has for the last ten years repudiated it.

It is the common practice of this Division that when Judges are pre-trialing cases, and every case of two days or more is pre-trialled in this Division,
Judges constantly point out deficiencies in the pleadings and the evidence to the parties and sometimes give what Mr Rundle derogatively referred to as "advice on evidence by Judges" at that stage of the hearing.

When I first came to this Bench in 1985 I had sufficient time with aborted trials to write a book in my first six months. As a result of the procedure which has been adopted over the last ten years, I have found that not only have I had no spare time, I have sometimes had fourteen reserved judgments at once. The procedure has meant greater efficiency in litigation, less opportunity for ambush at trial, more productivity in the Court, and a more just result, albeit at the expense of the stress level of the Judges.

Mr Rundle does not seek to attack that system at all. However, he says that if during the trial or at the end of the trial some problem of deficiency of evidence occurs then the Judge should just adjudicate on the matter and not become involved.

Again, that is right up to a point. I certainly considered very deeply in my chambers before I had my Associate write her memorandum, which is MIO8, because I agree that is the general rule. However, there does come a point where the Judge, who after all is trying to get a just result, if no one else is, has to intervene in a trial. In view of the great problems which I have already outlined in this case, it seemed to me that it was appropriate for me to intervene in this case and if no one else asked the questions, to ask the questions myself.

There is authority for the proposition that if a Judge is hearing an application and is not satisfied with the evidence before him or her then the proper course is not to dismiss the proceedings but to stand them over for the evidence to be presented. That is the more modern way of looking at the matter and it is the attitude that is applied in family law cases and in this
Division, especially in situations such as applications under the [Family
Provision Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/).

Whilst applications under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) are adversarial in most senses, it must always be remembered that the executrices have an obligation to the Court to assist the Court by putting before the Court all the material that is necessary for the Court to make a decision, including the attitude of other beneficiaries; see for instance Vasiljev versus Public
Trustee [[1974] 2 NSWLR 497.] 
Mr Rundle objects to me saying things like that because he says it puts the odium on the defendant rather than the plaintiff for not calling the evidence, but I merely make the comment because it is incorrect to equate proceedings under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) with a normal common law trial or criminal proceedings.

Mr Rundle then says that even if that proposition were generally true, where one is seeking an extension of time to make an application the general common law principles should apply. There may be some substance in that submission, and it must be remembered that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s16.html) of the [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) actually provides that the Court shall not extend the period unless sufficient cause is shown, which indicates that the legislature is looking to some fairly harsh objective standard.

The authorities to which Mr Rundle referred deal with Judges calling witnesses or "entering the fray". There is another clear line of authority of which Re
Hayes Williams <case>; [(1926) 26 SR 383], , is a good example that at any stage of a case, a Judge may for his or her own satisfaction direct that further evidence be adduced. However such a course should usually only be taken after suggesting that the relevant party apply to reopen. See also Haines versus Trustees Executors & Agency Co Ltd <case>; [(1892) 18 VLR 585] and Kelly versus Sweeney [19808] QSR 182.

Although the matter is unnecessary for me to deal with finally, it does seem to me that even after hearing Mr Rundle's lucid argument the decision that I made that I should ask the questions, if no one else did, was correct.
Returning to the main course of the trial, I have permitted the plaintiff to reopen and I will permit the affidavit of the plaintiff sworn 29 August 1996, which was filed in Court this morning, to be read. It may be that the plaintiff's lawyers should consider whether they should file still further evidence.
 [Discussion ensued as to the further course of the proceedings] 
I direct that any further evidence on behalf of the plaintiff be filed and served no later than 3 October 1996. Any party may issue subpoenas returnable before the Registrar on 30 October 1996. The affidavits of the defendants are to be filed and served by 27 November 1996 and any affidavits in reply by 11
December 1996.

I fix the further hearing of this case for 17 February 1997 before me at 10am with liberty to counsel to apply today or tomorrow to vary that date.

I fix a further pre-trial direction hearing before me on Monday 3 February at 12 noon.
 * * * 
