

Regina versus Said Morgan Matter No 70064/95 [1997] NSWSC 274 (28 July 1997) 
Regina versus Said Morgan /95 July 1997 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division /95 - REGINA versus Said MORGAN 
JUDGMENT (on admissibility of hearsay evidence relating to the deceased - see page 175 transcript) 
HIDDEN J: Before the Crown Prosecutor closed his case he informed me that police had obtained statements from Ms Amal Hanna, whom he did not wish to call but whom he would make available for cross examination by Mr Nicholson
SC, for the accused, if any of the evidence she might give were admissible. Ms
Hanna's statements to the police became exhibits B(1) and (2) on the voir dire and Mr Nicholson indicated portions of the first of those statements which he wished to lead. The Crown prosecutor objected to that evidence and I ruled that none of it was admissible, undertaking to give my reasons later.

The accused is on trial for the murder of his brother-in-law, Mansour Suha, on May 1995 at a home at Oakhurst, where Mr Suha had been a temporary resident. The accused was a detective in the New South Wales police force at the time and, in the days leading up to the killing, he had become aware of allegations that the deceased had been sexually molesting three young girls.
The deceased was married to the accused's sister. Two of the girls involved were his own children, that is, the accused's nieces, and the third girl was a niece of the deceased. The allegations, which were quite serious, had been reported to police and, to the accused's knowledge, the three girls had made statements. One of them, the deceased's niece, alleged in her statement that on two occasions the deceased had threatened to kill her if she told anyone about his misconduct, the second of those occasions being as recent as 16 May
The deceased had been interviewed by detectives and, again to the accused's knowledge, had denied all of his niece's allegations but had made some admissions of sexual interference with his daughters. The deceased was released on conditional bail.

It is already apparent that the accused will raise a defence of diminished responsibility and a psychiatrist has been called in the Crown's case in chief in relation to that matter. However, Mr Nicholson foreshadowed that it would also be contended that the killing was justified on the basis that the accused was acting in defence of the children. Indeed, the accused has since given evidence that, in the light of the threats said to have been made by the deceased to his niece, he believed that all three girls were in serious danger, given that the deceased had been charged as a result of their allegations and had been released on bail. It is upon this issue that the evidence sought to be led from Ms Hanna was said to bear.

The evidence is in the form of statements made by the deceased to Ms Hanna.
Some of it is first hand hearsay but, if it were relevant, it would be admissible as first hand hearsay tendered by the accused pursuant to [s (8)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html) of the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). The admission of such evidence could entitle the Crown to lead evidence of other things said by the deceased to the witness so as to explain, or place in their context, the statements relied upon by the accused: [s (9).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s65.html)
Ms Hanna's statement of 10 August 1995 asserts that she had been having an affair with the deceased for some years and recounts a number of conversations with him over a period up to about a fortnight before he died.

According to the statement, between 1992 and 1995 the deceased sometimes expressed fear of the accused. He told Ms Hanna that his relationship with his wife had broken down and was characterised by arguments and incidents of mutual violence. On a few occasions his wife called the police. Sometimes she would telephone the accused who would come to the home and threaten the deceased. Asked by Ms Hanna why he was scared of the accused, the deceased would reply, ".... he's big in the police and he would be able to find me. He always threatened to do something to me if I leave his sister." He expressed fear about the accused's reaction if he found out about his affair with Ms
Hanna. He said that he believed that the accused would "frame him with something" to provide a reason for killing him. He also made certain allegations of criminality on the part of the accused, which are not material for present purposes.

Paragraph 13 of the statement reads as follows: "One day Mansour said to me, `My life is in danger.' Mansour did not say exactly what he meant but basically made it clear that it was because of his relationship with his wife and police officer brother-in-law. He mentioned getting a gun on another occasion as well. He said, `If my life is in danger I might as well kill us all together so I'm not dead by myself.'" 
Reading the statement as a whole, it would appear that this conversation took place early in 1995. Mr Nicholson wished to lead the deceased's statement, " ... I might as well kill us all together so I'm not dead by myself", without reference to its context. He argued that it was evidence that the deceased had contemplated killing his children and this could bear upon the jury's assessment of the danger the three children actually faced at the time the accused killed the deceased.

I expressed misgivings about admitting that part of the statement only, stripped of its context of the deceased's fear of the accused. Mr Nicholson acknowledged that revelation of that fear would be too high a price to pay for the admission of the evidence upon which he relied, and said that he would not press it if I were of the view that it could not be admitted without reference to its background.

Paragraph 17 of the statement reads as follows: "Mansour also said, `I wanted to kill myself yesterday. I switched the gas on the stove and was in the process of losing consciousness. I wanted to kill everyone in the house but I thought about my two daughters and thought why should I waste there (sic) lives because of my problems with my wife.' I said, `Yes, it's not their problem why kill them.' He said, `I pulled myself up and switched off the gas.' Mansour kept saying that, `She doesn't want me any more. Morgan planned it to get me kicked out of the house.'" 
Mr Nicholson wished to lead the whole of that paragraph except the last sentence ("Morgan planned it to get me kicked out of the house."). From the next paragraph it appears that this conversation is said to have taken place on the last occasion Ms Hanna spoke to the deceased, about two weeks before his death. Mr Nicholson submitted that this was evidence of an attempt to kill the children and was admissible on the same basis as the material previously referred to. Again, he sought its admission without reference to the background of the deceased's fear of the accused.

The evidence was said to have even greater significance in the light of evidence which it was anticipated would be given by the accused's mother in the defence case. According to Mr Nicholson she would say that, about two weeks before the girls' allegations came to light, she visited the deceased's home. The deceased knew that she was coming. When she arrived he was not there and she let herself in with a key which had been provided to her. She found the gas stove on "full bore", as Mr Nicholson put it, and the deceased's two daughters in the bath. She was alarmed by the danger of the situation given that she was a constant smoker: a fact of which the deceased was well aware.
She later spoke to the deceased about the matter who said that the girls must have left the gas on. She also told the accused what had happened.

Given that the accused was told what had happened, the mother's evidence is no doubt admissible. Indeed, the accused has since given detailed evidence of what his mother told him and has said that the information assumed an ominous significance when he became aware of the girls' allegations against the deceased. He believed that the deceased had attempted to kill the children and his mother and, clearly, this bears upon his perception of the threat posed by the deceased to the girls at the time he killed him.

Mr Nicholson submitted that it was open to the jury to conclude that the incident described by the deceased in paragraph 27 of Ms Hanna's statement is the same as that recounted by the accused's mother. No doubt that conclusion would be open to the jury, notwithstanding the obvious differences between the two accounts. Again, however, the statements attributed to the deceased cannot readily be divorced from the background of his failed marriage and his associated fear of the accused. According to Ms Hanna's statement, he said in the same conversation that he had told his wife about their illicit relationship and, indeed, his affairs with other women, and she and the accused had effectively ordered him out of the home.

In my view, to allow the evidence relied upon by Mr Nicholson from paragraphs and 17 of the statement, without disclosing the background to it, would be misleading and unjust. However, the Crown prosecutor objected to the evidence on a more fundamental basis which I also consider to be sound. That was also the basis of his objection to the last part of Ms Hanna's statement which Mr
Nicholson wished to lead. According to her, in the same conversation about two weeks prior to his death, the deceased admitted having affairs with other women and, specifically, sleeping with "both of his children's babysitters".
In her statement to the police, the deceased's niece spoke of an occasion when she had been babysitting his younger daughter and Mr Nicholson argued that it was open to the jury to conclude that she was one of the babysitters to whom the deceased had been referring. For the purpose of this argument I am prepared to assume that the jury could draw that inference.

Nevertheless, this evidence is inadmissible for the same reason as the rest of the evidence relied upon by Mr Nicholson: it is not suggested that the accused knew that the deceased had made any of these statements. As I have observed,
Mr Nicholson tendered the evidence on the basis that it was relevant to the issue whether the accused was acting in defence of the children when he killed the deceased. The Crown prosecutor foreshadowed an argument that that issue should not be left to the jury, but that is not a matter which I can determine until the close of all the evidence in the trial and, for present purposes, I am content to assume that it does arise. It is necessary then to consider the principles of law governing that issue.

It is well established that where an issue of self defence arises in a criminal trial, whatever be the crime charged, the question to be asked is whether the accused believed, on reasonable grounds, that it was necessary in self defence to do what he or she did: Zecevic versus Director of Public
Prosecutions (Vic) <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 645], per Wilson, Dawson and Toohey JJ at 661. In Morgan v
Colman [(1981) 27 SASR 334], Wells J, with whom Mitchell ACJ and White J agreed, observed (at page 336) that "similar principles" to those relating to self defence "govern the situation where the right to defend someone other than oneself ... is in issue." Although that decision pre-dates the High Court's enunciation of the principles in Zecevic, I have no doubt that it is those principles which govern the issue of defence of another and are applicable here. In R versus Conlon [(1993) 69 A Crim R 92] at -9, Hunt CJ at CL explained that the test of whether there were reasonable grounds for an accused's belief is of a mixed objective and subjective nature.
His Honour restated the position in R versus Hawes [(1994) 35 NSWLR 294] at 305: "It is the belief of the accused, based upon the circumstances as the accused perceived them to be, which has to be reasonable, and not that of the hypothetical reasonable person in the position of the accused ... " 
Accordingly, in the present case, the question whether the accused had reasonable grounds for believing that the deceased posed a serious threat to the children must be determined in the light of the facts as he perceived them to be. Matters of which he was unaware can have no bearing on the issue. For this reason, all the evidence sought to be led from Ms Hanna is inadmissible.
 * * * 
