

Bridge and Anor versus Hooper and Anor [1996] NSWSC 185 (11 June 1996) 
Bridge & Anor versus Hooper & Anor /90 
Monday, 20 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In very broad terms the position in this matter is as follows. On 15 September 1993 an order was made in these proceedings by Cohen J which included an order that the defendants pay the plaintiffs' costs and since then those costs have been taxed, a certificate of taxation issued, which was subsequently amended, the amount payable thereunder being $43,745.38. There have been other proceedings between the same parties, or substantially the same parties, in the District Court, in which on 25 September 1992 an order was made that the present plaintiffs, or one of them, pay to the present defendants certain costs of those proceedings. There was an appeal by the present plaintiffs from the orders made in the District Court, and that appeal was dismissed by the Court of Appeal on 16 September 1994, on which occasion the Court of Appeal made an order in respect of the costs of the appeal in favour of the present defendants against the present plaintiffs. In or about July 1995 the present plaintiffs sought, by writ of execution, to enforce the costs order of 15 September 1993 in the present proceedings and, by notice of motion filed in the present proceedings, the present defendants sought to have the writ of execution set aside on the basis that there should be a set-off of costs as between the costs payable in these proceedings and the costs payable in the District Court and the Court of Appeal proceedings. That motion came before Young J who on 20 July 1995 held that there ought to be a set-off, at least prima facie, and his Honour set aside the writ of execution and adjourned the matter. The matter came before Young J again on 11 December 1995, on which date the adjustment to the certificate of taxation (to which I have already referred) was made, and the matter was again adjourned to 18 March 1996 so that the first defendant, Mr Hooper, could have time to proceed against his former solicitor to obtain the papers required for assessment of his costs. Young J directed that if Mr Hooper's costs had not been assessed by 18 March 1996, then he was to produce to the plaintiff and to the Court by 11 March 1996 the "best detailed estimate" he could supply of his costs so that the Court might finally deal with the matter on 18 March 1996.

The matter came before the Court again on 18 March 1996 and was referred to
Bryson J. By that time Mr Hooper had filed a "best detailed estimate" document, and Bryson J directed that the plaintiffs notify Mr Hooper what parts of that estimate were objected to, with a short statement of the grounds of objection, and adjourned the application to 22 April 1996. An affidavit of objections was duly filed and served.

On 22 April 1996 the matter again came before Bryson J, and on the application of the plaintiffs, the matter was adjourned again until today so that the solicitor for the plaintiffs could investigate a suggestion that some portion of the costs claimed by Mr Hooper were not to be enforced against him by his former solicitors. That suggestion has come to nothing.

The position as it stands today is that notwithstanding the directions given by other judges earlier concerning the filing of the "best estimate" document and the notice of objections, the plaintiffs do not consent to this Court assessing the costs properly payable under the orders of the District Court and the Court of Appeal for the purpose of ascertaining a net position in relation to a set-off. That being so, it appears to me that this Court is precluded from approaching the matter on a final basis in that way and the position must be dealt with on an interlocutory basis.

There seems now to be no escape from the position that the costs payable to the present defendants as a result of the orders in the District Court and the
Court of Appeal will have to be assessed or taxed. The solicitor for the plaintiffs submits that this should have occurred long ago and that the present defendants have had ample opportunity to pursue that matter. In the abstract that submission may have some merit, but I do have to take into account the history of the matter in this Court since July 1995 and in particular the attempts made by other Judges during the course of that history to try to have the matter resolved in a way which would save much time and expense, but which ultimately, as it seems to me, would require the agreement of all the parties, which now, it seems clear, will not be forthcoming.

I think that in the light of what has occurred, there is a plausible explanation why the defendants, and in particular Mr Hooper, have not sought to pursue such remedies as they may have against their former solicitor to obtain the documents necessary to prepare for a taxation or assessment of costs, but it is clear that whatever the explanation for delay so far has been, they will now have to act promptly to deal with the matter and it would seem that that may require proceedings to be commenced by the defendants against their former solicitor by summons for an order under [s.209C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s209c.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) for the delivery of a bill and for the delivery up of documents required for the purpose of assessment or taxation.

It is true that if such proceedings were to be commenced now and if within two or three weeks an order were to be made against the former solicitor requiring the delivery up of documents necessary to prepare for an assessment or taxation of costs, the actual process of delivery of any necessary bill and the preparation for any such assessment or taxation would extend well beyond that time. So far as the plaintiffs are concerned, they are entitled, as it seems to me, to monitor the situation and I think that it is not unreasonable that they should be able to elect, if they wish, to have the present application brought back before the Court within a relatively short period of time, in order to ascertain what has occurred in relation to the contemplated proceedings by the defendants against their former solicitor. They may, of course, not wish to incur the costs of doing that and they may wish to have a longer adjournment than the three weeks or so that I presently contemplate, so that more progress can be made (if any progress is to be made) in relation to preparing for assessment or taxation. I would envisage that if the defendants commence proceedings against their former solicitor, then the necessary summons could be issued and served and be back before the Court for hearing within two or three weeks.

In the meantime, however, I propose to stay the execution of the order for costs until whatever the adjourned date may be.
 [Discussion ensued] 
The orders of the Court are as follows: Order that the defendant's notice of motion stand over to 11 June 1996 before the Duty Judge.
 Order that execution of the order for costs made on 15 September 1993 be stayed up to and including 11 June 1996.
 * * * 
