

Garvey and Anor versus Vamamu Pty Ltd t/as Raine and Horne Woollahra Matter No
Ca 40497/96 [1998] NSWSC 444 (2 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 November 1998 
GARVEY & ANOR versus VAMAMU PTY LTD t/as RAINE & HORNE WOOLLAHRA 
CA 40497/96; DC 991/95 September 1998 
Handley JA, Sheller JA, Powell JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: District Court - Kirkham DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40497/96; DC 991/95 
DELIVERED: 2 September 1998 
HEARING DATE: 25 August 1998 
PARTIES: GARVEY & ANOR versus VAMAMU PTY LTD t/as RAINE & HORNE WOOLLAHRA 
JUDGMENT OF: HANDLEY, SHELLER, POWELL JJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: P R Garling SC 
Respondent: I Wales 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Jenkins & Associates 
Respondent: Anthony Sunman & Company 
CATCHWORDS: TRADE PRACTICES ACT SS 52 AND 53A - connection between breach of Act and damage severed 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:Dismissed with costs 
NO OF PAGES: 13 
GARVEY & ANOR versus VAMAMU PTY LIMITED t/as RAINE & HORNE WOOLLAHRA 
The plaintiffs had attended a public auction for a property in Bellevue Hill.
During the bidding, a price of $600,000 was reached and then bidding ceased.
The plaintiffs then spoke to a director of the defendant, which was trading as a real estate agent, and discussed a price of $650,000. The plaintiffs claimed that as a consequence of the conversation with the director of the defendant, they had been induced to make an offer of $650,000 in the belief that such an offer would be accepted by the vendor and the auction would not resume.
However, the offer was taken to be a bid and the auction continued and the property was purchased by the plaintiffs for $690,000.

The plaintiffs argued that the conduct of the director by leading them to believe their offer of $650,000 would be accepted and by informing the auctioneer that the offer was a bid constituted breaches of ss52 and 53A of the Trade Practices Act. As a result, they submitted that they had suffered loss and damage equal to the difference between the actual purchase price and the offer together with costs incurred in obtaining further finance.

The trial Judge held that although suspended at the time of the conversation, the auction was still in progress and that the plaintiffs had been content to allow to treat the $650,000 as a bid because they believed it would be a successful bid. His Honour found for the defendant on the basis that the plaintiffs had failed to show that they had suffered any loss.

Held:
The conduct of the director of the defendant was in breach of ss52 and
A(1)(b) because he did not expressly tell the plaintiffs that he was taking their offer of $650,000 as a bid.
After it was apparent that the auctioneer had treated the $650,000 as a bid, the plaintiffs were in a position to correct the misinterpretation and withdraw from any further negotiations. Instead, the plaintiffs continued to bid and paid no more for the property than it was worth. The plaintiffs' failure to correct the misinterpretation severed the connection between the statement claimed to be false and the damage the plaintiff claimed to have suffered. Argy versus Blunts & Lane Cove Real Estate Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 26 FCR 112] at 138 applied.

Authorities: 
Argy versus Blunts & Lane Cove Real Estate Pty Limited <case>; <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 351] 
ORDERS 
Dismissed with costs.

GARVEY & ANOR versus VAMAMU PTY LIMITED t/as RAINE & HORNE WOOLLAHRA 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Sheller JA. 
SHELLER JA: On 4 June 1992 the plaintiffs, John Francis Garvey and his wife, Tracey Louise Garvey, were present at a public auction conducted by an auctioneer, Mr Keith Jones. One of the properties put up for sale was a house at 41 Benelong Crescent, Bellevue Hill. Mr David Roderick, a director of the defendant, Vamamu Pty Limited, trading as Raine & Horne Woollahra, was the vendor's agent. During the bidding a price of $600,000 was reached and then the bidding ceased. The plaintiffs alleged in their statement of claim, which was filed on 20 February 1995, that thereafter the defendant engaged in conduct which offended relevantly, for present purposes, [ss52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and 53A of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).

His Honour Judge Kirkham heard the proceedings on 31 July 1996 and on 1 August gave a verdict for the defendant. The plaintiffs appeal from that decision.

The case turns upon conversations and oral statements of which Dr and Mrs
Garvey gave evidence largely by tendering a tape recording made on a dictaphone Dr Garvey was carrying at the time and a transcript which at least in large part was agreed between the parties. Both Dr and Mrs Garvey were cross-examined about this. The defendant called no evidence.

In their submissions on the appeal the plaintiffs contended that they were, as a consequence of a conversation they had with a Mr Roderick, induced to offer $650,000 for the property in the belief that such an offer would, if made, be accepted by the vendor and that the auction would not resume. In fact, contrary to the plaintiffs' belief, the offer of $650,000 made by them was proffered by Mr Roderick to the auctioneer as a bid, the auctioneer resumed the auction, and the plaintiffs were constrained to continue bidding and ultimately were obliged to pay $690,000 for the property. The plaintiffs contend that their loss and damage was the difference between the price which they paid and the reserve price of $650,000 together with additional costs incurred in raising another $40,000 by way of loan from the Commonwealth Bank.

Judge Kirkham, in his reasons for judgment, extracted the significant parts of the conversations and statements the plaintiffs rely on. After an earlier refusal by the auctioneer of an opening bid of $400,000, Dr Garvey bid $500,000 which was accepted. Bidders, including Dr Garvey, then took the price to $600,000 bid by Dr Garvey. Despite the best efforts of the auctioneer, no further bids were forthcoming and the auctioneer suspended bidding.
Thereafter, Mr Roderick said to Dr and Mrs Garvey "The vendor said he'll sell for 650 here and now". Mrs Garvey said "Ask him what about 640", Dr Garvey said: "No lets offer 625". Mr Roderick said: "No he won't take 625" and Mrs
Garvey said: "Get them in to negotiate". The auctioneer was heard to say to those present: "Just talking to the highest bidder. Giving them first right of refusal to the property. Its under my instructions at present".

Judge Kirkham observed that at this point it was clear that the auctioneer in the last sentence was stating that the offer of $600,000 made by Dr Garvey was under the reserve price set by the vendor. Mrs Garvey said: "If we offer him now, you can't knock it, you can't put it on the market" to which Mr
Roderick said: "That's right. He says its not on the market for under 650 so you won't be able to buy it for less than that anyway". Dr Garvey agreed that he understood the statement by Mr Roderick that the property was not on the market for under $650,000 "so you won't be able to buy it for less than that anyway" to mean "650 was only [the] minimum price at which the property could be obtained". The trial Judge took it to mean that it was Mr Roderick's instructions from the vendor that he, the vendor, was immovable on $650,000 being the reserve price below which he would not go. It was apparent from the auctioneer's comments that the property was still not on the market and that the bidding was at least temporarily still closed. His Honour said: "that an auction sale was in progress although temporarily suspended is [not in] doubt." Dr Garvey was content to allow the auctioneer to treat the $650,000 as a bid from himself because he believed that it would be a successful bid.

I set out here that part of the transcript of what next took place which is critical to the way the appellants put their submissions, interpolating Judge
Kirkham's comments.
 "Auctioneer: (In the background) It's under my instructions at present. Perhaps we can just lift that a little, like to lift that a little if we could, and, if we can't, just go back to our underbidders. 
Dr Garvey: That's OK, take it. 
David Roderick: Yes? 
Mrs Garvey: Yes 
David Roderick: Yes? Pay 650? 
Dr Garvey: Pay 650. (David Roderick goes to middle of room to speak to vendor).

Auctioneer: Right you are there at $600,000 was my last bid. My last bid at $600,000 and, sir, if I get it on the market, I'll re-open the bidding, sir and I'll come back up to see you there." [Judge Kirkham observed that this statement made clear that the auction sale was in progress although temporarily suspended.] "Mrs Garvey: They're going to use us now! You just wait. 
Auctioneer: I'll come up to see the underbidders. I'm coming back there. I'm coming back to you. I'm coming back to you, madam, also, if we can get them to say yes it's on the market for sale. What can we do there, David? 
David Roderick: I've got 650 here and it's on the market. 
Auctioneer: Thank you, David. That's $650,000. That correct, sir? 
Mrs Garvey: (squeals) Aaah!" [Judge Kirkham said: "It is not clear at this point what was said or done by Dr or Mrs Garvey in response to the auctioneer's question clearly directed to them, but the auctioneer is clearly left with the impression Dr Garvey has agreed that there was a bid from him of $650,000 for the property. Subsequent events however, raised the question of the nature of that bid or offer or figure. Was it a bid? This is what the auctioneer regarded it as. Or was it an offer to meet what the plaintiffs thought was what the vendor was prepared to take? One final comment about this and that is if it was not a bid then that fact was never communicated to the auctioneer by any person."] "Auctioneer: I have $650,000 sir, and my instructions are to sell. But I will take the $2,000 that I never took last time. Can't understand me! Never gave it to me! 650 and thank you sir. I think you're buying well. Madam, you can come in again if you like. You can come in also - eh? And against you up there, sir and, fair warning, but 650 is the money sir. At $650,000. Any change of mind before it goes.

FIRST CALL 
SECOND AND FAIR WARNING (Signal from the back: $655,000)" 
Judge Kirkham said that further spirited bidding ensued during which time Dr
Garvey made further bids until the property was knocked down to him for $690,000. This was over the next highest bid of $687,000. The transcript revealed that Dr Garvey was not anxious to continue but was encouraged by Mrs
Garvey to keep going.

In their written submissions on the appeal the plaintiffs say that the two pieces of conduct which constituted breaches of [ss52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and
A of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) were: "(a) the conduct of Roderick indicating to the appellants as correct their understanding that if they were to offer $650,000 the vendor would accept it and the property would not be subject to further auction: and the conduct of Roderick in informing the auctioneer, contrary to the fact, that the appellants had made a bid for the property of $650,000." 
The first "piece of conduct" starts with the submission that the appellants thought they were making a final offer to purchase at the vendor's reserve price of $650,000 and Mr Roderick, by his conduct, made it plain that they were correct in that belief. The auctioneer announced that the appellants were the highest bidder and that they were being given the first right of refusal to the property. In that context when Mrs Garvey said: "If we offer him 650 now you can't put it on the market" and Roderick said: "That's right" he engaged in conduct which was either misleading or else was likely to mislead.
Roderick's state of mind at the time was that what he was getting from the appellants was a bid but he did not tell them that. He certainly did not tell them that in express words and his conduct was in breach of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and
A (1) (b) because the representation was misleading and concerned the price payable for the land.

However, Mr Roderick did not stop when he said "that's right". He went on to say: "He says it's not on the market for under 650 so you won't be able to buy it for less than that anyway." Judge Kirkham said of what followed "Neither of [the plaintiffs] in answer to the question of the auctioneer demurred when the auctioneer asked for confirmation that there was a bid of $650,000 from them. Neither plaintiff corrected the auctioneer's mistaken understanding as to the $650,000. Instead with other bidders they continued bidding when the auctioneer called for further bids. They could have got up and left the auction rooms. At the point of calling for other bids it seems to me accepting this version of the facts for the purposes of argument, had this case been brought as a breach of contract that their right to require of the vendor's specific performance of the agreement to buy at $650,000 had crystallised." 
Judge Kirkham thought there was another difficulty. He said: "Another difficulty which arises in this case for the plaintiff is that there is no evidence that the vendor would not [sic - the word `not' should be ignored] have sold for $650,000. The vendor was not called nor was the auctioneer and it seems to me that if there was a false statement made then it was made by Mr Roderick to the auctioneer wrongly telling him that the $650,000 offered was a bid in the auction instead of an offer in a negotiating process between the plaintiffs and the vendor." 
As the appellants' argument developed orally, it was put first that by what was said up to Mr Roderick's statement "Yes! Pay 650?" the appellants were induced to make an offer of that amount in the belief that if they did so the vendor would agree to sell the property at that price and no further bidding would take place. This was a straightforward reliance case which ran immediately into two difficulties. First, as Dr Garvey and Mrs Garvey conceded in cross-examination, it was clear to them that the auctioneer appeared to treat the figure of $650,000 as a bid coming from Dr Garvey. Thereafter, the appellants were in a position to correct the misrepresentation and withdraw from any negotiations. Making the offer of $650,000 for the property as a result of Mr Roderick's inducement caused them no damage. As it happened Dr
Garvey and his wife took part in the bidding that followed and succeeded. They paid no more for the property than it was worth.

The second way in which the argument was put was that Mr Roderick's statement that Dr Garvey was prepared to bid $650,000 misrepresented to the auctioneer and those present what Dr Garvey had said. Dr Garvey was in the position to correct this misrepresentation as soon as it was uttered. However, it was submitted once it was uttered any correction would have been too late and the opportunity to buy the property privately for $650,000 was lost. As a result of the bidding that took place the appellants were forced to pay a higher price namely, $690,000. Accordingly, their loss was $40,000 together with the costs of raising another loan.

Beyond Mr Roderick's statement "He'll sell it for 650 here and now" there was no evidence that such an opportunity existed. The vendor was not called to give evidence. Mr Roderick's statement about the vendor's intention, if true, did not mean, when spoken at an auction of the vendor's property, that the vendor was prepared, while the auction was still taking place, to accept a private offer of $650,000. The transcript reference "David Roderick goes to middle of room to speak to vendor" and what happened after this suggests that the vendor was not prepared to accept such a private offer. In its context, I would read the vendor's position, if truly stated by Mr Roderick, as being that if the bidding reached $650,000 and went no higher he would accept that price. But all of this is little more than speculation.

The appellants urged that if the misrepresentation had not been made, the property would have been passed in and Dr Garvey would have had the right to negotiate a price of $650,000 which the vendor would have accepted. This assumes that the other persons present at the auction who bid the price up to $687,000, before Dr Garvey's final successful bid, would have played no part directly or indirectly in this negotiation process. The appellants point out that the bidding had stopped at $600,000.

Accepting, like the trial Judge, for the sake of argument, the appellants' account of what happened, one can appreciate their recorded comments such as
Mrs Garvey's "They are going to use us now! You just wait." and Dr Garvey's which were less complimentary. The respondent's conduct at the auction was unattractive. But the auctioneer sought and obtained confirmation from Dr
Garvey to treat the amount of $650,000 as a bid. I am not persuaded that the loss of the opportunity to buy for $650,000, if it existed, was caused other than by Dr Garvey's confirmation of his bid at that amount.

The damages claimed were not "reliance" damages but damages for the loss of the opportunity to buy the property for $650,000. In Johnson versus Perez <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 351] at 355-6 and 360 Mason CJ made clear, in a different context, that general principles of the assessment of damages "must give way in particular cases to solutions best adapted to giving an injured plaintiff that amount in damages which will most fairly compensate him for the wrong he has suffered" and that "the principles governing the assessment of damages do not permit the application of rigid rules based on categories of actions"; see generally, Collings Construction versus Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission [(1998) 43 NSWLR 131] at 146.
However, as Hill J remarked in Argy versus Blunts & Lane Cove Real Estate Pty
Limited <case>; [(1990) 26 FCR 112] at 138: "A case may perhaps be imagined where an applicant is so negligent in protecting his own interests that there will be a finding of fact that the representation complained of was not in the circumstances a real inducement to his entering into a contract. In such a case the element of causation between misrepresentation and damage will have been severed by the intervention of the negligence of the applicant." 
The plaintiffs' failure to correct Mr Roderick when he announced to the auctioneer and the auctioneer confirmed that the $650,000 was a bid severed the connection between the statement, claimed to be false, and the damage the plaintiffs claim to have suffered.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.

POWELL JA: I agree with Sheller JA. * * * 
