

Regina versus Hastings Matter No 60167/97 [1997] NSWSC 441 (29 September 1997) 
Regina versus Kevin Craig Hastings /97 September 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Sully J, Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Kevin Craig HASTINGS 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In July 1996 the appellant stood for trial before Rummery DCJ and a jury. He was charged with an offence against the Drug (Misuse and Trafficking) Act 1985 . The charge was that he, on 23 December 1994, at Kings Cross, supplied cocaine. The appellant was convicted. Ultimately, after some remands, he was sentenced to imprisonment for a term of twenty-four months, to be served by way of periodic detention. 
The issue in the case was simple and direct. A group of four police officers gave evidence that on the day in question they, acting together, entered some premises at Kings Cross, that they found the appellant on the premises, that he was searched, and that they found, as a result of the search, that he had a quantity of cocaine in his clothing.

The appellant acknowledged that he was on the premises when the four police officers arrived. However, he denied that when they searched him they found any cocaine in his clothing. To use the vernacular, he claimed that he was "loaded up" by the police.

There was also a fairly peripheral issue in the case about whether he made a verbal admission. The police alleged that one of them asked him whether the substance found in his clothing was cocaine, and he responded affirmatively.
He denied that that exchange occurred. Perhaps, more accurately, I should say that he denied making the precise response which they attributed to him.

In short, the case turned upon the fact that four police officers asserted that the appellant was searched and found to have cocaine in his possession.
He, for his part, said that he had nothing untoward in his possession and that the four police officers were perjuring themselves.

The detail of the Crown evidence may be summarised as follows.

The Crown case was that at about 10.45am on Friday, 23 December 1994, four officers from the Drug Enforcement Agency attended the Downunder Amusement
Centre in Darlinghurst Road, Kings Cross.

The four officers, in descending order of seniority, were Detective Sergeant
Kerin, Detective Sergeant Janson, Detective Constable Rehayem and Detective
Layhe.

The police gave evidence that, as they arrived, they noticed that the doors were open and a male person was leaving. They entered and went downstairs to the foyer. There they saw the appellant, standing near an open door near the office area. Detective Constable Rehayem told the appellant that they were police and asked him his name. The appellant replied. Detective Layhe then commenced to search the appellant in the presence of the other three police officers. Detective Layhe said that the appellant's name had been given to him as one that would be engaged in the sale of drugs.

The evidence of Detective Layhe, which was corroborated by the other three police officers, and which was the critical evidence in the case, was that he put his hands in the left pocket of the appellant's jeans and there found seventeen multi-coloured, tied balloons. Those balloons contained capsules of white powder. On analysis, the powder was found to be cocaine. It weighed approximately 3.4 grams. In the right pocket of the appellant's jeans
Detective Layhe said he located $320 in cash notes. According to the police officers, Detective Rehayem then said to the accused, in the presence of the other three, "What is it? Coke?" The appellant replied, "Yes". The appellant was then placed under arrest.

According to the police officers, a further search of the premises resulted in the finding of some other balloons containing capsules, but these were not the subject of the charges against the appellant.

The appellant was taken back to the Surry Hills police station. He declined to take part in a recorded interview or answer any further questions.

The appellant gave sworn evidence. He said that during December 1994 he was a casual cleaner at the Downunder Amusement Centre. On 23 December 1994 he had been called to work by the manager of the place, a Mr Richard Evans. When he had arrived at the premises the door was closed. Mr Evans let him in. He commenced to get his cleaning gear organised. Mr Evans then left the premises and shortly afterwards some men came down the stairs. One of them grabbed him.
It was the appellant's evidence that this was Detective Rehayem. Two other men, who were in the company of Detective Rehayem, began to search the premises. The appellant denied that they found any drugs on him, or that he had anything to do with any drugs that were found elsewhere on the premises.
The appellant said that he had no drugs on his person and that he neither used nor sold cocaine.

The appellant appeals against his conviction. The primary ground of appeal is that there is fresh evidence, which became available following the conclusion of the trial, and that should form the basis at least for the ordering of a new trial.

It is common ground between counsel for the appellant and the Crown that the question for this Court to consider in relation to the evidence relied upon as fresh evidence in the context of the evidence at the trial is whether there is a significant possibility that the jury, acting reasonably, would have acquitted the appellant if the new evidence had been before them, the onus lying on the appellant to demonstrate a miscarriage of justice resulting from the absence of that evidence. There is no dispute about the applicable legal principles or, for that matter, about the factual material relied upon as the fresh evidence.

The material relied upon as fresh evidence is information concerning Detective
Rehayem that emerged during the course of the Royal Commission into the Police
Service. It is not suggested that this evidence had any direct bearing upon the facts in issue at the trial of the appellant. It is not suggested that any evidence that emerged at the Royal Commission was directly concerned with the present case or with Detective Constable Rehayem's conduct in relation to the present case. What is suggested, however, is that the material that emerged at least gives rise to a suspicion that Detective Rehayem may have engaged in corrupt or improper conduct in certain respects as a police officer and that if this material had been available at the trial of the appellant it could have formed the basis of cross-examination of Detective Rehayem on his credit.
It is not suggested that Detective Rehayem has been convicted of any offence, but we were informed from the Bar table that he is under suspension at the moment, while certain departmental charges against him are being investigated.

The appellant's solicitor has made an affidavit, to which is exhibited a transcript of the evidence given by Detective Constable Rehayem before the
Police Royal Commission. The most serious matter that appears to have emerged to the discredit of Detective Rehayem arises out of some evidence that he purchased, at a substantial undervalue, a motorcycle from a person known or believed by him to have been a drug dealer. To put it shortly, it appears that he purchased for about $11,000 a motorcycle that was worth about $20,000.
There is also material capable of giving rise to the inference that he misused the police computer system, and that he made false statements to the
Commissioner of Police and to an insurance company.

There was also a body of evidence about which Detective Rehayem was cross- examined at length concerning financial dealings between himself and various relatives. Those dealings it is suggested show that he and/or members of his family, with his complicity, were engaged in tax avoidance. Counsel for the appellant specifically disclaims any suggestion that what was involved was tax evasion. In other words, it is not suggested that the evidence shows that there was illegality in the tax dealings involved.

All of this material, it is said, if it had been available at the time of the trial, would have enabled counsel for the appellant to have cross-examined
Detective Rehayem to put to good effect cross-examination on his credit.

I am prepared, for the purpose of this appeal, to assume that to be the case.
I emphasise that this is not an expression of any concluded view that
Detective Rehayem has engaged in any substantial form of wrongdoing. That, it appears, is a matter that is the subject of pending departmental proceedings.
It may be assumed, however, that if the so-called fresh evidence had been available at the time of the trial a substantial attack could have been mounted on the credit of Detective Rehayem on the basis of that evidence.

The principal difficulty which confronts the appellant is linking that assumption to a conclusion that the jury, acting reasonably, would have acquitted the appellant if the new evidence had been before it. The reason why that is a difficulty is that the critical evidence against the appellant at the trial was not the evidence of Detective Constable Rehayem; it was the evidence of all the police officers and, in particular, Detective Layhe, who was the person who gave evidence of finding the cocaine in the appellant's pocket.

The significance of the fact that, following the trial of a convicted person, information to the discredit of one of the police officers involved in the case has emerged during the course of the Police Royal Commission depends upon the facts and circumstances of the individual case. There is a wide variety of such circumstances. The variety is illustrated by a number of reported decisions which have been referred to in argument. (See, for example, R v
Vastag, NSW CCA, unreported, 20 June 1997; R versus Marsala, NSW CCA, unreported, 31 May 1996; R versus Selewski, NSW CCA, unreported, 19 June 1996; R v McLaren, NSW CCA, unreported, 22 October 1996.) 
In the course of argument, and in the course of exchanges between counsel and the bench in the present appeal, the matter was tested by discussion as to the directions which the trial judge might appropriately have given the jury in relation to the evidence of the other three police officers, if the material concerning Detective Rehayem had been adduced in evidence at the trial. This is not a case in which the role of Detective Rehayem in the investigation in question, or the operation in question, was such that discrediting him of itself cast doubt upon the reliability of the other police officers involved.

As appears from what has already been said, the factual issues in the case were simple and direct. The essential issue was whether Detective Layhe found cocaine in the trouser pocket of the appellant. Detective Layhe's evidence that such cocaine was found was corroborated by three other police officers, one of them being Detective Constable Rehayem. The central issue for the jury to decide was whether they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
Detective Layhe had found the cocaine in the trouser pocket of the appellant.

Some attempt was made in argument on behalf of the appellant to point to circumstances of the operation which cast doubt or suspicion upon the evidence of the other police officers. It was said, for example, that the circumstance that a person had been allowed to leave the premises shortly before the police arrived, without being searched or investigated, was suspicious and indicated that the police might have been protecting the manager of the premises.

At one point in his argument, counsel for the appellant said that it was very suspicious that all of the police officers gave the same evidence about the location of the cocaine in the pocket of the appellant. At another point in his submissions, counsel for the appellant said that it was very suspicious that the police officers did not give identical evidence in relation to other persons who were on the premises at the time of the operation. It was suggested, assuming there were other persons there, as the evidence of at least one of the police officers indicated, that it was suspicious that nobody except the appellant was searched.

In my view, the appellant has not been able to demonstrate that, even assuming that a strong attack could have been mounted on the credit of Detective
Rehayem on the basis of the fresh evidence referred to, this would have assisted in any material respect a challenge to the evidence of the other three police officers.

A subsidiary ground of appeal that was argued, but that turned largely upon the same matters, was that the conviction of the appellant was unsafe or unsatisfactory. Once again, putting aside the evidence of Detective Rehayem, the matter for the jury to determine was whether they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Detective Layhe had found, in the clothing of the appellant, the cocaine the subject of the charge. This turned upon whether the jury believed the evidence of Detective Layhe and of the police officers who corroborated the detective.

The analysis of the evidence that was made for the purpose of arguing the first ground of appeal is relevant also to this ground of appeal. That analysis does not demonstrate that it was not reasonably open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Detective Layhe found the substance in question in the clothing of the appellant. On the evidence, the jury were well entitled to believe that Detective Layhe had conducted a search of the appellant's clothing and had found cocaine there. In my view, neither ground of appeal has been made out. The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.
 
SULLY: I agree completely.
 
DUNFORD: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as I have proposed.

REGINA V Kevin Craig HASTINGS 
APPEAL - FRESH EVIDENCE - appellant convicted of supply of cocaine - four police officers gave evidence of seeing appellant searched and of finding cocaine in his clothing - one of the police officers later investigated, on unrelated matters by the Police Royal Commission - charges against him remain unresolved - common ground that material reflects adversely on his credit - nothing to discredit other three police officers - HELD - not shown that there was a significant possibility that a jury would have acquitted appellant if new evidence before them.

O R D E R 
Appeal dismissed. * * * 
