

Coral Lo Monaco versus NSW Ministerial Corporation [1996] NSWSC 494 (18 October )

CORAL LO MONACO versus NEW SOUTH WALES MINISTERIAL CORPORATION /87 
Friday 18 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - PERSONAL INJURY - MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT (1986) - DAMAGES ASSESSED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This action proceeded for assessment of damages arising out of an accident which occurred on 23 December 1986 when the plaintiff was riding as a passenger in a motor car which collided with a large articulated vehicle. 
It is convenient first to trace some personal details concerning the plaintiff. She was born on 26 February 1946 and was therefore aged forty when injured and is about to turn fifty. No explanation was offered at trial for the significant delay in the matter presenting for hearing although I note from the file that in September 1990 a registrar was informed that the plaintiff was not ready to proceed because she was scheduled to undergo surgery. Apparently it was ordered that the action be struck out with a requirement for a further notice to set down for trial filed. The action reappeared in a Prothonotary's list in February 1996.

The plaintiff attended school in the Sydney western suburbs and was married at the age of eighteen. She worked thereafter in a factory for about two years until her first son was born. Later she was employed in a milk bar and later still obtained work at Woolworths. In succeeding years she worked for that company as well as Flemings and Grace Bros. She gained experience as a supervisor at the "front end" of supermarkets, that is in the customer checkout and cash control areas. From time to time her employment was interrupted for the birth of her family of three sons and a daughter. The youngest was born in 1973. She resumed continuous employment in 1977 until she left Grace Bros in September 1982.

The plaintiff's husband had been employed by the Water Board. Together they explored the opportunity of establishing the family outside Sydney with an aim of overall betterment. To that end they eventually decided to and acquired a take-away food business in Laurieton on the mid north coast. The business was known as the White Rose. It was not a success. Mr Lo Monaco sought to supplement their income by operating a bread run but eventually both businesses were disposed of.

The plaintiff was presumably unwell in 1986 and the evidence shows that in
November of that year she was admitted to hospital at Port Macquarie, just north of Laurieton, where she underwent hysterectomy. At about that time the family moved into a home at Port Macquarie. The plaintiff was convalescing from her surgery when the subject accident occurred. I accept that when her convalescence was completed she intended to seek work of the type that she left in 1982 that is, in a broad sense, somewhere in a "front end" supervisory role within a supermarket.

The consequences of the accident extinguished the practicability of fulfilling that intention. The plaintiff felt capable of undertaking some gainful activity by 1989 and registered with the Commonwealth Employment Service. In that year she obtained some casual work as a waitress but this employment was unsatisfactory. I find that the sequelae of accident make a job which requires her to be significantly on her feet would be beyond her. In early 1990 she underwent the scheduled surgery earlier referred to. She has not obtained paid employment since that time but she has organized her home so as to operate as a day care mother for a number of infants. This is arranged through St
Joseph's Family Services of Port Macquarie on the basis set out in Exhibit 6.
I shall refer to this activity when assessing appropriate ingredients of damage.

The plaintiff's injuries and her residual disabilities are undoubtedly serious. On behalf of the defendant it was not contended otherwise. The critical injury was a lumbar vertebral fracture which was unstable. It obviously impinged upon her spinal cord and immediately after the accident she manifested a lower limb paresis. After admission to the local hospital at
Bellingen (near the accident site) she was transferred by air ambulance to
Royal North Shore Hospital where she remained for about eleven weeks. Fixation and immobilization avoided the potential catastrophe signalled by her paralysis and she recovered ability to walk and there was a significant neurological improvement which resulted in what was described as "adequate" bowel and bladder control. Her recovery was obstructed by the occurrence whilst she was in hospital of a pulmonary embolism secondary to a deep venous thrombosis. It can be noted that in the accident she also sustained multiple rib fractures and abrasions and cuts such as would be expected and I observe that there has been embedment of some glass particles.

The plaintiff's case on medical and related issues was presented by the tender (by consent) of a bundle of some thirty five assorted and uncoordinated reports. The defendant's case was presented in similar fashion again by consent tender of some twenty two assorted reports, some of which I note were already in the plaintiff's bundle. Unhappily the defendant's bundle was indexed and arranged in reverse chronology, that is in respect of any individual reporting examiner from the most recent to the earliest rather than in an order which would enable convenient progressive reading. Of course this can be achieved by taking each doctor and reading from the back forwards and this has been done but I mention the matter in the hope of discouraging the practice for future cases. The exception to the foregoing was the oral testimony of Dr Middleton who seemed as uninformed as I was as to why she alone was selected to give evidence viva voce.

From this hodgepodge I must extract information and make relevant findings. I make some observations about the tendered material from which those will be drawn.

I turn first to the material tendered on behalf of the plaintiff.

The notes from Bellingen and Royal North Shore Hospital reveal the fracture dislocation at lumbar Levels 2/3 and the latter notes treatment including interspinous wiring from L1 to L3 and the later fitting of a moulded polyurethane brace. Reports by Dr Andrews, Dr Reed and Dr Cumberland are inconclusive. Reports from Dr Tchan, an acupuncturist, and the William Street
Physiotherapy Centre are historical of their respective treatments.

A series of reports from Professor Thomas Taylor relates somewhat skeletally the treatment undertaken under his supervision at Royal North Shore Hospital.
In May 1990 upon review he noted that the plaintiff continued to have symptoms related to her spine "but with a rather diffuse pattern and no concomitant radicula complaints". He also recorded complaints of diffuse arthralgias.
Professor Taylor saw no reason to take any further action in relation to her spinal injury but said she should be encouraged to more active "within her reduced reserves" and to swim regularly. He thought she then looked quite well. His latest report dated July 1993 did not advance matters save that he expressed a general agreement with some opinions about employability expressed by Dr Jill Middleton.

A series of reports from Dr Fone a general practitioner are again substantially historical.

Dr Thomas Furber a consultant plastic surgeon described the plaintiff's scars both post operative and caused in the accident. He did not recommend any revisionary surgery. In the scheme of things, the residual scarring is not without significance but of course in the light of the plaintiff's disabilities other matters are more prominent in her appreciation.

Reports from Dr Nash who treated the plaintiff in respect of the venous thrombosis are important. Dr Nash seems to have acquired an inaccurate history that the plaintiff was a teacher and he repeats this in his reports. I regard it as simply a mistake in the doctor's records. I am satisfied from his reports that the plaintiff's deep venous thrombosis was causally connected with the accident and that it has resulted in the slow and gradual development of a post phlebitic syndrome due to the loss of valvular function in the deep veins of the calf. I accept the prediction that the reflux on the calf muscle will increase in intensity and that the plaintiff will require operative ligation of incompetent perforators to control it. I will include an amount in the damages to cover this cost in accordance with the estimates in the report from Dr Nash of September 1994.

A report from an organization describing itself as A.P. Care - Medico-legal
Services Division sets out certain costings in respect of the provision of specified services. The signatory to the report appears to be an occupational therapist and, whilst I am prepared to adopt estimates of costs by her, I prefer evidence elsewhere upon which to base any finding as to the extent of need. It seems to me that the opinions of the "assessment team" represent the hypothetical more than the actual.

There is a single report dated 22 June 1993 from Dr Seaton an orthopaedic surgeon. Save that I would not have chosen the word "lucky" - although I appreciate the context in which Dr Seaton uses it - I would express my agreement with the tenor of the final paragraph of his report which is in these terms: "In my opinion this woman hasn't changed much over the years and I do not think she will change in the future. She is very lucky, of course, to have regained the movement in her lower limbs and control, to some extent, of her bladder function. Nevertheless she is still seriously disabled and physically unfit because of her spinal injuries. The recent x-rays, however, indicate that she is not deteriorating and that, indeed, her spine has been treated excellently, it is solidly fused and there is no evidence of spondylo- arthritis as a result of the three vertebrae being fused: this is good. She should lose a little weight, this may help her bladder incontinence because she is frightened to sneeze because she is incontinent in that regard, and loss of weight would help but, of course, she is very inactive, in regard to sporting ability, apart from swimming and walking. I do not think her condition will change in the future and she will always have weakness in the right leg and swelling in the right leg and she will always have pain in the neck radiating down into the shoulders, down between the shoulder blades (because of her neck injury) and she will always have headaches (because of her head injury) and she will always have a weakness in her right thigh which will tend to make her fall frequently." 
An accumulation of relatively lengthy reports have been obtained from Dr Jill
Middleton, a rehabilitation specialist. I agree with her observation that the plaintiff would be likely to have significant trouble finding employment which suits her physical limitations both in terms of the actual job itself and her ability to travel to and from work. Specifically from this evidence and the accumulated evidence elsewhere which I accept I am satisfied that the plaintiff is and will remain unfit for the sort of work which she undertook when in the employment of Grace Bros and others in the supermarket section of the retail industry. As there is a specific claim in respect of an item it is convenient to here recite Dr Middleton's final observation namely: "It would be useful, could access be arranged, for her to have regular modified exercise in a heated swimming pool such as modified aqua aerobics, but this would need to be in a situation within reasonable travelling distance of her home." 
Dr Noel Dan, a neurosurgeon saw the plaintiff in 1987 and in 1993. To an extent his reports are inconclusive and I infer that he received little detail about the thrombosis although he was informed about its occurrence. I do not find anything in Dr Dan's reports upon which I need to draw separately from the balance of information.

Dr Rod Milton a psychiatrist saw the plaintiff once on 22 June 1993. He thought on the history given that the plaintiff had suffered from a post traumatic stress disorder but had made a satisfactory recovery from it. He thought she had a chronic reactive depression the level of which was described by him in terms that "she is not the person she was; she feels generally lower in spirits; has constantly to encourage herself in order to keep going against persistent feelings of depression and loss; and remains anxious when travelling in motor vehicles".

I accept these opinions of Dr Milton.

Dr John Norman provided a lengthy report following an examination on 21 June
I do not derive from his lengthy report any finding other than that which is available from elsewhere.

On 23 August 1996 (nearly ten years after the accident) Dr Eikens a rehabilitation physician was consulted by arrangement, apparently, made with the plaintiff's solicitors. It is not clear why this was thought desirable bearing in mind the series of reports already obtained from Dr Jill Middleton and is even more surprising having regard to the election of the plaintiff to call the latter to give evidence viva voce. Dr Eikens retraces what by now is familiar ground and finally expresses the opinion that it is unlikely that she could return to full time work on the open labour market and that self employment would be preferable to accommodate her symptoms. I agree. She said that she thought the plaintiff may benefit from psychiatric assessment and treatment of depression and her anxiety. With considerable foresight, and although the plaintiff had already been seen and assessed by Dr Milton, the solicitors for the plaintiff had sent her to a different psychiatrist Dr
Canaris who saw her on 22 August, that is the day previous to the appointment with Dr Eikens. He did not think that specific psychiatric treatment could do much for the plaintiff "at this stage". As I have already indicated my findings are coordinate with the opinions of Dr Milton.

I turn to the material presented on behalf of the defendant.

There are three reports from Dr B. Ireland an orthopaedic surgeon. Two observations of his bear repeating. He noted that the back injury was "a fairly significant one" and although so far as deformity is concerned the fusion operation has overcome the immediate risk he noted that the plaintiff has significant diminution in the disc spaces. He also thought it was probable there was some nerve damage. He observed on examination that the right leg was significantly increased in girth which he assumed was a consequence of the deep venous thrombosis. From other evidence I can confirm that his assumption was correct. The other observation concerns the plaintiff's present activity and in 1994 Dr Ireland stated: "I believe that it would be an effort for her to be coping with the care of pre school children as she is doing at this time." 
From remarks like that I derive fortification for my view that the plaintiff is presently working to the extent of whatever residual capacity she has.

The defendant tendered a series of reports from Dr Nash the vascular surgeon and these are, paradoxically, somewhat more comprehensive than those tendered by the plaintiff. Nothing will be gained by my reciting what can be read in these lengthy reports and it suffices to state that I accept the thrust of Dr
Nash's opinions. The defendant also tendered two reports from Professor Taylor which had previously been tendered by the plaintiff.

A single report was provided by Dr Millar a physician who saw the plaintiff on November 1995. He did not think there was any specific treatment which would significantly alter the plaintiff's present state which included a permanent unfitness for heavy work and moderate work requiring lifting, bending, carrying or prolonged standing. He thought the plaintiff was suited for light work. He thought it was reasonable that she would not be able to do heavy housework and she may need some home help for two or three hours a week.

There is a psychological report from Ms Goldberg a clinical psychologist. I do not regard her as qualified to express opinions upon history given but rather accept her expertise in the interpretation of standardized tests administered by her. I derive no significant assistance from this evidence.

The defendant arranged for the plaintiff to be seen by Dr Haber a consultant physician on 7 April 1994. His opinion was somewhat non committal and perhaps that is the reason that the defendant elected later to send the plaintiff to see Dr Millar (described in the index of reports as an orthopaedic surgeon but whose letterhead shows that he is a Fellow of the Royal Australasian College of Physicians and the Australian College of Rehabilitation Medicine).

However, Dr Haber and Dr Millar were not the physicians exclusively consulted on behalf of the defendant and as long ago as 22 September 1988 the plaintiff had been seen by Dr Burniston. He cannot be available for follow up reports but that of October 21 1988 is relatively comprehensive. He recognized the seriousness of the injury suffered by the plaintiff but said that he thought she was capable of much more activity than she claimed. Such matters are relative and I consider it important that my finding be based not upon compartmentalized views about physical, orthopaedic or psychiatric condition but rather upon a combination of all contributing factors. There is a report from Mr K. Singleton a psychologist in respect of whose opinion and report I repeat my comment concerning Ms Goldberg.

Next the evidence contains reports from Dr Brian Somerville a consultant neurologist. As he states, the absence of complaint about disturbance of bladder or bowel function contradicts continuing serious spinal cord involvement although it is obvious that there was such involvement immediately after the accident. The real issue is the overall extent of recovery and the assessment of this includes the credibility of the plaintiff which I see no reason to discount.

The defendant tendered a report from Dr Peter Anderson a psychiatric consultant. He opined: "There is no requirement for psychiatric or psychological treatment. The prognosis is for more of the same. The claimant's ability to lead a normal life has been significantly impaired, with regard to sporting activity and social life generally, and with regard to work. " 
I take it that "the same" refers to the plaintiff's "straightforward presentation as that of a person, anxious and depressed secondary to pain and disability". Despite Dr Anderson's opinion that there was no requirement for treatment he thought there was a permanent psychiatric impairment which he rated "at ten percent". An examination on 22 June 1988 produced a report from
Dr Boyd Leigh an orthopaedic consultant. In succinct terms he summed up "she has a bad back which will be permanent, she has been fused and wired, she has a deep vein thrombosis which requires further treatment, some glass she has in her arm is very small and she would be well advised to leave it alone." 
Finally the defendant tendered the report of Dr Thomas Furber dated 21
September 1988. It is identical to the report tendered by the plaintiff.

In totality, I accept the general thrust of the plaintiff's complaints and, although it was expressed as long ago as 1988, I doubt that I could summarize matters better than in the terms used by Dr Boyd Leigh which I have just quoted and which are representative of my impression.

I turn to the ingredients of damage. It is convenient first to deal with a claim which I reject. Exhibit C consists of quotations by two builders for the installation of a swimming pool at the plaintiff's home at Port Macquarie. I have set out some commentary by Professor Taylor and Dr Middleton about the benefit of swimming as an exercise. The plaintiff testified that she had previously been able to use a pool at the RSL Club but this had been closed.
She said that swimming eased the pain greatly and allowed her to do exercise that she cannot do on dry land. I am unpersuaded that the cost of installation of a private swimming pool (and the cost of maintaining it although no relevant figures were tendered) is beyond the limit of reasonable tort induced requirement. I note that it is over two years since the plaintiff has been able to make use of the pool at the Club. She testified that "there is none that it is convenient" for her to attend but there was no evidence of the extent of the claimed inconvenience.

The out of pocket expenses have been agreed at $25,289. A claim is made for the cost of the surgery suggested by Dr Nash and for subsequent sclerotherapy which are respectively estimated at $6,800 and $500 in the doctor's letter of September 1994. I am conscious that those figures may be out of date and also that the procedures are not to be undertaken immediately. There should be some discount for present receipt of this ingredient of damages and in lieu of the estimated total of $7,300 I propose to include in the damages $6,000. The evidence shows a continuing need for special stockings for the plaintiff to assuage the symptoms of her phlebitis and it is agreed that $2,778 should be included in the damages on this account.

Other claims are made for future expenditure. A visit to a general practitioner once a month at a cost of $35 or $420 per annum. An annual visit to a specialist at $240. Physiotherapy and acupuncture in alternate weeks at $45 per week, amounting to a claim of $2,340 per annum and, for medication $20 per week or $1,040 per annum. The total of these claims amounts to $4,040 per annum or $78 per week. The plaintiff has a life expectancy of thirty two years. At the authorized rate of interest for capitalization (5 per cent - s
B Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act) a continuing expenditure of $78 per week requires $65,910. The plaintiff has not been undergoing physiotherapy or acupuncture at the rate suggested but it is submitted that the reason for this is her lack of available funds. I am unpersuaded that throughout the whole of the balance of the plaintiff's life she is likely to undergo that treatment at the rate specified although I am satisfied that she will undertake a substantial amount of that therapy. Whether the plaintiff will continue to ingest medication at the current rate is also debatable. I approach the matter by discounting the calculated sum but I emphasize that I do not do so for reasons other than my findings that the expenditures will not continue at a rate as highly as that claimed. I will include in the damages $50,000 for future expenditure of the kind specified.

I turn to economic loss. As is conventional, I will approach this in two stages, to the present and for the future. At the time of accident the plaintiff was effectively in transition from the failed venture at Laurieton and was unable immediately to seek alternative employment because of her need for surgery and recuperation. In submissions neither counsel could direct me to any opinion in the torrent of medical reports which focussed upon the likely time that it would have taken the plaintiff to recuperate in any event.
It was vigorously urged by counsel for the defendant that there was no imminent prospect of employment for the plaintiff and that I should doubt her intention to return to work on a full time basis. The impression I have of the plaintiff and her husband is that they were hardworking folk intent upon doing the best for themselves and their children within the limits of their resources and capacities. Obviously they were passing through a patch of adversity when the enormity of the injuries sustained by the plaintiff in the accident were superadded. It may be true that there was no evidence of prospect of particular employment in 1987 but this is hardly surprising in the light of the circumstances. The evidence of Mr Bray who was a superior of the plaintiff in the Grace Bros organization is telling. I note that Grace Bros were withdrawing from their supermarket operations but I accept Mr Bray's evidence that no employee went without an offer of alternative employment either in a Coles supermarket or elsewhere within the Coles Myer retail group.
Of course, the plaintiff had already left that organization for the venture in
Laurieton but given the esteem in which she was held by persons such as Mr
Bray and her experience, I think it is probable that had she continued her search it is likely that she would have found suitable employment in the "front end" of a supermarket in Port Macquarie. If that failed, I consider the plaintiff and her husband were practical and resilient enough to consider returning to Sydney or to some other centre where they could both find available work.

I propose to award the plaintiff $80,000 for economic loss to date. I should reveal the guides which I have used in assessing that figure. In order to allow - in the defendant's favour - for the necessity for the plaintiff to recuperate from her pre-accident surgery and for the time it would take for search and the attainment of employment I omit the period from the accident until the end of the financial year 1988. From Exhibit D I can extract the weekly nett wages of a shop assistant for the income years progressing from to 1995 - a range commencing at $279.66 per week up to $335 per week. To this I add a sum for the current year at $350 per week. The total calculation results in a figure a little over $119,000.

The plaintiff had some very brief employment as a waitress but started to earn regular income in April 1993 when she commenced minding children through the
St Joseph's Services. How much is actually earned fluctuates and the income tax returns are not an entirely reliable guide because they - quite legitimately - take advantage of certain expenses and depreciations which are deductible for tax purposes. For the present exercise I make an estimate of the value of the plaintiff's utilized earning capacity at $150 per week nett over approximately three and a half years. In total this would be value of a little over $27,000.

Reminding myself that my exercise is one of judgment and not of arithmetic I can however observe that the latter suggests a resultant figure of a little over $90,000. To the extent that it is appropriate to take into account that during the period the plaintiff may have had some earning capacity which was unexercised I have taken that figure to the assessment sum first mentioned.

The plaintiff is entitled to interest upon this loss. She has received no subvention from social security nor does the evidence reveal that she has received any from elsewhere. I propose to award interest over the period of eight years thereby continuing the assumption that I have made that she would not in any event have re-entered the workforce until about mid 1988. As an average rate of interest over the period I would select 14 percent as appropriate but I have halved this in order to allow for the gradual accrual of loss. Interest at 7 percent on $80,000 for eight years is $44,800 and that sum will be included in the damages.

I see no reason not to adopt similar guidelines for the purpose of estimating future economic loss. I would assess the plaintiff's uninjured earning capacity at $350 per week (the guide taken from the Shop Assistants Wage) and as against that assess her residual earning capacity at $150 per week. She is presently aged fifty and, assuming a retirement at 65, she should receive damages calculated by reference to a continuing loss of $200 per week over the next fifteen years. At the authorized capitalization interest rate, a figure of $111,000 emerges. I consider it appropriate to discount this capital sum by percent in order to allow for any adverse vicissitudes during that period.
The sum of $94,350 will be included in the damages.

The plaintiff makes a claim for the provision of services in lieu of tasks which she cannot undertake. Exhibit F contains a calculation postulated on behalf of the plaintiff on the basis that it would be reasonable to obtain at cost household services for 14 hours per week. This is based - as I understand it - upon the evidence of Mr Lo Monaco that he spends an average of two hours per day helping his wife and his mother in law contributes about an hour a day. Having regard to the overall medical opinion as to the inhibitions upon the plaintiff's ability and the description of the tasks being performed, I find that 14 hours per week is a considerable overestimate of the time spent in providing services which it would be reasonable to obtain at cost as a result of tort induced disability. As commented by several of the doctors, and as is coordinate with my own determination, it would be appropriate to provide the plaintiff with some household help which I specify for the purpose of calculating damages at 4 hours per week. At the various rates scheduled in
Exhibit F it can be calculated that the plaintiff should receive $27,300 for such services rendered to the present. It was not submitted that any expenditure had been incurred nor that it was in this case appropriate to therefore include interest on this element.

The fulfilment of the plaintiff's tort induced needs will in my judgment continue in the future and over the 32 years of her life expectancy the provision of 4 hours payment to an appropriate employee at $15.34 per hour results in a capital sum to be awarded of $51,849. I am conscious that the figures in Exhibit F are based upon average weekly earnings rather than the earnings of a person engaged to perform necessary domestic tasks but the evidence provides me with no other material as a guide and [s
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/s35c.html) of the [Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/) is pertinent.

Finally I turn to general damages. These are necessarily matters of impression. As earlier observed, it was common ground between counsel that the plaintiff's injuries should be rated as serious. Whilst her recovery has been significant that is to be gauged in proportion to the immediate after effects of accident when she was without lower limb function. I have come to the conclusion that making due allowance for recovery it would be appropriate to include in the plaintiff's damages $80,000 as a solatium. Interest is prohibited by [s
D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/s35d.html) of the abovementioned statute.

For ease of reference I will tabulate the ingredients which I have assessed.

Out of pocket expenses  $25,289.00  
Future surgery  $6,000.00  
Provision of special stockings  $2,778.00  
Future medical, physiotherapy and acupuncture consultations and medication  $50,000.00  
Economic loss to date  $80,000.00  
Interest on economic loss to date  $44,800.00  
Future economic loss  $94,350.00  
Past services rendered necessary by the tort  $27,300.00  
Such services in the future  $51,849.00  
General damages 
Total:  $80,000.00 $462,366.00  
I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $462,366.00. The defendant is ordered to pay the plaintiff's costs. Provided application is made within twenty eight days of today, liberty to apply generally upon 48 hours notice to the opponent.
 * * * 
