

Grizonic versus Suttor [2010] NSWSC 1051 (10 June 2010) 
Last Updated: 16 September 2010 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Grizonic versus Suttor <case>  
JURISDICTION: 
Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /87265;  /258477;  /258993;  /287047  
HEARING DATE(S):  June 2010  
EX TEMPORE DATE:  June 2010  
PARTIES:  /87265: 
Claudio Grizonic (plaintiff) 
Suzanne Ranken Suttor (first defendant) 
Fina a Flat Pty Ltd (second defendant)  /258477: 
Claudio Grizonic (plaintiff) 
Suzanne Ranken Suttor (first defendant) 
Rodney Ranken Suttor (second defendant) 
Find a Flat Pty Ltd (third defendant)  /258993: 
Claudio Grizonic (plaintiff) 
Geoffrey McDonald (first defendant) 
Paul Leroy (second defendant) 
Suzanne Suttor (third defendant)  /287047: 
Dawn Wade (plaintiff) 
Suzanne Suttor (defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Brereton J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
A J Grant (Ms Suttor) 
J T Johnson (Trustees - LeRoy & McDonald) 
G C Jones (Ms Wade & Mr Grizonic)  
SOLICITORS: 
R Silberberg (Ms Suttor) 
Yates Beaggi Lawyers (Trustees) 
Mr Grizonic (in person) 
Ms Wade (in person)  
CATCHWORDS: 
EVIDENCE - Admissibility and relevancy - whether leave should be granted to read affidavit served late - balance of prejudice and injustice.  
LEGISLATION CITED:  
CATEGORY: 
Procedural and other rulings  
CASES CITED:  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Grant leave to read paragraphs 1 to 5 and 10 to 12 of affidavit of Dawn Wade sworn 7 June 2010.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
BRERETON J  
Thursday, 10 June 2010  /87265 Claudio Grizonic versus Suzanne Ranken Suttor & Ors  /258477 Claudio Grizonic versus Suzanne Ranken Suttor & Ors  /258993 Claudio Grizonic versus Geoffrey McDonald & Ors  /287047 Dawn Wade versus Suzanne Suttor  
JUDGMENT (ex tempore) HIS HONOUR: Mr Jones seeks leave to read the affidavit of Ms Wade sworn June 2010, notwithstanding that it was served outside the time limited for the service of affidavit evidence and in circumstances where I have refused leave to Ms Suttor to read a late affidavit.  There are important differences between the circumstances affecting Ms
Wade's affidavit and those affecting Ms Suttor's affidavit. So far as Ms
Suttor's affidavit was concerned, in large part, if not exclusively, it addressed facts that were in evidence or would otherwise be proved by documents or matters which were irrelevant. It covered an extensive period of time from the birth of Ms Suttor to the present, over many pages.  This affidavit is much more confined in character. It addresses two issues: first, the proof by Ms Wade of how a debt, which the former partnership is said to have owed Mr Trnka and which was ultimately assigned to Ms Wade, arose and, secondly, Mr Grizonic's attempts to sustain the restaurant business after
December 2003.  I cannot see how the second of those issues, which is covered by paragraphs , 7, 8 and 9 of the affidavit, is relevant to any fact in issue in the proceedings, and I will in any event reject those paragraphs.  The other paragraphs go to a relevant issue in the proceedings. Because of the lateness of this evidence, it is necessary to give close consideration as to whether its admission would be prejudicial to the other parties, who claim that they are deprived of an opportunity of testing it. If, as they say, Mr
Oliveri or Mr Grizonic do not give evidence, then that would in the ordinary course count significantly against the ultimate acceptance of Ms Wade on matters which one or other of them could corroborate, and paragraphs 4 and 10 of the affidavit in question suggest that there are matters which each of them could corroborate.  It is difficult to see, however, what further investigations the other parties might have taken had this material been served at an earlier stage. It relates essentially to conversations and transactions between Ms Wade and Mr
Grizonic, and cash payments which would be practically impossible to verify by subpoena or otherwise. So far as the American Express payments are concerned, the statements are exhibited to the affidavit, and it is difficult to see what further investigations could have produced in that respect.  Not without reservation because of its lateness, but because I think the prejudice, if any, from its admission is slight and because - unlike and distinct from Ms Suttor's affidavit where I think the prejudice from its exclusion was practically nil and its relevance slight - this affidavit is in a different category - I will grant leave to read paragraphs 1 to 5 and 10 to of the affidavit of Dawn Wade sworn 7 June 2010.  
LAST UPDATED:  September 2010 * * * 
