

Director-General of the Department of Fair Trading versus Finnie Matter No /95 [1997] NSWSC 614 (5 December 1997) 
Director-General of the Department of Fair Trading versus Sydney Thomas Finnie /95 December 1997 
Graham A-J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /95 - DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF FAIR 
TRADING versus SYDNEY THOMAS FINNIE 
JUDGMENT ON THE CHARGES OF CONTEMPT CONTAINED IN THE PLAINTIFF'S NOTICE OF MOTION FILED 10 APRIL 1996 
HIS HONOUR: 
These proceedings were commenced by a Summons filed in Court on 28 November in which the Director-General of the Department of Fair Trading was named as the plaintiff and Sydney Thomas Finnie, Craig Steven Finnie, Greville
Arthur Maudsley and Eleanor Elizabeth Fugger were named as the defendants. A fifth defendant has since been added.

A Statement of Claim was filed on 6 February 1996 pursuant to an order made by
Sperling J on 14 December 1995. It alleges, inter alia, contraventions by the first defendant of [sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) and [43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s43.html) of the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/). The
Summons contained 16 prayers for relief with an indication that relief on an interlocutory basis was sought in accordance with prayers 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 11.

On 28 November 1995 Sperling J granted extensive ex parte interlocutory relief to the plaintiff. The orders, which were entered on 28 November 1995, included the following:- "The Court orders that: ...
The first, second and third defendants, and each of them by themselves, their servants or agents or otherwise, including but not limited to the fourth defendant, and whether in their personal capacity or as a trustee for any trust, and whether in their own name or the name of any business or trust, including but not limited to "Combined Mortgage Finance Australia", "Western
Pacific Mortgage Trust", "Western Pacific Property Trust", "The Falcon Trust", "The Fairmont Trust", "United Mortgage Finance", "United Mortgage Trust", "United Mortgage Finance Australia", `Allied Mortgage Trust", "Finnco Combined
Mortgage Finance Australia" and/or any similar name be restrained from: carrying on any business as a finance broker or holding himself out as carrying on any business as a finance broker within the meaning of the [Credit (Administration) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ca1984226/); carrying on any business of providing credit or holding himself or themselves out as carrying on any business of providing credit within the meaning of the [Credit (Administration) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ca1984226/); publishing any advertisement representing expressly or by implication that the defendants or any of them or any business or trust of which they are a proprietor or trustee are lawfully entitled to supply, or carry on the business of supplying the service of negotiating, or acting as an intermediary, to obtain credit for any person; holding out to the public or to any person that the defendants or any of them or any business or trust of which they are a proprietor or trustee are lawfully entitled to supply, or carry on any business of supplying, the service of negotiating, or acting as an intermediary, to obtain credit for any person; supplying the service of negotiating, or acting as an intermediary, to obtain credit for any person; carrying on the business of supplying the service of negotiating, or acting as an intermediary, to obtain credit for any person; negotiating to obtain credit for any person for reward; acting as an intermediary to obtain credit for any person for reward; submitting to any credit provider any false information to support any application for credit made by the defendants or any of them or by any trust of which they are a trustee during the course of supplying, or carrying on any business of supplying, the service of negotiating, or acting as an intermediary, to obtain credit for any person; accepting or receiving any monies from any credit provider on behalf of any person in respect of whom the defendants or any of them or any trust of which they are a trustee or any business carried on by the defendants or any of them or by any trust of which they are a trustee has made any application for credit to any credit provider; charging or collecting any fee, commission, brokerage or other monies from any person on behalf of whom the defendants or any of them or any trust of which the defendants or any of them are a trusteed (sic) has made an application for credit to a credit provider; removing from the jurisdiction or otherwise disposing of or dealing with any of their assets within the jurisdiction including but not limited to any money held in any bank account in the name of the defendants or any of them or in the name of any business or trust of which they are a proprietor or trustee including but not limited to each of the businesses and trusts referred to above.
The defendants by themselves, their servants or agents permit John Robert
Warton and William John Widin both of 11th Floor, 4 Bligh Street, Sydney in the State of New South Wales, Chartered Accountants, or either of them and/or such persons as those persons may jointly or severally authorise together with a solicitor for or employed by the plaintiff to enter forthwith the premises known as Level 4, 1-5 Baker Street, Gosford; Suite 7, 281 Pacific Highway,
North Sydney and Level 5, 67 Castlereagh Street, Sydney or such parts thereof as are occupied or used by the defendants or any of them or by any business of which they or any of them are the proprietors or any trust of which they or any of them are a trustee between 6am and 9pm on any day for the purpose of: inspection of all original and copy files, notes, documents, correspondence, applications for finance, statements of assets and liabilities of or bearing the name of any intending borrower, tax returns of or in the name of any intending borrower, financial statements of or bearing the name of any intending borrower, accounts, bank statements, cheque books, deposit books, trust deeds, trust account records, loan documents, receipts, records relating to payments, reconciliation statements, trial balances, books of account, statements of account, computer discs and all other business records relating to the conduct by the defendants of the business and affairs of the business and trusts referred to in order 2 herein and any other business of a finance broker or credit provider conducted by or participated in by the defendants at any time including but not limited to any and all such files, notes, documents, accounts,, bank statements and records relating to any of the persons referred to in Schedule A hereto; taking possession of the documents and things referred to in (a) above and removing the same from the said premises.
 ...
The defendants do within 24 hours of the delivery to the defendants or any of them or to any trust of which the defendants or any of them is a trustee of any monies constituting all or any part of any fee, commission or brokerage or any loan funds or other payment in respect of any transaction whereunder the defendants or any of them or any trust of which the defendants or any of them is a trustee or any business carried on by the defendants or any of them or any trust of which the defendants or any of them is a trustee rendered any service of negotiating, or acting as an intermediary, to obtain credit for any person, inform the solicitors for the plaintiff in writing of the date of delivery and amount of such monies, the method by which the delivery of the said monies was made; if the monies were paid by cheque, then the cheque number and date, the identity of the payer and the description of any bank account upon which the cheque was drawn; if the payment was otherwise than by cheque, then detailing the precise manner in which the said monies were delivered.
The defendants and each of them do within 48 hours of the making of this
Order cause an affidavit to be made, filed with the Court and a copy served on the solicitors for the plaintiff, setting out: the name and address of the banks, building societies, credit union or other financial institution of which there is an account in any of the names of the defendants or under the control of the defendants or any of them whether or not such control is exercised in conjunction with some other person or persons, together with the number of such account and the balance therein on the date of service of this order, including any account in the name of any of the businesses or trusts referred to in order 2 herein and any other trust of which the defendants or either of them is a trustee; the name and address of any person who is or will be indebted to any of the defendants or any trust of which the defendants or any of them is a trustee, including but not limited to the businesses and trusts referred to in order 3 herein, the amount of the debt and the date the debt is or was due; an itemised inventory of goods owned by or in the possession or control of the defendants or any of them or any trust of which the defendants or any of them is a trustee at the date of service of this Order together with the address where each item is now held and the best estimate of its market value; an itemised inventory of any other asset owned by or in the possession or control of the defendants or any of them or any business or trust of which the defendants or any of them is a proprietor or trustee, including but not limited to the businesses and trusts referred to in order 2 above, identifying in particular: any interest in land, including any leasehold interest and any interest in the proceeds of the sale of any land; and any motor vehicles, including the registration numbers thereof and giving the best estimate of the market value of the interest of the defendants or either of them in that motor vehicle; an itemised inventory of any other property either real or personal in which the defendants or any of them or any business or trust of which the defendants or any of them is a proprietor or trustee has an interest and which exceeds in value $500 in the nature of the property, the nature of the interest and the best estimate of the market value of that interest; in respect of any of the property referred to above, whether it is subject to a charge or is encumbered or has been given security in some manner for any debt, stating the nature of the security and the debt so secured.
 ..." 
It is unnecessary for present purposes to set out the details of Schedule A to
His Honour's Orders, but I should mention that it does not mention the
Dochertys, to whom I shall refer shortly.

On 30 November 1995 Sperling J made Consent Orders varying, inter alia, Order
The Order of 30 November 1995 in relation to Order 8 was as follows:- "The time limited by Order 8 made by the Court on 28 November 1995 be extended to 4.30pm on 7 December 1995." 
A sealed copy of the Court's Orders of 28 November 1995 was served personally on the first defendant at 4.00pm on 30 November 1995. There is no evidence as to whether a Minute of the Order of 30 November 1995 or a Minute of the Order of 28 November 1995 as varied was served personally on the first defendant nor is there any evidence as to whether what was served bore a notice in accordance with the requirements of Part 42 rule 8(3) of the Rules. There is some evidence that the first defendant had notice of the Orders to which I have referred independently of the documents which were served upon him but, for reasons which will shortly appear, it is unnecessary to further consider this aspect of the matter.

The matter presently before the Court is a Notice of Motion filed 10 April on behalf of the plaintiff as applicant to which the sole respondent is
Sydney Thomas Finnie, the first defendant in the proceedings. The Notice of
Motion seeks some 13 findings that the respondent, whom I will hereafter refer to as the contemnor, was guilty of contempt of Court in respect of his failure to comply with certain of the Orders made by Sperling J to which I have referred.

In accordance with Part 55 rule 7 of the Rules a Statement of Charge was filed with the said Notice of Motion specifying the contempts of which the contemnor was alleged to be guilty. Before me, the contemnor pleaded guilty to each of the 13 charges of contempt of Court detailed in the Statement of Charge. They were as follows:- "CHARGE 1: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court for that he in wilful and contumacious disregard of orders 2, 3, 7 and 8(a) of the orders of Sperling J made on 28 November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30 November 1995 and so as to circumvent those orders did on 4
December 1995 open bank account number 121 592 250 at the Wynyard Branch of the St George Bank in the name of Sydney Thomas Finnie as trustee of the
Allied Mortgage Trust, deposit Bankwest cheque number 027890 302 100 in the sum of $52,539.88 being part of the proceeds of a settlement of finance transaction in respect of William Docherty and Gail Docherty which took place on 1 December 1995 into that account and on 4 December 1995 did cause $25,000 to be withdrawn from that account for the purchase of bank cheques 661 33572 and 661 33583 and on 8 December 1995 did cause a further $20,000 to be withdrawn from that account.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 2: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this Court for that he in wilful and contumacious disregard for the orders of Sperling J made on 28
November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30
November 1995 did on or about 13 December 1995 make an affidavit dated that day in purported compliance with order 8(b) stating that "To my knowledge there are persons who are indebted to Allied Mortgage Trust. On 28 November the plaintiff took into his possession all files, records and documents relating to such persons. I cannot without access to these records give details of these debts" without disclosing the name of the St George Bank as a person who was indebted to the Allied Mortgage Trust by reason of account number 121 592 250.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 3: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court for that he in wilful and contumacious disregard for the orders of Sperling J made on 28
November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30
November 1995 did on or about 13 December 1995 make an affidavit dated that day in purported compliance with order 8(b) of those orders stating that "To my knowledge there are persons who are indebted to Allied Mortgage Trust. On November 1995 the plaintiff took into his possession all files, records and documents relating to such persons. I cannot without access to these records give details of those debts" without disclosing the name of St George Bank as a person who was indebted to him by reason of account number 121 592 268.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 4: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court for that he in wilful and contumacious disregard for the orders of Sperling J made on 28
November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30
November 1995 did on or about 13 December 1995 make an affidavit dated that date in purported compliance with order 8(d) of those orders stating that "There are no other assets owned by or in my possession or control or owned by or in the possession or control of any business or trust of which I am a proprietor or trustee apart from the assets listed above" without disclosing the existence of St George Bank account number 121 592 250.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 5: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court for that he in wilful and contumacious disregard for the orders of Sperling J made on 28
November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30
November 1995 did on or about 13 December 1995 make an affidavit dated that date in purported compliance with order 8(d) of those orders stating that "There are no other assets owned by or in my possession or control or owned by or in the possession or control of any business or trust of which I am a proprietor or trustee apart from the assets listed above" without disclosing the existence of St George Bank account number 121 592 268.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 6: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court for that he in wilful and contumacious disregard of the orders of Sperling J made on 28
November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30
November 1995 did on or about 13 December 1995 make an affidavit dated that day in purported compliance with order 8(e) of those orders stating that "There is no other property either real or personal in which I or any business or trust of which I am a proprietor or trustee has an interest or which exceeds in value $500 in the nature of the property other than that referred to above" without disclosing the existence of St George Bank account number 592 268.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 7: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court for that he in wilful and contumacious disregard of the orders of Sperling J made on 28
November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30
November 1995 did on or about 13 December 1995 make an affidavit dated that date in purported compliance with order 8(e) of those orders stating that "There is no other property either real or personal in which I or any business or trust of which I am a proprietor or trustee has an interest and which exceeds in value $500 in the nature of the property other than that referred to above" without disclosing the existence of St George Bank account number 592 268.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 8: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court in that in breach of order 2 subparagraph (e) made by Sperling J on 28 November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30 November 1995 whereby the
First, Second and Third defendants in these proceedings and each of them by themselves their servants, agents or otherwise, including but not limited to the Fourth defendant, whether in their personal capacity or as a trustee for any trust, and whether in their own name or the name of any business or trust, including but not limited to "Combined Mortgage Finance Australia", "Western
Pacific Mortgage Trust", "Western Pacific Property Trust", "the Falcon Trust", "the Fairmont Trust", "United Mortgage Finance", "United Mortgage Trust", "United Mortgage Finance Australia", "Allied Mortgage Trust", "Finnco Combined
Mortgage Finance Australia" and/or any similar name were restrained from supplying the service of negotiating, or acting as an intermediary, to obtain credit for any person, he did between 5.00 pm on 30 November 1995 and 4
December 1995 supply the service of acting as an intermediary to obtain credit for William Docherty and/or Deborah Gail Docherty.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 9: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court in that in breach of order 2 subparagraph (j) made by Sperling J on 28 November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30 November 1995 whereby the
First, Second and Third defendants in these proceedings, and each of them by themselves, their servants, agents or otherwise, including but not limited to the Fourth defendant, whether in their personal capacity or as a trustee for any trust, and whether in their own name or the name of any business or trust, including but not limited to "Combined Mortgage Finance Australia", "Western
Pacific Mortgage Trust", "Western Pacific Property Trust", "The Falcon Trust", "The Fairmont Trust", "United Mortgage Finance", "United Mortgage Trust", "United Mortgage Finance Australia", "Allied Mortgage Trust", "Finnco Combined
Mortgage Finance Australia" and/or any similar name were restrained from accepting or receiving any moneys from any credit provider on behalf of any person in respect of whom the defendants or any of them or any trust of which they are a trustee or any business carried on by the defendants or any of them or by any trust of which they are a trustee has made any application for credit from any credit provider, he did on 1 December 1995 receive moneys from a credit provider, namely the Bank of Western Australia Limited on behalf of
William Docherty and Deborah Gail Docherty in respect of whom the First defendant had made application for credit to a credit provider, namely the said Bank of Western Australia Limited.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 10: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court in that in breach of order 2 subparagraph (k) made by Sperling J on 28 November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30 November 1995 whereby the
First, Second and Third defendants in these proceedings and each of them by themselves, their servants, agents or otherwise including but not limited to the Fourth defendant, whether in their personal capacity or as a trustee for any trust and whether in their own name or the name of any business or trust, including but not limited to "Combined Mortgage Finance Australia", "Western
Pacific Mortgage Trust", "Western Pacific Property Trust", "The Falcon Trust", "The Fairmont Trust", "United Mortgage Finance", "United Mortgage Trust", "United Mortgage Finance Australia", "Allied Mortgage Trust", "Finnco Combined
Mortgage Finance Australia" were restrained from charging or collecting any fee, commission, brokerage or other moneys from any person on behalf of whom the defendants or any of them or any trust of which the defendants or any of them is a trustee has made an application for credit to a credit provider, he did between 5.00 pm on 30 November 1995 and 4 December 1995 charge a fee from
William Docherty and Gail Docherty on behalf of whom the First defendant had made an application for credit to a credit provider, namely the Bank of
Western Australia Limited.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 11: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court in that in breach of order 2 subparagraph (l) made by Sperling J on 28 November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30 November 1995 whereby the
First, Second and Third defendants in these proceedings, and each of them by themselves, their servants, agents or otherwise, including but not limited to the Fourth defendant, whether in their personal capacity or as a trustee for any trust, and whether in their own name or the name of any business or trust, including but not limited to "Combined Mortgage Finance Australia", "Western
Pacific Mortgage Trust", "Western Pacific Property Trust", "The Falcon Trust", "The Fairmont Trust", "United Mortgage Finance", "United Mortgage Trust", "United Mortgage Finance Australia", "Allied Mortgage Trust", "Finnco Combined
Mortgage Finance Australia" and/or any similar name were restrained from removing from the jurisdiction or otherwise disposing of or dealing with any of their assets within the jurisdiction including but not limited to any money held in any bank account in the name of the defendants or any of them or in the name of any business or trust of which they are a proprietor or trustee including but not limited to any of the businesses or trusts referred to above, he did deal with money held in St George Bank account number 121 592 in the name of Allied Mortgage Trust of which he is a trustee by withdrawing $20,000 of the same on 4 December 1995 and purchasing a bank cheque with the said sum.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 12: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court in that in breach of order 2 subparagraph (l) made by Sperling J on 28 November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30 November 1995 whereby the
First, Second and Third defendants in these proceedings, and each of them by themselves, their servants, agents or otherwise, including but not limited to the Fourth defendant, whether in their personal capacity or as a trustee for any trust, and whether in their own name or the name of any business or trust, including but not limited to "Combined Mortgage Finance Australia", "Western
Pacific Mortgage Trust", "Western Pacific Property Trust", "The Falcon Trust", "The Fairmont Trust", "United Mortgage Finance", "United Mortgage Trust", "United Mortgage Finance Australia", "Allied Mortgage Trust", "Finnco Combined
Mortgage Finance Australia" and/or any similar name were restrained from removing from the jurisdiction or otherwise disposing of or dealing with any of their assets within the jurisdiction including but not limited to any money held in any bank account in the name of the defendants or any of them or in the name of any business or trust of which they are a proprietor or trustee including but not limited to each of the businesses and trusts referred to above, he did deal with money held in St George Bank account number 121 592 in the name of Allied Mortgage Trust of which he is a trustee by withdrawing $5,000 of the same on 4 December 1995 and purchasing a bank cheque with the said sum.

PLEA: Guilty.

CHARGE 13: The First Defendant is guilty of contempt of this court in that in breach of order 7 made by Sperling J on 28 November 1995 and varied in part by extension of time by consent on 30 November 1995 whereby the defendants were to within 24 hours of the delivery to them or any of them or to any trust of which the defendants or any of them is a trustee of any moneys constituting all or any part of any fee, commission or brokerage or any loan funds or other payment in respect of any transaction whereunder the defendants or any of them or any trust of which the defendants or any of them is a trustee or any business carried on by the defendants or any of them or any trust of which the defendants or any of them is a trustee rendered any service of negotiating, or acting as an intermediary, to obtain credit for any person, inform the solicitors for the plaintiff in writing of the date of delivery and amount of such moneys, the method by which the delivery of the said moneys was made; if the moneys were to be paid by cheque, then the cheque number and date, the identity of the payer and the description of any bank account upon which the cheque was drawn; if the payment was otherwise than by cheque, then detailing the precise manner in which the said moneys were delivered, he did fail, within 24 hours of the delivery to him on 1 December 1995 of moneys constituting part of loan funds in respect of a transaction whereunder the
First Defendant rendered the service of acting as an intermediary to obtain credit for William Docherty and Gail Docherty, to inform the solicitors for the plaintiff in writing of the date of delivery and amount of such moneys, the method by which the delivery of the said moneys was made; the cheque number and date, the identity of the payer and the description of any bank account upon which the cheque was drawn.

PLEA: Guilty.

Having regard to the nature of the contempts alleged and the time of filing of the Notice of Motion it can be seen that the current proceedings are punitive in nature rather than coercive. The first seven counts alleged wilful and contumacious disregard for the Orders of Sperling J and the remaining six alleged mere contraventions although as I understand it the applicant's case is that these contraventions were wilful and not inadvertent.

Under [section (3F)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s53.html) of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) disobedience of
Orders such as those made by Sperling J have been assigned to the Common Law
Division. As a procedural matter this assignment is effective in the present case even though the contempts alleged are said to have occurred in December and the Motion was filed on 10 April 1996 with sub-section (3F) not commencing until 2 May 1997.

Under [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/index.html#p55) [rule 13(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s13.html) of the Rules, where the contemnor is not a corporation, the Court may punish a contempt by committal to a correctional centre or fine or both.

No distinction now exists in relation to the Court's power to impose a fine between criminal contempts and civil contempts (see Witham v. Holloway [(1995) 183 CLR 525] at 545).

In light of the contemnor's pleas of guilty the only issue which presently arises is what, if any, punishment should be imposed.

The gravamen of the charges of contempt lies in a finance transaction undertaken by the contemnor for William Docherty and Deborah Gail Docherty for whom he negotiated a housing loan facility with Bank of Western Australia
Limited (which traded under the business name "BankWest") to be secured over their home located at 3 Burlington Avenue, Jilliby Downs, near Wyong.

The transaction was incomplete at the time of the making by Sperling J of his
Orders.

It is clear that by about 11.00am on Wednesday 29 November 1995 the contemnor had notice of the Orders which had been made on the previous day. Whether he was aware of the precise terms of the Orders at that stage is unclear. In any event he was served with a copy of the Orders of 28 November 1995 at 4.00pm on
Thursday 30 November 1995.

On the evening of that day the contemnor attended at the Dochertys' home in company with Mr. Wakeling, a solicitor, who proceeded to witness the execution by the Dochertys of certain security documents.

On 27 November 1995 United Mortgage Finance Australia lodged a caveat in the name of the contemnor as trustee for the Allied Mortgage Trust over the
Dochertys' home. The estate or interest claimed was expressed to be:- "Pursuant to a Deed of Agreement dated 18/10/95 
Condition in agreement to allow a Caveatable interest to be lodged for the purpose of securing fees, expenses and services payable be (sic) the registered proprietor." 
On 27 November 1995 the contemnor signed a letter to the Dochertys on the letterhead of United Mortgage Finance Australia which contained, inter alia, the following:- "We refer to your loan application and confirm approval of the same between joint lenders Allied Mortgage Trust and BankWest.

The following loan structure, terms and conditions apply: 
BORROW: $220,000.00 ...

LENDERS: ALLIED MORTGAGE TRUST & BANKWEST 
MORTGAGOR/S: WILLIAM & DEBORAH GAIL DOCHERTY 
SECURITY: 3 BURLINGTON AVENUE, JILLIBY DOWNS NSW 2259 ...

PURPOSE OF LOAN: 1. DISCHARGE 1ST MORTRGAGE TO CITIBANK LTD.
DISCHARGE UNSECURED CREDITORS
ASSIST WITH HOME/PROPERTY IMPROVEMENTS
PROVIDE BORROWING COSTS." 
On 27 November 1995 the Dochertys recorded their acceptance of these terms and conditions. Their acceptance also included the following:- "I/We request and confirm that all costs (including legal and other loan establishment costs & fees) reasonably incurred be deducted at settlement." 
When the security documents were being signed Mr. Wakeling showed the
Dochertys a letter of offer which he read to them including an entry indicating that the Dochertys had to pay the contemnor $13,000.00. Mrs.
Docherty then said "What's this $13,000 to Syd Finnie for?" to which the contemnor replied:- "The $13,000 is 0.2% of the total loan over the 20 year period and this represents my interest in the loan. I haven't got my calculator with me. If you sit down and work it out, $220,000 over the 20 years at 0.2% is $13,000 and I take that up front." 
Further conversation ensued about the fee.

Later that evening the contemnor returned to the Dochertys' home and said:- "I found my calculator, here it is. I just want to go back over the $13,000." 
The contemnor then made a series of calculations and concluded same by saying:- "There. See? 
I am furnishing a loan with you that most banks would not have done. The $13,000 is normal under those circumstances. If you think that the $13,000 is not justified then say so and we'll forget it." 
Mrs. Docherty responded:- "No, no, no, it's all right. I'm sorry for questioning it but I want to try to understand and get it clear in my mind what the $13,000 is for." 
Messrs. Corrs Chambers Westgarth were acting as the solicitors for Bank of
Western Australia Limited. At about 11.45am on Friday 1 December 1995 a letter on the letterhead of "Allied Mortgage Trust" was sent by facsimile to Messrs.
Corrs Chambers Westgarth from the premises of United Mortgage Finance. That letter, signed by the contemnor was as follows:- "RE: W. & D.G. DOCHERTY.
 BURLINGTON AVENUE 
JILLIBY DOWNS NSW 2259 
We advise that settlement of this matter is scheduled for Friday 1 December at 2.00pm.

Settlement venue is as follows: 
CITIBANK LTD 
LEVEL 2 MARGARET STREET 
SYDNEY NSW 2000 
TEL: 239 9323 CONTACT: MARGARET MUNROE 
We further advise cheques are to be drawn in the following manner: 
Amount of advance from Bank West: $220,000.00 
Less, Legal Fees $ 350.00 
Search Fees $ 10.00 
Bankruptcy Search $ 40.00 
Registration Fees $ 153.00 
Stamp Duty - Mortgage $ 821.00 
Sundries $ 20.00 
MGI Premium $1,717.00 
Application Fee - Bank West $ 280.00 $3,391.00 $ 3,391.00 $216,609.00 
Please provide Bank Cheques in favour of: 
Citibank Limited $164,069.12 
Sydney Thomas Finnie as Trustee for 
Allied Mortgage Trust $ 52,539.88 
Should you have any queries, please contact the undersigned on (02) 9929 ..

Yours faithfully, 
S. Finnie.

NOTE: * Withdrawal of Caveat from Sydney Thomas Finnie as Trustee for Allied Mortgage Trust, Original Section 47 Certificate, Original 149 
Certificate and Original Identification Survey will be produced at settlement.
 * Original Building Insurance `Certificate of Currency' will also be produced at settlement." 
At about 2.05pm on 1 December 1995 the contemnor, along with Mr. Chen of
Messrs. Corrs Chambers Westgarth for Bank of Western Australia Limited attended at the offices of Citibank Limited whereupon the proposed transaction concerning the Dochertys' land was completed. Citibank Limited was paid out $164,069.12 and a bank cheque of Bank of Western Australia Limited made payable to "Sydney Thomas Finnie ATF Allied Mortgage Trust" in the sum of $52,539.88 was handed over to the contemnor.

On Monday 4 December 1995 the contemnor opened account No.121 592 250 with
St.George Bank Limited in his own name as trustee for the Allied Mortgage
Trust. On the same day he deposited the cheque received from Mr. Chen on behalf of Bank of Western Australia Limited into the new account along with another Westpac Banking Corporation bank cheque for $5,315.00.

On 4 December 1995 the contemnor applied for the issue of two bank cheques by
St.George Bank Limited to be funded out of the newly opened account No. 121 250. Two such cheques were issued one made payable to Kelliher &
Associates in the sum of $20,000.00 and the other made payable to "Progressive
Marketing" in the sum of $5,000.00. On 8 December 1995 he drew a cheque for $20,000.00 on the said account to purchase a second bank cheque for $20,000.00 payable to Kelliher & Associates.

As at the opening of business on 13 December 1995 the balance standing to the credit of the account of the contemnor at trustee for the Allied Mortgage
Trust at the St.George Bank Limited was $2,691.88 and as at the close of business the balance standing to the credit of that account was $51.67.

It would appear that the contemnor opened another account in his own name at
St.George Bank Limited on 4 December 1995 No.121 592 268 which as at the opening of business on 13 December 1995 had a credit balance of $5,315.00 and, at the close of business on that day had a credit balance of $96.50.

The contemnor did not within 24 hours of receipt by him of the bank cheque of
Bank of Western Australia Limited in the sum of $52,539.88 inform the solicitors for the applicant in writing of its receipt, of the cheque number, the date of the cheque, the identity of the payer and the description of the bank account upon which the cheque was drawn.

On 14 December 1995 the contemnor caused an affidavit sworn by him on 13
December 1995 to be filed in Court. That affidavit included, inter alia, the following paragraphs:- "7. Order 8(b) 
To my knowledge there are persons who are indebted to Allied Mortgage Trust.
On 28 November 1995 the plaintiff took into his possession all files, records and documents relating to such persons. I cannot without access to these records give details of these debts.
 ...
Order 8(d) 
There are no other assets owned by or in my possession or control or owned by or in the possession or control of any business or trust of which I am a proprietor or trustee apart from the assets listed above.
Order 8(e) 
There is no other property either real or personal in which I or any business or trust of which I am a proprietor or trustee has an interest and which exceeds in value $500.00 in the nature of the property other than that referred to above." 
In his said affidavit purportedly filed in compliance with Order 8 of Sperling
J's Orders, which was one week out of time, no mention was made by the contemnor of the bank accounts which had been opened by him on 4 December 1995 with the St.George Bank Limited.

The conduct of the contemnor referred to above constituted clear breaches of the Orders of Sperling J as mentioned in the charges.

Miss Bergin of Counsel who appears for the applicant submitted that the present Motion was brought in the public interest to maintain the integrity of the judicial process and was not remedial or coercive in the interests of the plaintiff.

In the light of the judgments of the High Court in Witham v. Holloway the distinction between civil contempt and criminal contempt is now blurred if not non-existent. At page 534 Brennan, Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said in their joint judgment:- "The differences upon which the distinction between civil and criminal contempt is based are, in significant respects, illusory. They certainly do not justify the allocation of different standards of proof for civil and criminal contempt. Rather, the illusory nature of those differences and the fact that the usual outcome of successful proceedings is punishment, no matter whether primarily for the vindication of judicial authority or primarily for the purpose of coercing obedience in the interest of the individual, make it clear as Deane J said in Hinch (Hinch v. Attorney-General (Vict) <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 15] at 49) that all proceedings for contempt `must realistically be seen as criminal in nature'." (the words in parenthesis are mine) 
Earlier their Honours said at pages 531-534:- "The distinction between civil and criminal contempt is long standing. ... The distinction was described as being of an `unsatisfactory nature' in
Mudginberri (Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union v. Mudginberri
Station Pty. Limited <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 98] at 107).
 ...

The basis of the distinction between civil and criminal contempt is said to lie in the difference between proceedings which are remedial or coercive in the interest of the private individual and proceedings in the public interest to vindicate judicial authority or maintain the integrity of the judicial process. ...
 ...

The distinction between proceedings in the public interest and those that are coercive or remedial in the interest of the private individual is not, in our view, a satisfactory basis for the distinction usually made between civil and criminal contempt. ...
 ... All orders, whether they be Mareva injunctions, injunctions relating the subject matter of the suit or, simply, procedural orders, are made in the interests of justice. Non-compliance necessarily constitutes an interference with the administration of justice even if the position can be remedied as between the parties.
 ...
 ... nothing is achieved by describing some proceedings as `punitive' and others as `remedial or coercive'. Punishment is punishment, whether it is imposed in vindication or for remedial or coercive purposes. And there can be no doubt that imprisonment and the imposition of fines, the usual sanctions for contempt, constitute punishment. And the same is true of a sequestration made in consequence of a company's failure to comply with an order or undertaking." (the words in parenthesis are mine) 
In his judgment in Witham v. Holloway McHugh J provides a helpful analysis of the history of the law of contempt. Towards the conclusion of His Honour's reasons he said at pages 548-9:- "It follows in my view that this Court should now declare that, in all proceedings for contempt of court, the moving party must prove the contempt beyond reasonable doubt.

The appellant did not urge that the distinction between civil and criminal contempt should be abolished although, once the standard of proof becomes the same in both classes of proceedings, there is much to be said for abolishing all distinctions between them. Why should a person in the appellant's position be unable to obtain a pardon or remission of the sentence when those remedies would have been available if he or she had been prosecuted for criminal contempt? Why should the person who is prosecuted for criminal contempt be unable to purge his or her contempt when the person prosecuted for civil contempt has that option? If the right to waive civil contempts still exists, why should there be a right to waive the contempt in civil but not criminal proceedings? Why should the contemnor's right of appeal differ depending on whether the proceedings are for civil or criminal contempt? It is difficult, if not impossible, to rationally justify these differences once the standards of proof are assimilated and civil contempt can lead to purely punitive sanctions." 
Earlier in his judgment McHugh J said at pages 538 et seq:- "The phrase `contempt of court' dates from at least the twelfth century. While it was not until the seventeenth century that the courts drew a distinction between civil and criminal contempts, the existence of the distinction has been firmly established since the middle of the last century. ... Criminal contempts are acts or omissions that have a tendency to interfere with or undermine the authority, performance or dignity of the courts of justice for those who participate in their proceedings. Although criminal contempts take many forms, their characteristic attribute is an interference with the due administration of justice either in a particular case or as part of a continuing process. Defiance of the court or its procedures, publication of matters scandalising the court, actions calculated to prejudice the fair trial of a pending case, threats to parties or witnesses and misconduct within the court are examples of criminal contempts. Civil contempts, on the other hand, are concerned with failures to comply with judgments or orders of the courts.
But civil and criminal contempt overlap. Thus, disobedience to the order of a court constitutes criminal contempt when the disobedience is contumacious.
Defiance of the court's order renders criminal what would be otherwise civil contempt. Where non-compliance with a judgment or order goes beyond mere breach and involves misconduct, civil contempt also has `a penal or disciplinary jurisdiction [that is] exercised by the court in the public interest'." 
In the proceedings at first instance in Witham v. Holloway Hodgson J had committed Witham to prison for one month for his contempt. His Honour found
Witham guilty of contempt in that he failed to comply with orders made by
Powell J in the nature of a Mareva injunction restraining him from dealing with his Australian property so as to reduce its value below $200,000.00 and requiring him to swear an affidavit setting out certain details as to his property in Australia. For reasons related solely to the standard of proof the
High Court ordered that the matter be remitted to the Equity Division of the court for rehearing. That rehearing has yet to take place.

In relation to the sentence imposed by Hodgson J at the initial hearing Witham argued on appeal to the Court of Appeal that Hodgson J erred in the exercise of his sentencing discretion. It was submitted that His Honour should have considered making a community service order, having rejected the possibility of imposing a substantial fine, considering that to be inappropriate in view of Witham's financial position. Handley J.A. in delivering the leading judgment in the Court of Appeal said that he was entirely unpersuaded that the trial judge had erred. He said the contempts found were serious ones and that the purposes of the Mareva injunction had been frustrated. Handley J.A. said that if anything, His Honour's sentence was a lenient one and, had he been the primary judge he would have inclined to have sentenced Witham to a substantially longer period of full-time custody.

This brings me to the question of what is appropriate punishment, if any in the circumstances of this case.

I should indicate that nothing was done by the contemnor to purge his contempt prior to his Counsel conveying his apologies to the Court earlier today and also conveying his deep regret for his contempt. In my opinion such apology ought to be taken into account as should the circumstances in which it was given.

It is true to say that the Docherty transaction extended over a period of time which straddled the making of Sperling J's Orders. Before Mr. Coombs Q.C. of
Senior Counsel came into the matter to lead Mr. Cameron on the last day of the hearing, Mr. Cameron said that some time had been spent reading the orders of
Sperling J on 29 November 1995. The question of whether the Docherty transaction should be completed was raised and a decision was made that it should be completed. It was not made clear whether this was a decision made by the contemnor on the advice of his solicitor at the time, Mr. Wakeling, or a decision which he made regardless of that advice. In any event the contemnor does not seek to visit any blame upon Mr. Wakeling and accepts full responsibility for his conduct.

For the contemnor it was urged that following the service of the Court's
Orders upon him he suffered considerable physical and mental stress which led to him experiencing extraordinarily high blood pressure and a heart attack on December 1995 which caused him to be hospitalised in the Royal North Shore
Hospital for a period of time.

The reason advanced as to why the Docherty transaction and the assets arising from it were not disclosed in the affidavit which was filed, I might add out of time, was that it simply didn't occur to the contemnor to refer to it.
After receiving medical treatment and in the light of day the contemnor is said to have readily conceded that the Docherty transaction should have been disclosed. This concession seems to me to have been made very late in the day given that the Motion in this matter was filed on 10 April 1996 and the plea of guilty to the several counts of contempt was not entered or foreshadowed until virtually the commencement of the present hearing on 1 December 1997.

I think it is significant that no other breaches of the Orders of Sperling J have been alleged since the end of 1995. This, however, does not justify the contemnor's conduct on the very day on which he was formally served with the
Orders and the succeeding days.

It does not seem to me that I should, in these proceedings, be unduly concerned with the fact that the monies provided by Bank of Western Australia
Limited ended up in a bank account in the contemnor's name on 4 December 1995, albeit as trustee for the Allied Mortgage Trust, rather than in an account in the Dochertys' name. What is of particular concern to me is the blatant disregard by the contemnor for the Orders of the Court of which he had clear notice.

It does not seem to me that this is an appropriate matter to deal with by way of fine especially having regard to fact that the contemnor is an undischarged bankrupt. While I accept that he may have some resources available to him notwithstanding his bankruptcy there seems to me to be little likelihood of him being able to meet what might be thought to be an appropriate fine in any event.

Putting his financial circumstances to one side, I believe that the interference with the administration of justice brought about by flouting the
Orders of the Court in continuing to carry on the business of supplying the service of negotiating or acting as an intermediary to obtain credit for other persons, receiving moneys from a credit provider, opening bank accounts and depositing moneys to the credit of those accounts, withdrawing moneys from those accounts, failing to inform others as required of the receipt of the moneys which were received and providing false statements in respect of these matters in his affidavit cannot be condoned and treated lightly.

It does not seem to me to assist the contemnor's case that he experienced medical conditions after service of the Court's Orders upon him resulting in a heart attack on 15 December 1995. Especially in the period 30 November - 4
December 1995, I am satisfied that the contemnor knew precisely what he was doing and Mr. Coombs has not suggested otherwise.

The parties agree that the appropriate way for me to deal with the several contempts is to do so collectively although Miss Bergin submits that, and I think correctly, regard should be had to the pleas of guilty of the contemnor in respect of the 13 separate counts.

In my opinion each contempt has been shown to have been wilful. I note that in respect of the first seven counts the contemnor has conceded that his breaches were both wilful and contumacious.

In my opinion the contemnor should be committed to prison for a period of 14 days.

I cannot see any good ground why the Order should be stayed upon the contemnor entering into a good behaviour bond nor do I consider the case to be an appropriate one for the imposition of a community service order.

It has been agreed that the contemnor is currently the subject of a conviction for obtaining a valuable thing by a false statement for which he has been sentenced to nine months periodic detention. This conviction is, so I am informed, presently the subject of an appeal. In my opinion it would be inappropriate for me to have regard to this matter in determining what is the appropriate order to make in respect of the contempts of Court to which the contemnor has pleaded guilty.

I order that the respondent, Sydney Thomas Finnie, be committed to a correctional centre for a term of imprisonment of fourteen days such sentence to commence forthwith. I further order that the respondent pay the applicant's costs and that such costs be assessed on an indemnity basis. Such costs shall be payable forthwith after they have been assessed.
 * * * 
