

Regina versus El-Saleh Matter No Cca 60013/97 [1998] NSWSC 94 (9 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 April 1998 
REGINA versus EDEAN HOUSSAM EL-SALEH /97 April 1998 
Wood CJ at CL, Smart J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and sentence in the District Court (Mahoney DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 60013/97 
DELIVERED: Thursday, 9 April 1998 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday, 3 March 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Edean Houssam EL-SALEH 
JUDGMENT OF: Wood, Smart and Sperling JJ 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: J I Doris 
Respondent: C P O'Donnell 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Baird & Associates 
Respondent: DPP (Cth) 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - duress - Abousafiah direction - rule in Zheng - rule in Edwards 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Appeal against conviction dismissed 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Leave to appeal against sentence refused 
NO. OF PAGES: 26 
HEADNOTE 
E-S imported a trafficable quantity of heroin into Australia. He claimed that he was coerced into so doing, with threats being made against himself and his family.

Held per Smart J, with whom Wood J agreed: - Although there was some departure from the precise terms used in R v
Abousafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531], the overall effect of the judge's directions was to follow substantially the directions set out in Abousafiah.
 - Insofar as the effect of the judge's directions deviated from the requirements of Abousafiah, they favoured, and did not prejudice, the appellant.

Held per Sperling J: - Though the summing-up in relation to duress was defective and deficient, it would have been clear to the jury that the appellant had to be acquitted if, in their view, there was a reasonable possibility that the appellant's story was true.
 - No miscarriage of justice arose and the appeal ought to be dismissed on discretionary grounds.

Held per Smart J, with whom Wood and Sperling JJ agreed: - As the evidence suggesting that lies had been told stood apart from the positive evidence of the acts done, the rule in R versus Zheng [(1995) 83 A Crim
R 572] did not apply.
 - As the lies said to constitute an admission of guilt were not the only evidence against the accused or an indispensable link in a chain of evidence necessary to prove his guilt the rule in R versus Edwards <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 193] did not apply.
 - The Crown's case on the duress point was a circumstantial case thus it was appropriate for the judge to give the jury directions on circumstantial evidence.
 - The Crown case was very strong and the appellant's conviction was inevitable. There has been no miscarriage of justice and the appeal ought to be dismissed on discretionary grounds.

ORDERS 
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
Leave to appeal against sentence refused.

JUDGMENT 
WOOD J: I agree with the reasons and orders proposed by Smart J. 
SMART J: Edean Houssam El-Saleh appeals against his conviction of importing prohibited imports namely narcotic goods consisting of a quantity of heroin, being not less than the trafficable quantity applicable to heroin.

On 17 March 1996 the appellant left Lebanon by air. On 18 March 1996 he arrived at Sydney Airport where he was searched by Customs Officers, and detained on suspicion of possessing internally concealed material. He was conveyed to St George Hospital and x-rayed. The X-rays revealed a number of items in the appellant's bowel area. Following his arrest he was admitted to the hospital and passed 70 small packages. The appellant told the Federal
Police that the packages contained heroin. Gross weight of the heroin powder was 300.5 grams with a purity of 46%, that is, about 138 grams of pure heroin.

At the trial the appellant did not dispute that on 18 March 1996 he imported at least 2 grams of heroin into Australia (the trafficable quantity) and that heroin was a prohibited import. There was one issue namely, whether the Crown had proved beyond reasonable doubt that the importation was a free and voluntary act on the part of the appellant.

It was the appellant's case that he was coerced into importing the heroin into
Australia. He came to Australia from Lebanon in 1967 but he had never been back. He yearned to visit his native land but he could not afford to do so. He had a friend called Mohammed Batache (or Bitache) who had been able to visit
Lebanon. That friend told him of man called Mahmood who paid people to go to
Lebanon and return carrying drugs. Batache had arranged for Mahmood to pay his fare but once in Lebanon (or Syria) had declined to bring heroin into
Australia.

The appellant hit on the plan of having Mahmood pay his fares and expenses of a visit to Lebanon on the basis that the appellant told Mahmood that he would bring back some heroin. However, the appellant said that he never intended to import heroin into Australia. The appellant stated that when he got to Lebanon he was going to confront his cousin and obtain moneys that the cousin owed his family. From those moneys he would reimburse Mahmood for the expenses he had incurred. A figure of $10,000 was mentioned.

Batache told the appellant that Mahmood had already been informed of the appellant and of his desire to return to Lebanon.

The appellant stated that about a couple of months before he left Australia on March 1996 Mahmood telephoned and invited him to coffee. They met.
Arrangements were put in train to obtain a passport. In the ensuing weeks it appeared that Batache had gone to Lebanon and not made contact with Mahmood nor made arrangements to bring the heroin back to Sydney. The appellant agreed with Mahmood to do what Batache was supposed to do.

After receiving his passport the appellant called on Mahmood who introduced a man called Hassan. The upshot of the meeting was that the appellant was to deliver some photos the following day. Later, on the day of the meeting, after a telephone call, Mahmood and Hassan called at the appellant's home.

Mahmood arranged for a Lebanese visa to be obtained for the appellant who also lent his brother's passport to Hassan. A little later, Hassan telephoned the appellant and asked the appellant to leave on the following Tuesday. He expressed his inability to do so on the basis of his personal commitments but he was also having second thoughts. The appellant left Australia on 5 March using a return air ticket provided by Mahmood.

The appellant claimed that he was scared of what Mahmood and Hassan would do to his family if he did not do as they asked. He was aware that they were very angry with Batache for not bringing back any heroin. The appellant stated that after he had arrived in Lebanon he spoke with Mahmood on the telephone and advised that he was returning on 10 March 1996 as proposed arrangements had not eventuated. The appellant stated that Mahmood told him not to behave like
Batache and remember whom he left behind in Australia. The appellant was told to do as he was told. Hassan contacted him by telephone a little later and warned him not to " `F n C' with us" as Batache had done and not to forget whom he had left behind.

The appellant said that after much delay he was collected from his hotel by two men and driven to some premises which were well fortified with a steel door and bars across the windows. He and his belongings were searched. He and the two men slept there. The two men went out the following day. They returned with another man in the evening. The appellant said that he stayed in the premises, not being allowed to leave the flat until Sunday 10 March 1996 when the men took him out for about an hour before returning him to the premises.
The men refused to let him go to Tripoli to visit his family. He could not go because the men were pulling guns, his car had been taken, he did not have any methadone to enable him to survive and he did not know where he was. He did not feel threatened by the guns at that moment. He was told that he had to stay at the premises until 17 March 1996. They told him that if he did not stay there would be trouble.

The appellant said that the men forced him to swallow a large number of cylinders containing heroin. After he declined the request or instruction to swallow the containers the men slapped him. Then they put a gun to his head and threatened to shoot if he did not swallow the packages. He believed that they were members of a powerful criminal organisation known as Kuad and that the threat would be carried out if he did not do so. He said that he did not have any choice. He had thought that the heroin would be strapped to his body.

The appellant stated that he did not tell the customs officers of his plight as he believed that one of them was involved in the importation racket. He said that the told the police officers on the way to the hospital that he had been coerced.

The appellant was a heroin addict who needed his daily dose of methadone not to become distraught. Alternatively, doses of heroin would suffice. The failure of the organisation in Lebanon to provide the appellant with sufficient doses of methadone much restricted the appellant. The appellant confirmed that Mahmood and Hassan offered him $10,000 to go to Lebanon and bring back heroin. They paid his air fare, organised his passport and visa and gave him $1000 spending money. They paid some money to the Housing Commission to cover the rent of his flat at Lalor Park. He agreed that he said in his recorded interview on 21 March 1996 (p35) that he agreed to bring back the heroin as he needed the money. He also stated (at p35) that they were going to give him "some stuff too" when he returned.

The appellant explained that his failure to tell the police at the interview about the threats of Mahmood and Hassan was because he forgot a lot of things due to being in hospital for 3 days and not being well as he underwent treatment. Many of the packages burst and he had heroin in his stomach. He had to be and was flushed out. He was also on drugs prescribed by the doctors.

Batache gave evidence of telling the appellant about Mr Mahmood El-Hud-Ben paying for people going on trips and wanting them to bring something back.
Batache said that he told the appellant that he did not intend to bring anything back.

Ground of Appeal 1 - "The ... judge ... erred in his directions to the jury concerning duress. At SU 2.4 in giving brief directions before a weekend adjournment the judge said: "Now members of the jury, as Mr Pullinger had suggested to you in his submissions, the Crown is on notice that the accused is saying, `Well all right all these things happened but I didn't want to do it.' This is not an offence that you can commit by mistake. It is not an offence that you can be compelled to commit and Mr Pullinger quite fairly and quite properly, and the
Crown quite fairly and quite properly have said, one of the things that the
Crown has to prove as an essential element in the charge is to prove beyond reasonable doubt that this man brought the substance into Australia voluntarily. I will give you more directions about that on Monday." 
The appellant took exception to the words "It is not an offence that you can be compelled to commit." These words were unfortunate as the appellant contended that he had been compelled to import heroin. Probably what the judge meant was that no offence was committed if you are compelled to import the heroin. What the judge said was ambiguous and it could have been understood adversely to the accused.

On the Monday the judge gave the jury these directions. At SU 19-20 he said: "The fifth essential element that the Crown has to prove beyond reasonable doubt is the area which I suggest to you has been the area where the dispute has been in this case, where the real battle lines are drawn up, and it is this; that the act of importing the heroin into Australia was a free and voluntary act. That is, that the accused was not under any duress at the time in the form of threats, either to himself or to his family, and when I use the word `family' I am using that in a loose sense to cover his children, his wife, his defacto and his defacto's children, the whole lot of them. So whenever I use the word "family" I am referring to all of those people." 
And at SU 20-20A "... but the concept of duress is something that the Crown is obliged to eliminate from the case. So that the accused does not have to prove that he was under duress. The accused does not have to prove that some state of mind existed which entitles him to be acquitted. The onus of proof is on the Crown to eliminate any suggestion that he was in any way under duress.

The onus of proof is on the Crown to prove one of two things and the first is that there was no such peril threatened to him or his family. Alternatively, if the Crown cannot satisfy you beyond reasonable doubt that there was no reasonable possibility that he or his family were threatened, then the Crown has to establish beyond reasonable doubt that there is no reasonable possibility that an ordinary person of the same age and sex and maturity as the accused, and having ordinary firmness of mind and will, would have yielded to the threat in the way the accused did." 
These directions would have overcome the effect of what had been briefly mentioned on the Friday and made the jury realise that the Crown had to negative duress.

The appellant contended that the directions as to duress were not in conformity with the law as expounded in R v. Abousafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281991%29%2024%20NSWLR%20531 "View LawCiteRecord" ), per Hunt J.

It is necessary to set out the remainder of the directions as to duress. At SU
A-23: "Members of the jury, let me then go on to describe more to you about the fifth essential component that the Crown has to establish beyond reasonable doubt. The way you go about your task is this: you say, `Well, the accused has let the Crown know that he is relying upon the fact that he was under duress and that is why he imported the heroin'. So you say to yourselves question number one is: `Had any threat been issued to the accused which placed him or his family, in that extended sense, in jeopardy if he failed to import the heroin?' The accused says yes, there had been such a threat and he gives as evidence, in support of that claim, Mahmmoud saying to him before he left
Australia, `Don't forget who you are leaving behind'. And he gives evidence that Hassan said to him over the telephone, you will remember, when he picked up the mobile phone in the car, when he was taken away from his period of house arrest behind bars, the mobile phone rang and he recognised Hassan's voice, and amongst other things, Hassan said to him `Don't F and C the way
Mahmmoud did, don't forget who you left behind'.

In addition the accused says, as further evidence that he was under duress, he was picked up from the Astra hotel in Bahrain and driven in a motor car up into the hill country to a town with a name starting with `Y" and he described the location of the township. And he said he was taken into a room, or a flat in an apartment building. They call it a chalet I think he said. And it had a big steel door on it with glass in it. That was locked behind him. The windows were barred and fellows coming in and out of the room and that they had guns.
And then ultimately they told him he was going to have to swallow the packages. He said he would not do it. So they put a gun to his head and made him do it.

When you take all that into account, he says, he was clearly under duress. But he does not have to prove that that is the case. The Crown has to satisfy you beyond reasonable doubt that there is no real possibility of that threat being in existence.

The Crown says it relies on a couple of factors. A) It says first off, his first version to the agents of the Australian Federal Police, when asked why he did it, was he did it because he was promised ten thousand dollars if he did it. And the Crown says, look at his lifestyle. He had a motive to get some quick money. He needed it. He was four hundred dollars behind in his rent with the Housing Commission. He owed fines. His car was misfiring, or rough and it was an old car he picked up at the government auction.

So he had very good need for money and here was an ideal opportunity for him to get ten thousand dollars and a free trip to Lebanon and a thousand dollars spending money into the bargain.

The Crown says the second reason why you should reject any suggestion that there was a threat in existence, is that he didn't mention a threat until well after he was charged. And the Crown says, if this threat was operating on his mind, wouldn't you expect that he would have said something about it as soon as he was exposed in Sydney, if not to the customs officers, then to the police officers.

So the Crown says it is a red herring. Remember the submission by the Crown
Prosecutor, that it is a red herring thrown into the picture in order to divert your attention.

Members of the jury if, as I have suggested to you, you accept the evidence as unchallenged and, if you accept the fact that he did import all of the heroin in the pictures into Australia, in other words if you accept that as established beyond reasonable doubt that he imported the heroin into
Australia, and if the Crown has satisfied you beyond reasonable doubt that the reason he did it was to get the ten thousand dollars and not because of any fears of peril that his family was in, then that is the end of the matter of duress and you would find him guilty as charged.

However, if you decide that the Crown has not satisfied you beyond reasonable doubt that there is no reasonable possibility that he was under a threat at the time that he imported the heroin into Australia, then you have to consider two more questions. The first is, was it urgently necessary for him to do something in order to relieve his family from imminent peril? Secondly, was what he did namely, importing the heroin, was that an activity which was proportionate to the threat? In other words would an ordinary person of same age, sex and maturity of the accused have gone ahead with the importation as being a reasonable course open to him in order to deal with the threat? 
The Crown has to satisfy you beyond reasonable doubt that there was no reasonable possibility that the answers to those last two questions should both have been, yes.

To put it another way: If you accept that there was this threat, then the
Crown must satisfy you beyond reasonable doubt that there is no reasonable possibility that an ordinary person, that a person of the same age, sex and maturity as the accused would have dealt with the threat by deciding that he had no alternative but to go ahead with the importation of heroin, as being the appropriate way for him to relieve himself and his family from the peril they were in." 
The appellant submitted that no direction was given to the effect that "duress may operate where the threat is directed to persons other than the accused himself if such a threat to those persons would be likely to coerce or compel the person of ordinary firmness of character to yield by committing the crime in question." That quotation comes from the judgment of Hunt J at 545 and correctly states the principle. No direction in those terms was given.

At SU 20A as quoted earlier the judge referred to the Crown having to prove that there was "no such peril being threatened to him or his family" and to the question "Had any threat been issued to the accused which placed him or his family, in that extended sense, in jeopardy". In the last paragraph of the lengthy direction quoted from SU 20A-23 the judge referred to the Crown having to negative that an ordinary person of the same age, sex and maturity as the accused "would have dealt with the threat by deciding that he had no alternative but to go ahead with the importation of heroin as being the appropriate way for him to relieve himself and his family from the peril they were in." 
The directions, while in different words from those used by Hunt J sufficiently covered the point.

The appellant further complained that the judge failed correctly to address the onus and standard of proof when he said at SU 20A: "So you say to yourselves question number one is `Had any threat been issued to the accused which placed him or his family in, in that extended sense, in jeopardy if he failed to import the heroin." 
It was also submitted that this implied an objective assessment of the actual risk to the appellant and for his family and that the following direction was inadequate to redress what had been said: "When you take all that into account, he says, he was clearly under duress.
But he does not have to prove that is the case. The Crown has to satisfy you beyond reasonable doubt that there is no real possibility of that threat being in existence.

The question "Had any threat been issued to the accused" etc, without more, tends to mis-state the issue and to suggest that the jury has to decide whether a threat was issued. The judge then summarised the various threats alleged. The judge in asking the question and in his summary of the evidence was using common parlance in an effort to assist the jury. Ultimately, the judge drew the various threads together and formulated the correct principle.
The jury would not have been misled especially as the judge had earlier told the jury that the Crown had to eliminate any suggestion that the appellant was under duress. As submitted, the judge has not used words based on those of
Hunt J at 545 such as "when the accused did the act, there was no reasonable possibility that he did it by reason of a threat that death or really serious physical harm would be inflicted upon him or upon his family if he did not do it." However, the words used by the trial judge suffice. Indeed, they impose a slightly higher obligation. The judge said that the Crown had to establish that there was no real possibility of the threat being in existence. The terms of the Summing Up taken as a whole, and especially at SU 20A-21, do not suggest that an objective assessment of the actual risk had to be made.

Objection was taken at the trial to the judge (at SU 23) telling the jury "If you accept that there was this threat" and then proceeding to an alternative matter which the Crown had to prove. Upon request, the judge at SU 50 expressly corrected what he had earlier said. The correcting passage reads: "Fourthly, you will recall that on this question of duress I said there were two things that the Crown had to satisfy you about beyond reasonable doubt.
The first was whether or not there was any reasonable possibility that such a threat had been issued. I said, `If you find beyond reasonable doubt that there was no such reasonable possibility that is the end of the matter and you would find him guilty'. Then I said to you, `If you accept that there was a threat that he was under, a threat to his family then you have to consider two more questions'. Strictly speaking what I should have said to you was `If you accept there was a reasonable possibility of a threat to his family then you have to consider two more questions.' " 
There was no request for any further direction. Complaint is made that this was inadequate as the evidence given by the appellant had made reference to three separate occasions when threats had been issued. This correcting direction made reference only to the threat to his family and not to the threat to him. The latter threat involved taking him to the fortress premises, detaining him when he wished to leave and holding a gun to his head. These were the gravest threats. It was submitted that, in their totality, the directions given by the judge were inadequate to ensure that the collective mind of the jury was brought to the issue of proportionality between the threats and their potential targets in accordance with the correct standard of proof.

The judge had summarised the various threats and had made it clear to the jury that they had to consider whether the appellant was under threat at the time of his importing heroin into Australia. The judge had dealt with the issue of proportionality at SU 23 and told the jury that they had to consider whether importing heroin was proportionate to the threat received. The judge also told the jury at SU 23 that the Crown had to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the actions of the appellant were disproportionate to the threat received.

It could not be sensibly suggested that if there was a reasonable possibility that the dire threats alleged were made in Lebanon, such threats would not have had a continuing effect when the appellant was returning to the clutches of Mahmood and Hassan in Australia. The currency of the discourse had been established.

The judge's directions were adequate. The appellant complained that the judge had incorrectly introduced the concept of urgent necessity into his directions in this passage: "However, if you decide that the Crown has not satisfied you beyond reasonable doubt that there is no reasonable possibility that he was under a threat at the time that he imported the heroin into Australia, then you have to consider two more questions. The first is, was it urgently necessary for him to do something in order to relieve his family from imminent peril?" 
The appellant submitted that the judge had introduced a test which has no place in the law of duress. It implied (or sanctioned) an approach by the jury which, whilst possibly allowing that a person of ordinary firmness of mind and will and of the same sex and maturity as the accused, would have yielded to the threat in the way in which the accused did, would still permit a finding against the accused on the basis that his conduct was not urgently necessary.

From the remarks of the judge it is apparent that he took the concept of urgent necessity from the judgment of Gleeson CJ in the Court of Criminal
Appeal in R v. Rogers, unreported, 21 June 1996 and endeavoured to incorporate some of the principles from Rogers in his Summing Up. Both counsel stated that they had no objection to that course. The judge thought that duress and necessity overlapped to some extent. Rogers was relying on "necessity" to justify an escape from lawful custody. While Rogers may be the genesis of the direction which was given the questions remain, what was the effect of the direction and was it erroneous.

The concept of urgent necessity is not, as such, an integral part of the law relating to duress but it is always a critical consideration that the threat was still effective at the time when the crime was committed. The judge correctly made that point in his Summing Up. Duress no longer operates if the
Crown has established that the accused failed to take advantage of an opportunity which was reasonably open to him to render it ineffective. The
Summing Up canvassed the argument of both sides on this aspect.

In telling the jury that the Crown had to satisfy them beyond reasonable doubt that there was no reasonable possibility that it was urgently necessary for the appellant to do something in order to relieve his family from imminent peril the judge was placing upon the Crown the burden of proving a matter which was not strictly necessary. This point does not assist the accused.

The appellant submitted that the judge erred in the formulation of the "second" of those "two" questions: "Secondly, was what he did namely, importing the heroin, was that an activity which was proportionate to the threat? In other words would an ordinary person of same age, sex and maturity of the accused have gone ahead with the importation as being a reasonable course open to him in order to deal with the threat." 
The appellant contended that this direction incorrectly introduced the concept of reasonableness in relation to the course of action undertaken and materially altered the principle propounded by Hunt J in Abousafiah at 545.
The next paragraph in the directions required the Crown to establish beyond reasonable doubt that there was no reasonable possibility that the answer to the question just quoted should have been yes. That is important. It is hard to see how the negativing of a matter by the Crown, even if it is an additional or unnecessary requirement, prejudices the accused.

This direction may have taken into account some of the observations in
Rogers where it was pointed out that necessity does not arise if the accused had been afforded a reasonable opportunity for an alternative course of action which did not involve a breach of the law. This is an evidentiary matter.
Again, the important question is not the origin of the direction but its effect. I have earlier indicated its effect. This second question should be read along with the rest of the Summing Up. At SU 20A the judge said: " ... the Crown has to establish beyond reasonable doubt that there is no reasonable possibility that an ordinary person of the same age and sex and maturity as the accused, and having ordinary firmness of mind and will, would have yielded to the threat in the way the accused did." 
That correctly states the position. The later and challenged second question used a shortened version which would have been understood in the light of the earlier statement and was part of a discussion designed to assist in understanding the position. As with the first question and the reference to urgent necessity the judge was trying to explain in terms which could readily be appreciated the effect of the directions in Abousafiah. The shortened version favoured the appellant.

The overall effect of the judge's directions was to follow substantially the directions set out in Abousafiah.

Appeal Ground 2 - "The ... judge wrongly gave the jury directions concerning lies told by the accused and, in the terms in which they were given, the directions were erroneous." 
The appellant submitted that it was open to the jury to find that the accused had lied and that such lies as he may have told related to the issue of duress. If a jury rejected his explanation of the importation there was no further question to consider. Thus to give any direction on lies, whether as corroboration or as indicative of guilt, was entirely superfluous. See R v.
Zheng [(1995) 83 A Crim R 572] at .

The Crown had relied heavily on the appellant having given different versions of the events, the duress and the threats and the appellant not mentioning matters at an early stage on which he later relied.

The appellant submitted that the jury were not but should have been told that the lies had to be proven beyond reasonable doubt. Such a direction has to be given if the lie said to constitute the admission of guilt is the only evidence against the accused or is an indispensable link in a chain of evidence necessary to prove his guilt: R v. Edwards <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 193] at 210. The appellant correctly contended that the credibility of the accused was crucial. The appellant endeavoured to bring this case within the second category of lies being an indispensable link in a chain of evidence necessary to prove his guilt.

The Crown put to the jury that the appellant's explanation and statements as to the threats and duress varied and were lies. They were nothing but a desperate attempt to postpone the inevitable. The judge said to the jury: "There is a vast difference between the mere rejection of what the accused says about a particular matter and a finding that he has lied. Even if you find that the accused has told a lie about a particular topic, and here I am talking about threats that were held out to him in Sydney and over the mobile telephone in Lebanon and being held a prisoner, having been kidnapped from the
Astra Hotel, being a prisoner in a barred hotel room and being locked in a room. Even if the accused has told lies about this matter, that does not of itself mean that he is necessarily guilty. A lie will only be evidence against the accused if you are satisfied first that it was a lie and, secondly, that the accused told a lie because to have told the truth would not be consistent with his innocence. In other words, a lie, before you should act on it in the way the Crown wants to invite you to, must be something which is deliberate; it must be something which is not what an innocent person would say; and it must relate to a material issue in the case. In other words, that it is only explicable on the basis that if he had told the truth then he would be implicated in the offence of importing the heroin. In other words, that if he told the truth he knew you would convict him and that is why he has told a lie.

You must consider each statement of the accused which the Crown alleges was a lie, and then in respect of each one of those you may only use it if you were satisfied in the circumstances of this case, first, that it reveals a knowledge of the offence alleged and, secondly, that the accused knew that the truth of the matter about which he is said to be lying would implicate him in having committed the offence of importing the heroin. Thirdly, that it was not said by the accused out of panic or to escape an unjust accusation or to protect someone else or to avoid some other consequence.

Members of the jury, for those reasons I have said to you if the highest the
Crown can put its case is that he has told some lies, different versions about the duress and the threats, then that is not a very strong Crown case. It is up to you to determine whether or not that is as high as the Crown can put its case." 
This is not a case to which Zheng applies. The use of lies does not involve a circular process of reasoning. The Crown relied on lies in the different versions given by the appellant following his arrest about the duress and threats. In Zheng the appellant's lies as to what he did in the car park could not logically be established without first finding that the appellant had done what the Crown witnesses alleged. In the present case the evidence suggesting that lies had been told stands apart form the positive evidence of the acts done.

Edwards does not apply to the present case. At 210 the majority pointed out: "Although guilt must ultimately be proved beyond all reasonable doubt, an alleged admission constituted by the telling of a lie may be considered together with the other evidence and for that purpose does not have to be proved to any particular standard of proof. It may be considered together with the other evidence which as a whole must establish guilt beyond reasonable doubt if the accused is to be convicted." 
That statement of principle applies to the present case. The importation of heroin was conclusively proved and there was extensive material as to what the appellant had done and said including the recorded interview.

The jury had considerable objective evidence commencing at the time when the appellant first became involved and participated in arrangements for his overseas journey until the heroin cylinders were removed from his body. The jury had to assess this powerful material along with the varying statements and explanation of the appellant.

I reject Ground 2.

Appeal Ground 3 - "The ... judge wrongly gave the jury directions on circumstantial evidence." 
The appellant submitted that this was not a circumstantial case. I am unable to agree. The Crown's case on the duress point was a circumstantial case. It asked the jury to conclude that the Crown had negatived duress, or more accurately that it had established that beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant had acted voluntarily. The jury was asked to so conclude from many circumstances extending from the first participation in the venture to the removal of the heroin from his body and his various statements.

I reject Ground 3.

Appeal Ground 4 - " ... the accused was denied the right to have the single issue in his case decided by a jury which was clearly and unequivocally instructed as to the essential matters of proof and there was, in consequence, a miscarriage of justice." 
The appellant drew attention to his counsel's request to the judge at the trial to give a direction in the precise terms set out by Hunt J in
Abousafiah starting at sub-paragraph 1 and going to sub paragraph 7. The judge did not do this but he did make the correction which I have earlier mentioned.

It was submitted that the departures from the standard directions on the issue of duress in combination with the faulty direction as to lies and the superfluous direction as to circumstantial evidence resulted in a trial where the true issues were not posed and the jury may have applied erroneous standards and reasoning.

At pp 8 & 8A of his Summing Up on the Friday afternoon the judge checked that the Crown sought a direction as to lies and observed that broadly speaking this was a circumstantial evidence case. When the hearing resumed on the Monday morning the judge was not asked not to give these directions. Nor was he asked to withdraw them or correct them at the end of the Summing Up although he was asked to make some other corrections.

I have earlier indicated that Grounds 2 and 3 are without substance. While it would have been better if the judge had followed Abousafiah more closely, overall the jury was sufficiently directed as to duress.

This was a very strong Crown case. The importation of the heroin by the appellant was clear and beyond reasonable doubt. It was not in issue. The appellant wanted to visit Lebanon. He was in financial straights and much in need of money. He was a heroin addict on a methadone programme. He was provided with a return airline ticket, $1000 in spending money and promised $10,000 on his return as well as some heroin. He knew that he was dealing with some rather tough men. His suggestion that he intended to take the benefits offered but not bring back any heroin was not credible. The story which he told of the events in Lebanon was one which it was hard to take seriously. His explanation for failing to report his position to Customs and the police immediately upon his arrival in Australia was very unsatisfactory. Then he made varying statements as to the position after he had been detained.

The appellant's conviction was inevitable. This was a classic case for the application of the proviso. There has been no miscarriage of justice.

The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

The application for leave to appeal against sentence was abandoned at the start of the hearing in this Court. That application should be refused.

SPERLING J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of Smart J in this appeal. I respectfully agree with the orders he proposes and, substantially, I agree with his reasons. 
As to the first ground of appeal, the appellant having raised duress, it was a question for the jury whether the appellant acted voluntarily in what he did.
That was the issue in the case.

The appellant said he was forced against his will to swallow capsules of heroin at gun point and in response to threats made against his family. The case turned on whether there was a reasonable possibility that the appellant was telling the truth about the course of events as he told it. If there was that reasonable possibility, the appellant was to be acquitted. If not, he was to be convicted. There was no other issue. In particular, no serious question arose in this case as to whether the threats as alleged would be likely to induce a person of ordinary firmness of character to yield to the threats by committing the crime . Plainly, they would.

I do not agree, with respect, that the summing-up read as a whole, was a correct statement of the legal principles as laid down in Abousafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531.] It departed in a number of respects from the standard directions concerning duress. Much of it, including the lengthy passage at SU
A-23 would, in my view, have been incomprehensible to a jury. However, in my view, it would have been clear to the jury from the summing-up that - whatever else the trial judge said - the appellant had to be acquitted if, in their view, there was a reasonable possibility that the appellant's story was true.
The trial judge made that clear. I do not think anything else said by the trial judge might have detracted from that.

Accordingly, there was no miscarriage of justice arising from deficiencies in the summing-up in relation to duress and the appeal, insofar as it depends on this ground of appeal, should be dismissed under the proviso to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/).

As to the second ground of appeal (lies), I agree, with respect, with what
Smart J has written. The Crown was entitled to rely on the appellant having given inconsistent versions of what had occurred. If the versions were truly inconsistent, they could not all be true, which meant that one or more of them had to be a false account of events. The Crown was entitled to rely on such assertedly false accounts, not only as detracting from the reliability of the account relied upon at the trial, but also as evidence of a consciousness of guilt. What that amounted to in the present case would be a consciousness on the part of the appellant that he had acted voluntarily, ie. that his story about duress was false.

This was, however, very much a subsidiary approach to the main issue, that is, whether there was a reasonable possibility that the account of events relied upon by the appellant at the trial might be true.

The Crown's assertion that some aspects of the appellant's various accounts must have been false because they were inconsistent and the possible implication of consciousness of guilt, was not by any means the only evidence against the appellant, nor was it an indispensable link in the chain of evidence necessary to prove guilt. That being so, the direction given as to lies was not deficient in the circumstances of the present case.

I have nothing to add to what Smart J has written in relation to Grounds 3 and .
 * * * 
