

Application of David Joseph Levi [1996] NSWSC 79 (29 April 1996) 
APPLICATION OF DAVID JOSEPH LEVI /96 
THURSDAY 4 APRIL 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application under <case> of the Corporations Law to extend the convening period for an administrator to hold a meeting of creditors.

The administrator was appointed on 18 March 1996, so that in view of Easter the time for convening the appropriate meeting would expire on 14 or 15 April
The administrator says that because seven companies are involved with interrelated activities, and he needs to obtain proper valuations and expert advice, it is not purposeful to convene the meeting that early and he seeks an extension until 29 April 1996.

The legislature, when it drafted Pt 5.3A of the Law, imposed very tight time limits. It did that for a reason, that is that there should not be a lengthy period when the creditors were not able to keep control of a company. However, s 447A makes it clear that the court is to make such order as it thinks appropriate as to how the Part is to operate in relation to any particular company. It has been held that that is a very wide power; see Cawthorn v
Keira Constructions Pty Ltd [(1994) 33 NSWLR 607] and Re
I & J Foods Limited [(1995) 58 FCR 92.] 
The application made yesterday envisaged seven summonses being filed, one for each of the companies. In my view, and there is recent English authority to support this (but I must confess I have not been able to find it overnight), this is not the appropriate procedure.

The application should be made by the administrator and the summons should name all the companies in the relevant group. It is just a waste of time and money for companies which are floundering through financial problems to have to pay seven brief fees for the application and seven filing fees on the summonses.

When the application was made yesterday the affidavit of the applicant really, to my mind, went no further than saying that the administrator was himself satisfied he needed more time. In view of what I said in Mann versus Abruzzi
Sports Club Ltd [(1994) 12 ACSR 611], it is not necessary to show any special ground, but the court does need to have some degree of particularity as to the problems that have caused the administrator to seek an extension of time, not merely a bald assertion that the administrator needs it.

However, having now read the supplementary affidavit of the administrator I make orders 1 and 2 in the summons.
 * * * 
