

Coombwood Pty Limited versus Baulkham Hills Shire Council Nos. Ca 40485/90; Ed /85; Lec 30369/88 Environmental Law - Courts and Judges - Estoppel [1995]
NSWSC 145 (13 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), MEAGHER(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 1 December 1994 #DATE 28:3:1995 #ADD 13:11:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    J B Simpkins 
Solicitors for the Appellant:  Woodgate and
Fidler 
Counsel for the Respondent:   J J Webster 
Solicitors for the Respondent:  Gordon Robilliard and 
Associates
ORDER
Appeal allowed. Cross-appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P The Court has before it what purports to be an appeal and cross-appeal from what appear to be a judgment and orders of Stein J in the
Land and Environment Court.
 .
I say "purport" and "appear" because (as will become plain) it is the contention of Baulkham Hills Shire Council (the Council) (the respondent) that
Stein J did not eventually act as a judge of the Land and Environment Court, but as a private arbitrator, at the invitation of the parties. In these circumstances, the Council, by its cross-appeal, contends, defensively, that the appellant Coombwood
Pty Limited (Coombwood): has filed an incompetent purported appeal against something which was not, in law, an "order or decision" of the Land and Environment Court and hence cannot give rise to an appeal to this Court pursuant to <case> (or any other section) of the [Land and Environment Court Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/); or it contrary to that submission, what was done by Stein J was an order or decision of the Land and Environment Court, Coombwood is estopped, by its conduct, from appealing to this Court, by reason of an agreement, in effect, to submit the matter to private arbitration by Stein J and by reason of later conduct in pursuance of that agreement.
Coombwood, on the other hand, by its appeal, challenges Stein J's assumption that he had the power (and Coombwood's consent) to act as an arbitrator, and asserts that his Honour: erred in the exercise of that purported power; failed properly to exercise his jurisdiction as a judge of the Land and
Environment Court; erred in refusing to award damages-sought by Coombwood; and erred in not awarding
Coombwood costs on an indemnity basis (or alternatively, a solicitor/client basis) having regard to the "outrageous" conduct of the
Council.
To the complexities which would ordinarily attend the resolution of the foregoing questions must be added a number of additional problems which emerged during the argument of the appeal: 
If the decision and orders of Stein J are, as the
Council submits, purely the informal acts of an arbitrator, and hence not susceptible to appeal to this Court, that leaves on the face of the record, placed before the Court, what appears to be a formal "judgment" in a document titled "In the Land and
Environment
Court of New South Wales" with various other indicia of a decision of that Court (the Court number, the reference to "Coram: Stein
J", the names of the parties joined by the usual curial "versus", the title of the document as a "judgment", its commencement with the words "His Honour" and its certification by Stein J's Associate as "Reasons for Judgment" with the formal order that followed it, purporting to be an Order of the Land and Environment
Court, signed in the usual way, on behalf of that court, by its Registrar); 
Since the "judgment" of Stein J was delivered on 25 July 1990, the [Land and Environment Court Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/) has been amended to reflect the passage of the [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/). The initial jurisdiction of the Land and
Environment Court which was invoked (and which, as shall be shown, led to the remittal of the proceedings from the Supreme Court to that Court), namely an application for a declaration under the Local Government Act , has thus been removed. The transitional provisions, following the repeal of the 1919
Act, as contained in the Local Government (Consequential Provisions) Act 1993, now not only confine the jurisdiction of the Land and Environment Court in a way that would deprive that Court from exercising the jurisdiction which it had at the time the proceedings were before Stein J. The transitional proceedings also appear to deprive the Land and Environment Court, if the matter were now remitted to it, of the jurisdiction which it formerly enjoyed.
In this way, the return of the proceedings to the Land and Environment Court could effectively nullify whatever jurisdiction that court had and this by reason of the repeal of the former Local Government Act, the passage of the new Act and the failure to provide, in transitional provisions, for the peculiar circumstances which have arisen in this case; 
The passage of time since the dispute between the parties initially arose in 1978 (or thereabouts), has long since seen the descent of the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/) bar to prevent Coombwood asserting, as against the Council, any fresh cause of action which it may have had, elsewhere than in the
Land and
Environment Court, for interest or damages for delay in the payment of money as contemplated by the decision of the High
Court of Australia in Hungerfords v Walker <case>; [(1989) 171 CLR 125.] Furthermore, any belated application for such damages would run into numerous procedural problems including: that presented by the principles requiring the effective litigation, in the one proceeding, of all related legal claims. See Port of Melbourne
Authority v Anshun Pty Limited <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 589]; the discretionary character of the order of Stein J refusing Coombwood leave, on a belated application, to amend, virtually at the heel of the hunt, its already amended application to add a claim to incorporate an entitlement to damages for delay in the payment of money in accordance with the principles stated in Hungerfords versus Walker; and the practical problems presented by the enormous delays in the litigation of this dispute and the apparent descent of the limitation bar against the prosecution now, elsewhere than in the Land and Environment Court, of the claim which Coombwood wishes to prosecute for Hungerfords versus Walker type damages. At least under the "order" of Stein J, some provision was made for "interest" (as will be described). If this were set aside, upon whatever basis, Coombwood would now face significant problems in prosecuting its claim, either in the Land and Environment Court (because of the intervening amendment to that Court's jurisdiction in respect of the Local Government Act which was the foothold by which such jurisdiction was secured in the first place) or in the Supreme Court (by reason of procedural difficulties, the belated nature of the claim for such damages and the availability to the Council of various defences including the limitation bar and, if that could be overcome, the
Anshun principle).
I have stated these difficulties at the outset so that the reader of these reasons will understand the complexity of the questions presented by the appeal and cross-appeal to this Court. In a sense, it is an annoying complexity. The delays have been great and largely unexplained. The amount at stake is comparatively small. The conduct of the parties has been ambivalent.
The bifurcation of the powers of the Supreme Court and the Land and
Environment Court is virtually bound to present some of the problems identified. See National Parks and Wildlife Service and Anor versus Stables
Perisher Pty Limited [(1990) 20 NSWLR 573 (CA)], 584f, See also Proprietors of
Strata Plan 20754 versus Hawkesbury City Council (1991) 73 LGRA 199 (NSWCA), 206.
The proceedings meandered through three days of hearing before Stein J as the parties positioned themselves to seek perceived advantages from his
Honour's obviously well-meaning attempts to bring their ancient and relatively small initial dispute to a sensible conclusion. If, despite everything, there is any simple lesson in this case, it is that judicial officers must be extremely wary in going beyond their lawful jurisdiction. Even where the parties invite them to do so and it seems sensible to assist in an attempt to resolve a long-standing dispute and expensive litigation, judicial officers must, of necessity, always satisfy themselves that they have jurisdiction to make purported orders. This is so in every court. The multiplicity of courts in Australia today, both federal and State, means that every judicial officer is subject to some limitation upon his or her powers. This is true, even of a court such as the Supreme
Court of New South Wales, which is a continuation of the court created out of the Royal prerogative, enjoying larger inherent and implied powers than others.
The original source of the problem which now brings these proceedings before this Court was a concern that the statutory provisions conferring exclusive jurisdiction in certain matters upon the Land and Environment Court (see [Land and Environment Court Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/), [s 71)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s71.html) deprived the Supreme Court of jurisdiction and required that the matter be transferred to the Land and
Environment Court pursuant to [s 72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s72.html) of that Court's Act. To the extent that a judicial officer of any court proceeds in a well-meaning attempt to resolve the parties' dispute beyond the power which that judicial officer enjoys by law, there is invited the kind of problem and difficulties which have now been presented by this appeal. If the parties accept what is done, and do not challenge the "orders" made, nothing more is heard of their dispute. But if the parties do not accept the "order and decision" but challenge it as going beyond the primary court's jurisdiction, acute difficulties are then presented in addressing the problem and restoring the parties to their strict legal positions.
Not the least of these difficulties is that raised by the Council in its crossappeal. If what Stein J did, even at the invitation of the parties, was a private arbitration and not a lawful "order or decision" of the
Land and Environment Court, the basis may not then be established for an appeal to this Court. Such an appeal lies only from orders of Stein J in the
Land and Environment Court.
It does not lie from his Honour acting as an informal arbitrator at the invitation of the parties. Any such action is taken outside the operation of the [Land and Environment Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/). Its validity (if any) rests upon the consent of the parties. Its enforceability depends upon their agreement or upon any applicable principles of estoppel which will prevent one of the parties from reneging upon a consensual determination of a matter submitted to private determination.
 
A valuation dispute is transferred to the Land and Environment Court
It is now necessary to say something about the claim out of which the dispute between the parties originally arose. The detail was quite complex and
I am not sure that
I understand it all. Some of the facts may be lost in the mists of time.
In 1977, a firm of consulting surveyors, on behalf of Coombwood, put a proposal to the Council to bring to a head a long-standing submission for a subdivision of land at Bellamy Farm
Road, Pennant Hills. The plan provided for twelve residential lots and two areas for public reserves. It was intended that one of these areas should be dedicated as a public reserve. The other would be purchased by the Council from Coombwood. The dedicated land was in excess of that required by the Council to the extent of 1,260m2 . The plan for the subdivision was eventually registered on December 1979. It was common ground that that was the day upon which the market value of the land, applying ordinary valuation principles, was to be determined.
Unfortunately, the parties could not agree upon the valuation. In
November 1980, Coombwood said that it would accept $18,000 in full settlement.
However, the Council had been advised by the Valuer- General that the value of the subject land was only $4,000. It adhered to its offer of $4,000 which it had previously made.
In the languid way of this litigation, letters passed back and forth. By
February 1983 Coombwood had increased its demand to $30,000. It threatened that if the sum were not paid, application would be made to the Land and
Environment Court. The Council stood firm on $4,000. Notice of claim in pursuance of the [Public Works Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pwa1912159/) was served in August 1983. The latter claim was questioned by the Council's solicitors who pointed out that the land in question was dedicated under <case> of the Local Government Act 1919. There then ensued a dispute about this. Proceedings were begun in November in the Land and Environment Court claiming compensation for "acquisition of land for public purposes". Following further correspondence about the true nature of the dedication, the foregoing proceedings were discontinued in March 1985.
In October 1985, a statement of claim was filed in the Equity Division of the Supreme Court. This brought forth a protest from the solicitors for the
Council concerning the cause of action pleaded. An amended statement of claim was filed in the Equity Division in June 1986. This, in turn, meandered its way through the Equity fist. But it finally came on for hearing on 24 August before Young J.
The amended statement of claim recounted the subdivision; the provision for the transfer of one of the two lots to the Council "at a price to be negotiated..."; the consolidation of the two lots in a single lot; the fact that the Council held that part of the single lot which had previously been described in a separate lot as trustee for Coombwood; the negotiations with a view to agreeing upon the value of the lot; and the failure of such negotiations. The relief sought was a declaration that Coombwood was entitled to be registered as the owner in fee simple of that part of the single lot which was previously shown, in the separate lot, as its own; an order that the
Council prepare, approve and register a plan of subdivision; costs and other unspecified relief.
When the proceedings were heard by Young J, his Honour raised a question concerning the respective jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and of the Land and
Environment Court. This was obviously a sensible thing to do given the terms of [s 71](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s71.html) of the [Land and Environment Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/). That section states that certain proceedings, including for a declaration of right in relation to, relevantly, any obligation or duty conferred or imposed by a planning or environmental law "may not be commenced or entertained in the Supreme Court".
Such proceeding must be transferred to the Land and Environment Court. The provision empowering transfer is [s 72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s72.html) of the [Land and Environment Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/). That section reads, relevantly: "72. Where the Supreme Court is of opinion that any proceedings commenced or purporting to have been commenced in the Supreme Court could or should have been commenced in the (Land and Environment) Court, the
Supreme Court may, on the application of any party or of its own motion, order that those proceedings be transferred to the
Court."
The question of proper venue having been raised, and despite the earlier aborted commencement and discontinuance of proceedings in the Land and
Environment Court, Coombwood (which was then differently represented) sought orders from Young J, which the Council did not oppose, that the matter should be transferred to the Land and Environment Court pursuant to [s 71.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s71.html) Young J duly obliged.
When, by this most roundabout proceeding, the matter came back to the
Land and Environment Court, it was called over on no fewer than six occasions between October 1988 and April 1989. The hearing was originally fixed for July .
However those dates were vacated in June 1989. A seventh directions listing occurred in July 1989. New dates in November 1989 were assigned. At long last, after twelve years and the wandering course which had taken the parties to interminable correspondence, a false start in the Land and
Environment Court, a quick visit to the Equity Division and a transfer back to the Land and Environment
Court, the case was ready for trial. Unfortunately for him, it fell to Stein J to hear the case. One can only have sympathy for his
Honour as the recipient of such bitter litigious fruits.
 
Consent orders
Just before the hearing was due to commence, the parties reached a substantial measure of agreement, formulated in consent orders, which occasioned once again a change to the hearing dates.
The consent orders certainly resolved a procedure by which the market value of the land would be determined. Relevantly, the consent orders read: "BY CONSENT:-
The Court notes the agreement between the parties as set forth in paragraph 4 below and further notes that the parties consent to this Honourable Court making the assessment as set out below and any consequential orders.
The Court orders that the further steps in these proceedings be in accordance with paragraph 5 below.
 .
The costs of the proceedings be reserved
The Applicant and the Respondent Council agree that:- 
Upon the Court making an assessment as at 18th December of the market value of that part of lot 8 in D.P.
 over and above the land required for open space (being 1463m2), and (ii) Upon the Court determining WHAT AMOUNT (IF ANY)
SHOULD BE PAID FOR INTEREST on such amount as is assessed under paragraph (I) above, then (iii) The Respondent Council shall pay such sums as assessed in (i) and (ii) above within 28 days of such assessment to the Applicant, and (iv) Upon such payment the Applicant shall provide to the Respondent Council a deed of release ..., and (v) Each party agrees to be bound by any orders as to costs made by this Honourable Court.
The Court directs that:- 
The Applicant and the Respondent file and serve valuation and other expert reports ...

Statements as to evidence in respect of either the market value or THE CLAIM FOR INTEREST to be filed and served on or before 28th February 1990." (emphasis added)
Pursuant to these consent orders, the two days fixed for hearing were vacated. Yet again, in May 1990, the proceedings were called over. They were fixed for hearing in mid July
That is when Stein J heard them.
As his Honour recounts in the decision of 25 July 1990 which is the subject of this appeal: "At the commencement of the second day of hearing on 20 July Counsel announced that the parties had reached agreement on the market value of the land in the sum of $26,000. This leaves for determination the issues of interest and costs."
Let me pause at this stage in these reasons to reflect upon what this agreement meant. The dispute had started in 1977. The parties were initially far apart. Countless solicitors' letters were written, for whom someone (either Coombwood or the ratepayers of Baulkham Hills) must pay. A proceeding in the Supreme Court and then two in the Land and Environment Court occurred.
No fewer than eleven appearances in the Land and Environment Court took place.
The Council only abandoned its assertion that the land in respect of which
Coombwood sought compensation was within the land already dedicated on or about 20 November 1989. That was almost ten years after the date determined to be the due date for payment. It does not take much imagination to conclude that more than the differences between the parties at stake in the dispute would have been incurred as legal costs in such an ill-focused piece of litigation. Alas, the problems were only just beginning. The parties who could finally reach agreement on the value of the land, could finally reach no agreement on interest and costs. That led to further days of unclear debate before Stein J and then the appeal to this Court.
 
A delayed hearing in the Land and Environment Court
Fairness to Stein J requires that I set forth some of the many passages where his Honour expressed concern about the direction in which the parties were leading him. At the opening of the claim for, in effect, interest, counsel for Coombwood asserted that this could be awarded by his Honour upon one of two bases. The first was the lost opportunity cost that Coombwood would have earned on the money had it been received in a timely way from the Council in December 1979. Alternatively, Coombwood sought to prove the actual cost it incurred, being in overdraft, for the interest which it paid to its bank.
Stein J immediately saw dangers. The dangers were obvious enough to any lawyer reflecting upon the jurisdiction which his Honour enjoyed by statute.
There is no jurisdiction in the Land and Environment Court, relevant to a claim such as the present, to award retrospective interest. The only relevant power of the Land and Environment Court to order interest is found in s 69A of the [Land and Environment Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/). But that is a power which is confined to interest on an order "from the date the order takes effect". It does not, as the Supreme
Court is empowered to do, permit an award of interest retrospectively. Stein J was fully aware of this. Moreover, with respect to
Coombwood's claim for damages, along the lines of the then recent decision of the High Court in Hungerfords, the power of the Land and Environment Court to award damages is also extremely narrow, being that in <case>(d) of the Act.
That paragraph has no application to a case such as the present.
Very early in the proceeding upon Coombwood's claims, Stein J observed: "HIS HONOUR: ...
If it were not for the agreement between the parties there wouldn't be any (jurisdiction), there may not be any jurisdiction ... for this Court to embark on the exercise ...

Anyway, ... the parties are not concerned about that because of the agreement they have entered into, that's right isn't it?
MR SIMPKINS: Yes your Honour. As I understand it it might be best with an argument by either party that this Court lacks jurisdiction to resolve those finally outstanding matters.
HIS
HONOUR: And those outstanding matters include the matters that you have just mentioned of value, interest and costs? 
MR SIMPKINS: Yes your Honour."
Later still, following an objection for the Council that it "never anticipated (the hearing) being used in these proceedings as an argument for "damages" in the form of interest", Stein J reverted to jurisdiction: "HIS
HONOUR: Well, if look at the agreement, it says that the applicant and the respondent council agree that 1, the
Court makes an assessment of the value of part of Lot 8 and , the Court determining what amount if any should be paid for interest on such amount as assessed under 1, etc. Now I mean the whole of this agreement was put together because it may be that the
Court lacked jurisdiction." 
Later still, his Honour said: "HIS HONOUR: Well I mean all that would be fine if it was clearly understood between the parties and I fully understood that that was to be one of the ways in which
I'm supposed to approach the matter. And because of the circumstances I wanted the parties to be clear on what the
Court was being asked to determine and that is why this agreement was brought about. And if the Council says that they certainly didn't understand the reference to market value incorporating the possibility that you put, but intended it to be ordinary valuation principles to determine the market value, then I mean I'm in a bit of a difficult situation because it takes two to make an agreement and I don't quite know what to do about it. (The Council) says that the agreement sounds that it quite consciously was made, that the
Court determined the market value on what was a valuation principle. I find it very dfficult to depart from that interpretation ... I'm trying to assist the parties, and basically as I understand that the difference is now between $38,000 and $19,500.
So it's not a fortune that we're talking about. But it's an appreciable difference. There's a hundred percent difference between the parties. This aspect of it probably doesnt make a huge difference about ... that because there's quite a big difference between the gross value. ... But it's very difficult for the Court - I think you must appreciate that." .
And later still, a full day of argument having intervened, Stein J addressed counsel for Coombwood: "HIS HONOUR: When this matter came before me on 27 November ... it seemed apparent to me that there were fairly severe questions of the Court's jurisdiction to embark upon the matter and that would have included the question of interest too, obviously flowing from the question of assessment of compensation. My understanding of the agreement between the parties was that questions of jurisdiction would not arise so long as the Court did what it was asked to do and agreed to do pursuant to the agreement between the parties. I was willing to go along with that as I said yesterday in an endeavour to assist the parties and bring this matter to finality, particularly in view of its age and history. So I mean I would imagine that what the Court's being asked to do is to determine whether or not on the assessment of the market value there should be any interest paid by the
Council to Coombwood.

MR SIMPKINS: Yes your Honour ...

HIS HONOUR: ... Questions of strict jurisdiction of this
Court to award interest would not be raised by either of the parties and that the parties would abide by the Court's decision.
Now one obviously needs to find that in a court and I assume in particular the Supreme Court there would be power to award interest on compensation or damages of this nature as I assume there is from the Supreme Court Rules. So
I don't quite know why you need to amend the application ...
because the application such as it is has become almost irrelevant to the exercise upon which I probably foolishly agreed to embark."
By this stage, counsel for Coombwood was pressing an amendment to the application before the Land and Environment Court. This was to add a claim for relief in respect of the award of damages for the delay in the payment of moneys to which a party is entitled, as provided by the High Court in
Hungerfords. Obviously, Stein J did not consider that such an amendment was strictly necessary. It emerges clearly enough from the passage cited above that his Honour considered himself by this stage to be exercising a consensual jurisdiction as an arbitrator. For that purpose, he appeared to consider that he could take into account the power of the Supreme Court, under its statute, to award interest, which was not a power he would have enjoyed, exercising strictly his jurisdiction as a judge of the Land and Environment Court. This statement provoked the following response from counsel for Coombwood: "MR SIMPKINS: Your Honour's not sitting as a referee or arbitrator and obviously is not purporting to sit as such.
Your Honour's purporting to exercise powers of the Court and the only way that could come about would be by the parties electing in a case of doubtful jurisdiction not to argue jurisdiction. But when it comes to assessing interest the fundamental point I just sought to make is that the principles that your Honour will apply in determining interest are dependent upon the source of power that your Honour perceives the Court as exercising. ... In order to make an award for interest you will need to decide what power the Court's exercising and need to be satisfied that there is at least an arguable basis for that power."
So far as Coombwood was concerned, therefore, it was made plain that it was not asking Stein J to act as an informal arbitrator. It was invoking a jurisdiction which his Honour was said to enjoy under the [Land and Environment
Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/) (as will be described later). It was rejecting the notion of an extracurial activity beyond the powers conferred on his Honour by that Act.
For the Council, Mr Webster disagreed: "MR WEBSTER: That's quite contrary to the understanding that the
Council had in respect of the matter and it was the basis upon which the agreement was reached... on the last occasion.
...
It was fairly obvious ... that the claim that had been made to the Court in respect of the amended statement that was produced to the Court had significant difficulties so far as ... jurisdiction was concerned ... Both Parties in the circumstances felt that, as there was money owing and it was recognised that the plaintiff had brought himself into a situation where he was before this Court with doubtful jurisdiction and he could not go back to the Supreme Court, the time had expired for any recommencement of any proceedings.
And therefore the Council suggested, your Honour might recall, that this agreement be reached But there was to be no suggestion from either party that there would be any challenge to any jurisdiction or the question of jurisdiction arise at all.
So that, when my friend says that the argument between us is going to be well at least your Honour - suggests your Honour's not acting as an arbitrator. In fact that was the agreement that both parties reached...
that we should seek the expertise of this Court to act, in effect, as an arbitrator to determine what the amounts would be.
But that in determining these amounts there was no suggestion that we would submit that your
Honour should have, or should not have, any powers, or the exercising of powers other than one of reason was, in other words, in regard to the question of what should be ordered. And that it's not a question that was going to be raised, namely that we would be arguing that the source of any power to interest would come other than by the agreement itself."
It was upon this basis that
Mr Webster, for the Council, objected to any amendment of the application to include a claim for damages. In response to that submission,
Stein J refused the application. He recorded that Mr
Webster's submissions accorded with his own recollection of what had been agreed.
He went on: "HIS HONOUR: ... I am suggesting that if you seek to argue questions of jurisdiction on any aspect of ... what the Court's been asked to enquire into and determine, I don't think that
I can proceed with the matter. I don't say that with any intent to put a loaded gun against your head... It's just in defence of the Court.

MR SIMPKINS: I take it from what your Honour's said that you would regard a submission that the only source of power your
Honour has to award interest is a power to award interest in the nature of damages as being a submission going to jurisdiction.

HIS HONOUR: No. I think that I have already said and I think
Mr Webster concedes that the question of interest is at large in that each party, as I understand it, has agreed not to, as it were, raise issues of jurisdiction of this Court to make an award of interest.
Therefore your submissions may be at large. If you can convince me that interest should be awarded on a certain basis ...
then I will not stop you making that submission and will give it consideration. As I understand it
Mr Webster doesn't suggest that I should not receive such a submission either. That is so Mr Webster? 
MR WEBSTER: It is. But I don't understand my friend suggesting to your Honour from what he's just said that your Honour would have any alternative as by reason of jurisdiction of this Court to award interest other than damages. Now that's the submission
I will object to. In other words we would submit that the question of discretion only as coming in ... not the question of whether your Honour has any power. That's what my friend wants to argue with your Honour that your Honour does have any power other than to award... damages.

MR SIMPKINS:
I don't wish to argue. I was merely seeking to clarify so I don't infringe any more ...

HIS HONOUR: Certainly that would raise the question of jurisdiction.

MR SIMPKINS: I don't want to be in that position. That obviously you'd understand...

HIS HONOUR: Mr Simpkins. I appreciate your situation and I appreciate what you want to put. It just seems to me that such a submission would run contrary to the agreement that the parties reached and the Court was willing to act upon on the last occasion.... It would place the Court in a conceivably embarrassing situation and I'm not prepared to do that.

MR
SIMPKINS: Yes I understand your Honour's predicament ..."
After a short adjournment, counsel for Coombwood returned with an announcement which led to the final denouement: "MR SIMPKINS: Having given the matter some consideration, my instructions are that we would not wish to be seen to resile from the agreement. We would wish your Honour to continue to hear the matter and given your Honour's encouragement as to the limitations imposed by the consent orders, we would not propose to argue that your Honour's only source of power to award interest here is in the nature of an award of damages but obviously we will be continuing as a matter of discretion.
They are the principles to which your Honour will have regard... "
After short further argument, Stein J reserved his decision. His "judgment" was delivered five days later.
 
The primary judge's determination
Stein J's judgment began with noting the agreement between the parties: "... consenting to the assessment by the Court of the market value of a certain parcel of land ... and consequential orders for interest and costs. The agreement also provides that the parties agree to be bound by the assessment made, including any order as to cost."
After recounting that the agreement had arisen, following transfer of the proceedings to the Land and Environment Court "because of doubts as to this
Court's jurisdiction", Stein J went on: "I was willing to ARBITRATE the matters set forth in the agreement at the request of the parties bearing in mind the history of the matter and the litigation. It is clearly in the interests of the parties and the public to bring finality to the dispute." (emphasis added)
His Honour then proceeded to make a determination as to interest.
He recounted Coombwood's submission that it should have interest compounded at commercial rates to provide restitution along the lines allowed by the High
Court in Hungerfords. He recounted the Council's argument that simple interest rates only should be applied in accordance with the [Public Works Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pwa1912159/) as if the proceedings were for an assessment of compensation upon a resumption. He acknowledged the principle in Hungerfords that where a party is kept out of money to which it is entitled and is bound to replace it with borrowed money, damages may be recovered.
However, he went on: "I am satisfied that such a step is completely inappropriate to the circumstances before the Court.
In my opinion, to do so would be a wholly unreasonable application of the discretion which I am asked to exercise. The circumstances disclosed by the evidence do not warrant an award of compound interest."
Stein J concluded that it was appropriate to award simple interest under the gazetted rates under the Public Works Art, <case>.
On the question of costs, Stein J recorded
Coombwood's demand for fun indemnity or solicitor/client costs and the Council's submission that each party should bear its own costs.
He rejected the higher scale of costs. But he ordered the Council to pay Coombwood's costs both in the Land and Environment
Court and in the Equity Division of the Supreme Court reserved by Young J on an ordinary party/party basis.
The foregoing determination (I use a neutral word) led to the following "findings and orders": "1. By consent I assess the market value of the subject land at $26,000;
Interest is to be paid by the respondent in the sum of $26,000 at the rates prescribed under <case> [Public Works Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pwa1912159/);
The respondent is to pay the applicant's costs on a party/party basis including the costs reserved by Young J." .
These orders later appeared in the formal "Order" signed on behalf of the
Land and Environment Court by the Registrar. It is against that order that
Coombwood has appealed to this Court.
What Stein J finally determined appears to be a sensible enough resolution of the total dispute between the parties. The claim for
Hungerfords-type damages was extremely belated, outside anything that was claimed in the Supreme Court or could be claimed in the Land and Environment
Court. To provide interest as of a resumption was not apparently unreasonable.
That in effect, was what had occurred. The provision of a general order for party/party costs, including in the Supreme Court, in the light of the ill-focused litigation, so long delayed, was certainly a view open to Stein J.
One might have expected that Coombwood, after such a long saga, would have allowed matters to rest there. Whatever the legalities, the marginal difference between its belated claim for Hungerfords damages and the interest awarded by Stein J, might not have seemed sufficient to invite yet a further plunge into litigation fraught with uncertainties, many of them brought about by the lack of clarity of the issues presented for resolution in the Land and
Environment Court.
But now this Court has the appeal and cross-appeal before it. It has heard the contested submissions of the parties. However unpalatable is the task, it must seek to unravel what has occurred and do what the law requires.
I now embark upon that task. However I do so with the observation that the foregoing history of this case (at least as I see it) brings little credit upon the legal profession and presents the parties, behind the lawyers, as apparently lacking a sensible view (or sensible advice) concerning the costs and perils of litigation and where their true interests lay.
 
The jurisdiction of the Land and Environment Court
If there is said to be doubt concerning the jurisdiction of Stein J to do what he did, let there be no question concerning the jurisdiction of this
Court which is now invoked.
The Council, it will be recalled, has submitted that all that Stein J did was to act, as the parties had invited, as an informal arbitrator. No appeal therefore lay from him. Alternatively, Coombwood should not be heard to appeal because it had gone along with the informal arbitration which the Council at all times supported. Upon this approach, Coombwood agreed to accept an extracurial arbitration by Stein J. Having failed to secure what it claimed, it now quite wrongly seeks to dispute Stein J's jurisdiction. It is estopped from doing so, because his Honour acted pursuant to the agreement signed by the then counsel for Coombwood. Proceedings were heard and the sums awarded paid, to the detriment of the Council. Coombwood should therefore be held to its agreement. So went the submissions of the Council.
The difficulty with these arguments arose perhaps from the change of
Coombwood's counsel between the signature of the consent orders (and the
November 1989 discussions before Stein J) and the proceedings before his
Honour in July 1990. By that time, not only was fresh counsel retained, but the decision in Hungerfords had gained currency and provided what was thought to be a new basis for
Coombwood's claim.
The quoted passages of the exchanges between Stein J and counsel in July suggest that there were differing views between the parties concerning the effect of the consent orders and sharply differing views concerning exactly what it was that Stein J was being asked to perform. For the Council it was merely an informal arbitration. That appears to be the way Stein
J, for the most part, approached it. That this is so is made clear in his "judgment": "I was willing to arbitrate the matter set forth in the agreement at the request of the parties ... "
I leave to one side the lawfulness of a judge of a superior court, such as the Land and Environment Court, acting as an arbitrator beyond jurisdiction. For the moment I will assume that it would be competent to such a judge to act as an arbitrator. The Council even submitted that Stein J had, pursuant to the agreement signified by the consent orders, become an arbitrator within the terms of [s 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s4.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), so that what he had produced was an "award" which was final and binding, contained no manifest error on its face appeal against which should not be entertained by this Court. There are obvious legal difficulties in such a submission. But the most important are that neither in its terms, nor in its character, was what Stein J produced an arbitrator's award. 
The decision was not expressed to be an award, but a judgment; 
It appeared under the title and court number of the Land and Environment
Court; 
Stein J was referred to in it as "His Honour"; 
The document was certified by His Honour's associate as "Reasons for
Judgment ... of the Honourable Justice Paul L. Stein"; and 
The reasons were then given effect by what purports to be an order of the Land and Environment Court, signed by the Registrar and apparently enforceable as such.
Accordingly, despite the discussion with counsel which is recorded, and what seem to have been cross-purposes between Coombwood and the Council, what finally emerged appears to be a properly entered order of a superior court, viz the Land and Environment Court. This Court, and the public, are entitled to treat that document as valid on its face. Whilst it stands, it has the force of law. It purports to be an order after the lawful exercise of jurisdiction of the Land and Environment Court.
The fundamental question therefore posed is whether that Court had any such jurisdiction as would empower it to make the order for interest in order
It certainly had the power to make the consent order for the assessed market value, for that was arguably within its power pursuant to the proceedings transferred to the Land and
Environment Court by Young J.
Likewise, it had the power to order costs, both under <case> of the [Land and
Environment Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/) and under the reservation by Young J of the costs in the
Supreme Court to be determined by the Land and Environment Court. See also the
Act, <case>(c). Thus, the only issue as to a suggested excess of jurisdiction concerned the order that interest be paid by the respondent in the sum of $26,000 at the rates prescribed under <case> of the [Public Works Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pwa1912159/).
 
The Land and Environment Court's power to award interest
As a court with defined jurisdiction and powers, the Land and Environment
Court may not order interest to be paid unless the power to do so can be found in the express terms of legislation or is otherwise necessarily implied in powers expressly conferred on it. It was not suggested that the power of Stein
J to award interest, as in order 2, came from the very limited power now afforded by the express terms of <case> of the [Land and Environment Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/).
Nor could the transfer of the proceedings from the Supreme Court, pursuant to [s 72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s72.html) of that Act, bring with it the larger powers expressly conferred on the
Supreme Court to order interest to be paid on outstanding sums. Therefore, there would seem to be no express power in the Land and Environment Court to order 'interest as order 2 purports to do. Nor can such power be implied in the express powers conferred on the court or its nature as a court. See Logwon
Pty Ltd v
Warringah Shire Council [(1993) 33 NSWLR 13 (CA)], 17,26.
In a sense, it was the lack of power of the Land and Environment Court to award interest that led Coombwood to its belated claim for damages. But that claim was misconceived. Leaving aside its belated formulation, the probable descent of a limitation bar, possible Anshun arguments and the discretionary order of Stein J rejecting an amendment to the record to permit to be advanced, the jurisdiction of the Land and Environment Court to award damages is very strictly limited, as this Court has earlier pointed out.
Relevantly, the power appears in [s 20(2)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s20.html) of the [Land and Environment Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/).
Coombwood urged that it would have been open to Stein J to make a declaration of right in relation to Hungerfords damages and that his Honour had erred in declining to do so. The suggested source of that jurisdiction was s 20(2)(c) of the Court Act. This provides: "s 20(2) The Court has the same civil jurisdiction as the
Supreme Court would, but for section 71, have to hear and dispose of proceedings: to enforce any right, obligation or duty conferred or imposed by a planning or environmental law ...
...
to make declarations of right in relation to any such right, obligation or duty ... ; and whether or not as provided by [section 68](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s68.html) of the [Supreme
Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) - to award damages for a breach of an agreement referred to in subsection (3)(c). (a development contract)"
There are numerous difficulties in the way of attempting to make s (2)(c) do the work which Coombwood asserted. Even allowing that the phrase "in relation to" is very broad, what Coombwood was seeking was not merely a declaration of right, but an order for the payment of interest. It was seeking to go beyond the right and to secure a remedy. Given that damages are expressly referred to in <case>(d) of the act, and in an extremely limited way, it cannot be imagined that Parliament intended, by the power to make declarations of right under <case>(c), to empower the Land and Environment
Court to make a declaration of right as to damages that would effectively circumvent the strict limitations imposed by <case>(d). Cf. O'Grady versus The
Northern Queensland Co. Limited <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 356], 373. For this reason, in addition to the numerous procedural impediments which stood in the way of the belated claim for Hungerfords type damages, and whether or not it was within the consent orders signed by the parties, no jurisdiction existed in the Land and
Environment Court to make an order or decision in relation either to the interest or damages which Coombwood sought.
Stein
J appears (in the passages quoted) to have recognised this.
Earlier, in Whitehouse versus Remme (1988)64 LGRA 375, Stein J, at 382, found jurisdiction in the Land and Environment Court as a result of a concession.
However, as was pointed out in Stables Perisher (see e.g. 585), the jurisdiction of a court of tribunal of limited authority cannot be conferred by concession. In the case of a court created by statute, at least, jurisdiction must be found expressly stated or necessarily implied in the language of the statute.
See ibid and John Fairfax and Sons Ltd versus Police
Tribunal of New South Wales and Anor [(1986) 5 NSWLR 465, (CA)] 476.
In the matter then before him, Stein J would have been quite aware of the limitations on the Land and Environment Court's jurisdiction to award interest or damages or to make a declaration of night designed, in effect, to award damages. With respect (and admittedly with the hindsight of this appeal), the course which should have been taken is plain. His Honour should have made it clear that, despite the repeated attempts of Coombwood to get orders for interest or declarations as to damages, no jurisdiction existed in the Land and Environment Court to oblige. Without more ado, Coombwood would then have been forced (1) to seek to return to the
Supreme Court, (2) to accept an informal arbitration outside the Land and Environment Court, (3) to accept the offer made by the
Council or (4) to abandon the claim for interest and damages which the Council made. Instead of this, the proceedings persisted in their confused way over two more days, with the parties at crosspurposes and his
Honour seeking with good heart to bring this unfortunate saga to an end. The result, sadly, was an order made which clearly went beyond the jurisdiction of the Land and Environment Court.
 
Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal
This conclusion having been reached, can it be said that it destroys the basis for an appeal to this Court against the order of the Land and
Environment Court? I think not. That order on its face is perfectly valid.
The reasons of Stein J which sustain it, have all the hallmarks of a decision of the Land and Environment Court. Orders were made which appear perfectly valid.
Certainly the order for costs of the proceedings transferred from the Supreme
Court and probably the order by consent were valid. Upon this footing, the order of the Land and Environment Court, properly characterised, was not an arbitrator's award. It was such an "order or decision" of that Court as gives rise to an appeal to this Court. Such appeal is from a decision of the Land and Environment Court in its Class 3 jurisdiction. Accordingly, by [s 57](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s57.html) of the [Land and Environment Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/), the only ground for an appeal against an order or decision is "on a question of law". That phrase has been narrowly confined by a long line of authority in this Court. See eg Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB
Industries Ltd [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139 (CA)], 156.
An order made in excess of jurisdiction, involving a misunderstanding of the limits of the power of the Land and Environment
Court, amounts nonetheless to an order or decision of the Land and Environment Court on a question of law. There is therefore no doubt that it founds a valid appeal to this Court.
The suggestion to the contrary by the Council must be rejected. Although Stein
J may subjectively have intended, in providing for interest, to have acted as an informal arbitrator, he was in fact acting, or purporting to act as a judge of the Land and Environment Court. The order which followed his decision is an undoubted order of that court. It must be dealt with by this Court upon that basis. The challenge to the jurisdiction of this Court must therefore be dismissed.
 
Consequences to dispose of the proceedings
To rebuff the foregoing arguments, the Council raised a number of responses. As to the first, that the judgment was, in effect, an award of an arbitrator under the [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), I have already said that I see no merit in that contention.
As to the second, that Coombwood was estopped from raising before this
Court a challenge to the jurisdiction of the Land and Environment Court, I am unconvinced. The moneys "ordered" by Stein J may have been paid to the Council and not returned. But at all times, the Council knew of Coombwood's appeal, by which it challenged the jurisdiction of Stein J to order as he did. A reading of the transcript of the oral exchanges between Stein J and counsel, set out above, makes it clear enough that his Honour and Mr Webster (for the Council) believed that in respect of interest and interest-like damages, the parties had agreed to what was, in effect, a consensual arbitration. But Mr Simpkins for Coombwood never ultimately consented to that course. He urged Stein J to "continue to hear the matter". He did not surrender his argument (misconceived although
I think it was) that his Honour should make a declaration of right as to damages pursuant to his powers under the [Land and Environment Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/).
In any case, a claim for such an estoppel by the Council is not appropriately determined by this Court in resolving a ground in a cross-appeal. If the Council seriously asserted such an estoppel, it would be obliged to claim substantive relief in the Equity
Division where evidence could be taken, such as we have not heard and facts found, such as we can scarcely assess on the transcript and documents before us.
Finally, there is a question as to whether this Court should provide relief, given the circumstances which have been disclosed. According to the
Council, there is now no jurisdiction even to grant the declaratory relief previously admitted by the Council as being available under [s 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s20.html) of the [Land and Environment Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/) in respect of the rights of Coombwood under the
Local Government Act 1919. Those circumstances include the extremely dilatory and imprecise proceedings; the misconceived claim for declaratory relief in the Land and Environment Court to which Coombwood has asked the Supreme Court to transfer its claim; the acute difficulty (if not impossibility) of that
Court's now providing any relief at all to Coombwood following the repeal of the Local Government Act 1919 and the passage of the Local Government (Consequential Provisions)
Act 1993.
If I could simply leave matters rest where they stand by the orders of
Stein J in the Land and Environment Court,
I would gladly do so. Setting aside his Honour's order for interest appears to create serious problems for
Coombwood. It may remove the foundation for the payment of a sum which it still contends to be inadequate. How it is now going to prosecute its claim for a larger sum, in the face of the many difficulties which I have mentioned, is not at all clear. Nevertheless, because I am convinced that the order of the Land and Environment Court, so far as it required the payment of interest was made without jurisdiction, and because the relief of this Court has been invoked to so hold, I consider that the Court must so determine.
It was always open to Coombwood to withdraw its challenge. In the course of the hearing of the appeal, the Court paused to make sure that Coombwood had been properly apprised of the risks which it took by continuing with the appeal. Those risks included that the award for interest which was made would be set aside and that Coombwood would now be too late to prosecute its claim elsewhere for damages or interest.
Because counsel assured the Court that
Coombwood, appreciating the risks, wished to have its legal rights upheld, I see no reason why the Court should refrain from doing so.
The central point of this case is that a judge of the Land and
Environment Court ordered interest to be paid in circumstances where there was no jurisdiction to do so. That was an error on the question of law.
Jurisdiction could not be conferred by consent. See, e.g. Stables Perisher , 578, 586. Cf. Welsh versus Anderson [(1902) 5 WAR 1.] The purported order requiring the payment of interest must therefore be set aside.
There is no apparent point in returning the matter to the Land and
Environment Court. Upon the above analysis, that Court has no power to make any award of interest relevant to Coombwood's claim. Nor, even if there be power, would this be an appropriate case in which a declaration of right as to damages would be made by that Court. It was gently suggested that this Court should refer the proceedings back to the Equity Division so that Coombwood could take up any entitlement it might still have there before Young J, at the request of the parties, transferred the proceedings to the Land and
Environment Court. Alternatively, it was suggested that the Court should nunc pro tunc revoke the order made by Young J for transfer of the proceedings from the Equity Division of the Supreme Court to the Land and Environment Court.
Given the antiquity of the litigation, the failure to make such application before Stein J, some doubt as to the power of re-transfer following the making of an order under [s 72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s72.html) of the [Land and Environment Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/), and other discretionary considerations, I would not accede to those requests. The sum of $58,063 has been paid by the Council to
Coombwood. That sum includes the amount "of interest ordered" by Stein J. The sum has not been returned. Unless the proceedings are in some way reactivated, I did not take the Council to be indicating an intention to pursue Coombwood for the actual return of the interest paid.
 
Challenge to costs
The foregoing leaves only that ground of appeal which challenged Stein
J's refusal of an order, sought by Coombwood, that the Council should pay its costs on an indemnity basis. As I have previously pointed out, the decision of the Land and Environment Court was made in its Class 3 jurisdiction.
Accordingly, the only ground of appeal permissible by <case> of the Act is "on a question of law". That expression has been narrowly construed. I do not see any question of law in the exercise of the jurisdiction as to costs. But assuming that this difficulty could be overcome, I will address the merits.
There was some justice in Combwood's complaint. The Council's original resistance to the claim for compensation was, at one stage, an apparently churlish suggestion that, because the compensable block had been consolidated to a single lot, compensation was not payable. However, cost orders are discretionary. There were many reasons in the history of this litigation which would have sustained a refusal of indemnity costs. Although I might have reached a different conclusion from that to which Stein J gave effect by order of his orders,
I am not convinced that it was wrong in such a way as to authorise this Court to disturb it. Still less do I see an error of law.
The last matter to be decided concerns the costs of the appeal and cross-appeal. In the conclusions which I have reached, the cross-appeal wholly fails. The appeal succeeds. But it succeeds only upon the suggested excess of jurisdiction by Stein J to which his Honour was led, in part, by the conduct of the appellant. If the appellant had made it absolutely clear throughout that it completely rejected any suggestion of an informal arbitration and insisted on its rights at law, I entertain little doubt that
Stein J would have dismissed the claim for interest, as he did the claim for damages of the
Hungerfords kind.
In these circumstances,
I believe that this Court should bring this melancholy tale to a conclusion by making no order as to the costs in this
Court. Neither party succeeded in substance. The success of Coombwood is a
Pyrrhic victory. The necessity of appeal could have been avoided (as could many of the steps in this litigation) by a clearer expression of the parties' respective claims and a sharper attention to the jurisdiction of the courts involved to provide the claimed relief.
 
Orders
The following orders should be made: 
Appeal allowed; 
Set aside order 2 of the orders of the Land and Environment Court dated July 1990; 
Appeal against those orders otherwise dismissed; and 
Cross-appeal dismissed.
JUDGE2
MEAGHER JA I agree with Kirby P.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA I agree with Kirby
P.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/145.html  
