

Clark versus Faldan P/L and Anor [1996] NSWSC 312 (31 July 1996) 
Clark versus Faldan Pty Ltd & Anor /96 
Monday, 20 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff has applied for interlocutory relief in respect of a licence agreement between her and the first defendant dated 14 November 1995 relating to the operation of a hotel at Enfield. The matter of immediate dispute between the parties relates to the question whether under that agreement the first defendant was obliged to provide to the plaintiff a poker machine system, which it is unnecessary further to describe, which had been in the hotel until about August 1995 and which had then been removed after the appointment of receivers of the first defendant, and was, at the time of execution of the licence agreement, in store.

The dispute really comes down to the proper construction of clause 4(a) of the licence agreement, which says: "The definition of 'premises' in item 4 includes the fittings and fixtures, plant and equipment, utensils, shelving, counters, safes and any other articles upon the premises owned by the licensor as set out in schedule 3 to this licence." 
The reference to item 4 is a reference to the definition in the first schedule to the agreement of the expression "the premises", which is there defined to mean the hotel in question. Although it is not so marked, schedule 3 to the licence is obviously a list of plant and equipment under the letterhead of
Gray Eisdell Timms Pty Ltd, which is attached to the agreement and executed as part of the agreement in which there is included the poker machine system in question.

The plaintiff's contention is that the poker machine system is included in the expression "premises" by virtue of clause 4(a) and since it was not physically there at the time of the licence agreement, there should be imported an implied obligation on the first defendant to re-deliver it to the hotel for the use of the plaintiff. The defendant's contention is that the poker machine system is not included in the premises by virtue of clause 4(a), because it was not at the date of the agreement upon the premises, even though it was listed in schedule 3.

There is clearly a serious question to be tried as to the proper construction of the agreement and I would have thought that there is a good deal to be said in favour of the plaintiff's contention.

On the question of the balance of convenience as to whether injunctive relief ought to be granted on an interlocutory basis, some factors against the granting of an interlocutory injunction are (1) the delay of the plaintiff in applying for relief, particularly after correspondence in February 1996 had clarified the positions taken by the respective parties; (2) the prospective termination of the licence in any event on or before 31 July 1996, which is the last date for completion of a contract of sale of the hotel which has been entered into by the first defendant; (3) the ability of either party to terminate the licence in any event on one week's notice to the other; and (4) the need for the plaintiff to obtain an alteration to her licence under the [Liquor Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la107/), inserting a condition permitting her to operate the poker machine system, which is an approved amusement device within the meaning of that Act.

Factors favouring the granting of an interlocutory injunction include (1) the absence of any substantial prejudice to the defendants (subject to one matter to which I will come); and (2) the apparent importance to the profitability of the plaintiff's activities of being able to operate the poker machine system.

There are two further matters to which attention has been directed in argument. One is the circumstance that no licence fees have been paid by the plaintiff since January 1996. I do not regard that as a particularly significant matter for present purposes. It is obviously in the commercial interests of the defendants to have the plaintiff operating the hotel under the licence, otherwise no doubt the defendants would have terminated the licence long ago, and so long as it suits the defendants to have the plaintiff there, then the defendants, it might be said, ought to provide the plaintiff with whatever it was that was agreed to be provided to the plaintiff under the licence agreement.

The other matter which I think is of very substantial importance and indeed, so far as the relief presently sought is concerned, of overriding significance, is that it would appear that the delivery of the poker machine system by the defendants to the plaintiff at the present time would involve the defendants in committing an offence under s.187 of the [Liquor Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/), which says: "(1) A person who offers to supply or supplies an approved amusement device, otherwise than by way of sale, is guilty of an offence against this Act unless the offer or supply has the approval of the board and any conditions imposed by the board when giving the approval are complied with.
 ...

A person who supplies an approved amusement device to a hotelier is guilty of an offence against this Act unless the keeping of the device by the hotelier would be lawful." 
By s.184(1) of the Act a person knowingly in possession of an approved amusement device is guilty of an offence against the Act unless the person: "... is the holder of a hotelier's licence which is subject to a condition authorising the licensee to keep in the hotel and permit the use and operation of the approved amusement device." 
It is common ground that the plaintiff's licence is not presently subject to such a condition, although it is of course open to her to apply to have such a condition inserted. Reference has been made to s.161 which empowers the Liquor
Administration Board to add such a condition to a hotelier's licence and provides conditions for the exercise of that power, including in subs.(8), an ability to require various forms of information to be supplied to the Board.

The net result is that a mandatory order in terms of the interlocutory injunction sought by the plaintiff would appear to involve the defendants in committing an offence against the [Liquor
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/). That seems to me to be a sufficient reason why such an order should not be made.
During the course of argument other questions have been canvassed relating to whether, if the plaintiff did apply for the appropriate condition to be inserted in her licence, that application might fail because of a lack of co- operation by the defendants.

There is an absence of evidence as to what the attitude of the Board might be to an application by the plaintiff for an appropriate condition to be inserted in her licence. One might speculate that the potential shortness of duration of the plaintiff's tenure could be a relevant factor and one just does not know how such an application would be received or dealt with.

Because the relief sought today by the plaintiff does not extend to acts in relation to such an application and because there is really no evidence about the mechanics or the practicalities of it, I would only wish to say firstly that I do not think it is appropriate to explore other possible forms of interlocutory relief today, but secondly, it may be that with further evidence the plaintiff may be able to make a case for requiring the defendants, on an interlocutory basis, to join in, or to provide information about or to take some other course of action in respect of, any application to the board which might be made by the plaintiff. I would not wish to have anything I say today treated as precluding any future application of that kind.

Apart from the interlocutory injunction to which I have referred, the plaintiff also seeks what are described in the summons as "interlocutory declarations". The expression "interlocutory declaration" is somewhat ambiguous and I would only wish to say that if by an "interlocutory declaration" is meant a declaration that is intended to have only temporary or provisional effect pending a final hearing of the claim to the right declared, then in my view the expression is a contradiction in terms. A declaratory order is, of its very nature, a form of final relief, final in the sense that it creates an issue estoppel. Authorities supporting that view include Bond v
Sulan <case>; [98 ALR 121] at , Magman versus Westpac Banking Corporation <case>; [104 ALR 575] at , International General Electric Co versus Commissioners of Customs &
Excise [1962 1 Ch 784], and Internal Revenue Commissioners versus Rossminster <case>; [1980 AC 952] at pages 1,000, 1,007 and 1,014.

The order of the Court is that the application for interlocutory orders in terms of paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the summons is dismissed without prejudice to such other interlocutory relief as the plaintiff may be advised to seek.
 * * * 
