

New South Wales Crime Commission versus Nicholson Matter No 11200/97 [1998]
NSWSC 749 (18 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
NEW SOUTH WALES CRIME COMMISSION versus SHANE JOSEPH NICHOLSON /97 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter, Mr. Temby of Queen's Counsel appears on behalf of the Commission seeking a forfeiture order. Mr. Parisi, the solicitor for the respondent, appears. Mr. Parisi has sought an adjournment on the basis that, although he is instructed by the respondent as to the substance of the application that he was willing to submit to a forfeiture of the property claimed, those instructions were on the basis that the respondent was not willing to pay the applicant's costs. 
This is an application under the [Criminal Assets Recovery Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cara1990272/). Under that Act property the subject of a restraining order shall be forfeited unless an application is made to remove the property from the effect of the restraining order and subsequent forfeiture will occur where at least serious criminal activity has been proved such that the Commission may proceed beyond the restraining order to the forfeiture.

In this case, there has been tendered a certificate of conviction showing that the applicant has been convicted both of robbery and of supply prohibited drug. The application for forfeiture is not in itself opposed by Mr. Parisi.
However, Mr. Parisi does oppose any order for costs in the light of his instructions. Regrettably, Mr. Parisi is unable to advance any argument as to why the ordinary course should not be followed and a costs order of the ordinary kind ensue following the success of the Commission's application.

In the circumstances, I grant the application and I make an order for costs in favour of the Commission.

I make orders in accordance with the short minutes to which the parties have assented at the bar table, initialled by me and placed with the papers.
 * * * 
