

Regina versus Spies Matter No Cca 60674/97 [1998] NSWSC 459 (17 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 November 1998 
REGINA versus PETER MANNERY SPIES 
CCA 60674/97 September 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Sully J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
HEADNOTE 
The appellant, a director of Stirling Nicholas Duty Free Pty Limited (`SNDF'), was convicted under s176A of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) of the offence of defrauding the creditors of SNDF in their dealings with the company. The Crown case turned on the contention that the appellant caused
SNDF to purchase the shares in Stirling Nicholas Holdings Pty Limited (`SNH'), with the purpose of making himself a (secured) creditor at a time when the company was about to go into liquidation, and entered upon another transaction as a means to give the appearance of worth to the share deal. The appellant challenges the verdict.

Held:
In this case a proper direction to the jury should not have rested with the broad element of charging a jury to find that the accused intended to defraud creditors. A specific mechanism for the fraud has been identified, and the jury should have been given a direction of the elements of knowledge that are implicit in that case. In the instant case, the trial judge should have directed the jury that the state of mind of the accused encompassed at least an understanding of the circumstances which made the value of the shares fictitious. The trial judge failed to do this. Accordingly, the appeal from the conviction should be allowed.
The finding of the jury on the more serious charge of intending to defraud creditors encompassed a finding that there was an improper use of position and that the objective of the transaction was intended to be to benefit the appellant. Therefore, it can be said that the jury was satisfied of facts which proved the appellant guilty of the alternative charge under s229(4) of the Companies Code. Accordingly, this was an appropriate case for the Court to apply [s7(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s7.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) .

ORDERS
The verdict of the jury substituted for a verdict that the Appellant is guilty of the offence charged in the second count of the indictment.
Appellant sentenced to imprisonment for twelve months to be served by way of periodic detention dated to commence on 3 January 1998, as ordered by the primary sentencing judge.

REGINA versus Peter Mannery SPIES 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The Appellant Peter Mannery Spies was charged with two offences. The first offence was under s176A of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) : "Between about 17 October 1989 and 9 May 1990 at Sydney in the State of New
South Wales, being a Director of a Body Corporate, namely Stirling Nicholas
Duty Free Pty Limited ('the body corporate'), defrauded persons, being the creditors of the Body Corporate in their dealings with the Body Corporate, by causing the Body Corporate to purchase his shares in Stirling Nicholas
Holdings Pty Limited for $500,000".

In the alternative, an offence under s229(4) of the Companies Code: "Between 17 October 1989 and 9 May 1990 at Sydney in the State of New South
Wales, being an officer of a Corporation, namely Stirling Nicholas Duty Free
Pty Limited ('the Corporation'), made an improper use of his position to gain directly an advantage for himself by causing the Corporation to purchase his shares in Stirling Nicholas Holdings Pty Limited for $500,000 which sum he caused to be credited to his loan account with the Corporation." 
The Appellant pleaded not guilty to both charges.

Following his trial before Armitage DCJ and a jury, he was convicted on the first charge and, as the second charge was an alternative, no verdict was taken thereon. On 22 December 1997 Armitage DCJ sentenced the Appellant to eighteen months imprisonment, to be served by way of periodic detention.

The charge of which the Appellant was convicted did not focus on any act of defrauding of the company of which the Appellant was a director, ie Stirling
Nicholas Duty Free Pty Limited ('SNDF'). Rather, it alleged that in his capacity as a director of SNDF he defrauded a third party, namely, the creditors of SNDF in their dealings with SNDF. This is a matter of some significant as will presently appear.

It was possible for the Crown to have pleaded that it was Stirling Nicholas that had been defrauded by reason of the misappropriation of a valuable commercial lease. However, it chose to lay a charge which focused on the position of the creditors of that company, rather than the company itself.

The factual substratum of the case involved two companies. The first is
Stirling Nicholas Holdings Pty Limited ('SNH') in which the Appellant held almost all of the shares, namely, 9998 out of ten thousand. The second company is SNDF in which the Appellant held about two thirds of the issued shares, namely, 33,750 out of fifty thousand.

The basic factual transaction which occurred was that SNDF bought from the
Appellant his shareholding in SNH for a sum of $500,000. The only substantial asset which SNH had was a lease over the premises from which SNDF conducted, as it had conducted for many years, its business of a duty free shop.

There was no issue at the trial that the Appellant was a director of SNDF: nor was there an issue that he caused SNDF to purchase his shares in SNH. The issue at the trial was whether or not his conduct constituted the third element of the offence, ie, defrauding the creditors of SNDF in their dealings with SNDF by the act of causing SNDF to purchase the shares in SNH.

The evidence at the trial which the jury was entitled to accept included the following:
By late 1989 SNDF was in financial trouble, and this was known to the
Appellant.
In the event that the business of SNDF could not be sold, which the
Appellant was attempting to do, SNDF would go into liquidation with substantial debts owing to its creditors.
The liquidation of SNDF would have substantial adverse effects on the
Appellant. He himself owed SNDF $176,354.80 which could be called up by a liquidator. In addition, he had personally guaranteed SNDF's bank overdraft at the ANZ Bank, giving security by way of a mortgage over his home.
By minute of meeting of SNDF dated 17 October 1989 SNDF resolved to purchase all of the issued shares of SNH for an amount of $500,000.
The transfer of shares in SNH to SNDF took place in March of 1990. The
Appellant's SNH shares were paid for by crediting the Appellant's loan account at SNDF with the purchase price of his SNH shares and, accordingly, the
Appellant had changed his position from a substantial debtor of SNDF to a substantial creditor and he was owed $323,645.20. There was no issue at the trial that the Appellant had caused this entry to be made to his account.
By minute of meeting of SNDF dated 30 March 1990 it was recorded that SNDF was unable to pay the purchase price of the SNH shares, and that the Appellant had agreed to accept an equitable mortgage over the assets of SNDF until all the monies were paid. Accordingly, the Appellant became a secured creditor of
SNDF and, subject to action being taken by or on behalf of other creditors to set aside the transaction, the Appellant was placed in a position superior to that of unsecured creditors.
On 24 August 1990 SNDF resolved to go into voluntary liquidation. Debts exceeded assets by over two million dollars.

Central to the case of the Crown was a transaction with respect to a lease of premises at 113-115 Oxford St. These premises had been leased from a company,
Adams Tourist Centre Limited which was operated by an elderly lady, a Mrs
Lipman, who was friendly with the Appellant. The basic facts before the jury in relation to the lease were:
SNDF was the lessee under a lease with Adams Tourist Centre Limited, which lease had expired in 1987. It remained, however, in occupation of the premises thereafter.
By clause 14(a) of that lease, SNDF had an option to renew.
By letter dated 16 January 1987, the Appellant on behalf of SNDF sought renewal of the lease for a further ten years (although the lease option only allowed for a further period of four years).
Mrs Lipman had indicated her acceptance of this offer. However, no new lease was entered into, and further negotiations continued with respect to
SNDF taking occupation of an additional floor in the building and extending the lease term.
In late 1988 SNDF was permitted to occupy an additional floor, but there was no written lease with respect to this change.
Eventually, in 1990, an agreement was reached between Mrs Lipman, on behalf of the lessor, and the Appellant, on behalf of SNDF, for a fresh lease in respect of all four floors. All correspondence concerning the lease and draft lease agreement were in the name of SNDF, which had continued to occupy the building and had paid the rent.
The terms of the new lease were favourable for SNDF, and the Appellant had obtained an opinion from real estate agents that a profit in the order of $700,000 was achievable over the term of the lease and option period.
On 24 May 1990 a lease was duly executed for the premises. However, this lease was in the name of SNH and not SNDF.
It should be noted that at the time SNDF resolved to acquire the
Appellant's shares in SNH in October 1989, and indeed at the time of the actual settling of the acquisition in March 1990, SNH had no assets in the sense that the proposed lease had not been executed. However, at the latter time the Appellant had taken steps which would lead to the lease being taken out in the name of SNH. Exhibit 25 in the proceedings is a letter of 27 March which enclosed a new form of lease in the name of SNH.
In August of 1990 SNDF agreed to sell all the shares in SNH to a third party company, Glortone Pty Limited, the principal of which was Dr Pittorino.
The consideration for this was $450,000 as to which $160,000 was paid to the company to reduce the overdraft, and as to $290,000 to the Appellant as a guarantee and as a reduction in discharge of the equitable charge.

His Honour, during the course of his summing up, gave a direction of law to the jury which referred to the correspondence constituting the letter of 16
January 1987 and the acceptance of the offer, to which I have referred above in points 3 and 4 of the recitation. The nature of the direction was that the letter "on the face of it constitutes the acceptance by her company of the offer made in the letter" - "ie, the acceptance of the renewal of the lease for ten years by Stirling
Nicholas. 
In other words on the face of the document Stirling Nicholas Duty Free was entitled to the benefit of the renewal of that lease." 
In submissions to this Court Mr Menzies, on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that this letter was not an exercise of the option to renew under the original lease. This was plainly correct. He then went on to say that the agreement was not supported by consideration. I reject that submission insofar as that agreement constituted a binding document, the mutual promises contained in it were consideration for each other. Insofar as there was any enforceable right contained in that arrangement it was in favour of SNDF.

Subsequently the parties renegotiated the arrangement in the manner I have outlined in the narrative in points one to nine above. That did not detract from the proposition about which his Honour directed the jury on a matter of law in the course of his summing up.

Whatever may have been the propriety of the Appellant's conduct in diverting a valuable commercial lease from SNDF to SNH, that act was not the subject of the charge. The illegal conduct alleged was the sale of his shares in SNH to
SNDF and it was that act, not the diversion of the lease, which is said to be the actus reus and also of the improper use of position charge, contrary to s229(4) of the Companies Code.

As his Honour indicated in his summing up to the jury, the only issue in dispute with respect to the various elements of the offence under s176A of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) was whether or not the Crown had proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused defrauded the creditors of the company. The trial Judge emphasised in his summing up that the test was subjective, ie, that the Crown had to prove that the accused intended to defraud the creditors.

The nature of the Crown case was summarised as follows: "As to this element of the offence the Crown invites you to draw an inference from all the surrounding circumstances that the purpose of the sale of the accused's shares in Stirling Nicholas Holdings to Stirling Nicholas Duty Free was for no reason other than to delay or hinder creditors by making the accused himself, a creditor rather than a debtor; and I should add not only a creditor but a secured creditor at a time when the accused well knew that the company was about to go into liquidation.

The accused's response to this argument is, in essence, that the transaction was entered into in good faith; that there had been no obligation on his part to renew the lease in the name of Stirling Nicholas Duty Free; that the shares in Stirling Nicholas Holdings were not valueless; and that Stirling Nicholas
Duty Free received value for money." 
Later in his summing up the trial Judge put the Crown case and the accused's case in greater detail: "The Crown case is, in essence, that you the jury are clearly entitled to draw an inference that the purpose behind the accused selling his shares in
Stirling Nicholas Holdings to Stirling Nicholas Duty Free was to defraud creditors by making the accused a creditor, not a debtor at a time when the company was obviously about to go into liquidation.

The Crown submits that the accused must have known the desperate position in which the company was in because the fact is it was not able to pay its debts when they became due.

The Crown further submits that his conduct was clearly fraudulent as it's very clear purpose was to stop the creditors getting hold of the money." 
As to the defence case, his Honour summarised it in the following way: "The case for the accused is, in essence, that the company was not insolvent at the relevant time and that there was no evidence to prove that the accused, at any relevant time, knew it was insolvent." 
He then referred to the Crown assertion that the shares in Stirling Nicholas
Holdings were worthless which was based on the proposition that the valuable commercial lease that had been taken out in it's name should be ignored. This is because SNDF should have itself had the lease of the premises and, accordingly, there was no asset in SNH.

Later in his summing up his Honour referred to this matter again in the following terms.
 "But, the Crown says Duty Free by rights should have itself had the lease to the premises, what it was doing was paying half a million dollars for something it should have had in the first place." 
The Appellant challenged the trial Judge's directions in a number of different respects. The essence of one of the complaints was the proposition that the
Crown case involved treating the lease as if it was a nullity. The Crown case appeared to accept the proposition that the shares had some value, but that such value could be ignored because it was entirely attributable to the lease which, in terms of the trial Judge's summing up of the Crown case, was something which "by rights" SNDF "should have itself had".

The submission of the Crown in this Court turned on the proposition that the lease was merely a means to give the appearance of worth to the share transaction and, accordingly, was evidence which could be taken into account on the charge as framed under s176A of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).

The question of the sale of shares, and the intention to defraud creditors, is a matter of some difficulty where it is suggested that the shares had an appearance of value which was entirely fictitious. In such a context a proper direction to the jury should not, in my opinion, rest with the broad element of charging a jury to find that the accused intended to defraud creditors. If a specific mechanism for the fraud has been identified in the Crown case, the jury should be given a direction of the elements of knowledge that are implicit in the Crown case as put before the Court. In such a context the trial Judge should direct the jury that the state of mind of the accused, encompassed at least an understanding of the circumstances which made the value fictitious, in this case, of the shares.

The jury could have been left with a belief that as long as they were satisfied as a fact that the shares were not worth anything, the charge could have been made out, even if the accused believed that there was real value in the shares after the transaction.

The nature of the direction that I believe was appropriate in this case was a direction, in the context of making the ultimate finding that the accused intended to defraud the creditors, that the jury had to be satisfied that the accused knew that the transaction by which value had been given to the shares, or as the Crown put it, the appearance of value had been given to the shares, was a transaction which was liable to be set aside, or his knowledge was such that it gave only the fictitious appearance of adding value to the shares.

His Honour failed to direct the jury in that regard in any meaningful respect.
Rather he left open the issue of intention to defraud without any elaboration or application to the particular circumstances of the case in hand. In my view that was an error and the appeal from that conviction should be allowed.

In that eventuality the Crown put that the alternative charge, to which a verdict was not taken from the jury, fell within the provisions of [s7(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s7.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) , which provides: "(2) Where an Appellant has been convicted of an offence and the jury could on the indictment have found the Appellant guilty of some other offence, and on the finding of the jury it appears to the Court that the jury must have been satisfied of facts which proved the Appellant guilty of that other offence, the Court may instead of dismissing the appeal substitute for the verdict found by the jury a verdict of guilty of that other offence, and pass such sentence in substitution for the sentence passed at the trial as may be warranted in law for that other offence, not being a sentence of greater severity." 
The elements of the offence under s229(4) have been considered authoritatively by the High Court in Chew <case>; [(1991-92) 173 CLR 626], and Byrnes [(1995) 183 CLR 401.] 
In Chew the High Court established that the relevant mental element of the offence was to be found in the words, relevantly for this case, "to gain advantage". That purposive element was construed in R versus Chew to mean "in order to " receive a relevant advantage, rather than as a causative meaning of "so as to." 
The improper use of position element of the offence was not one that involved an element of mens rea, although the mental state of an accused may be relevant to the identification of the improper use of the position.

The High Court in Chew established that it was necessary to show that the accused believed that the intended result would be an advantage for himself or herself (635). It went on to outline in a particular passage that the accused's state of mind is relevant to some aspects of the element of improper use (634).

That aspect of the judgment was considered further by Dawson J in his judgment but not in a manner inconsistent with anything that fell from the members of the High Court who participated in the joint judgment (p641).

This led to some difficulty in its application. In this Court in the case of
Yuill [(1994) 34 NSWLR 179], esp @ -198, the Court set out a number of stages through which a trial Judge should go in applying the dictum in Chew concerning the circumstances in which a mental element is relevant to the improper use of position part of the offence. That occurred at a time when the Full Court of the Supreme Court of
South Australia had laid down a controversial construction of that passage of the judgment in Chew in the case of Hopwood and Byrnes [(1994) 35 A Crim R .] Yuill was decided in this Court prior to the successful appeal in Byrnes so that the stages, for which this Court made provision in the judgment in Yuill, have now been superseded by the High Court judgment in Byrnes.

The issue before this Court is whether or not, in accordance with the test in [s7(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s7.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), the findings of the jury with respect to the charge under s176A of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) mean that "the jury must have been satisfied of facts which proved the Appellant guilty" of the offence under s229(4).

The essence of the offence under s229(4) in terms of its mental element, is distinctively different from the mental element under s176A. It is not a question of intending to defraud creditors, it is a question of whether or not the accused intended to benefit himself.

With respect to a charge under s229(4) of intent to advantage, it is quite often the case that the same facts and matters will constitute the "improper use of position".

This appears to me to be such a case. If it could be said that the jury's finding meant that the accused believed that the intended result would be advantageous to him, then it follows that both the mental element in the s229(4) charge and the improper use of position element in the s229(4) charge would be satisfied. The improper use of position in this case is constituted by the entering into of an arrangement for an improper purpose, that purpose being the advantage to be gained by the accused, rather than any purpose of the company, relevantly, SNDF.

In my opinion the finding of the jury on the fraud charge must have encompassed a finding that there was an improper use of position in this sense and that the entire objective of the transaction was to benefit the accused, the now Appellant. Accordingly, the finding on the more serious charge of intending to defraud creditors encompassed the relevant findings for the purposes of s229(4). The mechanism by which the creditors would be defrauded in the only case put to the jury, was a mechanism by which the Appellant received an advantage in the sense used in s229(4) and that intention to defraud the creditors through that mechanism necessarily encompassed a finding that he made improper use of his position.

Accordingly, in my opinion this is an appropriate case for the Court to apply [s7(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s7.html) 
In his submissions to us, Mr Menzies said that we should not do so. One basis for that was that the charge in the case of the s229(4) offence contained the additional words, that is after the reference to the purchase price of $500,000: "Which sum he caused to be credited to his loan account with the
Corporation". This was not an element of the offence but it was a particular mechanism by which the offence was committed. That is not a relevant distinction.

Similarly Mr Menzies also referred the Court to the case of R versus McQueeny [(1989) 39 A Crim R 56], in particular a passage at page 60, where this Court said, in the context of considering the appropriate application of [s7(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s7.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/): "Nevertheless caution should be used before exercising the power in a case where the reason for setting aside the jury's verdict would be the inadequacy of the instruction that the jury was given." 
I take into account the need for such caution, and I have found that the verdict on the charge under s176A was inadequate. However, in my opinion it was inadequate in a sense relating to the mens rea requirement of s176A, which requirement goes well beyond the mental element of a charge under s229(4). The inadequacy, insofar as there was a failure to adequately assist the jury to identify the mental element in the particular steps that the Crown case required, is not such as to have an effect on any aspect of the charge under s229(4), and in particular does not have any particular effect on the mental element of such charge.

Accordingly, in my opinion the order of the Court should be that the Court, pursuant to [s7(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s7.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) substitutes for the verdict of the jury a verdict that the Appellant is guilty of the offence charged in the second count of the indictment upon which he was prosecuted for trial.

The Court therefore convicts the Appellant accordingly; sentences him to imprisonment for twelve months to be served by way of periodic detention dated to commence on 3 January 1998, as ordered by the primary sentencing judge.

SULLY J I agree. 
HIDDEN J: I also agree. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The order of the Court is as I have indicated. * * * 
