

Wambo Mining Corporation Pty Limited versus Wall Street (Holding) Pty Limited and Ors Matter No Ca 40358/96 [1998] NSWSC 448 (2 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 November 1998 
WAMBO MINING CORPORATION PTY LIMITED versus WALL STREET (HOLDING) PTY LIMITED &
ORS 
CA 40358/96; ED 4971/92 September 1998 
Sheller JA, Powell JA, Fitzgerald AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Equity Division - Gleeson CJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40358/96; ED 4971/92 
DELIVERED: 2 September 1998 
HEARING DATE: 14 July 1998 
PARTIES: WAMBO MINING CORPORATION PTY LIMITED versus WALL STREET (HOLDING) PTY LIMITED & ORS 
JUDGMENT OF: SHELLER, POWELL JJA, FITZGERALD AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: G Griffith QC/J Stuckey-Clarke 
Respondent (Wall St): B W Walker SC/D Pritchard 
Respondent (Micabel): I M Jackman/M J Leeming 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Fitzgerald White Talbot 
Respondent (Wall St): Coors Chambers Westgarth 
Respondent (Micabel): Speed & Stracey 
CATCHWORDS: CORPORATIONS LAW - financial assistance DIRECTORS' DUTIES - whether breach of duty - shareholder ratification 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
NO OF PAGES: 37 
WAMBO MINING CORPORATION PTY LIMITED versus WALL STREET (HOLDING) PTY LIMITED & ORS 
On 7 July 1971 the Hartogen group of companies entered into a written agreement to purchase shares in Wambo Mining Corporation Pty Limited (Wambo), a company engaged in coal mining, from several other companies (the vendors).
Each vendor company was controlled by a director of Wambo. The sale left
Hartogen with an 80 percent share holding in Wambo and the each of the vendors with 2.5 percent.

Before the sale was completed, each vendor company entered into a deed of covenant with Wambo whereby each vendor company covenanted not to search for or acquire any coal prospecting or mining rights over land within five miles of but outside any point of Wambo's colliery holding. The consideration for the deed covenant was the payment of a royalty of 0.15 percent of the price per ton of coal mined outside Wambo's colliery holding but within the five mile area. Wambo's entry into the deed of covenant was unanimously ratified by an extraordinary meeting of Wambo's share holders in accordance with it articles of association.

From 1980 to 1990, Wambo mined coal within the five mile area and paid the royalty. However, since 1991 no royalty payments have been made.

In 1991 proceedings were commenced by the respondents in the Equity Division for specific performance, an account and damages in relation to payment of the royalties. In its defence and cross claims at trial, Wambo argued that its directors, by causing it to enter into the covenant, had breached their fiduciary duties. It was also argued that the deeds covenant amounted financial assistance for the purpose of or in connection with Hartogen's purchase of shares in breach of s.67 of the Companies Act 1967. The Chief
Justice, who heard the matter, held that there was no breach of fiduciary duties and that the deeds of covenant did not amount to financial assistance within the meaning of s67. The appellant appealed from this decision on the bases that the Chief Justice erred in finding that there was no breach of fiduciary which, in the circumstances would render the covenant voidable and that there was no breach of s67.

Held:
The articles of association of a company may modify the rule that a director may not deal, on behalf of the company, with himself. The articles of association of Wambo did just that. At trial it had been conceded that the share holder's ratification of the covenants was sufficient to the extent that it was to approve, in accordance with the articles of association, the director's interests in the covenant. Therefore, it was not appropriate to address this issue on appeal. Transvaal Lands Company versus New Belgium
Land and Development Company <case>; [[1967] 2 AC 46] discussed.
No reason was advanced to cast doubt upon the Chief Justice's finding that the covenant was a practical commercial solution to a problem considered in commercial, rather than legal, terms.
The covenants were designed to remove Hartogen's concerns over potential competition. In doing so, the covenants benefited Wambo by resolving the problem of a potential investor being put off by the threat of the existence and the threat of the future existence of private coal interests held by
Wambo's directors or shareholders.
The directors did not breach their fiduciary duty by causing Wambo to enter into the deeds of covenant.
In order to succeed under s67 of the Companies Act, Wambo needed to show that in contemplation of Hartogen's acquisition of its shares, it undertook a contingent obligation to obtain the covenants for its own benefit and by doing so it gave financial assistance in relation to the acquisition. Burton v
Palmer [[1980] 2 NSWLR 878] at 889 applied.
Wambo had obtained commercially reasonable covenants which continued for the benefit of Wambo regardless of whether Hartogen purchased or continued to hold the shares. The covenants made the shares more attractive to Hartogen but they did not amount to financial assistance. Charterhouse Investment Trust
Limited versus Tempest Diesels Limited [[1986] BCLC 1] and Belmont
Finance Corp versus Williams Furniture Limited (No 2) [1980] 1 All ER 393 discussed.

Authorities: 
Belmont Finance Corp versus Williams Furniture Limited (No 2) <case>; <case>; [[1967] 2 AC ]

Transvaal Lands Company versus New Belgium (Transvaal) Land and Development
Company [[1914] 2 Ch 488] 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

WAMBO MINING CORPORATION PTY LIMITED versus WALL STREET (HOLDING) PTY LIMITED & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: 
SHARE PURCHASE 
By an agreement in writing dated 7 July 1971, six companies, which can be referred to as the Hartogen group of companies, agreed to purchase from P R
Cant Pty Limited (P R Cant), Hudspeth Holdings Pty Limited (Hudspeth
Holdings), B Marheine Holdings Pty Limited (Marheine) and Wall Street
Pty Limited (Wall Street), part of the vendors' shareholdings in
Wambo Mining Corporation Pty Limited (Wambo). The other shareholders were
Delta Minerals NL, which owned 10 percent of the shares, and Mr McDonald and
Mrs Blasick, who each owned .88 percent of the shares. Each of the vendor companies owned 22.06 percent of the shares in Wambo. As a result of the sale, the shareholding of each was reduced to 2.5 percent and the Hartogen group was left with a 80 percent holding. The balance of 10 percent remained with Delta
Minerals NL.

DEEDS OF COVENANT 
On 11 June 1971, before the sale, each of the vendor companies entered into a deed of covenant with Wambo whereby the vendor company, referred to in the deed as "the Payee", covenanted that for a period of 5 years from the date of the deed: "[I]t will not nor will it cause or allow any employee or agent of it whether solely or in partnership or in conjunction with any person or corporation and whether as principal agent servant director or shareholder or beneficial owner of shares or otherwise carry on or be engaged in or concerned in or interested in the search for or acquisition of any coal prospecting or coal mining rights over land situated within five miles of any point in the Colliery Holding; the parties hereto conclusively declare and acknowledge that the foregoing restrictions are fair and reasonable." 
In recital E to the deed the Colliery Holding was said to be a colliery holding of which Wambo was the holder of the freehold and leasehold titles described in an attached map.

Clause 2 of the deed of covenant provided as follows: "Wambo shall hereafter pay or cause to be paid in cash to the Payee (or to such other person or corporation as the Payee may from time to time nominate by notice in writing to Wambo) a royalty in respect of all coal mined in and under lands outside the Colliery Holding but within five miles of any point in the Colliery Holding and [sic] by Wambo or any successor lessee or licensee or assignee of Wambo and duly delivered at any time hereafter calculated at the rate of point one five per centum (0.15 %) of the price per ton on the basis of free on board trimmed (FOBT) at Newcastle in the said State." 
The recitals to the deed acknowledged (A) that Wambo was incorporated on 21
January 1969 in New South Wales, (B) that the Payee had been active in the search for coal bearing lands in the Warkworth area and prospecting and mining rights over those lands and had been instrumental in acquiring such rights for
Wambo, (C) that in view of the expertise acquired by the Payee in relation to the said area and the acquisition of such rights Wambo had requested that the
Payee enter into covenants against competition with Wambo in the form thereinafter contained, (D) that in consideration of the foregoing and with a view to securing the future assistance of the Payee to Wambo, Wambo wished to grant to the Payee a royalty assessed on the basis of certain coal sold by
Wambo, and (E) that Wambo had or was endeavouring to obtain other prospecting and mining rights over land outside the Colliery Holding.

PROCEEDINGS 
Until 1980, Wambo did not mine any coal under lands outside the Colliery
Holding but within the area of five miles from any point in the Colliery
Holding. From 1980 until 1990 Wambo (which, over the period, underwent a number of changes of control) paid, and continued to pay, the royalties required by cl 2 to the four vendor companies or their assignees. Over that period, the average annual amount paid by way of royalty to each of the four was approximately $16,000. Since 1991 no payments have been made.

In 1991 Wall Street and assignees of its right title and interest to the royalty and Marheine began proceedings against Wambo in the Equity Division for specific performance, an account and damages. In 1992 Micabil Pty Limited , formerly Hudspeth Holdings Pty Limited, began similar proceedings against Wambo. In both actions, Wambo filed defences, relevantly, alleging that the deeds of covenant sued on were void or voidable at the option of
Wambo and had been avoided by Wambo. Wambo cross-claimed to recover all monies paid by it pursuant to the deeds of covenant sued upon.

When the deeds of covenant were made, the directors of Wambo were Mr Todner (who represented a financier named Trans City Securities Limited), Mr Cowan, who was involved in share trading and merchant banking in Sydney and controlled Wall Street, Mr Hudspeth, who was also involved in share trading and merchant banking in Sydney and controlled Hudspeth Holdings, Mr Marheine, who was experienced in coal mining in the Hunter Valley and had significant interests in coal mining there and controlled Marheine and Mr Cant, who also was experienced in coal mining in the Hunter Valley and had significant interests in coal mining there and controlled P R Cant.

The minutes of a meeting of directors of Wambo held on 11 June 1971, at which all five directors were present, recorded a general discussion as to how the company proposed to deal with the financing of its initial development of the
Wambo mine, it being obvious that the funds advanced to date had not raised sufficient money to further mining operations, and then proceeded: "Mr Cowan stated that he had heard that certain of the directors were negotiating for themselves, to acquire coal leases outside the Company's colliery holding. He felt that this was not proper and in view of the fact should outside parties again look at Wambo with a view to providing finance that the major shareholders should enter into certain covenants with the
Company restricting their rights to negotiate for themselves within a certain area of the colliery holding. Mr Cowan tabled an agreement whereby these covenants would be put into effect and in return the major shareholders would receive a small royalty. Accordingly it was RESOLVED that the Company enter into this agreement between the Company, P R Cant Pty Limited, B Marheine
Holdings Pty Limited, Hudspeth Holdings Pty Limited and Wall Street (Holding)
Pty Limited and that the agreement to be signed under the Common Seal of the
Company." 
On 21 July 1971 an extraordinary general meeting of the shareholders of Wambo unanimously ratified the entry by Wambo into the deeds of covenant.

In its defences and cross-claims Wambo alleged, relevantly, that its directors caused it to enter into the deed of covenant in breach of their fiduciary duties to Wambo and that the entering into of the deeds of covenant amounted to the giving of financial assistance for the purpose of or in connection with the purchase made or to be made in 1971 by the Hartogen group of companies within the meaning of s67 (1) of the [Companies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) (the [Companies Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/)) and was a contravention of the section within the meaning of subsection (3).
In part answer to these defences and cross-claims, the plaintiffs relied upon waiver, estoppel, laches, acquiescence and the statute of limitations.

Windeyer J heard and determined, as a separate question, an argument by Wambo that, even if it had previously been liable to pay the royalties, that liability came to an end by reason of certain legislation enacted in 1981.
Windeyer J rejected that argument and answered the separate question unfavourably to Wambo. Consequently, the litigation proceeded to a full hearing.

HEARING 
Gleeson CJ heard both actions together on 13 and 14 November 1995. On 22
November 1995 the Chief Justice published his reasons according to which the plaintiffs were entitled to succeed. In due course, declarations and orders were made giving effect to this result. Wambo appealed from the decision and the orders made.

FINDINGS OF FACT 
The evidence in the case was given almost entirely by affidavit and by the tender of agreed documents. The brief cross-examination of one deponent, Mr
Cowan, was directed only at clarifying a particular matter. There was no challenge, either by evidence or by cross-examination, to the testimony of any of the witnesses who swore affidavits. The argument proceeded on the basis that the whole of that evidence could be accepted at face value. The bulk of it was directed towards justifying in commercial terms the transaction, or series of transactions, claimed by Wambo in its pleadings to involve breaches of fiduciary duty on the part of former directors. In the result, Senior
Counsel for Wambo acknowledged that the evidence went some way towards meeting the charges of breach of fiduciary duty as originally framed. Nevertheless,
Wambo still contended that there were breaches. What the Chief Justice described as Wambo's main argument was that the evidence disclosed that the deeds of covenant were made in circumstances which involved a contravention of s67 of the [Companies
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) and were on that account void.

THE CHIEF JUSTICE'S REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
It is convenient to quote extensively from the reasons for judgment rather than to attempt to summarise them. The Chief Justice explained the issues in the case by reference to the deed between Wambo and Wall Street. His Honour said: "The plaintiffs in the two actions are companies, or the assignees of companies, controlled by persons involved in its promotion. Over the years, there have been a number of changes in the shareholdings in Wambo, and it is currently controlled by the Sumitomo group. As will appear below, the disputed royalty agreements were made, in 1971, in anticipation of a transaction pursuant to which 80 percent of the shares in the capital of Wambo were acquired by the Hartogen group of companies.
 ......

The form of the recital [of the deed of covenant] reflects a fact made clear by the evidence, which is that the deed was entered into in anticipation of the Hartogen acquisition. As will appear, the obligations undertaken by Wall
Street (Holding) Pty Limited under the deed, in consideration for the royalty, were required by Hartogen as a condition of its willingness to acquire a major interest in Wambo.
 ......

The references in recital E, and clause 2 [in the deed of covenant], to the
Colliery Holding are references to the area of land in respect of which Wambo had acquired mining titles or interests.

Wambo had commenced preliminary mining operations by early 1970 but, in late and early 1971, it had encountered financial difficulties, and was short of the funds needed for its proposed operations. As will appear, there was substantial uncertainty as to the extent to which, if at all, Wambo would be either willing or able to extend its operations beyond the area of the colliery holding, and there was also a question as to the extent to which persons associated with Wambo, and in particular, Messrs Cant and Marheine, might themselves take up coal interests in the general locality in which Wambo was intending to operate.
 ......

There are two grounds (apart from the matter previously dealt with by Windeyer
J) upon which it is contended that Wambo is not obliged to make the royalty payments. First, it is argued that the entering into the deeds involved a breach by the then directors of Wambo of their fiduciary obligations, that the deeds were therefore voidable, and that the company is now entitled to avoid them. Second, it is argued that the deeds contravened s67 of the [Companies
Act 1961](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/), in that they involved giving financial assistance to Hartogen in connection with its acquisition of shares in Wambo, and that they were on that account void.
The defendant maintains that, if either of those submissions be correct, then it is not liable to make any future royalty payments. It also claims to recover past royalty payments, but that claim is acknowledged to depend upon success of the s67 argument, and is in any event subject to a limitation period.
 .....

The evidence makes it clear that the deeds of covenant were entered into with the knowledge and approval of Hartogen and, indeed, at the suggestion of
Hartogen.
 ......

The sequence of events was as follows. On 11 June 1971 the then directors of
Wambo resolved that the company would enter into the deeds of covenant. On 7
July 1971, the sale agreement under which Hartogen was to acquire 80 percent of the shares in Wambo was entered into. That agreement referred to the deeds of covenant, and the royalty obligations to which they gave rise. On 7 July , Messrs Hudspeth, Cant and Marheine resigned as directors of Wambo, and nominees of Hartogen were appointed in their place. On 21 July 1971, at an extraordinary general meeting of all the shareholders of Wambo, the deeds were ratified. Immediately afterwards, the Hartogen purchase was completed. Mrs
Blasick and Mr McDonald ceased to be shareholders, and the shareholdings of the four companies associated respectively with Messrs Cowan, Hudspeth, Cant and Marheine were reduced.

It is probable that the need for ratification was regarded as arising from the provisions of Article 95 of the Articles of Association of Wambo. That article was in the following terms: `95. No director shall be disqualified by his office from holding any office or place of profit under the Company or any subsidiary or associated Company except that of Auditor or under any company in which the Company shall be a shareholder or otherwise interested or from contracting with the Company either as vendor purchaser or otherwise nor shall any such contract or arrangement entered into by or on behalf of a firm or company in which any
Director shall be in any way interested be avoided nor in the event of disclosure as hereinafter mentioned shall any Director be liable to account to the Company for any profit arising from any such office or place of profit or realised by any such contract or arrangement by reason only of such Director holding that office or of the fiduciary relations thereby established but it is declared that the nature of his interest must be disclosed by him at the meeting of the Board at which the contract or arrangement is first taken into consideration if his interest then exists or in any other case at the first meeting of the Board after the acquisition of his interest. If a Director becomes interested in a contract or arrangement after it is made or entered into the disclosure of his interest shall be made at the first meeting of the
Board held after he becomes so interested. A Director shall not as a Director vote in respect of any contract or arrangement in which he is so interested as aforesaid and if he do so vote his vote shall not be counted but this prohibition may at any time or times be suspended or relaxed to any extent by a General Meeting and such prohibition shall not apply to any contract by or on behalf of the Company to give the Directors or any of them security by way of indemnity. A general notice that a Director is a member of any specified firm or company and is to be regarded as interested in all transactions with that firm or company shall be sufficient disclosure under this clause as regards such Director and the said transactions and after such general notice it shall not be necessary for such Director to give a special notice relating to any particular transaction with that firm or company.' 
The constitution of the Board of Directors of Wambo on 11 June 1971 was such that it would not have been possible to constitute a disinterested quorum of directors to deal with the matter of the deeds of covenant. Although a meeting of directors of 11 June 1971 purported to resolve that the deeds be executed, and the deeds were soon after executed, the effect of Article 95 was that, for the deeds to be effective, it was necessary for the shareholders of Wambo to `suspend or relax' the prohibition contained in Article 95 and to ratify the deeds. This was done on 21 July 1971 by all the shareholders, including Mr
McDonald, Mrs Blasick and a representative of Delta.

No reliance is placed by the defendant, in these proceedings, on the provisions of Article 95, and it has been conceded that, if the only need for ratification or shareholders' approval arose by reason of the provisions of
Article 95, then what occurred on 21 July 1971 was adequate to overcome that problem. There was, therefore, no attempt to investigate in any detail the circumstances of the ratification.

On the other hand, there is no suggestion in the evidence, and I would not be prepared to infer, that the kind of ratification considered by the meeting of July 1971 involved waiver by shareholders of a breach by directors of their fiduciary duties. (cf Winthrop Investments Limited versus Winns Limited [[1975] 2
NSWLR 666).] It does not appear to have been suggested by anyone, at the time, that there was anything improper in the making of the deeds of covenant, and the approval of the shareholders was not sought on the basis that they were being asked to approve conduct which, without such approval, would involve a breach of fiduciary duty.

It is no part of the defendant's case that the deeds of covenant were shams, or merely colourable arrangements, or contrivances, aimed at increasing, indirectly, the consideration to be paid for the Hartogen acquisition. As was mentioned earlier, all of the individuals involved in the transaction swore affidavits in these proceedings, and they were not cross-examined to suggest anything of the kind just mentioned or, for that matter, any other form of personal impropriety. The deeds of covenant were approved by Delta Minerals, and by Mr McDonald and Mrs Blasick, who received no benefit from them.

No attempt was made to suggest, either by evidence, or by argument, that, if it were proper for Wambo to agree to pay royalties in consideration for the covenants contained in clause 1 of the deeds of covenant, the amount of the agreed royalties was excessive.
 ......

It should also be mentioned that the evidence reveals that, by early 1971, there was a degree of tension between the directors of Wambo. In particular,
Mr Cowan was pressing for early repayment of monies owed to him by Wambo, and there was frustration at the company's apparent inability to raise the funds necessary for profitable development of the colliery holding. At the same time, Messrs Cant and Marheine had other coal mining interests in nearby areas, and the unresolved question as to the extent to which Wambo might wish to expand its operations beyond the area of the colliery holding left them unclear as to the extent to which they might wish to acquire, on their own account, interests in surrounding areas.

In early 1971, the Board of Wambo was looking at various possible ways to obtain finance, and Mr Cowan was actively seeking to encourage some major investor to take up a large interest in Wambo. By May 1971 it appeared that he had successfully aroused the interest of the Hartogen group of companies, whose Chairman was Mr Burke. Mr Burke was being advised in relation to the matter by a man with wide experience in the coal industry, Mr Austen, who founded Austen and Butta Limited, a coal mining and marketing company. Mr
Austen, in his affidavit, said that the had been aware for a number of years of the interests of both Mr Marheine and Mr Cant in coal mining in the Hunter
Valley, and he knew of their interest in Wambo. He was also aware that Mr
Cant, whose family was associated with the Bloomfield Collieries, had an interest in Canwan Coals, which owned the only privately-owned coal loader in the Port of Newcastle. Mr Austen agreed, for a fee, to advise Hartogen in relation to the proposal that it invest in Wambo. He said that he gave Mr
Burke advice in the following terms: `There are two critical matters in this deal. Marheine and Cant are very able operators and I believe that they have the ear of the Minister. The current participants in Wambo may be in a position to get permission to mine and as they know the Hunter Valley well it is important that they not compete against you. This is a very significant seam of coal and in the event that you obtain control of Wambo, you do not want the former shareholders to open another mine. This is particularly important with Peter Cant as Canwan Coal owns the only privately owned coal loader in Newcastle.

You may be assured that if Peter Cant opens his own mine or is involved in a mine in the area, his coal will get preference, and capacity at the coal loaders at Newcastle is always a problem. From the materials that you have shown me, Wambo have only scratched the surface of this coal seam, and there is every possibility of Wambo being able to expand the mine into the northern areas.' 
Mr Austen advised Mr Burke that as a pre-condition of investment in Wambo, he should insist that a non-competition covenant be agreed with the shareholders, restricting their right to compete against the company for a period.

Mr Burke gave a similar account of the advice he received from Mr Austen. He believed that it was important that the existing shareholders in Wambo covenant not to compete. He considered that it was critical that, prior to any sale, such a non-competition covenant should be entered into between the shareholders and Wambo.

Mr Marheine said that he first learned of the discussions with Hartogen in
April 1971. He said that, in connection with those discussions, Mr Cowan said to him: `Brian, Pat is very concerned about you competing against the company. He knows that you continue to talk to the adjoining coal owners - if it all goes ahead you are going to have to sign a non-competition clause to ensure that you do not compete against the company.' 
Although the concerns of Mr Austen and Mr Burke appear to have related mainly to Messrs Cant and Marheine, it seems to have been contemplated by all those involved in the discussions that the restraint on competition was to apply equally to the companies of each of the four promoters of Wambo, that is
Messrs Cowan, Cant, Hudspeth and Marheine.
 .......

In an affidavit filed in these proceedings, Mr Cowan advanced an explanation of the terms of [minute of the Directors' meeting of 11 June 1971]. His explanation was not subject to any challenge in cross-examination. He said that his reference to something not being proper was not a reference to conduct in breach of directors duties to the company, but was a reference to the commercial consequences of what was going on. Wambo was suffering from what he believed to be chronic financial problems, and it did not assist the resolution of those problems for potential investors in the company to be put off by the existence, and potential future existence, of private coal interests held by Wambo directors or shareholders.

Hartogen, for the reasons explained by Mr Austen, was insisting to Mr Cowan that it would only buy a large shareholding in Wambo if agreements of the kind contained in the deeds of covenant were entered into. The minutes of the meeting of 11 June 1971 indicate that Mr Cowan understood that, by the same token, if the Hartogen deal did not proceed to fruition, it was likely that any other potential substantial investor would have a similar requirement. The deeds of covenant were, of course, fully disclosed to Hartogen, and were referred to in the agreement for the sale of shares to Hartogen. Hartogen was content to accept them as a satisfactory resolution of the problem which was concerning Mr Austen and Mr Burke.

The deeds of covenant, in return for which Wambo agreed to pay the disputed royalties, were not necessarily a perfect solution to Mr Austen's problem, but, then, the nature of the problem to be solved was itself somewhat ill- defined. If, in mid-1971, and bearing in mind Wambo's financial difficulties, a lawyer had been asked to advise as to the extent to which, consistently with their duties as directors of Wambo, Mr Cant or Mr Marheine could take up further mining interests in the general locality, the answer would have been far from clear. Part of the problem was seen to lie in interests which they had independently of, and earlier than, their interests in Wambo.

Technically, of course, the four companies which entered into the covenants not to compete themselves owed no fiduciary obligations to Wambo. They were shareholders, not directors, of Wambo.

The covenants not to compete appear to represent a practical commercial solution to a problem that was being considered in commercial, rather than legal, terms. They are none the worse for that. A close analysis of the legalities concerning the possible acquisition of interests in the area by entities associated with the directors of Wambo would have been a difficult and perhaps unrewarding exercise. No attack has been made upon the subjective good faith of any of the individuals involved, and a good test of the reasonableness of the arrangements is that they were satisfactory to Hartogen.
Hartogen was intending to be a long term major shareholder in Wambo, and, as the owner of 80 percent of the issued shares in Wambo, it was going to bear 80 percent of the burden of the royalty payments. If, and when, it ever came to sell its shares, it was obviously going to have to disclose the royalty obligations to its purchaser which would, in turn, take them into account in calculating the purchase price." 
BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY 
The Chief Justice dealt with the allegation that the directors of Wambo acted in breach of their fiduciary duties to the company as follows: "Senior counsel for the defendant, when invited to formulate precisely the breach of duty said to have been involved in the entry into the deeds of covenant, responded as follows: `The breach of duty requiring ratification based on fully informed consent (including express consent as to absolution from a breach of duty) was that the directors put themselves in a position of conflict of duty and interest and as directors caused Wambo, to whom they owed duties, and their companies, in which they had interests, to enter into agreements or arrangements whereby their companies were promised significant benefits for agreeing not to do things which, at the time and whilesoever the directors remained directors of
Wambo and the companies remained controlled by the directors, both the directors and (indirectly) the companies were prohibited from doing.' 
Two preliminary observations may be made about that formulation.

First, the introductory words are aimed at a point which, for reasons given above, is not substantially in dispute. If there were a breach of fiduciary duty, the ratification of 21 July 1971 was not aimed at curing that problem.
It was for a quite different purpose, related to Article 95. If there were a breach of duty, it was not effectively waived by the resolution of the extraordinary general meeting of 21 July.

Second, the qualification contained in the words `at the time and whilesoever the directors remained directors of Wambo and the companies remained controlled by the directors' is significant. Messrs Hudspeth, Cant and
Marheine ceased to be directors of Wambo on 7 July 1971, and they were not directors of Wambo when the deeds were ratified on 21 July. When the deeds were originally executed, in June, they were executed in anticipation of the sale to Hartogen which would, in turn, involve the three persons named ceasing to be directors of Wambo. Furthermore, there is nothing in the language of clause 1 of the deeds which restricts its operation to a period during which the payee companies remained under the control of Messrs Cowan, Hudspeth, Cant and Marheine.

The following additional matters should be noted.

In the case of each deed of covenant, the payee of the royalty, by clause 1 of the deed, covenanted that, for a period of five years from 11 June 1971, it would not (to put it briefly) directly or indirectly become involved in the search for, or acquisition of, coal prospecting or mining rights over land situated within five miles of any point in the Colliery Holding. No doubt there was a degree of arbitrariness about both the period of five years, and the distance of five miles, but no attempt was made in the present proceedings to dispute the acknowledgment, at the conclusion of clause 1, that the restrictions were fair and reasonable.

The entities bound by the restrictions were shareholders, not directors, or former directors, of Wambo.

In their practical operation, the restrictive covenants may well have had a significant effect upon the future conduct of the individuals who controlled the covenanted companies. In the case of Messrs Cant and Marheine, it was clearly intended by Hartogen that they would do so. On the other hand, it is impossible to maintain that there was an equivalence between the restrictions imposed by the covenants, and the inhibitions which the law, absent the covenants, imposed upon the future activities of Messrs Cowan, Hudspeth, Cant and Marheine as directors, or former directors, of Wambo.

The covenants would be binding on the covenantor companies for the stipulated period even if the companies, during that period, ceased to have any connection with their original controllers. The fact that the motivation of
Hartogen in seeking the covenants was closely related to the association between the covenantors and their individual controllers does not mean that their legal effect was limited by reference to that association.

The essence of the defendant's charge is that what the four shareholder companies covenanted, in clause 1, not to do, they were in any event prohibited by law from doing, and therefore it was improper of the directors to commit Wambo to an agreement to pay them royalties in consideration for such covenants.

The legal and factual bases of that charge have not been made out.

At the most, the evidence suggests that some interesting and potentially difficult questions could have arisen, especially in relation to Mr Cant and
Mr Marheine, and their respective companies, as to their freedom at some future time to take up and exploit mining interests in the immediate vicinity of the Wambo colliery holding. The evidence does not permit any definitive answer to those questions; and certainly not the answer for which the defendant contends.

The evidence does not, for example, establish that the taking up by the covenantors of interests of the kind foreclosed to them by clause 1 would necessarily, or even probably, have involved improper use or exploitation by directors, or former directors, of corporate information or opportunity of
Wambo. (cf Regal (Hastings) Ltd versus Gulliver <case>; [[1942] 1
All ER 378]; Boardman versus Phipps [[1962] 2 AC 46).] Indeed, if any such issue had arisen, the outcome might have depended upon Wambo's own intentions at the relevant time. (Queensland Mines Ltd versus Hudson [(1978) 52
ALJR 399).] 
Even if it were possible to conclude, from the evidence, that there was a possibility that some forms of activity covered by clause 1 would, in any event, have been, to use the language of the defendant's submissions, prohibited, that does not suffice to make good the defendant's case.

However, so far as appears from the evidence, the restraints imposed by clause went substantially beyond anything upon which Wambo was entitled to insist.
The agreement by Wambo to pay royalties to the four companies, in consideration for their accepting the restrictions in clause 1, made at the urging of the incoming major shareholder of Wambo, and ratified by all the shareholders, has not been shown to involve any impropriety or breach of fiduciary duty on the part of anyone.

There was, in the argument presented for the defendants, a brief suggestion that the deeds of covenant were ultra vires. This I understand to be based upon the same premise as the argument considered above, ie, that the covenants in clause 1 gave Wambo nothing to which it was not already entitled, and the royalties simply amounted to gifts to companies associated with the directors.
For the reasons given above, the premise has not been established. Putting that argument to one side, Wambo was formed to carry on business as a mining company, and it was within its powers to enter into agreements of the kind presently in question." 
SECTION 67 OF THE [COMPANIES ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) 
The Chief Justice said: "Central to the defendant's argument is the submission that the deeds of covenant, and in particular the undertaking of the royalty obligations in clause 2, are properly to be characterised as involving the giving of financial assistance in connection with the proposed purchase of shares by
Hartogen in Wambo.

The factual connection between the deeds of covenant and Hartogen's share purchase is not in dispute, although it is important to be clear about the nature of that connection. The deeds of covenant were not conditional upon the proposed Hartogen acquisition going ahead. Indeed, the Board minute of 11 June suggests that it was contemplated that it would be very desirable to have such arrangements in place in the event that the Wambo shareholders should find themselves dealing with some other potential investor. The arrangements contained in the deeds, of which the royalty agreements were a part, were seen as removing a problem which was likely to discourage investors, and they were essential if the proposed Hartogen acquisition were to proceed.

In what way did the deeds, or the arrangements embodied in them, give `financial assistance' in connection with the Hartogen acquisition? 
It may be accepted that, in certain circumstances, an agreement by a company to acquire or dispose of an asset, or contractual rights, even though at a fair price, might nevertheless constitute the giving of financial assistance within the meaning of s67. (Belmont Finance Corp versus Williams Furniture Ltd [1980] 1 All ER 393 at 402; Saltergate Insurance Co Ltd versus Knight [[1982] 1
NSWLR 369]; Independent Steels Pty Ltd versus Ryan <case>; [[1990] VR 247).] It does not, therefore, answer the defendant's argument simply to point out that, so far as appears from the evidence, the deeds of covenant were commercially reasonable agreements for Wambo to make, or, at least, have not been shown to be otherwise. What has sometimes been described as `impoverishment' is not the test of whether there has been a breach of s67, although in particular cases it may be of factual relevance. (Re National
Mutual Royal Bank Ltd [[1982] 1 QdR 533]; Dempster v
National Companies and Securities Commission [(1993) 9 WAR 215).] The point remains, however, that to contravene s67, the conduct in question must bear the character of financial assistance.

In Charterhouse Investment Trust Ltd versus Tempest Diesels Ltd [[1986] BCLC ], Hoffmann
J pointed out that the words `financial assistance' have no technical meaning, and their frame of reference is the language of ordinary commerce.

Senior counsel for the defendant argued that, if Hartogen wanted restrictive covenants from the shareholders, of the kind contained in clause 1, it should have obtained them, and paid for them, itself. This was said to be the key to the characterisation of the transactions as financial assistance.

I am quite unable to accept that proposition.

The covenants in clause 1 were for the direct and immediate benefit of Wambo, not Hartogen. If Hartogen had sold all its shares in Wambo the following year, the covenants would have continued to operate for the direct benefit of Wambo, and the indirect benefit of the incoming shareholders. Of course, so long as
Hartogen owned 80 percent of the shares in Wambo, it indirectly received 80 percent of the benefit of the covenants; and it indirectly bore 80 percent of the cost of any royalties. But it was only in its capacity as a shareholder of
Wambo that it had an interest in the arrangements.

The fallacy in the defendant's argument may be demonstrated by a simple example, not far removed from the present case. Suppose Mr Austen's advice to
Mr Burke had been that, before he went ahead with his share acquisition, he should insist that Wambo secure its future access to Mr Cant's coal loader by purchasing an interest in the coal loader. He might have reasoned that it was all very well for Wambo to assume it would have no problem with access, so long as Mr Cant remained a director, and his company a large shareholder, but that as Mr Cant was going to cease to be a director, and his company was only going to be a very small shareholder, then Wambo needed a more secure arrangement concerning the loader. Suppose, then, that Wambo bought an interest in the loader for a proper commercial price. That would not be described, in the language of ordinary commerce, as giving financial assistance in connection with a purchase of shares in Wambo." 
GROUNDS OF APPEAL 
The grounds of appeal in the notice of appeal fell under two heads: that the Chief Justice erred in failing to find that the entry into the deeds of covenant involved a breach of fiduciary obligation by the directors of Wambo and the participation in such breach by the contracting parties such that the agreements were and remained voidable at the instance of Wambo; and that the Chief Justice erred in failing to find that the claims of the plai´ntiffs could not be maintained by reason of the operation of s67 of the [Companies Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/).

However, in his submissions on the appeal, Dr Griffith QC, for the appellant, put ground (a) in two ways. In the first place, he submitted that the deeds of covenant were made in breach of the directors' fiduciary duties because they were made for the purposes of conferring a financial benefit upon the directors personally as controllers of the covenantees or payees of royalties.
Counsel called in aid two dicta, one from the judgment of the English Court of
Appeal in Transvaal Lands Company versus New Belgium (Transvaal) Land and
Development Company <case>; [[1967] 2 AC .] In
Transvaal at 503 the Court of Appeal held that a director of a company who has an interest as shareholder in another company which is proposing to enter into engagements with the company of which he is a director, has a personal interest within the rule which precludes a director of a company from dealing, on behalf of the company, with himself, and owed a duty which conflicted with his duty to the company of which he was a director. In Phipps versus Boardman
Lord Upjohn at 123 said that a person in a fiduciary capacity must not make a profit out of his trust. This is part of the wider rule that a trustee must not place himself in a position where his duty and his interest may conflict.

This submission was a surprising one. It has been long accepted (see [1914] 2
Ch at 504) that the articles of association may modify the rule relied on.
Article 95, which the Chief Justice quoted, did just that. The Chief Justice observed that it had been conceded that, if the only need for ratification or shareholders' approval arose by reason of the provisions of Article 95, then what occurred on 21 July 1971 was adequate to overcome that problem.
Therefore, no attempt was made to investigate in any detail the circumstances of the ratification. In reliance upon what was next said by the Chief Justice,
Dr Griffiths sought to argue that there was no evidence that the ratification was made by the shareholders with knowledge that there had been a breach of fiduciary duty. This flies right in the face of the concession which the Chief
Justice noted. Reference to the submissions of Senior Counsel for the appellant at the trial make it quite plain that, so far as there was a necessity for ratification by reason of the interests of the directors in the contract, nothing further needed to be done than was done. This way of putting ground (a) was not open and should be rejected.

As to the second way of putting ground (a) the Chief Justice set out the precise formulation by Senior Counsel for Wambo of the breach of duty said to have been involved in the entry into the deeds of covenant. The substance of it was that the covenant was an empty one because the promises were to do things which "at the time and whilesoever the directors remained directors of
Wambo and the companies remained controlled by the directors, both the directors and (indirectly) the companies were prohibited from doing". To this
Dr Griffiths added that while the companies were bound by the covenants, the directors were not. It was submitted that the sum of all this was that in return for a contingent right to a royalty through the companies they controlled, the directors gave nothing of any value. I should emphasise that, as the Chief Justice said, it was not part of the appellant's case at trial that the deeds of covenants were shams, or merely colourable arrangements, or contrivances, aimed at increasing, indirectly, the consideration to be paid for the Hartogen acquisition or that the directors were guilty of any form of personal impropriety. The Chief Justice observed in the passage I have quoted: "No attack has been made upon the subjective good faith of any of the individuals involved, and a good test of the reasonableness of the arrangements is that they were satisfactory to Hartogen." 
In my opinion, the submission now put sits uneasily with a failure to direct to any of the directors, who put on affidavits, any questions about the alleged inadequacies of the covenants. The unchallenged evidence was that on the advice of Mr Austen who had wide experience in the coal industry the
Hartogen group of companies insisted that a non-competition covenant be agreed with the shareholders, restricting their right to compete against Wambo for a period. Mr Burke, the Chairman of the Hartogen group of companies, considered that it was critical that, prior to any sale, such a non-competition covenant should be entered into between the shareholders and Wambo. Mr Cowan unchallenged said that Wambo was suffering from what he believed to be chronic financial problems, and it did not assist the resolution of those problems for potential investors in the company to be put off by the existence, and potential future existence, of private coal interests held by Wambo directors or shareholders.

The Chief Justice considered that the covenants represented a practical commercial solution to a problem that was being considered in commercial, rather than legal, terms. No reason was advanced which cast doubt on this conclusion. The appellant submitted that the covenants were not in the best interests of Wambo. It was said that the only potential investor was Hartogen and the directors personally or through other corporate vehicles could have avoided the intent of the covenant and what, no doubt, was seen by the commercial negotiators as its spirit. In my opinion, the Chief Justice's answer to this was complete: "The deeds of covenant were, of course, fully disclosed to Hartogen, and were referred to in the agreement for the sale of shares to Hartogen. Hartogen was content to accept them as a satisfactory resolution of the problem which was concerning Mr Austen and Mr Burke." 
In my opinion, ground (a) of the appeal fails.

The second head concerned the operation of s67 of the [Companies
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/), which, relevantly provided: "(1) Except as is otherwise expressly provided by this Act no company shall, whether directly or indirectly and whether by means of a loan guarantee or the provision of security or otherwise, give any financial assistance for the purpose of or in connection with a purchase or subscription made or to be made by any person of or for any shares in the company ......

If there is any contravention of this section, the company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be guilty of an offence against this Act." 
The judgment of Mahoney JA, with which Samuels JA concurred, in Burton v
Palmer [[1980] 2 NSWLR 878] includes a useful analysis of s67. In that case, an arrangement was made whereby it was agreed that the plaintiff would sell to the defendant and another his shares in a company and the company would make a payment to the plaintiff of a sum in satisfaction of its indebtedness to him.
Default occurred in both payments and the plaintiff sued to recover the outstanding balances. The defendant submitted that the transaction contravened the section. Mahoney JA, at 885, described the defendant's submission as follows: "....that the plaintiff would not have entered into the transaction for the sale of the shares if he had not been assured that the company would pay to him the amount which (it is assumed for this purpose) it owed to the plaintiff; that the company covenanted to pay that amount to the plaintiff; and that that constituted the provision of financial assistance in connection with the transfer of the shares." 
It was accepted that the plaintiff would not have been prepared to sell his shares without the company providing for the discharge of its indebtedness to him. His Honour continued, at 885: "I do not think that the mere agreement of the company to pay its present indebtedness is `financial assistance', even if the agreement be made to satisfy a condition imposed by the vendor of its shares. (I put aside for this purpose cases in which the company does financially what it is not obliged to do, eg, pays a debt earlier than it was legally obliged to do; I shall refer to this kind of case subsequently). It has been said that if a company owes money to the purchaser of its shares, it may discharge its debt to the purchaser so that he can pay the vendor and may itself draw a cheque in favour of the vendor of the shares for this purpose: Spink (Bournmouth) Ltd versus Spink [[1936] Ch 544] at 548-9. A fortiori, a company which owes money to the vendor is, in my opinion, not required, under pain of contravention of s67, to refuse to pay that which it is obliged to pay." 
His Honour referred to the particular reasons McInerney J gave in E H Dey (In
Liquidation) versus Dey <case>; [(1966) VR 464] for the conclusion that what had happened constituted the giving of financial assistance and said at 886: "...the company gave up a valuable right for no return to itself and for the purpose of enabling the sale of its shares to be effected. Both the form of the transaction and the financial reality of it were inconsistent with the section." 
At 886 Mahoney JA said that the word "assistance" may denote merely "co-operation" but may also mean the furnishing of something which is needed or, at the least, which is wanted, in order that the transaction be carried out. "I think that, in s67, it has a meaning which is closer to need or want; it does not mean something which is merely co-operation." The mischief which prompted the enactment of s67's original predecessor was arrangements which offended against the spirit, if not the letter, of the law which prohibited a company from trafficking in its own shares. At 887 his Honour said: "What the company did was to enable the transaction involving the purchase of its shares to go forward but what it did for that purpose was merely to pay what it presently owed. If, apart from the proposal for the sale of its shares, the plaintiff had demanded that the company discharge its indebtedness to him, he would have been entitled in law to have it do so." 
At 889 his Honour said: "The fact that a company undertakes obligations, absolute or contingent, in connection with the proposal for the transfer of its shares does not of itself constitute the giving of financial assistance. As I have said, the fact that a company facilitates a proposal for such a transfer will not involve it necessarily in a contravention of s67. Thus, a company may answer requests for information relevant to the proposed transfer knowing that it does so in circumstances such that it will be liable for damages if, for lack of care, the information is incorrect; ........ But, by answering such requests, the company does not thereby give financial assistance." 
In accordance with the principle Mahoney JA set out, the appellant in order to succeed must show more than that, in contemplation of Hartogen's acquisition of its shares, it undertook a contingent obligation in order to obtain covenants for its own benefit. In addition, the appellant had to demonstrate that by so doing it gave financial assistance in connection with this acquisition.

The Chief Justice referred to Charterhouse Investment Trust Limited versus Tempest
Diesels Limited. In that case a subsidiary company, T, was trading at a loss and had accumulated valuable tax losses. An employee, who was the finance and sales director of T, faced with redundancy, offered to buy the entire issued share capital of T. He negotiated an agreement with the group of holding companies including the immediate holding company, CCI. The agreement was complicated and involved inter-company transactions, including the subscription by the group of £780,000 for a rights issue of new shares in T to pay off part of its debts, at the end of which the shares in T would be sold to the purchaser for £1. Part of the arrangement, Hoffman J found, was that T would surrender tax losses to the holding group. In proceedings to enforce the agreement by specific performance, which succeeded, one of the defences was reliance upon a statutory equivalent of s67. It was argued that the tax losses were valuable assets and their surrender could constitute the giving of financial assistance. Without the surrender the group would have demanded a price substantially higher than £1.

At 10 his Lordship said, in the passage the Chief Justice adopted, that the words "giving financial assistance" in the section had no technical meaning and their frame of reference was the language of ordinary commerce. "One must examine the commercial realities of the transaction and decide whether it can properly be described as the giving of financial assistance by the company, bearing in mind that the section is a penal one and should not be strained to cover transactions which are not fairly within it." It does not matter that the company's balance sheet is undisturbed in the sense that the cash paid out is replaced by an asset of equivalent value. At 10-11 his Lordship said: "The need to look at the commercial realities means that one cannot consider the surrender letter in isolation. Although it constituted a collateral contract, it was in truth part of the composite transaction under which [T] both received benefits and assumed burdens. It is necessary to look at this transaction as a whole and decide whether it constituted the giving of financial assistance by [T]. This must involve a determination of where the net balance of financial advantage lay. I see no contradiction between this view and anything which was said in Belmont Finance Corp versus Williams Furniture
Limited (No 2) [1980] 1 All ER 393. In Belmont the company made cash available to the purchaser. This amounted to giving financial assistance and no less so because it was done without any net transfer of value by the company. On the facts of this case there is no question of cash being provided and the only way in which it can even plausibly be suggested that [T] gave financial assistance is if it made a net transfer of value which reduced the price Mr Allam would have had to pay for the shares if the transaction as a whole had not taken place." 
His Lordship then identified a number of benefits to T and put against them burdens that it undertook including the surrender of tax losses. At 13 his
Lordship said: "If I were required to express a view on the effect of the transaction as a whole, ignoring the effect of the £780,000 subscription, I would say that it clearly constituted financial assistance being given to [T] for the purpose of putting it into a state in which Mr Allam would buy the shares for £1 and did not involve [T] giving financial assistance to anyone. It is sufficient however for me to say that the defendant has failed to discharge the burden of proving that the transaction amounted to a giving of assistance." 
In his written submissions Mr Jackman, who appeared for the respondent
Micabil, provided a useful analysis of this judgment. Hoffman J distinguished two principal categories of case, those where the only or main purpose of the transaction was to give the purchaser the financial means to buy the shares when the section was contravened, and those where there is collateral transaction which does not have as its only or main purpose giving the purchaser the financial means to buy the shares, but is nonetheless factually related to the purchase of shares. In the latter category the Court must determine where the net balance of financial advantage lies. Only if the company makes a net transfer of value which reduces the price the purchaser would have had to pay for the shares, if the transaction as a whole had not taken place, can it be said that financial assistance has been given.

In the first category was the Belmont case where a collateral purchase of an asset by the company from the person purchasing the company shares was found to be for the sole purpose of putting that party in funds to acquire shares in the company. It was submitted that the present case did not fall in the first category because the purpose of the deeds was not to give financial assistance for the purchase of shares by Hartogen but for the removal of a problem which was likely to discourage investors and was essential if the proposed Hartogen acquisition was to proceed. It did not fall within the second category because there was no evidence that the price paid for the covenants did not reflect the proper commercial value of the covenants. Counsel at the trial disavowed any suggestion that the s67 argument depended on Wambo paying more for the covenants than they were worth.

I think the appellant's contention can be answered quite simply. Wambo obtained covenants, regarded as commercially reasonable, and intended to remove the potential problem of competition from one or more of its principal shareholders. The covenant enured for the benefit of Wambo regardless of whether the Hartogen group of companies bought or continued to hold shares in
Wambo. No doubt the existence of the covenants made the shares more attractive to Hartogen. But this of itself did not, in my opinion, amount to the giving of financial assistance for their purchase.

The Chief Justice was not satisfied that the appellant had demonstrated that the making of the deeds of covenant involved a contravention of s67 (1). There is no reason to doubt that his Honour was correct in this conclusion.

In my opinion, ground (b) of the appeal also fails.

NOTICE OF CONTENTION 
At the end of his judgment the Chief Justice said that on the view he formed as to the appellant's arguments, it was unnecessary to deal with the respondents' counter arguments based upon waiver, estoppel, laches, acquiescence and the Statute of Limitations. "The relevant facts are not in dispute in any respect, and there is no occasion for me to make any findings of fact." Without objection the respondents filed notices of contention that the decision of the Court below should be affirmed on those grounds. The notices of contention referred to the relevant factual matters. Because I am of the view that the appeal should be dismissed substantially for the reasons given by the Chief Justice in upholding the respondents' claims, it is unnecessary to deal with the notices of contention.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

POWELL JA: I agree with Sheller JA. 
FITZGERALD AJA: The circumstances giving rise to this appeal are set out in the judgment of Sheller JA, and need not be repeated. Subject to what follows, I am in general agreement with his Honour's reasons for judgment, which in turn are substantially consistent with what was said by the trial judge.  BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY 
Wambo's argument before this Court interwove two propositions relating to directors' duties in order to challenge the deeds which it had executed, which provided for royalty payments by Wambo to the directors' companies.[1] The first proposition was that, at the material time, the then directors of Wambo were motivated by an improper purpose, namely their personal interests, not the interests of Wambo, in causing it to enter into the deeds. The second proposition was that the royalty payments to the directors' companies indirectly benefited the directors in conflict with their duty to Wambo.

There is obviously scope for overlap between those two propositions, but they do not wholly coincide. The former is related to subjective considerations, although a conclusion adverse to directors might in some circumstances be inferred despite an absence of direct evidence concerning their purpose. The latter is related to the nature of the material transaction and the surrounding circumstances, and a conclusion adverse to directors might be reached although their only purpose was the benefit the company.

The First Proposition 
No attempt was made before the primary judge, by evidence, cross-examination or otherwise, to prove that the directors of Wambo were motivated by self- interest, not Wambo's interest, at the material time. There is no justification for this Court forming such a conclusion, which would be inconsistent with the trial judge's findings, which were plainly open to him.
At least in the absence of any suggestion of oppression of minority shareholders, it is not obvious to me that a transaction in this category would be void, not voidable, and could not be ratified by shareholders, or those shareholders not disqualified from voting, but it is unnecessary to consider that issue in the present proceeding.

The Second Proposition 
Transactions involving actual or potential conflict between the interests of the directors of Wambo and their duties to Wambo were permissible in accordance with Article 95 of Wambo's Articles of Association, and could be ratified by Wambo's shareholders. Such a ratification took place at the shareholders' meeting on 21 July 1971, at which all shareholders were present and supported Wambo's execution of the deeds. Further, the transactions took place with the support of the incoming majority shareholder, which the trial judge conveniently referred to as the "Hartogen group". Thereafter, Wambo acted on the deeds without complaint for over a decade.

This ground of appeal fails.
 SECTION 67 OF THE [COMPANIES ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) 
Inconsistently with its earlier assertion that it had been disadvantaged by the deeds, this element of Wambo's case proceeded on the basis that it had benefited from the deeds.

Section 67of the [Companies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1961107/) undoubtedly presented difficulties. There is nothing to be gained by further attempts at judicial exegesis of the terms of the section, which was repealed subsequently to the material transactions. Not all the cases in which explanations of the section's operation were attempted can be reconciled, and some contain statements which cannot satisfactorily be applied to circumstances other than those which were then under consideration.

In my opinion, the deeds which Wambo entered, which made the shares being sold to the "Hartogen group" more commercially attractive to the purchaser because of the benefit of the deeds to Wambo, did not constitute "financial assistance" within the meaning of s67, and did not breach that section.

This ground of appeal also fails.

I agree that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 [1] 
As I understood Wambo's argument in this Court, the directors' interests referred to in this part of its argument were not related to their companies' sales of shares in Wambo.
 * * * 
