

John De La Blanca versus Roslyn Donohoo [1997] NSWSC 108 (4 April 1997) 
JOHN DE LA BLANCA v. ROSLYN DONOHOO /93 
FRIDAY 4 APRIL 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, John De La Blanca was injured in a motor vehicle accident on 9 July 1992 when the car which he was driving came into collision with a car driven by the defendant. The defendant admits liability to pay damages in respect of the plaintiff's injuries.

It is common ground that those injuries included:-
A closed head injury causing brain damage, namely contusions in the right cerebellum and right occipital lobe, which has resulted in permanent disability, namely an ataxic gait and a partial loss of visual field in the left lower quadrant. At the conclusion of the evidence, the defendant conceded that those physical consequences of organic brain damage have resulted in a total loss of earning capacity.
Abdominal injuries comprising an extensive injury to the small intestine which was treated surgically, namely by a procedure of laparotomy during which a portion of bowel was resected; and a superficial laceration of the liver which by the time of operation had ceased to bleed and required no specific treatment. The plaintiff's post-operative course was complicated by the development of bilateral deep vein thromboses, treated by the insertion of an inferior venacaval filter, a device intended, as I understand the evidence, to prevent the passage of potentially dangerous emboli from the limbs to the heart, lungs or brain. Nevertheless he developed pulmonary embolism and required a lengthy period of anti-coagulation treatment with heparin and warfarin.

The plaintiff claims in addition to have sustained some injury to his neck and to his low back. A possible neck injury was identified on his original admission to Westmead Hospital when a hard collar was fitted; but that was removed some time on the following day and the hospital notes record no further evidence of such an injury.

The medical reports over the years are sprinkled with references to a complaint of some degree of pain and stiffness, sometimes of the neck, sometimes of the low back and sometimes of both. It does not seem to have been a major problem; it does not seem that the plaintiff has ever been driven to seek medical advice in respect of it. Dr. Henke noted the complaint and, on examination, found some minimal restriction of low back movement and of straight leg raising but offered no diagnosis and expressed no opinion relating those complaints to any injury sustained in the motor vehicle accident.

When seen by Dr. Lawson on 20 July 1993, the plaintiff complained of "some generalised body stiffness, particularly of spine and upper body" but it was the opinion of that doctor that there was "little evidence of major organic impairment of these areas". Complaints of that sort did not form part of the summary of his problems prepared by his general practitioner in November 1993.

In October 1995, Dr. Fearnside noted a complaint of head and neck pain for which the plaintiff took panadeine, and a complaint that "the neck pain was frustrating for him and he often became angry". On examination there was also a complaint of pain in the low back. Dr. Fearnside found some slight restriction of movements of the lumbar and cervical spine.

Mrs. Beltran reports that the plaintiff complains from time to time of back pain, but makes no mention of neck pain. The statement of the plaintiff's mother refers to neither.

Having regard to all of that evidence I am unable to be satisfied that the plaintiff has any significant disability affecting either his low back or his neck and in any event, if he has, I am unable to be satisfied that it is a consequence of his motor vehicle accident.

The plaintiff claims to have continuing symptoms attributable to the abdominal injury, namely colicky low abdominal pain and frequent diarrhoea; and to have continuing symptoms attributable to the deep vein thromboses, namely cramping pains in both calves.

Dr. Shead, the surgeon who performed the laparotomy, described "an extensive injury to the small intestine". He saw the plaintiff once or twice as an outpatient after his initial discharge from the hospital, but no specific observations or opinions are recorded. In November 1993 he offered this opinion as to prognosis:- "I would imagine that his prognosis with regard to his abdomen should be good.
There is a possibility that he may develop adhesions which could give him trouble in the future because of the extensive nature of his injuries, but it is impossible to give an estimate of the likelihood of that occurring." 
I accept the evidence of Mrs. Beltran that the plaintiff has, since his discharge from hospital, continually complained of colicky abdominal pain and experienced (as he did whilst in hospital) frequent diarrhoea. Further investigations by way of gastroscopy and colonoscopy appear to have revealed nothing of significance; and he does not appear to have had any effective treatment. It seems likely that Dr. Shead's prognostication of adhesions has been realised.

The plaintiff's solicitors caused him to be examined by Dr. John Lawson on 20
July 1993. He noted the plaintiff's complaint of symptoms related to the abdominal injury, namely abdominal pain and persistent diarrhoea. Dr. Lawson's opinion is that his continued complaints of pain are due to intra-abdominal adhesions which are unlikely to require further treatment except in the event that some intestinal obstruction develops in the future, which can occur with adhesion formation. Dr. Lawson seems to have been unable to offer any explanation of the persistent diarrhoea.

The plaintiff's general practitioner, Dr. Michael Chan, reported in November and expressed the view that anxiety plays a part in the production of the plaintiff's abdominal symptoms, meaning thereby to include, as I would understand it, his persistent diarrhoea. There has been no further medical investigation of his abdominal problems.

Dr. Henke, a rehabilitation specialist who assessed the plaintiff on 1
November 1993, suggested that the continuing problem of diarrhoea is due to impaired bowel control directly resulting from the loss of part of his small bowel.

Dr. Neild who saw the plaintiff on behalf of the defendant on 24 January 1994, seems to relate the diarrhoea to the bowel resection; and expressed the view that "his abdominal symptoms are reasonable and a direct result of the accident". He also referred to the possibility of post-operative adhesions.

The plaintiff was seen on behalf of the defendant by Dr. Gavin Barr who reported on 7 October 1994. He does not deal with the suggestion of adhesions, perhaps because by the time he saw the plaintiff the plaintiff was reporting slow improvement of his symptoms. In the light of that, Dr. Barr came to the conclusion that the most likely explanation of all his problems was "an irritable bowel syndrome" and he thought the overall prognosis from the standpoint of that condition was good. He said:- "His gastrointestinal symptoms on their own should not substantially alter his lifestyle unless his reported improvement is short lived." 
It is not clear whether this opinion conforms or conflicts with those expressed by Dr. Henke and Dr. Neild.

The plaintiff's evidence that the problems continue to the present time (which might not have been sufficient, given problems of his credibility discussed later) is confirmed by the evidence of his sister, Mrs. Beltran, and I accept it. A suggestion which emerged in cross-examination of the plaintiff, that problems of gastric pain and diarrhoea were a long term problem afflicting him before the accident, seems to have no real foundation. There is a single instance of problems of that sort recorded in his personal file at the State
Rail Authority, but no evidence that it was a chronic problem.

I am satisfied that the present symptoms which the plaintiff has by way of colicky abdominal pain and frequent diarrhoea are attributable to his abdominal injuries and the treatment for them, though they may well be exacerbated and/or prolonged by the effect of an anxiety state of which I shall have more to say. It appears to me that the probability is that he will suffer similar problems indefinitely, very likely permanently and they represent a significant matter in the assessment of damages for non-economic loss.

The pulmonary emboli which developed during the plaintiff's second term of hospitalisation, notwithstanding the insertion of the venacaval filter, were effectively and successfully treated whilst he was in hospital, and he has no continuing respiratory problem. He continued to complain through 1993 of pain and swelling of his legs and Dr. Lawson on 20 July 1993 found some persisting but minimal swelling of the right leg but no gross signs of venous congestion.
He noted that the plaintiff was able at that time to manage without use of supportive stockings, he thought him unlikely to benefit from any further surgical intervention and that he could continue safely without anticoagulant treatment. Dr. Chan later the same year expressed the opinion that the then still present deep venous thrombosis of the right leg should dissolve completely. He thought it unlikely that the filter would ever require surgical removal, although that had been contemplated at some stage. There is no more recent assessment of the legs and they seem not to have been the subject of any particular complaint to any medical practitioner in recent times.

There is, however, evidence from Mrs. Beltran, which I accept, that the plaintiff frequently complains of pain in the back of his calves and requires to be massaged (I take it by her) approximately every two days to relieve that pain. Some of his movements shown on the video, Exhibit 4, could be construed (as the plaintiff claims) as attempts to relieve discomfort or pain in the calves. I am satisfied that there is some continuing problem affecting the plaintiff's legs, being of an organic nature related to the previous deep vein thromboses. I am satisfied that he continues to experience some symptoms attributable to that problem and is likely to continue to experience same indefinitely, and very likely permanently. I am not, however, satisfied that the pain which he experiences is as severe as the evidence of his sister would suggest. As will subsequently appear, I am in no doubt that the plaintiff grossly exaggerated the severity of many of his symptoms and while there is nothing to indicate specifically exaggeration in relation to his leg pain, the unfortunate reality is that any finding as to the severity of and disabling nature of such pain is dependent entirely on his own complaint, that is to say in respect of this symptom, his complaint to his mother and sister, and I find myself unable to accept (although they obviously do) his complaints at face value.

The major matter litigated has been the plaintiff's claim that the brain damage consequent upon his closed head injury was not limited to the right cerebellar and occipital regions of the brain but was more extensive, resulting in a significant loss of cognitive deficits and, secondarily to those and his other physical problems, a major depressive illness and a severe anxiety state, and that by reason of both the organic and the emotional consequences of his injuries he is grossly disabled, and needs constant attendant care, and his quality of life has been virtually destroyed.

The medical evidence shows that it is entirely consistent that there should have been injury to other areas of the brain notwithstanding that such is not demonstrated in the scans which show evidence of contusions in the right cerebellar and occipital regions.

The plaintiff was taken from the scene of the accident to Westmead Hospital by ambulance and remained there until 20 July 1992. The main focus of treatment was his abdominal injury and although the hospital records provide evidence of his having sustained a head injury, no neurological assessment was carried out during that admission.

At the time of the accident the plaintiff was living in a defacto relationship with Ms. Jennifer Bell, he having moved out of his mother's home at Tregear to
Ms. Bell's home at St. Clair about six months before the date of the accident.

Upon his discharge from the hospital the plaintiff resumed co-habitation with
Ms. Bell at her home at St. Clair. She was immediately concerned about his condition. She said:- "At the time of his release from hospital ... I had enormous trouble in communicating with John. He was very distant, he had no sense of direction, he was unable to balance, he could barely keep his eyes open. He was bed ridden most of the time. ... At home he couldn't walk, he wouldn't bath, I had to feed him, I had to dress and undress him, I had to get him in and out of bed,
I couldn't hold a conversation with him, he was disorientated, distant, and barely able to stand on his own." 
On the day following his discharge from hospital the plaintiff was interviewed by an investigator engaged on behalf of his employer's workers compensation insurer. The interview took place at Ms. Bell's home in her presence. It is clear that much of the detail in the statement came from the plaintiff, although obviously not in the form in which it now appears. What appears is, I think, a composite of general information already in the possession of the investigator, some information proffered by Ms. Bell on the basis of her personal knowledge or belief and such information as the plaintiff himself was able to give. Although I think Ms. Bell's recollection of the extent of the plaintiff's confusion at that time may be faulty and I accept as substantially accurate Mr. Cowie's account of the interview, I do not find the fact that the plaintiff was able to participate in the interview in the manner described by
Mr. Cowie necessarily casts doubt on the general thrust of Ms. Bell's evidence in the passage extracted above nor does it cast doubt on the plaintiff's claim that his head injury caused some cognitive deficits.

The fact is that a few days later Ms. Bell took the plaintiff back to the hospital (23 July 1992). He was seen by Dr. Gurka, the head of the brain injury unit who thought that there were signs suggestive of a right sided cerebellar lesion; but also that there were significant organic neurological signs and symptoms consistent with a significant recent brain injury. These included reports by the plaintiff, confirmed by Ms. Bell and the plaintiff's mother, of memory problems and fluctuating orientation; and in the course of the interview evidence of fluctuating attention and poor concentration. There was also concern that he may have bilateral deep venous thromboses. He at once admitted the plaintiff to the hospital for further investigation. A cranial CT scan performed that day confirmed the presence of contusions in the right cerebellum and right occipital lobe. An MRI scan reported on 28 July 1992 showed similar results. The diagnosis of deep venous thromboses was confirmed.

Formal neuropsychological evaluation was performed on 10 August 1992, by Ms.
Philippa Hedges. On this first assessment he performed poorly on tests of memory, and demonstrated poor organisation and planning skills. There was, however, no evidence of decreased verbal fluency and no evidence of psychomotor slowing. It was the opinion of Ms. Hedges and of Dr. Gurka that the deficits found were "entirely consistent with those seen following a significant brain injury".

On 24 November 1992, the plaintiff was examined by Dr. William Wolfenden, consultant neurologist, who recorded the various physical symptoms referred to elsewhere, a complaint that memory was poor and a complaint of feeling depressed because of the loss of physical abilities. It was Dr. Wolfenden's opinion that he had sustained brain damage affecting his cognitive functions and particularly memory.

These opinions provide the earliest evidence of cognitive deficits existing in consequence of brain injury. I am satisfied that such did exist although they did not appear at that stage to be of great severity.

While in respect of the plaintiff's condition later the picture is very much clouded by the plaintiff's obvious exaggeration of his plight, that does not appear to be true of the first year or 18 months after the accident, notwithstanding that as early as November 1992 Dr. Wolfenden noted signs of depression. It seems to me that the best evidence on this issue is that of Dr.
Gurka, to which I will refer a little later.

Further psychometric testing of the plaintiff was conducted at Westmead
Hospital on 20 January 1993 by Dr. Davis, a neuropsychological intern then working in the hospital under the supervision of Ms. Jennifer Batchelor, clinical neuropsychologist. Dr. Davis summarised the results of her testing as follows:- "His intellectual ability was estimated to be within the low average range which is consistent with his education. On measures of higher reasoning his performance was somewhat variable with his best scores being achieved in tasks involving complex non-verbal reasoning.

His attention and concentration were slightly lower than would be expected given his age and low average intelligence. A similar result was seen on tests involving learning and recall of new information. On one non-verbal memory task it was clear that his poor performance was due to lack of effective strategies for initially encoding this fairly complex material. John's speed of information processing was adequate for simple tasks, but there was significant slowing on more complex tasks requiring sustained attention and self-monitoring.

In summary, John presented as a man of low average intellectual ability whose test performance suggests mild residual impairment of attention and of the ability to form new memories. In addition there was evidence that he finds complex cognitive processes very difficult. These results are consistent with the residual effects of closed head injury." 
In the annexure to her report which sets out the test results, she estimated (based on the results on the WAIS-R) that he had then a full scale IQ of 80, which is the bottom of the low average range.

On subsequent occasions when the plaintiff underwent psychometric testing, to the detail of some of which it will be necessary to refer, his presentation was of a person who was severely depressed and somewhat anxious. There is every reason to think that his performance on some testing may have been affected by a mood disorder. As well, there is clear evidence that when tested by Dr. Roldan the plaintiff was (to say the least) not trying to do his best when tested. It does not appear that any such problems can be identified as affecting the validity of Dr. Davis' tests. She observed that:- "In interview he presented as a friendly young man with a good sense of humour and an ability to laugh at his own difficulties. He was fully co-operative with testing although initially anxious, and he appeared motivated to do his best throughout a long assessment. He was alert and responsive during testing.
He was fully orientated for person, place and time." 
There is some ambiguity in Dr. Davis' report, namely as to whether her statement that his intellectual ability "was estimated to be within the low average range which is consistent with his education" was intended as a reference only to his then current state as shown by testing; or was intended as a description of his pre-morbid level of intelligence; or as both, that is to say as indicating that there was no loss of general intelligence as measured by IQ traceable to the accident. Unfortunately, Dr. Davis was not called to give oral evidence. If the third interpretation is, as the defendant submitted, the correct one then I find myself driven by other evidence to reject that opinion.

Before his accident the plaintiff had a long and satisfactory employment history. The following summary taken from the report of Dr. Mattick appears to me to be substantially correct in the light of other evidence:- "2.1 His first job upon leaving school was working on a farm for one year driving a tractor. He left as he found another job.
 .2 His next position was working as a labourer, concreting for 11 months. He left because the money was insufficient.
 .3 He next worked in the Bonds Clothing Company as a general maintenance man, oiling and greasing machinery. He held this position for 51/2 years.
 .4 He then worked for the State Rail Authority assembling trains. He became a classified assembler one year after joining the SRA. He worked with the SRA for 101/2 years and, as mentioned before, undertook a number of in-service training courses and gained seniority. He worked on cranes, forklifts and as a chaser. He eventually became a fitter who knew how to strip and rebuild a train bogey.
 .5 He was offered redundancy by the SRA and decided to take it. He then commenced working in a steel yard at Smithfield where he had been working for one month when the accident in question occurred. His duties at the Smithfield
Steel Yard were as a crane driver loading trucks. He said the accident in question occurred on his way home from work." 
An entry in the State Rail Authority file at the time when he left that employment records that his conduct and service was satisfactory.

In the course of his employment with the State Rail Authority, the plaintiff obtained on 15 February 1985 a learners permit to enable him to train as a crane driver and on 27 September 1985 passed the Department of Industrial
Relations examination for a certificate of competency as driver of an electric overhead travelling crane (cabin controlled). He immediately applied for transfer to a position of crane driver, but it seems that on 4 February 1986 he withdrew that application and thereafter continued in his previous position as a bogey assembler. It seems, however, highly likely that he utilised his newly acquired qualifications in that position during the remainder of his employment because when, in May 1992, he obtained employment with Penrith
Personnel, by whom he was hired out to work for various clients of that company, he claimed at his initial interview to have "good overhead crane experience from SRA", a claim which I would expect to have been verified by that new employer before he was hired out to work for clients of that company as an overhead crane driver (as in fact occurred from 29 May 1992). I am satisfied that he did in fact work at the State Rail Authority, at least from time to time, as an overhead crane driver. Uninstructed by any other evidence,
I would have thought that to undertake the operation of expensive machinery, in circumstances where a lack of judgment or competence carried the risk of injury to the plaintiff himself and/or to other workers and/or to plant and materials, would have demanded a level of intelligence in at least the low average range, and likely above that. No doubt for such reasons Dr. Haik expressed the opinion that the plaintiff's work history suggested an IQ in the order of 95 or above. Dr. Mattick and Ms. Batchelor expressed somewhat similar views, proposing that the plaintiff's occupational history suggested a pre- injury IQ of above 80, in "low average" range, (80-90).

Consequently, the finding by Dr. Davis that his IQ on testing on 10 April 1993 was 80 does not warrant a conclusion that the plaintiff had suffered no loss of general intelligence as measured by IQ.

That assessment was followed about a month later by one carried out by Ms. Lyn
Glaser. She estimated the plaintiff's pre-morbid IQ as just slightly below average but found on testing that his intelligence quotient was currently in the borderline retarded range. He was functioning at a borderline retarded level in both the verbal and performance areas. She found evidence of problems with concentration, sustained attention, response speed and visuomotor co- ordination and concluded that the tests which she performed:- "... show that the patient is suffering from intellectual dysfunction consistent with brain damage*. They confirm the presence of a memory deficit in both the verbal and visual areas of the brain. Delayed recall was also retarded in both areas. Performance on psychomotor tasks and planning was very poor. The personality change, slurred speech and word finding difficulties are all consistent with someone suffering from brain damage. It is my opinion that
Mr. De La Blanca is totally unfit for work. He would have to be retested in 12 months time in order to determine whether any of the cognitive functions impaired have improved. ... There is no doubt that Mr. De La Blanca's brain injury is genuine. He attempted all questions and tried very hard on the tests. There was no attempt to fabricate these results." (* This part of her report is misquoted by Dr. Roldan who wrongly attributed to Ms. Glaser the words "psychological test results indicate Mr. De La Blanca is suffering from brain damage", and used that as the basis of some unwarranted criticism of her and her opinion.) 
Convinced as she was of the genuineness of the plaintiff's effort in the testing process, Ms. Glaser did not administer to him any of the tests (to which reference will later be made) said to be capable of detecting lack of effort and/or malingering. On the basis of her tests she determined the plaintiff's current full scale IQ at 76. As I would understand, that is not sufficiently different from the figure determined by Dr. Davis to warrant a conclusion that there had been any deterioration in performance between the two tests. Some allowance has to be made for inter-test variability which may have many causes.

The defendant sought to rebut the proposition that the plaintiff may have had a pre-morbid IQ of above 80 by reference to the fact that at the end of his primary schooling he did not proceed directly to a normal high school, but spent two years at Niland Special School. According to Mr. Alan Cullen, the current principal of the school, employed there since 1987, that school at the relevant time catered for students "with a mild intellectual disability, in other words students who had been assessed by a school counsellor as having scored within the IQ band of 55 to 80 on a standardised intelligence test".
There is no evidence as to the circumstances in which the plaintiff, who had done his primary schooling at Tregear Public School, was enrolled at Niland
School. His mother's evidence is of no assistance on this issue. Accepting, in the light of Mr. Cullen's evidence, that his IQ must have been assessed as no higher than 80 at the time of his enrolment, and that he spent two years at that special school, the fact is that eventually he was admitted to Dunheved
High School, and there is no evidence to suggest that there he was the subject of any special placement. He was brought up in a home where the language of his parents was Spanish. According to his mother, she spoke to him in Spanish and if she spoke sufficiently slowly he was able to understand; I gather that he could speak some Spanish but generally he spoke to her in English and, if he spoke sufficiently slowly, she could understand. In such a home environment, he would not enjoy the benefit of absorbing the English language as part of the ordinary activities of life, and that gives point to the following remarks of Mr. Cullen in his first statement (one of two which comprise Exhibit T):- "It would be within reason to expect that a student from a non-English background would have scored low on the verbal sections of a standardised intelligence test thus restricting the full score assessment result. After receiving more intensive programmes at a special school it would also be reasonable to expect that on re-assessment the verbal scores would have improved thus increasing the full score assessment result. The student's full score may have been within the normal intelligence range and therefore the student would have been recommended by the review committee for enrolment in a mainstream class in the regular high school." 
Dr. Mattick commented to the like effect. Mr. Cullen also acknowledged the possibility that the assessment of the plaintiff at the end of his term at
Niland may have placed him still in the mild intellectual disability range but competent enough to function in a special class within the local high school.
All that is speculative. All that can be said, as it seems to me, is that the fact that he spent two years at Niland does no more than raise the possibility that by the time of the accident he was still in the mild intellectual disability range. In light of the employment history it appears to me that the probability is that he was functioning at a somewhat higher level.

The evidence satisfies me that in the motor vehicle accident the plaintiff did in fact sustain brain damage which produced some impairment of cognitive functions; that the test results recorded by Dr. Davis and Ms. Glaser early in reflect with reasonable accuracy the level of his then functioning; and that by reason of the accident he suffered specific cognitive defects in the areas of attention, concentration and the ability to learn new material, reflected as at January 1993 by (but not precisely measured by) a definite drop in IQ, possibly as much as 10 to 20 points.

In the normal course of such injuries, it was to be anticipated that there would be a progressive but not necessarily rapid improvement in function over a period of up to two years before the consequences of the injury settled at what would be their final state. As will appear, inconsistently with the usual pattern of recovery following a brain injury, the plaintiff's condition has demonstrated almost continuous deterioration, at least from about the middle of 1993.

That usual pattern of recovery is not universal. In some cases there may be little or no recovery before a plateau stage is reached. The evidence shows, however, that what will not occur as the consequence of organic brain damage is a progressive deterioration in function; and it is clear on the evidence in this case that the deterioration in the plaintiff's function, which the evidence demonstrates, cannot be attributable to organic brain damage unaffected by other factors. The evidence enables the identification of two factors, either or both of which may account for the gross level of disability which the plaintiff now claims and for the deterioration of cognitive function reflected in the results of psychometric testing. Those factors are the existence of a psychological illness in the nature of major depression and/or anxiety state, and, secondly, malingering. Either factor may operate either in the presence of or in the absence of continuing organically based cognitive deficits.

Psychometric assessment by Dr. Davis and Ms. Glaser took place about six months post-injury, that is to say at a time when in the ordinary course further improvement was likely though not certain to occur.

On 21 May 1993, about 10 months post-injury, a further neuropsychological assessment was carried out, this time by Ms. Jennifer Batchelor.

Although Dr. Davis had been working under the supervision of Ms. Batchelor, it does not appear that Ms. Batchelor had any involvement with the assessment of the plaintiff which took place at Westmead Hospital in January 1993. However, in May 1993, the plaintiff was referred to her by his solicitors. She found what she regarded as definitive evidence of acquired cognitive impairment revealed on tests of intelligence and of recent memory. She assessed his full scale IQ at 65 (in the mentally retarded range) and commented:- "Were Mr. De La Blanca operating at this level prior to the accident, it is extremely unlikely that he would have been capable of either participating in a normal class or maintaining employment on the open labour market. He would have been considered in need of special educational placement and his work options would have been severely restricted. ... The average full scale IQ for those of his age and occupational background is 87. Mr. De La Blanca's full scale IQ falls short of the latter estimate by close to 1.5 standard deviations. Thus the data indicate the level at which he is now able to achieve on tests of intelligence to fall well below that which would be expected on the basis of his pre-morbid educational and occupational achievements." 
She found him to be fully co-operative throughout the assessment and at all times he appeared to be working to the best of his abilities, that is to say, there was to her no suggestion of malingering. Nevertheless she deemed it appropriate to administer two tests "that lend themselves to the detection of enactment or exaggeration" namely Rey's 15 Item Test and the Warrington
Recognition Memory Test (Faces). The scores which he obtained were not such as to indicate a patient attempting to simulate or feign memory impairment; although Dr. Mattick does suggest that the score on the Faces test might indicate that the plaintiff "possibly wasn't even trying", I prefer on this issue the evidence of Ms. Batchelor who was better placed to judge.

She did not report evidence of depression or anxiety. It was her opinion at the time of the assessment that the cognitive impairment reflected in the test results did not reflect factors other than organic brain damage. She acknowledged the possibility of some improvement within the first two years post-trauma but thought that "the extent of the deficits now apparent would strongly suggest however that he will remain very significantly disabled".

Ms. Batchelor was subsequently made aware of the results of the psychometric assessments carried out by Dr. Davis and Ms. Glaser and thus, that the level of functioning revealed by her own testing represented a considerable deterioration. She commented on that in a report dated 8 November 1996; she pointed out that such a deterioration is not what would be expected during the period of recovery from closed head injury, but noted that the possibility that his deficits represented a deliberate attempt to under-achieve (ie.
malingering) had been investigated at the time of her assessment in May, at which time the data provided no support for that hypothesis. She said that she suspected that the decline that occurred between January and May of 1993 was a result of depression/anxiety. She noted that subsequent assessments (to which
I will shortly refer) revealed evidence of significant emotional disturbance, and she said:- "I suspect that this began some time after January 1993 and continued to escalate." 
She expressed the opinion that the results obtained by Dr. Davis represent the best indication of the degree of organic brain damage caused by the head injury and that they were entirely consistent with the medical record of his injury showing post-traumatic amnesia "for between five and seven days post- injury". (In fact it became common ground that the period of post-traumatic amnesia was seven days as revealed by the Westmead Hospital notes.) Noting that there was no evidence of malingering when she examined the plaintiff in
January 1993, she thought that the result of her assessment should be viewed as representing the combined effects of the head injury and his emotional disturbance and commented:- "That depression can exert a significant influence on cognitive test scores has been well documented in literature." 
Between the date of Ms. Glaser's assessment and the date of Ms. Batchelor's assessment, the plaintiff had been admitted to Westmead Hospital for a third time. The admission occurred in the following circumstances: Dr. Gurka was clearly dissatisfied with the plaintiff's progress. He had no doubt that the plaintiff had sustained a significant brain injury but did not feel that his cognitive impairment resulting therefrom was severe enough to prevent him from returning to open employment at some time in the future. However, his plans for ongoing rehabilitation had been disrupted because the plaintiff continued to be troubled by his persistent abdominal pain and diarrhoea. In a letter to the general practitioner on 7 April 1993, Dr. Gurka said:- "My general impression is that Mr. De La Blanca appears to have an anxiety state which may be contributing to many of his symptoms as well as a possible irritable bowel syndrome. However, he is likely to have organic deficits as well which have been previously documented on neuropsychological examination which would also inhibit his ability to reintegrate into his previous lifestyle. At present [he] is not attending therapy as arranged for him because of his abdominal complaints and the fact that he appears to forget his appointments. He is generally socially isolated and inactive. He is receiving workers compensation payments. There is no currently active rehabilitation or management plan. I feel his problems require further assessment before a definitive management plan can be implemented. I have suggested to him that I feel the best way of addressing this problem would be to readmit him into a rehabilitation setting where an intensive reassessment by a multi-disciplinary team can be undertaken. At this time I would also organise for him to have a clinical psychology assessment as well as a surgical consult. I am hopeful that I may be able to admit him to the Brain Injury Unit at Westmead Hospital in the next two to three weeks." 
The plaintiff was admitted to the Westmead Brain Injury Rehabilitation Unit under the care of Dr. Gurka on 21 April 1993. Dr. Gurka describes what happened:- "This was done in an attempt to implement an intensive inpatient programme designed to improve his independent living skills which, to a large extent, have been lost as he had become increasingly dependent on his mother and family. Unfortunately during this hospital stay [the plaintiff] found it very anxiety provoking and he discharged himself from hospital a week following admission before all assessments were complete. Since then he has continued to be monitored and managed by the brain injury outreach team." 
That passage is taken from a report written by Dr. Gurka on 21 October 1993 to the workers compensation insurer. Dr. Gurka proceeded to summarise his then current view:- "There is no doubt that Mr. De La Blanca has sustained a significant brain injury. His length of post traumatic amnesia and subsequent findings on neuropsychological testing confirm that his brain injury has been a severe one. His memory deficits have been found to be moderately severe as have deficits in planning and organisational abilities. Because of his poor adjustment to these problems as well as the presence of persisting abdominal symptoms, Mr. De La Blanca has developed significant anxiety and depression as a direct result of his accident. The combination of cognitive and emotional disturbances have resulted in significant disruption to his psychosocial functioning where he has now separated from his defacto wife and has been unable to return to work. There has also been a significant change to his social network. He has become emotionally dependent on his family and at present has little direction or motivation.

In his current situation Mr. De La Blanca is totally incapacitated from any form of working duties. It is now 15 months since Mr. De La Blanca's accident and injury.

I feel that main impairments resulting in his incapacity to return to work and normal psychosocial functioning are the emotional disturbances which have resulted from Mr. De La Blanca's injury. I feel the cognitive impairments he has sustained would not alone be enough to prevent him from returning to some form of gainful employment. At this stage it is recommended that he continue with psychological counselling and psychiatric care and review in an effort to reduce his anxiety and depression. If this were to succeed, it may then be appropriate to specifically address his cognitive impairments and to re- evaluate them. It may also then be possible to look at involving him in a return to work programme. At this stage following his brain injury, it is still possible that some improvements in this general condition will occur although, as time goes on, the prognosis for a good recovery in terms of return to gainful employment and total independence in psychosocial functioning is becoming poor. He continues to be managed by the Adult Brain
Injury Outreach Team and is reviewed on a three to six monthly basis in the
Brain Injury Rehabilitation Outpatient clinic by myself." 
Although Ms. Batchelor on 21 May 1993 did not observe any evidence of depression or anxiety, the fact is that already by that date Dr. Gurka had (as appears earlier) proposed to Dr. Chan a diagnosis of an anxiety state.
Although in the course of his evidence Dr. Gurka acknowledged the possibility that in later years the plaintiff may have been feigning disability, it was not his opinion that that was the case in early 1993. (Nor indeed, as appears from his letter of referral to Dr. Jungfer on 8 April 1994, was that his view a year later.) I am satisfied that, insofar as the test results recorded by
Ms. Batchelor fell significantly below those obtained by Ms. Glaser and Dr.
Davis, the difference is attributable to developing psychological problems or emotional problems, in the nature of depression or anxiety or both.

Through 1993, the plaintiff was still experiencing symptoms attributable to his abdominal injury (colicky pain and diarrhoea) and to his vascular problem (pain and swelling of the calves) and it is apparent from the evidence of family members, as well as from medical reports, that these symptoms together with his cognitive deficits, particularly his memory problems and his difficulty in conversation, were a source of great concern to him. It is reasonable to infer that he was becoming progressively depressed and/or anxious during 1993.

In September of that year, two further neuropsychological assessments were carried out, within a few days - on 13 September by Ms. Kraiuhin, a neuropsychologist in the Brain Injury Unit at Westmead, and on 15 September by
Dr. Mattick on behalf of the defendant.

Ms. Kraiuhin observed that the plaintiff's performances on formal testing were considerably worse than when he was examined six months post-injury, which raised a suspicion of simulation. She administered the Rey 15 Item Memory Test and the plaintiff obtained a score of four only, out of a possible 15, a result which is accepted on all sides as demonstrating at least that he was not trying and possibly that he was deliberately feigning. Of course, that result is significant not only for the particular test upon which it was obtained but for all the tests carried out on that occasion. The possibility has to be recognised, that on all of the tests, the plaintiff was at least not trying and possibly malingering.

As against that, it is to be noted that the test results on that day showed (according to Dr. Mattick - Ms. Kraiuhin's report is silent on the matter) an estimated IQ of 70, "possibly somewhat lower"; that is higher than the IQ assessed by Ms. Batchelor; and also that Ms. Kraiuhin recorded that the plaintiff's presentation "suggested a mixed picture of depression and anxiety". She concluded that his emotional state had deteriorated since he was last assessed and "that this is impacting on his cognitive and day to day functioning". Her interpretation of the Rey 15 Item Test result seems to have been not that he was malingering in the sense of pretending to the existence of deficits where none existed in fact, but that he was exaggerating his remaining cognitive difficulties.

Dr. Mattick was apparently aware that there had been several recent tests and for that reason chose to administer a different batch of tests including, as I understand it, some which had by then ceased to be in current use. As to intelligence, he administered the Nailor Harwood Adult Intelligence Scale, which he acknowledged to be a superseded measure of IQ, and purported to adjust the figures to allow comparison with the more modern WAIS-R. He opined that the plaintiff's full scale IQ thus adjusted was 63. He also administered the Rey 15 Item Test: the plaintiff was only able to recall "two strings correctly out of five", ie. a score of six out of 15, which he said was "suggestive of variable motivation or effort".

In oral evidence Dr. Mattick expressed the view that the declining performance shown by the series of test results to that date suggested that the plaintiff was consciously exaggerating whatever cognitive dysfunction remained. He observed that the plaintiff's presentation during interview and history taking indicated a level of functioning greatly in excess of what was demonstrated on formal testing.

It is submitted on behalf of the defendant that I should take the view that by
September 1993, the plaintiff was deliberately setting out to deceive those who attempted to assess his cognitive function. I do not draw that conclusion, notwithstanding the powerful evidence of feigning at a later stage. Dr.
Mattick observed that the plaintiff was "quite unhappy and dysphoric" and "appeared to be genuinely distressed". He administered what is known as the
Beck Depression Inventory and on that the plaintiff achieved a score of 49 which Dr. Mattick said in oral evidence showed severe depression. In his report he concluded that the plaintiff was apparently suffering from severe depression and had a number of psychological problems indicating general distress.

Dr. Mattick observed that the results obtained by him were generally consistent with those obtained by Ms. Batchelor in May 1993 but acknowledged that there might have been some improvement in memory functioning, which was consistent with what had been reported to him in the course of his interview with the plaintiff and his sister. That the patient should report improvement is hardly consistent with malingering. It is not my understanding that a low score on the Rey 15 Item Test necessarily bespeaks malingering although it quite clearly bespeaks lack of motivation or effort.

The plaintiff was referred back to Ms. Batchelor for neuropsychological re- assessment on 20 January 1994. On this occasion the results on the WAIS-R indicated a full scale IQ of 69. The components of that were a verbal IQ measured at 66 and a performance (non-verbal) IQ at 75. Ms. Batchelor commented:- "These scores fall in the mentally retarded and borderline ranges. Although his verbal score was commensurate with that obtained at the time of the previous assessment, the results returned on the performance scale were somewhat better on this occasion than when previously assessed. This recovery of intellectual function is in keeping with what would be expected in the years immediately preceding injury and provides additional evidence to suggest that the deficits documented at the time of the initial examination represented the direct result of damage imparted to the brain at the time of trauma." 
However, it was her opinion that his recovery was far from complete and there was still a gap between his present performance and what would have been expected on the basis of his pre-accident educational and occupation attainments. She also observed a degree of scatter between the scores returned on the different sub-tests which, she said, was "highly unlikely in the non- brain damaged population and should be considered strongly suggestive of acquired abnormality". The result on one particular test (the Digit Span sub- test of the WAIS-R) was so bad as to raise the possibility of malingering, because that sub-test is a measure of immediate memory and is typically relatively unaffected by closed head injury. Accordingly she administered again the Rey 15 Item Visual Memory Test and the Warrington Recognition Memory
Test (Faces). On the Warrington the score was less than five. On the Rey the plaintiff scored nine out of 15. She commented:- "Although scoring very poorly on each of these measures, Mr. De La Blanca's results were not so impoverished as to be suggestive of a conscious attempt to simulate impairments. ... Thus the results did not provide any evidence to support the hypothesis that he was attempting to feign or exaggerate his disabilities. That he appeared motivated to succeed and that many of the scores returned on this occasion were better than those previously achieved also argue against the hypothesis of conscious enactment." 
Overall she regarded the test results as valid and as providing evidence of very severe cognitive impairment particularly in the areas of intellect and recent memory.

At the same time, Ms. Batchelor conducted an assessment of emotional status using a test entitled the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales of Lovibond and
Lovibond which, she said, was preferable to more commonly used tests because it was more readily comprehended by someone of the plaintiff's current level of intellect. She said that his responses were indicative of severe emotional disturbance and that he would be rated, according to the criteria of that test, as suffering extremely severe depression, extremely severe anxiety and severe stress. She thought it quite possible that those emotional problems were contributing to the degree of difficulty evident on tests of intellect, memory and attention, and provided an explanation for his poor performance on several tests of immediately memory span. She thought psychiatric assessment and intervention were clearly indicated.

I have already referred to the comments made by Ms. Batchelor in her report of November 1996 upon the apparent deterioration in the plaintiff's performance between the time of the tests in early 1993 and her own assessment of him in
May of that year. In that same report she adhered to the view expressed following her assessment of the plaintiff in January 1994 and affirmed that his results at that time "provided no evidence of malingering".

It appears to me that the most probable interpretation of the test results in
September 1993 (and indeed in May) and of the results in January 1994 in the light of all of the other evidence is that the plaintiff was by then severely depressed (as indeed was Dr. Mattick's opinion) and that the test results, to the extent that they indicate more severe cognitive deficits than the tests carried out by Dr. Davis and Ms. Glaser, are to be explained on the basis of psychological factors affecting motivation and effort, rather than on the basis of deliberate exaggeration.

It may be that by January 1994 there was little or no organic loss of function: that the progressive improvement which is the ordinary pattern in such cases had occurred, and would have been revealed by psychometric testing uninfluenced by emotional or motivational factors. There is no evidence to show that that is the case. None of the evidence really points to the probability that the organically based cognitive deficits earlier demonstrated would have resolved entirely. It seems to me that the probability is that the plaintiff in September 1993 and January 1994 was still afflicted to some degree by organically based deficits (and indeed the probability is that he is still so afflicted).

Because of his lack of effort in neuropsychological testing in September 1993 and his actual malingering later, it has ceased to be possible to say to what extent he now suffers (or in 1993 suffered) cognitive deficits organically produced. I am, however, satisfied that at least until early in 1994 he was substantially disabled by a combination of factors directly traceable to his injury, namely cognitive deficits in the areas of memory, concentration, attention and new learning, traceable in part to actual brain damage and in part to depression, itself a consequence of his awareness of the way in which he had been damaged cognitively, and his experience of symptoms produced by his other physical injuries.

In reaching those conclusions, I place considerable weight on the lay evidence of his performance and functioning since his discharge from hospital, to which
I will later refer in some detail.

Dr. Mellick saw the plaintiff on behalf of the defendant on 19 January 1994.
He reported that his examination did not reveal any identifiable abnormality of cognitive function nor any disorder of intellectual function, mood or temperament but, noting the neuropsychological evaluation by Dr. Davis on 20
January 1993, and Dr. Gurka's comment thereon, the plaintiff's complaint of lethargy and Mrs. Beltran's description of the plaintiff as having undergone a marked personality change (very stressed, withdrawn, verbally aggressive) and of his memory deficits, Dr. Mellick commented:- "It is likely that there are neurological abnormalities involving other areas [ie. other than the right cerebellum and right occipital lobe] not identified tomographically. It is likely therefore that the change in personality which has been referred to is an additional expression of neurological deficit more likely than not secondary to contusions occurring also at that time. It is likely having regard to the time which has elapsed since the accident, that the abnormalities now present will be permanent." 
He thought that the plaintiff's lethargy might not be a direct expression of neurological injury but might reflect psychological factors.

On 9 February 1994, the plaintiff was seen by a consultant psychiatrist, Dr.
James Maguire, at the request of the defendant's solicitor. Dr. Maguire appears to have had no difficulty in obtaining a full history. He seemed prepared to accept the probability of some cognitive impairment attributable to the head injury but thought it too early (not yet two years from trauma) to assess the residual degree of impairment. Noting a report of restlessness, irritability and a tendency to "blow up at times", Dr. Maguire was not convinced that that was due to an organic change in personality. He ascribed those symptoms, together with his feelings of distress and depression, to an adjustment disorder of moderate severity, related to his concern about the change in his cognitive and physical. He thought treatment by a psychologist or psychiatrist was indicated.

On 8 April 1994, as noted above, Dr. Gurka referred the plaintiff to Dr.
Patricia Jungfer, a consultant psychiatrist. The letter of referral gave a brief history of the plaintiff's injury and said:- "Neuropsychological evaluations (reports enclosed) have demonstrated significant impairments in memory and planning/ organisational skills which have prevented him from getting back to pre-morbid activities and occupation.

He has been managed by the Outreach team and has been attending outpatient clinic appointments for review. As well as his cognitive impairments he has also developed significant anxiety and depression which has been very resistant to counselling by the Outreach social worker and in recent times
Richard Bryant. Richard is of the opinion that this man's only chance of improvement is through drug management and he is a poor candidate for counselling and psychotherapy. I would appreciate therefore your assessment and recommendation regarding pharmacological management of his emotional disturbances since his head injury.

He currently functions extremely poorly such that he can only perform basic self-care tasks and is unable to do anything else without direction and supervision. I feel that this could be considerably better if his depression were successfully managed." 
Dr. Jungfer saw the plaintiff for the first time on 5 May 1994 and thereafter on five subsequent occasions during that year. She summarised those attendances in her first report dated 15 December 1994.

She recorded what she subsequently described as the classic symptoms of a depressive illness and she diagnosed a severe endogenous depression which she explained in oral evidence as referring to a depressive illness founded upon an underlying biological process, a disturbance of body chemistry which may develop in case of brain injury many months after the injury.

She recorded the plaintiff's account of his cognitive problems, specifically his severe memory deficit, which she described as an inability to recall the most basic detail. She also recorded the reports of his family of a personality change following the injury and his hospitalisation marked by an extremely quick and explosive temper, his explosions followed by displays of considerable remorse, and a report that he readily becomes agitated and angry over minor events particularly if he were forgetful of things. She diagnosed personality and cognitive changes as the consequence of a severe closed head injury.

Finally, she summarised his multitude of pain complaints, including but not limited to those referred to earlier in this judgment She noted that there was a partial organic basis for some of his complaints, but that his complaints were excessive and beyond that explained by the pathology: accordingly, she diagnosed a somatoform pain disorder. She thought that a significant factor in the aetiology of the last-mentioned diagnosis was the plaintiff's limited understanding, possibly due to inadequate medical explanation but more likely due to his inability to absorb information, about his various illnesses and their management. She noted that he had no idea as to what treatment he received with regard to his surgery and therefore no understanding as to why he may be getting the abdominal pain. It is appropriate to observe that, although she did not refer to it specifically, the same may well be true in relation to his complaint of continuing leg pain, for it is quite apparent from the hospital records that there was at one stage a divergence of medical opinion as to the desirability of surgery to remove the venocaval filter; if divergent medical opinions were communicated to a man of his limited understanding, the consequence may well have been confusion and anxiety. She made clear, in her oral evidence, that this diagnosis rested upon an acceptance that the plaintiff did in fact experience the symptoms of which he complained.

Dr. Jungfer commenced the plaintiff on anti-depressant therapy (he was already in receipt of some anti-depressant medication but at what she regarded as a sub-therapeutic dose). She observed during the course of the year, and attributed to that treatment, what she described as "a good resolution of his mood disturbance" so that when she last saw him on 7 November 1994 there were "little residual symptoms of depression" although he still had a mild sleep disturbance. She observed mild but not substantial improvement in his cognitive performance, a circumstance which seems to go some way to support the proposition that the deterioration in his cognitive function since mid-1993 may have been to some extent influenced by his psychological state.
Noting that it was then more than two years since the time of the accident, she thought it unlikely that there would be any improvement in his personality and cognitive changes. She was of the opinion that he would, in any event, require lengthy anti-depressant therapy and might possibly require to remain on such treatment indefinitely.

As I would understand, the management of his anti-depressant treatment thereafter was left in the hands of his general practitioner, the evidence of
Mrs. Beltran being that the plaintiff saw Dr. Chan frequently and regularly.
The plaintiff was not referred back to Dr. Jungfer until 15 August 1996 following the first group of hearing days in the present trial.

To some examining doctors, in late 1995 and since, the plaintiff has presented himself as grossly cognitively impaired, and as depressed and apathetic.
Consistently with those presentations, on the first day of the trial (17 June ) when the plaintiff was called to give evidence, he walked with apparent great difficulty to the witness box and sat there apathetic and passive, evidently withdrawn. Asked, in a leading question, his name, he nodded, but when asked to speak up, he answered, "yes". Asked his address, he paused for a long time then slowly withdrew his wallet from his pocket, and from his wallet produced a piece of paper (Exhibit 1, the piece of paper referred to in Mrs.
Beltran's evidence) from which he purported to read his address aloud. His own counsel chose to ask no further questions.

In cross-examination he answered questions slowly, seemingly reluctantly, in a manner which was very unforthcoming. Sometimes he appeared unable to understand even quite simple questions; on other occasions, he answered responsively to questions which were less simply framed and which used relatively sophisticated vocabulary, eg:- "Q. How do you use that keycard number to perform a transaction? A. Go to the bank and show the card, get the money out.

Q. You have to perform some functions do you not in that transaction? What functions do you perform? A. Card give it, give the number, the number and get the money out." 
At the request of counsel I asked him to walk across the court so that I might observe his gait. He walked slowly with apparent effort and with his feet spaced widely apart, at least 30 centimetres apart. He sometimes stuttered. He agreed that that was a disability that he had had before the accident but it was not, he said, as bad as now. It was very difficult indeed to access his veracity from the way in which he presented and the way in which he answered questions. If his presentation was a genuine reflection of his cognitive function, then quite clearly he was grossly disabled.

In cross-examination he was confronted with a video taken on 15 April 1996.
That video showed two scenes. First it showed the plaintiff in apparently animated conversation with a person subsequently identified as his neighbour,
Mr. Alan Kemp, in what was identified as the garden or driveway of Mr. Kemp's home. He moved much more freely than he had done in the courtroom but still for the most part stood or walked with his legs widely spaced. There were some occasions when he had his feet much more closely together and displayed some quite rapid movements of the feet, but all of those appeared to be occasions when he was able to support himself against a wall. In marked contrast to his performance in court, his movements were animated, even vigorous, and so was his speech. He appeared to speak volubly, with animation, and with many gestures.

In later cross-examination, the plaintiff indicated that when, as shown on the video, he had bent his leg and put the sole of the foot against the wall, that was a manoeuvre to rest his leg or relieve a cramp in it.

The second scene displayed was in a pharmacy where the plaintiff appeared to utilise an EFTPOS facility to withdraw cash. He could be observed manipulating the EFTPOS device, that is to say punching a multi-digit number but, although the film was by no means clear, I was left after several viewings of it with the clear impression that he utilised as an aide memoir a piece of paper like that which he produced in court to state his address: not, however, taking from it each digit separately, but, to my observation, studying it before punching the entire number quite rapidly.

On the following morning (18 June 1996) when the hearing resumed, the plaintiff was cross-examined about the first portion of the video film which occupied (it was said) between 30 and 45 minutes (my own impression was that the conversation with Mr. Kemp continued for over an hour). He agreed that it showed him talking to another person. Then followed the following passage:- "Q. You were talking and you were talking to him quickly? A. Yes.

Q. You agree with that? A. Yes.

Q. Why didn't you talk in the same manner to us in court? A. What do you mean? 
Q. On the film you were shown to be talking quite freely to this man, gesticulating with your hands. You agree with that, do you, that proposition, that you were talking quite freely to this man, gesticulating? A. Yes.

Q. Whereas in court you are hesitant in the way in which you answer questions, do you agree with that? A. I don't get what you mean.

Q. Sorry? A. I don't get what you mean. What do you mean? 
Q. You don't know what the word `hesitant' means, is that what you say? A.
Yes.

Q. Why are you closing your eyes? A. I feel sick.

HOLMES: Q. Are you having trouble keeping awake? Would your Honour note the colour of the plaintiff.

WITNESS: I feel sick.

HOLMES: My observation is he is pallid.

HIS HONOUR: I did not myself observe him change.

MURRAY: I can't either.

MURRAY: Q. What is the problem Mr. De La Blanca? A. I just feel dizzy.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Would you like a break? A. Yes, please." 
The witness was stood down and after a short adjournment it was reported that he was outside the court, unwell, unable to continue; in due course arrangements were made for a doctor to attend him.

On the following day he was unfit to give evidence (medical certificates which were produced are described later) and the matter did not proceed until
Thursday 20 June 1996. Other witnesses having been interposed, the cross- examination of the plaintiff resumed after the luncheon adjournment on that day.

The plaintiff claimed not to remember having been in the witness box earlier in the week nor having seen a video of himself. In that, he was completely unconvincing and I am satisfied that he was not being truthful. Immediately afterwards he was asked questions about the game of snooker, at which, according to the evidence he had some prowess prior to the accident. He was able, without difficulty, to describe the several colours and respective values of the balls used and the process of play.

His appearance was somewhat dishevelled. He was asked whether he had showered or washed, and combed his hair before coming to court. He claimed not to remember. It was suggested that he had deliberately tried to present himself in an untidy condition but he did not in terms answer that suggestion. He denied that he was trying to present himself to the court as an imbecile.
Again asked his address, he claimed to be unable to do so without reference to the piece of paper in his wallet which he duly produced.

He was then asked some questions about his activities during the luncheon adjournment immediately before the resumption of his evidence - where he had gone for lunch, what he had had to eat and to drink. He agreed that he had had lunch with Mr. Kemp and with his sister Mrs. Beltran but claimed not to be able to say where. Led, he agreed that it was at the Leagues Club across the road from the court. He agreed that during the lunch break he had been talking. He did not concede that he had been laughing. He did not know whether he had counted out money to his sister. He was reluctant and unforthcoming in his answers.

A video was shown, taken at the Leagues Club during the luncheon adjournment.
The tape showed the plaintiff to be talking freely, even volubly, on occasions to be laughing, and on one occasion to hand money to Mr. Kemp to buy drinks and subsequently pick up the change. He agreed that the tape showed him to be relaxed and comfortable. Asked why he did not respond freely to questioning in the court he said:- "Because I am nervous and stressed. I don't know nobody here. I am too nervous." 
There was a clear and dramatic contrast between his apathetic, withdrawn and generally unresponsive presentation in court and his relaxed and animated behaviour shown on the video.

The recommencement of the proceedings on Friday 21 June 1996 was delayed until .35 pm by a part-heard matter and the luncheon adjournment was taken early because the plaintiff claimed that he was dizzy and had a stomach pain. After lunch, in cross-examination, he claimed not to remember anything about the preceding day, about his having had lunch at the Leagues Club and of having seen a video of himself. At the commencement of the day's proceedings the first question in cross-examination was as to his address and again he purported to be unable to answer until he had withdrawn from his wallet the piece of paper on which his address in written.

The dramatic difference between his presentation in court on the one hand and his manner and behaviour as shown on the video tapes affords the clearest evidence that he has tried to exaggerate the severity of his disability.

The plaintiff was referred by his solicitors to Dr. Michael Fearnside, a neurological surgeon and clinical associate professor at Westmead Hospital who saw him on 30 October 1995. He described the plaintiff's presentation on that occasion and, having seen, before he gave evidence, the video of his conversation with Mr. Kemp, agreed that the presentation of the plaintiff on the video was in contrast with his presentation to the witness six months earlier. He then gave this evidence:- "Q. I want you to assume that when he came to court here, he presented in a similar way to the way he presented to you but perhaps even more extreme. He sat in the witness box with a very passive expression on his face. When asked his address, needed to refer to a piece of paper where it was written down.
When asked questions like the day of the week, the month, the year, was unable to give answers. Was mute for a lot of the time and then during a luncheon adjournment, he was recorded on video going across with his sister and companion to the Leagues Club across the road, having conversation with them, eating his bread roll or whatever it was, having a couple of drinks, laughing at times; then came back to court and presented in the way that I have described. There is no explanation for that other than that he was putting it on, is there? A. None." 
The matters thus put to Professor Fearnside are not entirely accurate, but the general thrust of the question was sufficiently accurate and quite fair. I do not believe that the inaccuracy in detail in any way detracts from the opinion expressed by the witness, which I accept.

Dr. Gurka also commented on the contrasting presentation of the plaintiff as shown on the video and in court (as described to him by counsel) and agreed that the inconsistency could not be explained on the basis of organic brain injury. It might have been due to mood fluctuation, his performance in what he perceived as a stressful situation being markedly impaired by anxiety or depression. He though that the discrepancy between the plaintiff's presentation in court as described to him and his presentation in the Leagues
Club during the lunch adjournment might similarly be accounted for on the basis of fluctuating mood. He conceded that the plaintiff might be feigning but "could not say that it is highly likely".

Dr. Haik, a psychiatrist and Dr. Jones, associate professor in rehabilitation medicine, both saw the plaintiff on behalf of the defendant and both concluded that he was feigning all or some of his symptoms.

The most recent neuropsychological assessment was conducted by Dr. Fernando
Roldan on 13 May 1996. In his report and particularly in his oral evidence he demonstrated, as it seems to me beyond doubt, that the plaintiff's performance on certain neuropsychological tests specifically designed to identify malingering could not be explained except on the basis that the plaintiff was deliberately performing below his true capacity.

I am satisfied that for whatever reason the plaintiff intentionally falsified his responses in the course of the neuropsychological assessment by Dr.
Roldan; and that he presented to Dr. Fearnside, Dr. Haik, Dr. Jones and in court, in a manner which the video shows to be not his normal state. My clear impression during the various parts of the cross-examination to which I have referred was that the plaintiff was pretending that his disabilities were far greater than they really are. I simply do not accept that he had so little memory of very recent events occurring in the running of the case. In so saying I have given careful consideration to Dr. Jungfer's evidence that in her opinion, in certain situations of stress, the plaintiff is likely to decompensate. I do not find that theory (plausible as it is and indeed acceptable as to some aspects of the plaintiff's behaviour) to be an adequate explanation of his behaviour in court. I shall refer later to her evidence of how he may respond to non-hostile questioning and how he may become stressed if pressed. I saw the plaintiff's behaviour; Dr. Jungfer did not, although no doubt she read the transcript. I think it was behaviour of a different order from what she has attempted to describe and explain. I have no doubt that he was deliberately attempting to mislead the court as to his cognitive state in just the same way as, in my view, he attempted to mislead Dr. Roldan. On the other hand, I do not entirely discount the possibility that his reluctant, unresponsive and unforthcoming demeanour in court was in part the result of his nervous state or anxiety. That having been said, I think it is clearly the case that in large part the reason for his anxiety was his awareness that he was trying to deceive the court as to the gravity of his condition and his awareness that the defendant was in a position by the production of the video to prove that that was what he was doing. I do, however, accept that he was genuinely ill in response to the pressure of cross-examination on 18 June 1996 after the video film had been shown. I will refer later to the medical evidence of that. At this stage I note the evidence of Mrs. Beltran that he appeared to be dizzy, losing balance, losing concentration and not focusing.

In the circumstances I cannot rely on the manner and content of the plaintiff's evidence as a basis for any finding of disability, and I cannot rely on any of the test results obtained by Dr. Roldan as a basis for any finding that he continues to suffer cognitive deficits. It follows that if the case which he seeks to make is to be established, it must be established by other evidence; and insofar as the evidence of experts and lay persons upon whom the plaintiff's case relies depends upon their acceptance of the plaintiff's own account of his condition, rather than upon observations of his functioning, that evidence must be treated with considerable reserve. For that reason, I reject the third diagnosis offered by Dr. Jungfer of a "somatiform pain disorder". That diagnosis rests only upon Dr. Jungfer's acceptance of the plaintiff's descriptions of his symptoms, and that description I am not prepared to accept, except to the limited extent earlier indicated, that is as to his abdominal pain, diarrhoea and leg cramps. I reject any psychiatric diagnosis of somatiform pain disorder, but on the other hand, I accept that such symptoms as he does have have the capacity to contribute to a depressive illness. This finding has little effect on any head of damage other than damages for non-economic loss; in that regard, it accounts in large part for my rejection of the submission put by the plaintiff's counsel, that this case is a "most extreme case" within the meaning of s.79 of the Motor Accidents
Act.

There is evidence that shortly before the trial commenced on 18 June 1996, the plaintiff's mother became ill and was admitted to hospital for treatment of a heart condition. I accept the evidence of Mrs. Beltran as to the plaintiff's reaction to that, which their brother had described as his having "collapsed".
Mrs. Beltran rejected that description but said that:- "When my mother was leaving to go to hospital he got, he could not help, he just froze while my mother was screaming.", and when she herself saw him later that night when she picked him up from a neighbour's home:- "He was then out, he was like he was not there. He didn't know who I was. I didn't know why I was there. I could have come and left and he would not have known." 
On 18 June 1996 after the plaintiff purportedly became ill in the course of the proceedings, he was taken to the emergency department at Sydney Hospital and a Dr. Furber by whom he was seen issued a short note in the following terms:- "John De La Blanca presented to ED with symptoms consistent with fatigue and anxiety. If possible he needs to go home and rest." 
He was seen later that day by Dr. Chan, who issued a certificate in the following terms:- "John De La Blanca is unfit for court for one day from 19 June 1996 inclusive due to anxiety induced vasal-vagal attack." 
The certificates are now Exhibit H.

Dr. Chan referred the plaintiff back to Dr. Jungfer. She had not seen the plaintiff between November 1994 and the commencement of the trial on 17 June
She saw him on 15 August 1996 and on a number of other occasions between the first five days of this trial and the resumption of the trial in
March 1997, when she herself was called to give evidence.

Writing to Dr. Chan on 15 August 1996, she described him as displaying "a most interesting mental state". He described himself "as feeling numb and tired and indicated that he felt very moody on most days". He reported disturbed sleep, multiple pains in the chest and the leg, good appetite, continuing significant problems of memory:- "He primarily, however, focuses on physical symptoms, he indicated that he had a severe balance problem and has the most bizarre gait." 
He said that but for his wide based gait he would fall and he demonstrated a tendency to fall when he stood not only with his eyes closed (which is normal) but also when his eyes were open, which Dr. Jungfer later said was inconsistent with any organic condition and could represent simulation. He reported that central chest pains occurred when he became uptight or upset.
Dr. Jungfer recorded this:- "The family indicated that he gets extremely distressed when visiting doctors, and was very distressed with recent court proceedings. When I discussed with him the recent court proceedings in the interview setting, he became very teary, distressed and quite agitated. He was unable to indicate what the court proceedings were about or why he was there." 
Dr. Jungfer said that he described moodiness rather than consistent depressed mood and commented that he is "almost certainly not as depressed as when I originally saw him". That seems to make it less likely that his diminished cognitive function can still be attributed to depression and perhaps assists a conclusion that he continues to have some organically based cognitive defects.
However, anxiety was still a feature of his condition. She thought it necessary to exclude any other possible physical causes and ordered investigations which apparently did exclude any such. She saw him on several occasions after that prior to giving oral evidence on 4 March 1997.

On 15 October 1996, she reported to Dr. Gurka:- "Currently I am attempting to alter his medication to see if we can get better symptom control. As you might be aware, there have been some significant problems with John in that he appears at times to decompensate to the point where he is mute. He is also quite slowed and I thought that the nortriptyline may be causing some of this. So the nortriptyline has been ceased and John's primary concern now is that he report significant problems with anxiety and an inability to sleep. The anxiety existed while he was on the nortriptyline.
However, he has developed worsening anxiety because of his sleep disturbance and has become quite agitated and distressed by this. ... He seems unduly concerned about the inability to sleep to the point where he almost had the panic attack. ... Today I started him in paroxetine as it has a good anxiolytic effect and I hope that this medication will in fact relieve his symptoms. ..." 
On 6 November 1996, she found him brighter and more alert although his sister reported him to be more agitated and that, she said, was the case at interview. She thought his mood appeared to be relatively stable; however, when she asked him to undertake a number of cognitive tasks, "he became extremely anxious, and hyperventilated in the session". She concluded that he has "a chronic hyperventilation syndrome", I take it as a manifestation of anxiety. She instructed him and Mrs. Beltran in a relaxation strategy using breath control techniques and said that she was able to demonstrate, during the interview on that day that he was able to contain his anxiety "and he did not need to go out and be sick, what had been his initial request on becoming anxious".

On 18 November 1996, she wrote a lengthy and detailed report dealing with these recent examinations and commenting on the reports of Dr. Maguire and Dr.
Haik, to which some reference has already been made. She acknowledged the rationale of Dr. Maguire's diagnosis of a moderately severe adjustment reaction disorder, rather than an organic mood disorder (major depression) but pointed out that the differential diagnosis can be very difficult and often needs to be done over a period of time, implying that she had an advantage in that regard and her diagnosis ought to be preferred. She commented on the video tape evidence and suggested that nothing on the tapes was inconsistent with her diagnosis of a major depressive illness, given that the plaintiff had been in receipt of anti-depressant therapy for over two years. She said that frequently such medication will relieve a lot of the physical or biological symptoms of the disorder but have less effect on the mood state and that treatment of the endogenous depressive illness might well have the effect of revealing a co-existing reactive depression and/or adjustment disorder. On that basis she thought that the video evidence of the conversation with Mr.
Kemp wherein he appeared quite animated was not out of keeping with her view of his overall condition.

Dr. Jungfer noted the history of the development of a significant anxiety condition in the plaintiff, much of the evidence of which has already been referred to. Anxiety symptoms, she said, may be a feature of the depressive illness or may be a separate diagnosis, it being not always possible to say which is the case. She observed that:- "Despite adequate treatment with anti-depressants he continues at times to be plagued with an anxiety which is performance in nature, that is, if he is in his own environment, where he knows people, where he is not expected to do anything and there is no demand on his level of performance he is quite calm, when he is placed in a situation where there are expectations upon him to do testing, or to perform certain tests, or to be in an unfamiliar environment he becomes quite anxious and his behaviour inappropriate. It has been documented when I have seen him in my rooms that he becomes quite overwhelmed with anxiety when directly questioned. If one engages him in a routine social conversation he, in fact, can communicate reasonably adequately considering his level of intellectual functioning, his language skills. However, when he is placed in a situation where is confronted with questions he decompensates and becomes anxious. As a consequence of his anxiety symptoms his ability to perform deteriorates further and this would account for his behaviour, both in the court setting and on a number of occasions of testing." 
She noted research which shows that anxiety has a profound effect on the ability to perform in cognitive functioning and said:- "The effect of profound anxiety is quite overwhelming on test results." 
She suggested that "when Mr. De La Blanca becomes anxious he is unable to resource what cognitive skills he has and there is a significant deterioration". She summarised her view:- "I therefore propose that the difficulties with Mr. De La Blanca's testing has been predominantly influenced by his psychological state, significant anxiety and difficulties with coping with confrontation with regards to his performance and expectations upon him to perform." 
She acknowledges the possibility that he is feigning or deliberately exaggerating, but that is not her own opinion of the true explanation of the inconsistency between his presentation in court and to certain medical practitioners on the one hand, and on the other hand his presentation on other occasions, particularly as shown in the videos. It is still her opinion that he suffers from a major depressive illness, which may be in part an organic consequence of his brain injury or may be reactive to his cognitive deficits and his physical symptoms.

She diagnoses also a situation specific anxiety which overcomes him on occasions which he perceives as occasions of stress, such as some medical consultations and appearances in court. She pointed out that in her long experience with the plaintiff she had found that with patience and gentle persistence it was possible to induce from him a great deal more responsiveness than he shows in pressure situations. She said (t.398):- "I have a reasonably good rapport with him. I have seen him on and off over a number of years. I have learnt there are ways that I can ask him questions and get information and he will co-operate with the interview and there are other ways when no information is forthcoming. You tend to need to jolly him along.
If you spend sufficient time, give him sufficient time to answer, you can usually get quite a lot of information out of him. It just takes time." 
I did not understand anything in Dr. Jungfer's report of 15 December 1994 as suggesting any actual episode of decompensation during any of her consultations with him during that year. Nor would I understand the report of any of the other doctors who examined him prior to the end of 1995 to be describing any such thing. Dr. Fearnside's account of the plaintiff's presentation on 30 October 1995 describes something approaching (but by no means as extreme as) the plaintiff's presentation in court. The same may be said of the plaintiff's presentation to Dr. Wolfenden by whom he was seen on behalf of the defendant on 15 May 1996. Dr. Wolfenden said:- "Mr. De La Blanca walked into my room with a very wide based lurching gait and seemed at times about to fall. He would clutch things around him. He was quite incapable of giving any history and just sat on a chair and stared at the wall. The only history obtainable was from his sister." 
He contrasted the plaintiff's presentation with what he had reported in
November 1992. He said:- "Contrary to his performance at that time he now was quite unable to give me his address nor could he tell me the day, month or year. He could not repeat seven digits and could not do even the simplest forms of mental arithmetic. He could tell me the name of the current Prime Minister but not the previous one and had no idea how many weeks there were in a year ..." 
Dr. Wolfenden's opinion was expressed as follows:- "Undoubtedly Mr. De La Blanca has sustained brain damage in the injury described. His performance at the moment, however, is very much worse than it was when I saw him in November 1992. There is, of course, no reason why he should be progressively worse after such a brain injury and if anything there should be a gradual improvement to some degree. This therefore suggests to me that there a psychological factors which have worsened his performance. He is said to be depressed and at times cries and this would seem to be a likely reason for the worsening of his performance and he may have subsided in a type of invalid behaviour becoming more and more reliant upon a caring family. ...
I am unable to pass comment on whether there is any desire for secondary gain in his behaviour nor whether his family is actively impeding his improvement though this latter would seem doubtful. A psychiatric opinion with regard to his depression would be desirable. He has, of course, suffered brain injury and his life has been entirely altered and this in itself may seem a reasonable cause for the onset of a depressive illness. The other complicating factor, of course, is his bowel disturbance which I presume has resulted from the removal of bowel so that the remaining bowel is over-active. This, of course, would be a further distressing symptom. ..." 
When the plaintiff was seen by Professor Jones on 7 June 1996, there was:- "... initially very little rapport ... although as the interview progressed and under great difficulty Mr. De La Blanca finally responded to some of my questions and on occasions was quite cogent and responsive, although later he might deteriorate into stuttering and perseveration." 
Professor Jones was able to obtain a quite substantial history from the plaintiff. Professor Jones commented:- "On my examination Mr. De La Blanca seemed to be almost totally incapable of performing the tests I put to him but was able to provide me, albeit with some insistence on the examiners part, the majority of the history above in this report. I am of the view that Mr. De La Blanca is not performing to his maximum ability, is variable in his performance in an examination situation and has a marked psychological reaction to his perceived impairments. The majority of the apparent impairments detected during my physical examination were not organically based. I am of the view that De La Blanca is independent in personal care and could be independent in the activities of daily living.
The level of variability in the testing situation may indicate a level of conscious effort at misleading the examiner." 
He said:- "A degree of underlying brain damage however cannot be ascertained but indicators would suggest that there was a conscious effort at misleading the examiner. It was difficult to ascertain as to whether Mr. De La Blanca was depressed as initially he seemed to be almost totally incapable of any response with the examiner but then brightened and would share an occasional aside. Some form of secondary gain is in my opinion involved in his presentation. Perhaps continuing psychiatric assistance may be beneficial. The family's role in his bizarre presentation could only be surmised. I have the opinion that there is much more potential for Mr. De La Blanca in his level of independence than has been conceded by him. In his present performance one could not envisage him working. Were he to overcome his psychological illness, then one could envisage him having the potential to live independently and perhaps to return to the community activities." 
Subsequently, Professor Jones saw the videos. He regarded them as confirming that there was a degree of feigned brain impairment. He thought that Dr.
Jungfer's explanation of the plaintiff's fluctuating performance as reflecting fluctuations in his level of depression was inadequate to explain the frequency and degree of the latter in the present case.

Professor Jones records a incident which had some of the features of other occurrences which Dr. Jungfer describes as decompensation. At one point in the interview, Professor Jones said:- "The plaintiff called out `toilet', perhaps indicating that he wished to go to the toilet. As the interview was extraordinarily slow, I encouraged Mr. De La
Blanca to stay and this he did." 
If one looks at Professor Jones' experience of the plaintiff with Dr.
Jungfer's explanation in mind, then it has to be said that what occurred may have been the onset of an episode of decompensation such as Dr. Jungfer postulates, which Professor Jones intercepted and resolved in much the same way as Dr. Jungfer herself claims to have been able to do.

The presentation of the plaintiff to Dr. Haik on 20 November 1996 as described in his report of 25 November, includes just such an episode as Dr. Jungfer describes:- "Some 15 minutes after the interview began, following some apparent indigestion, Mr. De La Blanca announced that he felt `sick' and wanted to go to the toilet. He stumbled out of the room and returned five minutes later. He re-entered my office without closing the door and sat down in silence. His face was dripping with water which had wet the front of his shirt. He made no comment as to what had happened." 
Dr. Haik reported that;- "Today one was unable to obtain any satisfactory history from him. Although we were together one hour, his contribution was so parsimonious that none of the history obtained in 1994 was forthcoming. ... He appeared not to hear most of the questions asked and if goaded he sometimes replied monosyllabically in a voice was little more than a whisper. Most often, he merely repeated the last word of the sentence he has been asked." 
Dr. Jungfer (t.234) described what she meant by her reference in her report to situation specific anxiety. She said:- "In a situation where he is unfamiliar, feels like he may not be able to perform adequately, is uncertain regarding his safety or is unsure about what is happening, he is prone to become anxious, he will hyperventilate frequently, he will say, `I have to go to the toilet' and complains of feeling very unwell and anxious." 
In re-examination (t.258) she was asked what she had seen in her rooms in that regard and she said:- "If you start firing questions at John and, you know, pushing him for information and asking him to do things he can't do, that he doesn't have the level of functioning to do, he becomes - he starts hyper - he has a very characteristic posture, he leans forward and says he want to go to the toilet and he hyperventilates and he gets very pale and he gets very agitated and that can be terminated with relaxation." 
Dr. Jungfer was recalled after Dr. Haik had given evidence, because the content of Dr. Haik's report of 25 November 1996 had never been put to her.
She referred to the incident which I have already extracted from the report and she commented (t.397):- "Mr. De La Blanca has behaved in that manner in my consultation rooms, however, I have not allowed him to leave the room and he very rapidly hyperventilates and clearly is anxious. People who have an anxiety condition may solely have physical symptoms, they may complain of chest pain, difficulties breathing, and sense of discomfort, needing to go to the toilet.
They may not say they are anxious. The behaviour he exhibited in the office is very consistent with what he is like when he is anxious ... John frequently presents like this when anxious." 
The two episodes recounted above, described by Mrs. Beltran, seem also to be consistent with Dr. Jungfer's description of the plaintiff decompensating - I refer to his reaction when his mother was taken to hospital, and his vasal- vagal attack in the course of his cross-examination on 18 June.

The defendant submits, and I have indicated my acceptance of this submission, that the plaintiff has attempted to deceive the court and Dr. Roldan as to his level of cognitive function; and has attempted to deceive the court as to the magnitude of his disability generally, the evidence of that being the marked contrast between his presentation in court and his presentation as displayed on the videos. While I accept Dr. Jungfer's view that some degree of fluctuation in the plaintiff's presentation is to be expected by reason of fluctuations in the level of his depression, I do not find that to be an adequate explanation of fluctuations so extreme as the evidence of the medical witnesses and the videos reveal. The defendant seeks to extrapolate from the conclusion that the plaintiff has acted in that way and from the fact that (accepting as I do in this regard the opinions of Dr. Haik and Professor
Jones) he has attempted also to deceive them as to the magnitude of his disability, a conclusion that there is no disability other than the physical consequences of his brain injury and his abdominal injury. That is, in my view, simplistic.

Certainly it follows, as I have indicated, that I cannot make any findings as to the level of the plaintiff's disability on the basis only of his own evidence. It follows that to the extent that I am satisfied that there is exaggeration, I must strip away so much of the demonstrated disability as appears to be the consequence of exaggeration, feigning or malingering, whichever words are used. It is important, however, to recognise that it is not the function of this court to punish a plaintiff who falsely pretends to symptoms that he does not have or falsely exaggerates the magnitude of the symptoms that he does have. The function of this court is to assess compensation for such disability as is proved on the balance of probabilities do exist. A plaintiff who lies about the existence or extent of disability faces the risk that to the extent that proof of disability depends on acceptance of his own evidence he may fail to discharge the onus of proof. It does not, however, necessarily and always follow that that will be the result.
If the existence of disability and the level of disability is established by other evidence, the plaintiff does not lose his right to be compensated for it because he has attempted for whatever reason to magnify his disability or to pretend to disabilities which other evidence does not establish.

When discharged from the hospital the plaintiff again went to live with Ms.
Bell but in about October or November of that year he moved back to his mother's home and their relationship gradually withered and died. Certainly it was long over by the time of the plaintiff's third admission to hospital in
April 1993. In her statement, Exhibit K, she attributes the end of the relationship to the vast change in the plaintiff: "He was not the same person that I had lived in a defacto relationship with. ... John was effectively mentally handicapped and came across as retarded". It appears that she has not seen him often since that time and I would understand much of her description of his behaviour and functioning in Exhibit K to relate to the three months immediately following the accident - for example her comment that:- "He is no longer capable of having a meaningful conversation. He skips from subject to subject, loses the point of what he was talking about or forgets what he was saying entirely." 
I would, however, take from her evidence that to her observation he has in those respects and in others deteriorated since that time. In particular I refer to her observation that his physical appearance has deteriorated.

The plaintiff was observed by his mother and his sister to manifest not only physical problems of gait and balance, stomach pain, diarrhoea and leg pain, but also problems of cognition, personality and emotion. It was suggested in a general way to Mrs. Beltran that she had endeavoured to paint a picture in the court of her brother as far more disabled than he really is. I have to say that nothing in the cross-examination of her nor in her demeanour generally led me to believe that such was the case. She was obviously sympathetic to her brother's plight and distressed by what she perceived as a very gross change in him as compared with what he was like before the accident. For some reason she appears to have been present in court during the plaintiff's brief evidence in chief and for the first few minutes of his cross-examination, and must have been aware, at least to that extent, of the grossly exaggerated presentation which he made of himself but I did not understand at any stage of her evidence that she asserted that that presentation reflected his ordinary behaviour even on what she described as his bad days. She gave evidence (tt.30-32) of his state during the first couple of years after the accident during which time she saw him three or four times a week. He was hesitant about getting dressed, evidently because of difficulty in selecting what clothes to wear and in taking the initiative to start to put them on.
Conversation was limited. They could talk "mainly about things we were going to do that day. You could not have a conversation about what we had done the other day. He just wouldn't remember". I accept her evidence as an accurate reflection of his condition at that time. In her statement, Exhibit J, she does not clearly distinguish his present condition, so far as relates to cognitive functions, from his condition in the first couple of years after the accident but I take from her evidence generally that her perception is that his cognitive difficulties were manifest in those early years and have deteriorated since. I accept what she said in paragraphs 24 and 25 of her statement:- "24. I state that since the accident John's memory is hopeless, he doesn't even remember what happened yesterday, he could be in the middle of saying something he will forget what he was saying, he repeats himself constantly and if interrupted he will lose his train of thought altogether. Holding a conversation with him at the best of times is extremely difficult unless he is having a very good day. On his bad days communication with him is entirely impossible. He becomes distant, disorientated and very irritable.
I state that since the accident John has lost all sense of direction, he gets lost very easily. I have often taken John shopping. I state that when I do this I have to keep an eye on him at all times as he becomes easily disorientated and wanders off and gets lost. One on occasion in particular I let John go to the toilet and he became lost. He very easily becomes disorientated and he is unable to go anywhere himself. I do state however, that in areas that he knows John is better however, even then he can become lost and disorientated." 
Somewhat remarkably, it appears that relatively soon after the accident the plaintiff replaced his car which was destroyed in the accident, and was encouraged by his mother and sister to attempt again to drive. Not surprisingly, the defendant sought to take advantage of that evidence as supporting the view that the plaintiff exaggerates his disability. As to that,
I accept the evidence of Ms. Bell, Mrs. Beltran and the plaintiff's mother to the effect that he was quite incapable of driving safely, for which reason Ms.
Bell instigated moves to have his license cancelled and Mrs. De La Blanca, after about the third occasion on which the plaintiff attempted to drive, confiscated his car keys to make sure that he did not repeat the endeavour.

There is no reason to think that the level of function which he displayed when being filmed is anything other than an accurate reflection of his functional ability. At a time when he had no reason to believe that he was observed, he displayed a method of walking which was clearly ataxic, albeit not as gross as the gait displayed in court.

At a time when he had no reason to think that he was being observed, he utilised the piece of paper from his wallet (in the manner I have described) in order to punch his keycard into the EFTPOS facility.

Mrs. Beltran gave evidence about that piece of paper. It sets out his address, his and her telephone numbers and his keycard number. She said that she wrote it out for him about two years ago and then got him to copy it out in his own handwriting. I accept her evidence. The fact that she saw the need to do it provides, it seems to me, fairly convincing corroboration of her belief that he was, at least at that time, incompetent. She gave evidence of his use of
EFTPOS or ATM facilities and in particular that she had spent a great deal of time teaching him how to use such machines despite which he is unable to use the ordinary ATM. He has been able to learn how to make use of the machines available at places like chemist shops "where all he has to do is hand over his card and tell her what type of account it is, how much money he wants and then all he has to do is press in his pin number which is contained in the piece of paper in his wallet". I accept that evidence and find nothing in the video evidence of his effecting an EFTPOS transaction which is inconsistent with it.

What may be inconsistent with it is the evidence derived from the plaintiff's bank statements which show that during 1996 he used what would appear to have been ATM facilities (possibly occasionally EFTPOS) at a number of licensed clubs to withdraw vast sums of money in a very large number of individual transactions throughout the year. There is no doubt that whether the plaintiff's mother and sister realised it or not, the plaintiff was going to such clubs very frequently indeed. Their evidence (and his) is that he never went unaccompanied - he always went with one of his brothers or with a person to whom his mother referred only as Gary. In the absence of any evidence from those gentlemen to suggest otherwise (and I would certainly not be prepared to assume that they were improperly inducing the plaintiff to withdraw money from his account for their benefit) the obvious inference from the vast sums of money drawn and from the places at which the withdrawals were made is (and the plaintiff's evidence, to the extent one can rely on it, is consistent with this) that those sums of money represent withdrawals made by him from his account by the use of either ATM or EFTPOS facilities at the clubs. I think the only inference which I can draw is that contrary to Mrs. Beltran's belief, her efforts to show the plaintiff how to use an ATM have been successful after all. The task of using such a machine is not of such complexity as to lead me to the view that his ability to utilise one demonstrates any significant level of cognitive function (though the level and frequency of the withdrawals demonstrate a serious lack of inhibition or responsibility).

Nor is his ability to use the ATM inconsistent with the other evidence of Mrs.
Beltran and of Mr. Kemp (both of whom I accept) as to his inability to carry on an intelligent conversation, and as to the memory difficulties that he has.
As to his ability to converse, I accept Mrs. Beltran's evidence:- "Q. When your brother is at home and there are a group of you does he join in the conversation? A. Very rarely.

Q. When he joins in, does he converse? A. He will just wait until everyone has stopped and just go back to the beginning of the conversation, not what we finished with." 
That evidence is entirely consistent with the evidence of Mr. Kemp and Mrs.
Geale. Mr. Kemp is the neighbour who appears with the plaintiff in the videos, first in the course of a lengthy and animated conversation at Mr. Kemp's home, secondly over lunch at the Leagues Club. Obviously Mr. Kemp did not recall the particular occasion of the conversation at his home. Equally obviously it is typical of a scene often repeated. I accept his evidence in paragraphs 13-17 of his statement, Exhibit M, as applying to the video conversation as much as to any others that took place between them:- "13. I state that after the accident it is impossible to hold a normal conversation with John, he can be talking about one thing one minute and something entirely different the next, he completely forgets what he was talking about all the time I have noted that his memory is simply awful.
Sometimes I find it annoying and quite an inconvenience to when John comes to visit and have a talk as it is just impossible to hold a normal conversation with him, but I feel very sorry for John because of his circumstances I cannot fully describe the changes which John has undergone since this accident.
I can still talk to John but it is extremely difficult to do so as he floats from one topic to the next without any rhythm or reason, he often forgets what he was talking about and goes onto a completely unrelated topic, he is very hard to follow at the best of time, when this happens he appears to become quite agitated and angry and gets quite excitable.
Our conversation since the accident has been extremely limited even on his good days all that could be said is that John is talkative, it certainly couldn't be said that his conversations follow any coherent lines. I couldn't describe John since the accident as being a total idiot but he is just not anywhere near the person in my opinion that he used to be, he certainly has the effect of being under some significant mental impairment since the accident." 
As to the plaintiff's memory, Mrs. Beltran gave unchallenged evidence which I accept that for the past three weeks (as at the date when she gave that evidence, 18 June 1996) the plaintiff had been going to the Governor Phillip
Special Hospital for hydrotherapy and, from one visit to the next (he was attending on Mondays and Fridays) he was unable to remember the therapy routine.

In relation to the plaintiff's emotional state, again the evidence of Mrs.
Beltran and Mrs. De La Blanca does not distinguish very clearly between his condition in the first couple of years and his condition today but is entirely consistent with the picture that emerges from the medical evidence, particularly of Dr. Gurka, of the gradual emergence of a condition of depression and anxiety which has increased in severity; and entirely consistent with Dr. Jungfer's picture of him as a man who through 1994 was severely depressed and who now presents as anxious and withdrawn.

All of these portrayals (including both videos) of the plaintiff's present level of and manner of functioning stand in dramatic contrast to the pre- accident picture of an active, happy man, of no great intelligence and regularly employed when he chose to be and living a full life, including an active social and sporting component, particularly his successful participation in ten-pin bowling competitions: a life very different from that which he now leads, where his only diversion appears to be his extensive (and expensive) gambling on poker machines. The second video does show some residual capacity for interaction and enjoyment in a social situation but has to be viewed in the light of the evidence of his conversational limitations.

Leaving aside entirely the plaintiff's own account and demonstration of disability, I am nevertheless satisfied, on the basis of the lay evidence and an acceptance of the general thrust of Dr. Jungfer's evidence, that there is a significant disability in cognitive function whether organically based or, as seems more likely, due to a combination of organic deficits and the effects of anxiety and depression; and that he is also grossly disabled by a depressive illness accompanied by, or a component of which is an anxiety state. It does not appear to me that the level of that disability should be taken to be always as gross as has occurred from time to time during episodes of decompensation. I am satisfied that a reasonably accurate picture of it is presented by the evidence of particularly Mrs. Beltran and Mr. Kemp taken in conjunction with the video evidence which gives some concrete demonstration of the extent of his capacity on some occasions. I am satisfied that by reason of his depressive condition coupled with and contributing to his cognitive deficits, the plaintiff is deprived of the ability to live a normal life and to participate in any real sense in the ordinary incidents of social and family intercourse. He is lonely and isolated and in my view destined to remain so for the rest of his life.

I am satisfied that he needs assistance in the management of his daily life.
For a period after his discharge from hospital, he needed full time care (or, at least, care in excess of 46 hours per week: see later), but I am not persuaded that his present need in that regard is so extensive, nor is it as extensive as Dr. Jungfer suggests. I do not think he needs 24 hour care. I am not persuaded that he needs a carer during the whole of his waking hours. I am persuaded that he needs daily contact with somebody who can provide a plan or structure for his day and assist him to initiate it, and who can monitor his performance of the things which he needs to do and is physically capable of doing in terms of self-care. I am satisfied that he is in general terms not capable of providing himself with meals but it is pretty obvious that that need can be met otherwise than by the provision of a full-time carer. I assess the plaintiff's need to be such as can be reasonably be met by his having the assistance of a person who comes to him for two or three hours each morning, seven days a week and for two or three hours in the evenings, perhaps three or four times per week, a total of say 27 hours a week. Anything more than that would, in my view, be over-provision.

I recognise that there is a risk that incidents of decompensation such as have been revealed in the evidence may occur from time to time in the plaintiff's life but it is, I think, clear that the major occurrences of that kind have been directly related to the conduct of this litigation and, once he settles back into the ordinary routine of his life, provided with such care as I envisage to be necessary (which for a long time in the foreseeable future will no doubt be provided by his family), there is no reason to expect that such things will occur with such frequency as to interfere significantly with his enjoyment of life, such as it now is, or as to necessitate the provision of more intensive care. The appropriate thing is, I think, to recognise the possibility of such instances, for example in case of family crisis such as occurred with his mother's illness, and to recognise that as a component requiring compensation as part of his non-economic loss.

The amount which may be awarded as compensation for care provided on a voluntary basis by the plaintiff's family is regulated by [s.72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) (as that section stood prior to the commencement of the Motor Accidents (Amendment) Act (which commenced 1 September 1994). The value of such care is a subject of compensation only if the care provided is not such as would have been provided even if the person had not been injured by the motor vehicle accident: s.79(3). The level of care which the plaintiff required immediately after his discharge from hospital and at all times since, except when he has again been in hospital, has been such, in my view, as to satisfy that test. By s.79(2), "no compensation shall be awarded unless the services are provided, or are to be provided, for not less than six months and may be awarded only for services provided or to be provided after the six month period". The plaintiff's submissions were advanced on the basis that care provided commenced to be compensable immediately upon the expiration of six months from the date of accident and was compensable continuously thereafter in respect of whether or when care was actually provided. That appears to me to be wrong. It appears to me that the period of six months in respect of which no compensation may be awarded is not a continuous period of six months from the date of accident irrespective of whether care was provided by members of the family or not, but refers to the first six months of care, whether provided over a continuous period of six months or during broken periods totalling six months. On the facts of this case that six month period embraces:- two days after the plaintiff's first discharge from hospital and before his second admission, that is to say the days 21 and 22 July 1992; a period of 25 weeks and five days commencing after his second discharge from hospital, that is commencing on 19 August 1992 and ending on and including 14 February 1993.

That care which is the subject of compensation is only such care as was provided on and after 15 February 1993. Compensation may be awarded in respect of care from 15 February 1993 to 28 April 1993 (when the plaintiff was again admitted to hospital) and from 1 May 1993 (the day after his discharge from that admission).

I am satisfied that initially full time care was required (or, at the least, care exceeding 46 hours per week) so that, having regard to the provisions of s.79(4) and s.79(5), the compensation is to be awarded at an amount per week equal to the average weekly total earnings of all employees in New South Wales (it being common ground that the application of an hourly rate as would be charged on a commercial basis would result in a figure exceeding average weekly total earnings). It appears to me that that initial period during which care in excess of 46 hours per week was needed did not extend beyond the end of 1993. To the extent that the hours of care which have been in fact provided may thereafter from time to time have exceeded the level of care which I have assessed as presently warranted (about 27 hours per week), that additional care has been provided, as it seems to me, not because of any need objectively existing but because of the generous concern of the plaintiff's mother and sister; it does not attract compensation.

So far as the future is concerned, the reality clearly is that care will be provided by the plaintiff's mother so long as she is physically fit to do so and thereafter by the plaintiff's sister, Mrs. Beltran for an indefinite period, possibly forever. She is younger than he. On the other hand, it needs to be recognised that the provision of care by her to her brother will always represent a considerable burden on her which, having regard to the demands of her own family and her wish to live an ordinary life, may at some time become intolerable. It is impossible to say if or when that may occur. I think the appropriate way in which provision should be made for that eventuality is to make an allowance for future care and supervision for the remainder of the plaintiff's life on the basis of care provided by his family, but to provide in somewhat arbitrary fashion an additional lump sum by way of a cushion against the risk that family care will cease and a need will occur to engage a carer on a commercial basis.

The plaintiff's counsel submitted that there should be a specific allowance over and above the cost of care for the cost which the plaintiff would incur to take a carer away with him should he go on holiday. The defendant did not concede the need but offered no specific submissions about this claim. To the extent that care is provided by the plaintiff's family, with whom he would no doubt go on holiday in any event, it does not seem that additional cost would be incurred. Should such a cost be incurred when the plaintiff is no longer in the care of his family, the appropriate way to allow for it would seem to be as part of the cushion for the cost of commercial care, and I have taken it into account in assessing that sum.

A separate claim is made for the cost of bringing in a handyman/gardener to do such work around his own home as the plaintiff, but for his injuries, would have done. The claim for $20 per hour for three hours per week was not specifically challenged (except as to need) and appears to me to be warranted on the evidence.

In the light of the above findings, I assess damages as follows:-
Non-economic loss. The defendant conceded, on the basis that there was no brain damage and no genuine persisting emotional disability, that the case falls within the range of 60-65% of the most extreme case. That is, I think, a generous concession having regard to the basis upon which it was made.
However, it is certainly not adequate to take account of the persisting cognitive and emotional disabilities that I have found to result from the accident. It is not, however, a matter of accepting the level of loss conceded by the defendant and adding something to it for the additional detriments which I have found to exist. I put aside entirely the defendant's concession and, looking at the whole of the evidence of the effect which the accident has upon the plaintiff's ability to lead an ordinary life, and taking account of the specific matters that I have mentioned elsewhere in this judgment, I assess the plaintiff's non-economic loss as equivalent to 75% of a most extreme case. He is entitled in respect of non-economic loss to $185,250.
Past pharmaceutical and medical expenses are agreed at $24,126.67.
Past net wage loss is agreed at $91,477.29.
Reimbursement of tax deducted from workers compensation payments (Fox v. Wood) is agreed at $6,967.17.
Future medical expenses 
For a long period the plaintiff was incurring expense for medications, related to his anxiety and depression, at an average of about $40 per month.
More recently his medication has been changed and the current level of such expense is about $78 per month. It would, I think, be unrealistic to assume that the medications will necessarily continue in their present form and at their present cost, and a figure representing the average monthly cost to date would be more valid as an allowance for the future. There is also, I think, a question as to how long the need for such medication will continue. The claim at $80 per month for the balance of the plaintiff's life amounts to $18,422. A more realistic figure of $56 per month, extrapolated over the whole of the plaintiff's remaining life, would amount to about $11,900. The figure which I think is just as between the parties is $8,000 and that is the amount I will award under this head.

Similarly a claim is made for regular attendances on the general practitioner, and periodical attendances on the psychiatrist. The evidence is capable of supporting the figure of $17,500 submitted on behalf of the plaintiff, which represents the average weekly cost of such attendances over the whole of the plaintiff's life; but it does not seem to me that the evidence supports the probability that the plaintiff will have treatment at that level, over that period, particularly having regard to his own expressed aversion to any further treatment. I allow in this regard the sum of $10,000.
Future loss of earning capacity. The defendant concedes that the plaintiff is entitled to be compensated on the basis of a total and permanent loss of earning capacity, and that his earning capacity might appropriately be measured at $417.03 per week net, a figure derived from the earnings of comparable employees in the plaintiff's most recent employment; but contends that by reason of the plaintiff's relatively low pre-injury intelligence and what is said to be a somewhat unsatisfactory pre-accident work history, the resulting mathematical figure should be discounted quite heavily for vicissitudes, indeed by as much as 25%. I see nothing in the plaintiff's work history to justify such a deduction. In fact his history is one of almost continuous employment until he took the opportunity offered by the redundancy package at the State Rail Authority; having taken that, he remained off work for no more than a year and indeed seems to have had some casual employments during that time. Given such handicap as his limited intellectual capacity may have presented, his work history seems to me to be a remarkably good one.
There are, of course, ordinary vicissitudes of life to be taken into account.
They are adequately met in this case by reducing the mathematically calculated figure by 15%. I allow in respect of future earning capacity $284,679.27.
Loss of income from ten-pin bowling. It is clear that from time to time the plaintiff won prizes in ten-pin bowling competitions and is now deprived of the opportunity to do so. The evidence does not provide any basis upon which a specific sum could be attributed to any loss thus resulting.
Loss of superannuation. Associated with the loss of the plaintiff's earning capacity is the loss of employer funded superannuation benefits, and the defendant accepts the calculation of that loss at $28,969 subject to an appropriate discount for vicissitudes. For reasons already given, I think the appropriate discount is no more than 15%. I allow under this head $24,514.15.
Care and supervision provided by the plaintiff's family to date. I allow care at a cost equal to average weekly earnings from 15 February 1993 to April 1993, and from 1 May 1993 to 30 December 1993. Adapting in respect of those periods the calculations set out in Schedule B to the plaintiff's written submission, I allow in respect of that period a total of $23,810.70.
Thereafter I allow for care for 21 hours per week (needed care 27 hours, less the statutory excess of six hours) at one-fortieth of the average weekly earnings figures agreed between the parties and set out in the plaintiff's schedule. On that basis, the allowance pursuant to Griffith v. Kerkemeyer for the period 18 November 1993 to 12 March 1997 (the period covered by the plaintiff's schedule) is $52,206.79 and the total allowance under this head is accordingly $76,017.49.
Future care. I have indicated the basis upon which this should be assessed. The maximum allowance is, in respect of 40 hours care per week, the amount of average weekly earnings, presently $598.80 per week. I allow /40ths of that sum over 40.5 years, and using a multiplier of 921.1, arrive at a figure of $289,566.20. To that is to be added (as explained above) a cushion against the possibility that the plaintiff will be forced to obtain such care from persons other than members of his family and incorporating a sum for that purpose, I allow the total figure of $375,000.
Home handyman/gardener. I allow $55,266.

The total of those allowances under the different heads of damage is $1,141,298.04.

Cost of fund management 
I am satisfied that the plaintiff is unable to manage without professional assistance the fund of money which will result from this verdict, and I am satisfied that, although it is doubtful whether with his pre-injury level of intellectual capacity he would have been able to undertake such a task in any event, the clear consequence of the accident is to deprive him of any capacity that he may have had in that regard and I think it is appropriate to make allowance for the cost of fund management, utilising the mode of calculation outlined by Meagher, JA. in Rosniak v. GIO [(1992) 27 NSWLR 665] at -699.

What remains to be determined is the amount of the fund. Of the sums which I have assessed and which together make up the sum of $1,141,298.04, all should form part of the fund except the sum of $24,126.67 in respect of past pharmaceutical and medical expenses. Exclusion of that reduces the available funds to $1,117,171.37 but from that will need to be deducted also the amount, if any, repayable to the workers compensation insurer of the plaintiff's employer, the accident having happened on the plaintiff's journey home from work.

The matter will therefore stand over to a date to be fixed, when the parties can inform me of the amount to be deducted in respect of the workers compensation repayment, the residual amount of the fund, and the result of the calculation, in accordance with Rosniak, of the amount to be allowed by way of the cost of fund management. On that date I will enter judgment for the plaintiff accordingly.
 * * * 
