

Regina versus Donnelly Matter No 70035/95 [1997] NSWSC 472 (10 October 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
REGINA versus BRENNAN PATRICK DONNELLY /95 October 1997 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
REMARKS ON SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: On 21 August 1997, Brennan Patrick Donnelly was arraigned upon an indictment charging him with the murder of his wife, Mary Donnelly, at their flat at Blacktown in October 1994. He pleaded not guilty, having elected for trial by judge alone. The case against him rested mainly upon admissions made by him to police and the admissibility of that evidence was tested on the voir dire. On 27 August I ruled the evidence admissible, undertaking to give my reasons later in the trial. I did not publish those reasons until 19 September but, on 1 September, I was informed that the prisoner intended to plead guilty to manslaughter and that the Crown would accept that plea in satisfaction of the indictment. The matter was then adjourned until 19 September when the prisoner entered that plea upon being rearraigned, and I received evidence and submissions on sentence.

The facts are outlined at pages 1 to 3 of my reasons of 19 September and it is unnecessary to repeat what is there set out. It is sufficient to say that the killing occurred on Tuesday, 18 October 1994 in the course of an argument relating to difficulties in the relationship between the prisoner and the deceased, both of whom had been heroin users and were on a methadone programme at the relevant time. The focus of the argument was the deceased's dissatisfaction with their lifestyle and the prisoner's concern about her use of tablets.

There was further evidence bearing upon their relationship which I rejected in the trial but which was admitted in the sentence proceedings. Some of this was to the effect that, at the relevant time, the prisoner believed that the deceased was being induced to become involved in prostitution, a prospect which caused him further distress. On the other hand, one of the witnesses, a resident of the same block of flats, had observed the relationship to be, by and large, a loving one. Both the prisoner and the deceased had been subject to the supervision of the Probation and Parole Service and there was evidence from a probation officer that, in August 1994, the prisoner told her that there were difficulties in the marriage, partly cultural due to the deceased's
Middle Eastern background, that they had separated for a time, but that they were attempting to resolve their differences and take responsibility for their lives.

The argument on the Tuesday culminated with the prisoner choking the deceased with his tie. For much of the time from then until the following Sunday, 23
October, he remained in the flat with her. He attempted suicide in various ways, finally slashing his wrists. On the Sunday morning he sought help from a neighbour who drove him to Blacktown Hospital, where he was admitted for treatment. It was there that he confessed what he had done to his cousin, a police officer, and in the afternoon of the following day he gave a detailed account of what had occurred to detectives in an electronically recorded interview at Blacktown police station.

It is clear that the prisoner's strangulation of his wife was a spontaneous act in the course of what had become a very heated argument. His behaviour thereafter - in particular, his suicide attempts - demonstrates a significant depressive condition, but I am satisfied that this condition was not only reactive to the killing. The opinion of Dr Bruce Westmore, forensic psychiatrist, is that the prisoner was suffering from such a condition at the time of the incident itself and, if the trial for murder had proceeded and I had been satisfied of the elements of the crime, he would have had a defence of diminished responsibility based on that condition. The doctor saw it as arising from a number of "psychological stressors" to which the prisoner was subject at the time. I have already referred to the difficulties in his relationship with the deceased, which must be viewed in the light of her asserted belief that he had introduced her to the use of heroin. Further light is cast on these difficulties by the evidence of the prisoner's background and psychological profile to be found in a pre-sentence report and in an assessment by Mr W John Taylor, forensic psychologist.

The prisoner was 27 years old at the time of these events and is now aged 30.
He has two siblings, an older sister and a younger brother. His father left the family when he was about two years old, and such further contact as he had with him was brief and unsatisfactory. His mother raised the family alone, although in due course the prisoner assumed a parental role. Subsequently his mother formed a relationship with another man, whom she married. The prisoner did not accept this union and felt betrayed by his mother. They were estranged for some time although, by the time of the killing, their relationship had improved considerably.

He first married at the age of 19 and the marriage endured for four years.
There is a daughter of that union whom he continued to see up until the time of his arrest for this offence, but there had been difficulties in arrangements for access to her. His first wife was Lebanese and it seems that cultural differences, including the intrusion of her family into the relationship, led to their separation. He was 25 when he married the deceased and they had no children. As observed, that relationship was also complicated by cultural differences, and it seems that her family never accepted him. It was after the breakdown of his first marriage that he began to use heroin, although in earlier years he had been a recreational user of marijuana. It was in the later part of 1993 that he and the deceased both embarked upon a methadone programme.

Mr Taylor saw the prisoner's personality functioning as marked by "a degree of instability". Both Mr Taylor and the author of the pre-sentence report described his low self esteem, which would appear to be of long standing and, no doubt, is explicable by his background.

I am satisfied that the prisoner is deeply remorseful. There could be no more compelling evidence of this than his suicide attempts, but it is apparent also from his admissions to his cousin and to the detectives, as it is from a letter he wrote to the deceased's brother in February 1995, and from his account of events to Mr Taylor. His plea of guilty to manslaugher also demonstrates his contrition, given that there would have been an issue in the trial whether it was his act which in fact caused the death of the deceased: see the evidence summarised at pages 13-14 of my reasons of 19 September, and the report of Dr R Byron Collins, forensic pathologist.

Two other matters emerge from the evidence which are relevant to the question of sentence. The first is the incident at Blacktown Hospital on the Monday afternoon involving the deceased's brother and a companion which is outlined at pages 4-5 of my reasons of 19 September. That appears to have been an attempt on the prisoner's life, and I have no doubt that he saw it as such.
The second is his account to Mr Taylor that he had been on protection during a period of custody following his arrest, and his fear that he would still require protection on returning to custody: see page 6 of the report. This material was not challenged by the Crown, but equally it was not developed by counsel for the prisoner in the sentence proceedings. I accept that he was on protection during that earlier period but, in the absence of further information, I am unable to assess his need for segregation in the future.

The prisoner has a criminal record which the Crown prosecutor fairly characterised as "relatively minor", and which I do not consider of significance for present purposes. He has a creditable work record, including a period of employment whilst on bail awaiting his trial. His reconciliation with his mother is now complete and, in an updated pre-sentence report, he is described as having "a close and supportive relationship with all family members, including his stepfather". In recent times he has not seen his daughter, but he told the probation officer that upon his release he intends to seek access to her. The report of a general practitioner, Dr Paul Russell, attests to his favourable response to the methadone programme since he began consulting that doctor in December 1995.

The plea of guilty to manslaughter was entered, and accepted by the Crown, on the basis that the prisoner caused the death of his wife by an unlawful and dangerous act. I referred earlier to Dr Westmore's opinion that the prisoner might also have made out the defence of diminished responsibility, but that is not material for present purposes. What is significant is the doctor's opinion, which I accept, that at the time of the killing the prisoner was suffering from a depressive illness which, no doubt, provides an explanation for his actions. Dr Westmore considered his risk of reoffending in this way as "negligible, probably non-existent". In his report he went on: "I think this event was a highly specific incident which occurred in the context of an intense, possibly unhealthy over-dependent relationship with the deceased woman. There were a range of extraordinary pressures affecting both
Mr Donnelly and the deceased woman and it would be unlikely for this particular set of circumstances to be repeated." 
Mr Taylor's psychological testing revealed "no suggestion of any antisocial or aggressive personality disorder". I consider the prisoner's mental state at the time a matter in mitigation of sentence in accordance with the principles summarised by Gleeson CJ in R versus Engert [(1995) 84 A Crim R 67], at pages 70-1. His prospects of rehabilitation are good, provided he receives appropriate guidance and support upon his release. Mr Taylor reported that he would "... expect that Mr Donnelly will continue to become more emotionally stable in the future and, provided he is able to maintain his current motivation to remain drug free, then he would have every likelihood of leading a stable and productive life once he is released from prison." 
Dr Russell referred to the need for "on-going psychiatric support", and the updated pre-sentence report recommends a lengthy period of supervision upon his release. In the light of this material, I am satisfied that there are special circumstances warranting a departure from the usual proportion between minimum and additional terms.

For all these reasons, the prisoner has made out a strong case for leniency.
In so saying I do not lose sight of the objective seriousness of his crime. He has taken the life of a young woman with whom he had enjoyed an intimate relationship. She leaves behind a family devastated by her loss. Pursuant to [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/index.html#p6a) of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/), I received in evidence a statement by her parents describing in moving terms the enduring effects of her death upon the family. I expressed then, and I repeat now, my sincere sympathy for them in their bereavement. Nevertheless, I do not consider it appropriate to take that statement into account in determining the sentence to be imposed, for the reasons expressed by Hunt CJ at CL in his remarks on sentence in Reg versus Previtera (unreported, 27 May 1997) at pp -19, and in my own remarks in Reg versus Audsley (unreported, 30 May 1997) at pp 8-9.

The prisoner was in custody from his arrest on 23 October 1994 until 17 July , when he was released on bail. However, for six months of that period he was serving a sentence in relation to another matter. Despite a submission that I ought allow him credit for the whole of that period, I feel that he should have the benefit only for the period of custody referable exclusively to this matter, amounting to 86 days. I shall allow three months. At the conclusion of the proceedings on sentence on 19 September 1997, I remanded the prisoner in custody and I shall direct his sentence to commence on that date.

The Court of Criminal Appeal has, on many occasions, commented upon the breadth of the range of sentence for manslaughter (whatever be the legal basis on which the crime is made out). For a recent observation about the matter see
Reg versus Isaacs (CCA, unreported, 9 April 1997) at p 14. Nevertheless, I am indebted to counsel on both sides for reference to authority and statistical information to assist in assessing the appropriate sentence, and I have had regard to that material. In all the circumstances, I have concluded that the appropriate sentence is penal servitude for five years comprising a minimum term of two years and an additional term of three years. I shall deduct from the minimum term the period of three months which I intend to allow for pre- trial custody.

Brennan Patrick Donnelly, you are sentenced to penal servitude for 4 years and months, comprising a minimum term of 1 year and 9 months commencing on 19
September 1997 and expiring on 18 June 1999, and an additional term of 3 years commencing on 19 June 1999 and expiring on 18 June 2002. You will be eligible for release on parole on 19 June 1999.
 * * * 
