

Kotsambasis versus Singapore Airlines Ltd Matter No Ca 40154/96 [1997] NSWSC (13 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Kotsambasis versus Singapore Airlines Ltd 
CA 40154/96 August 1997 
Meagher JA, Powell JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: APPEAL FROM COOPER DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40154/96 
DELIVERED: 13 AUGUST 1997 
HEARING DATE: 2 JULY 1997 
PARTIES: KOTSAMBASIS versus SINGAPORE AIRLINES LTD 
CORAM: MEAGHER JA POWELL JA STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: D RUSSELL 
Respondent: P HELY QC/T BLACKBURN 
SOLICITORS 
Appellant: XENOS JORDAN 
Respondent: TURNER FREEMAN 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 20 
CATCHWORDS 
International carriage by air - Civil Aviation Carriers Liability Act 1959 
Cth s.13 - Warsaw Convention Art. 17, meaning of "bodily injury" and "lesion corporelle" - Hague protocol - interpretation of international conventions: articles 31, 32 Vienna Convention - application approach to interpretation - meaning "process embarkation and disembarkation" 
Georgopolous versus American Airlines (Unreported, Ireland J, 10 December 1993,
Supreme Court of New South Wales); Boyle versus The Nominal Defendant [(1959) 76
WN 598]; The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd versus Gamlen Chemical Co <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 142] -
Fothergill versus Monarch Airlines <case>; [(1981) AC ] -
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade versus Magno <case>; [(1992) 112 ALR 529] - Commonwealth of Australia versus Baume <case>; [(1905) 2 CLR 405] - Sidhu versus British Airways <case>; [[1997] 2
WLR 26] - Floyd versus Eastern Airlines Inc <case>; [499 US 530] (1991) 
KOTSAMBASIS versus SINGAPORE AIRLINES LTD 
FACTS 
The appellant claimed damages for back and psychological injuries allegedly sustained whilst a passenger of the respondent. In the court below the appellant/plaintiff was awarded damages for psychological injuries but not back injuries, and has appealed. The respondent/defendant has cross-appealed the award of damages under Article 17 of the Warsaw Convention, alleging his
Honour incorrectly classified her psychological injury as within the meaning of "bodily injury".

HELD 
By Meagher JA; Powell, Stein JJA agreeing: 
The term "bodily injury" for the purposes of the Warsaw Convention does not include a purely psychological injury: Georgopolous versus American Airlines (Unreported, Ireland J, 10 December 1993, Supreme Court of New South Wales), overruled; The general approach to the interpretation of an international convention is by application of the rules of interpretation recognised by customary international law: Minister for Foreign Affairs versus Magno <case>; [(1992) 112 ALR 529.] The words are first read literally and then if the meaning is unclear the courts are to give effect to the intention of the signatories to the convention including object and purpose of the convention.
Municipal Law can assist interpretation especially if the signatories had regard to the municipal law of particular contracting parties: The Shipping
Corporation of India Ltd versus Gamlen Chemical Co <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 142.] In the interpretation of international agreements, courts are not at liberty to consider any word as superfluous or insignificant:
Commonwealth of Australia versus Baume <case>; [(1905) 2 CLR 405] and effect is to be given to words of limitation: Council of the Municipality of Randwick versus Rutledge (1959) 102 54. In this case the word "bodily" is a word of limitation; and when read in context to the object and purpose of the convention are clearly intended by not to impose absolute liability in respect of all forms of injury.

Under Article 17 of the Convention, liability only lies where the accident causing injury occurs on board the carrier or in the processes of embarking or disembarking. The phrase " in the course of any of the operations of embarking or disembarking" is to be construed parsimoniously and with regard to location, activity and control: McCarthy versus North West Airlines <case>; [56 F 3d 313] (1st Cir. 1995 - United States Court of Appeals), and in light of the purpose and object of the Convention. In this case the appellant/plaintiff did not sustain injury on board the aircraft nor in the process of embarking or disembarking, Cooper DCJ adopted the finding of the medical expert that the carrying of heavy bags within the airport precipitated the plaintiff's back injury and this court cannot disturb his finding.

ORDERS
Appeal dismissed with costs,
Cross-appeal allowed
Judgement and orders of Cooper DCJ of 6 March 1996 be set aside.
In lieu thereof order that the proceedings before Cooper DCJ be dismissed with costs,
The cross-respondent/appellant to pay the costs of the cross-appellant in the cross-appeal and to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).

KOTSAMBASIS versus SINGAPORE AIRLINES LTD 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: This is an appeal from a decision of Judge Cooper of the District Court of New South Wales. The decision, delivered 6 March 1996, granted damages to the appellant, Miss Kotsambasis, on the basis of psychological injuries suffered as a result of an incident which occurred on board a Singapore Airlines aircraft shortly after departure from Athens airport. The appellant had also claimed in respect of back injuries, but that claim was not successful. 
It is convenient to set out Judge Cooper's findings of fact. The appellant was visiting her mother in Greece. On 28 May 1992 she boarded a Singapore Airlines aircraft in Athens, which was scheduled to fly to Sydney via Singapore. Miss
Kotsambasis was seated near the port side wing, adjacent to a window. Shortly after takeoff, she was leaning forward in her seat when a sudden jolt threw her back into her seat. Judge Cooper may have accepted that the plaintiff felt a pain in the midline of her back at this time, but did not appear to accept that she suffered an injury. Other passengers were screaming and the appellant saw smoke coming from a starboard engine, which had caught alight. There then came an announcement that there was an engine problem and that the aircraft would be returning to Athens, but that fuel had first to be jettisoned. The aircraft landed over an hour after takeoff, at 3.23 am. The appellant wanted to leave the aircraft. However, a lack of facilities provided by Athens airport prevented the passengers disembarking from the aircraft immediately.
The passengers were allowed to disembark between 5.50 am and 6.10 am.

Judge Cooper accepted Miss Kotsambasis' evidence that she was anxious and distressed and that she regarded the sight of smoke coming from the engine as life-threatening. He accepted that she sustained a severe fright and that she believed there was a good chance she could perish.

Following disembarkation, the appellant was taken by bus to the Athens terminal, where she waited some three hours before being offered various alternatives to get back to Sydney. One of the offers was take an Olympic
Airlines flight to Paris to take a flight to Singapore, followed by a further flight to Sydney. Despite then being scared of flying, Miss Kotsambasis accepted the Paris option.

The appellant had to carry two heavy suitcases and a bag over her shoulder.
Judge Cooper accepted that the carrying of these weights caused the appellant pain in the back and that it was the carrying which caused injury. The appellant arrived back in Sydney about two days later and returned, after a further couple of days, to her work as a general support officer in the New
South Wales Police Service.

The proceedings which came before Judge Cooper were based upon the Warsaw
Convention ("the Convention"), as amended by the Hague Protocol ("the
Protocol"), relating to international carriage by air. It was not a claim based on negligence or contract. The Convention and Protocol have been incorporated into the law of Australia by the Civil Aviation Carriers
Liability Act 1959 (Cth) ("the Act"), section 13 of which provides that the liability (in respect of the personal injury of a passenger) under the
Convention is in substitution for any civil liability of the carrier under any other law. The Convention is set out in schedule 1 of the Act. Article 17 of the Convention provides: 
The carrier is liable for damage sustained in the event of the death or wounding of a passenger or any other bodily injury suffered by a passenger if the accident which caused the damage so sustained took place on board the aircraft or in the course of any of the operations of embarking or disembarking.

That article imposes absolute liability on a carrier, provided the accident causing the damage took place on board the aircraft or in the course of embarking or disembarking. Liability is in respect only "of the death or wounding of a passenger or any other bodily injury suffered by a passenger".

Judge Cooper awarded damages to the appellant in respect of psychological injuries, but not in respect of back injuries. The appellant appeals on the basis that his Honour erred in not awarding damages for the back injury and erred in only awarding some two thousand one hundred and ninety dollars in general damages and interest in respect of the psychological injury. The respondent cross-appeals on the basis that his Honour erred in finding that a psychological injury fell within the scope of "bodily injury" used in Article
It is convenient to deal with the cross-appeal first.

In Georgopoulos versus American Airlines, an unreported decision of 10 December of Justice Ireland of the Supreme Court of NSW, it was held that the term "other bodily injury" included a psychological injury. Judge Cooper followed that decision, noting that it was binding upon him. I cannot agree that the term "bodily injury" used in the Convention includes a psychological injury. I note that the term "bodily injury" or an equivalent is used in some municipal legislation and that the trend in Anglo-Australian law is to interpret the phrase as including a psychological or mental injury: see, for example, Boyle v The Nominal Defendant [(1959) 76 WN 598.]
However, the interpretation of a particular phrase used in municipal law and the change over years in that interpretation cannot guide the interpretation of the same phrase that might appear in an international agreement.

The interpretation of an international convention proceeds in much the same way as the interpretation of an Act of Parliament: the words used usually mean what they say, but if they do not or the meaning is unclear or capable of differing interpretations, then courts are to give effect to the meaning intended. It is, therefore, quite proper to look at the intention of the signatories to an international convention in order to ascertain the meaning of the words that appear in it. It was noted in The Shipping Corporation of
India Ltd versus Gamlen Chemical Co <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 142] at 159 that municipal law is relevant to the interpretation of international conventions, especially where consideration has been given by the parties to the convention to the words used which have been interpreted in a specific way by national courts. In that case, however, the High Court noted that it was the language of the convention that was being expounded and that "great store is set upon certainty and uniformity of application". In other words, it is only if the interpretation of certain words by a national court assist (in the sense, for example, that the municipal law can elucidate the intention of the parties to the convention) in the interpretation of the same words that appear in an international convention that any significant weight can be imported to the municipal law.

Section 8(1) of the Act provides that it is the text as set out in the
Schedule to the Act which is the text of the Convention for the purposes of the Act. Section 8(2) provides: 
If there is any inconsistency between the text of a convention as set out in a
Schedule and the text that would result if the authentic French texts of the instruments making up the convention were read and interpreted together as one single document, the latter text prevails.

As Lord Wilberforce said, in Fothergill versus Monarch Airlines <case>; [(1981) AC ] at 272: 
Here it is not only permissible to look at a foreign language text, but obligatoryÖ Furthermore, it cannot be judged whether there is an inconsistency between two texts unless one looks at both. So, in the present case the process of interpretation seems to involve:
Interpretation of the English text, according to the principles upon which international conventions are to be interpreted (see James Buchanan & Co
Ltd versus Babco Forwarding & Shipping (UK) Ltd [[1978] AC 141] and Stag Line
Ltd versus Foscolo, Mango & Co Ltd [[1932] AC 328).]
Interpretation of the French text according to the same principles but with additional linguistic problems.
Comparison of these meanings.

Lord Diplock made the following comment (at 281-282): 
The language of that Convention that has been adopted at the international conference to express the common intention of the majority of the states represented there is meant to be understood in the same sense by the courts of all those states which ratify or accede to the Convention. Their national styles of legislative draftsmanship will vary considerably as between one another. So will the approach of their judiciaries to the interpretation of written laws and to the extent to which recourse may be had to travaux preparatoires, doctrine and jurisprudence as extraneous aids to the interpretation of the legislative text.

The language of an international convention has not been chosen by an English parliamentary draftsman. It is neither couched in the conventional English legislative idiom nor designed to be construed exclusively by English judges.
It is addressed to a much wider and more varied judicial audience than is an
Act of Parliament that deals with purely domestic law. It should be interpreted, as Lord Wilberforce put it in James Buchanan & Co Ltd v
Babco Forwarding & Shipping (UK) Ltd [[1978] AC 141], 152, "unconstrained by technical rules of English law, or by English legal precedent, but on broad principles of general acceptation." 
The common law position in relation to the interpretation of international agreements directly incorporated into domestic law is repeated by Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention. Paragraph 1 of Article 31 provides: 
A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose.

Article 32 provides: 
Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 31: leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

In Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade versus Magno <case>; [(1992) 112 ALR 529] at 565, Einfeld J accepted that "international obligations incorporated directly into domestic law are to be interpreted according to principles of international law, not domestic law". Gummow J said (at 535-6): [I]t is to be remembered that the terms used are not those drafted by parliamentary counsel, but are the result of negotiations between a number of contracting State parties with various legal systems and methods of legislative draftingÖ [T]he applicable rules of interpretation are those recognised by customary international law, as codified by the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties: see Zoeller versus Federal Republic of Germany [(1989) 91 ALR 341] at 348-50; Thiel versus FCT <case>; [(1990) 94 ALR 647] at 658; Littrell versus USA [[1992] 3 All ER 218] at 221.

The words "bodily injury" appear, in the authentic French texts, as "lesion corporelle". Those phrases can be regarded essentially as equivalents. They both have the same ambiguity, namely whether the phrase can be taken to refer to a psychological injury. This ambiguity can only be resolved by looking at the intention of the contracting parties and adopting a purposive approach to the interpretation of the Convention. It is immediately apparent that the adjective "bodily" is a word of qualification or limitation. It is a general principle of statutory interpretation, equally applicable to the interpretation of international agreements, that courts are not at liberty to consider any word as superfluous or insignificant - Commonwealth of Australia v Baume <case>; [(1905) 2 CLR 405] at 414 - and, more specifically, that effect is to be given to words of limitation: Randwick Corp versus Rutledge <case>; [(1959) 102 CLR 54] at 94. It is clear that the draftsmen of the convention did not intend to impose absolute liability in respect of all forms of injury.

Other provisions in the Convention are indicative of the approach which should be adopted to the interpretation of Article 17. The monetary liability of the carrier is limited by Article 22. Article 23 states that any provision tending to relieve the carrier of liability or to fix a lower limit than that which is laid down in the Convention shall be null and void. That Article is intended to prevent carriers from contracting out of any of the provisions of the
Convention. The surrendering by carriers of their freedom of contract was an important concession which must be seen in the context of the entire
Convention, which amongst other things dealt with carriers' liabilities by providing limitations and certainty. The purpose of Article 17, when read with the rest of the convention, was recently considered by Lord Hope of Craighead in Sidhu versus British Airways <case>; [[1997] 2
WLR 26] (at 40,47): 
On the one hand the carrier surrenders his freedom to exclude or to limit his liability. On the other hand the passenger or other party to the contract is restricted in the claims which he can bring in an action of damages by the conditions and limits set out in the ConventionÖ [The Convention] was not designed to provide remedies against the carrier to enable all losses to be compensated. It was designed instead to define those situations in which compensation was to be available. So it set out the limits of liabilityÖ A balance was struck, in the interests of certainty and uniformityÖ 
The Convention was negotiated prior to, and found its final form, in 1929. An examination of French law in 1929 was undertaken by the United States Supreme
Court in Floyd versus Eastern Airlines Inc <case>; [499 US 530] . That examination included a review of legislation, case law and academic writings after which Marshall J, delivering the opinion of the court, concluded that the phrase, "lesion corporelle", could not, at that time, be taken to cover a purely psychological injury. Marshall J went on to consider, in depth, the history of negotiations of the Convention and the state of the law in many of the other contracting states at the time: 
Our review of the documentary record for the Warsaw Conference confirms - and courts and commentators appear universally to agree - that there is no evidence that the drafters or signatories of the Warsaw Convention specifically considered liability for psychic injury or the meaning of lesion corporelleÖ Indeed, the unavailability of compensation for purely psychic injury in many common and civil law countries at the time of the Warsaw
Conference persuades us that the signatories had no specific intent to include such a remedy in the convention. Because such a remedy was unknown in many, if not most, jurisdictions in 1929, the drafters most likely would have felt compelled to make an unequivocal reference to purely mental injury if they had specifically intended to allow such recovery.

In this sense, we find it significant that, when the parties to a different international transport treaty wanted to make it clear that rail passengers could recover for purely psychic harms, the drafters made a specific modification to this effect.

I am of the opinion that the term "bodily injury" was not intended to, and on a proper interpretation of the convention does not, include purely psychological injury. I note that the decision in Floyd specifically left open the possibility that recovery might be available where psychological injury was accompanied by physical injury. Judge Cooper found that the appellant did not suffer a physical injury which came within the terms of
Article 17. For the reasons I will give, Judge Cooper's findings in that regard will not be disturbed. Accordingly, it is not necessary to decide whether Article 17 provides compensation for psychological injuries accompanied by physical injuries. It follows that I would allow the cross- appeal, which leaves for consideration the appellant's disappointment with
Judge Cooper's decision in relation to her back injuries.

Judge Cooper found that Miss Kotsambasis did not suffer a back injury that fell to be compensated pursuant to Article 17. It will be remembered that the article limits liability to those circumstances in which bodily injury is suffered "on board the aircraft or in the course of any of the operations of embarking or disembarking". Of crucial importance then is the Judge's findings as to where and when the appellant suffered injury. The appellant has submitted that Judge Cooper accepted her injury was sustained on board the aircraft. The respondent contends the Judge found the injury was sustained at
Paris airport. I accept that Judge Cooper's reasons are somewhat ambiguous, but in the end it is clear that he believed the injury was sustained at Paris airport. The ambiguity is most distinct in two places. First, the following is to be found on the first page of the Judge's reasons: Ö Before going to the legal basis of the plaintiff's claim it is convenient to set out my findings of fact in relation to the incident, which findings are made on the balance of probabilities.
 Ö Shortly after takeoff the plaintiff was leaning forward in her seat, talking to a passenger in front. There was then a sudden jolt in the plane and the plaintiff was thrown back into the back, or squab, of her seat and the plaintiff says that she felt a pain in the midline of her back.

When the judgment is read as a whole it is apparent that, at this point, Judge
Cooper was merely reciting what Miss Kotsambasis' evidence was, but not what his finding was. Alternatively, even if the Judge did accept that she felt pain on board the aircraft, his reasons sufficiently explain that he did not accept she sustained an injury at that point and there is certainly no finding that she did.

Secondly, Judge Cooper deals with the evidence of one of the medical experts in the following fashion: 
The main medical evidence in support of the plaintiff's claim is a report from
Dr Courtney (?) [sic] dated 21 August 1994. He sets out the history, the relevant parts of which say that it was necessary for the plaintiff to carry her baggage from the terminal on to a bus. It was also necessary for her to carry all her baggage for a distance in excess of fifty metres. She was carrying quite a lot of baggage. She had two large bags and two handbags and carry-ons. She then had to again carry the bags herself from one bus to another, and then arrived at Paris airport. He continues to say that she was kept at the Paris airport terminal for a period of eight hours and that she then had to carry her bags, re-check into the plane at Singapore and then arrive at Sydney. [The passage of the report from which Judge Cooper made that summary appears to be the following: "It was necessary for the patient to carry her baggage from the [Athens] terminal onto a bus. It was also necessary for her to carry all her baggage for a distance of in excess of 50 metres. She was carrying quite a lot of baggage, having returned from holidays. She had two large bags and two handbags and carryon bags. She then had to again carry the bags herself from one bus to another and then arrived at Paris airportÖ [T]hey were kept in the [Paris] airport terminal for a period of eight hours until another plane was able to take them to Singapore. They then had to carry their own bags and recheck into the plane to Singapore, and then eventually arriving in Singapore they were transferred to Australia.] The history which he obtained from the plaintiff is: "At the time when she was carrying the bags, she noticed some soreness in her lower back which got progressively worse. This was particularly noted and aggravated by the extended times of carrying her bags." 
He also goes on to say under the heading "Opinion": "This lady who is not very physically fit was required to carry heavy bags and carry-on bags for a significant distance when she was left stranded at Athens airport. I understand that there were no trolleys or other assistance available. She noticed some pain in her lower back when this occurred. Her current weight situation would obviously be an aggravating factor. And once the symptoms are settled in, and also due to a relative lack of fitness and the increased load on the back, a chronic pain pattern has set in." 
He continues: "In the history that I have obtained I feel quite confident that the carrying of the heavy bags did precipitate her lower back problem. She suspects that the jolting of the plane may have been a factor. It may or may not. But it was certainly all related to the aeroplane incident whether it be partly precipitated by the jolt in the air and further aggravated by carrying the luggage. The fact that she carries more weight than is ideal has been a factor in the persistence of her symptoms." 
I accept the view of Dr Courtney [sic], that it was the carrying of the heavy bags which precipitated the plaintiff's back condition. However, the carrying of these bags occurred, according to the plaintiff's evidence, at Paris airport.

The last passage of Dr Courtenay's evidence quoted above begins by expressing the opinion that it was the carrying of the bags that caused the lower back problem. The doctor then says that the jolt on the aircraft may or may not have been a factor involved, in that, one presumes, it may or may not have caused an injury which was later aggravated by the carrying of the bags. In other words, what the doctor has written is that he is of the opinion that it was more likely than not that the lower back problem was caused by the carrying of the bags. This was the evidence that Judge Cooper accepted and his finding in that regard, whilst it might seem odd, is not open to challenge.

Nowhere, on the other hand, does Dr Courtenay express the opinion that the injury occurred at Paris airport as opposed to the other places where the carrying of the bags was necessary, in particular from the aircraft to the respective terminals. The Judge, however, stated that he accepted the evidence of Miss Kotsambasis that the injury occurred at Paris airport. Nowhere does
Miss Kotsambasis give such evidence. The pleadings do not assist either. The only reference in the Statement of Claim to what occurred in Paris is as follows: 
The plaintiff was carried at the request of the Defendant by Olympic Airways to Paris where the Plaintiff had to carry her own luggage onto two buses and into the arrival section. The plaintiff waited six hours for a plane to
Singapore and waited six hours in Singapore for a plane to Sydney.

The absence of evidence on the point is understandable; the appellant had clearly always run her case on the basis that the injury was sustained on board the Singapore Airlines aircraft. The following appears in the Statement of Claim: 
Article 17 of the Convention provides that the defendant is liable for any bodily injury suffered by a passenger on board the aircraft.

PARTICULARS OF INJURIES 
Soreness to lower backÖ 
Miss Kotsambasis' evidence as to the circumstances in which the injury was sustained and, in particular, where it was sustained (if not on board the aircraft) was so limited that the entirety of it can be repeated: 
Q. Now, on the physical side, you've told us about this pain in your back. Was there any recurrence of that problem once you got back to Australia? 
A. Yes there was and I also had to carry my luggage from Paris which I believe aggravated it as well. When I came back to Australia, the pain used to come and goÖ (at AB 20) 
Q. Instead of travelling direct from Athens to Singapore you had to go through
Paris? 
A. That's right.
 Ö

Q. You had a bit of a wait, had a few hours' wait in Paris? 
A. And at Athens airport and at Singapore airport. (at AB 37) 
The evidence above cannot possibly allow a finding that any injury occurred at
Paris airport. In fact, there is only one mention of the plaintiff's back condition at Paris airport and that is to be found in the history obtained by
Dr Borenstein, recorded in his report dated 15 November 1995, and tendered without viva voce evidence. It is in the following terms: 
She recalls feeling particularly anxious and fearful for "the whole journey".
"On arrival at Paris airport we were given no assistance, I had to get my own luggage". At this point she noted a worsening of back discomfort which developed into frank pain. She first noticed the discomfort when her body jolted back into the seat during the incident which progressively worsened as the hours went by.

Dr Borenstein, a clinical psychologist, did not express any opinion as to whether or not a back injury was sustained, nor where it was sustained; he simply recorded a history given to him more than three years after the relevant events took place. Judge Cooper did not refer to this evidence. The
Judge specifically said that it was the plaintiff's evidence which led him to conclude that an injury was sustained in Paris. Judge Cooper erred in making such a finding.

However, even if the Judge did not err in making that finding, the appellant would still not be entitled to any award, for the reasons the Judge gave.
Liability only lies where the accident causing injury occurs on board the carrier or in any of the processes of embarking or disembarking. There does not appear to be any Australian authority dealing with the phrase "in the course of any of the operations of embarking or disembarking". It has, however, been considered in the United States. In McCarthy versus North West
Airlines <case>; [56 F 3d 313] (1st Cir. 1995 - United States Court of Appeals) at 316-317, Selya J delivering the judgment of the court, said: 
Given the historical record and the signals that the Supreme Court has sent, most courts have interpreted the terms "embarking" and "disembarking" to connote a close temporal and spatial relationship with the flight itself. In the process, these courts have found a three-pronged inquiry to be useful. The inquiry focuses on (1) the passenger's activity at the time of injury, (2) his or her whereabouts when injured, and (3) the extent to which the carrier was exercising control at the moment of injury [authorities cited]Ö We do not view the three factors - activity, location, and control - as separate legs of a stool, but, rather, as forming a single unitary base. In the last analysis, the factors are inextricably intertwined.

What is more, the language of Article 17 - which speaks to accidents that occur "in the course of any of the operations of embarking" - strongly suggests that there must be a tight tie between an accident and the physical act of entering an aircraft. See Martinez Hernandez, 545 F.2d at 283-84 (concluding that the drafters of the Warsaw Convention understood embarking "as essentially the physical activity of entering" an airplane); see also
Evangelinos, 550 F.2d at 155. This "tying" concept informs location as well as activity. Consequently, for Article 17 to attach, the passenger must not only do something that, at the particular time, constitutes a necessary step in the boarding process, but also must do it in a place not too remote from the location at which he or she isÖ to enter the designated aircraft.

I accept that location, activity and control are useful in determining whether, on the facts of any given case, an accident can be regarded as having occurred in the process of embarking or disembarking. They may not be the only factors and, in the end, the answer will lie in the facts of the particular case. However, I would stress that regard has to be directed to the intention of the contracting parties to the Convention and that intention was to impose absolute liability in certain, fairly narrow, circumstances. In interpreting the words "embarking or disembarking" it should be remembered that the
Convention is to be read parsimoniously.

It is clear that not everything that occurred at Paris airport could be regarded as occurring in the process of embarking or disembarking. If the appellant, when the accident occurred, was descending the stairs placed at the aircraft door to get to the tarmac to board the bus to the terminal, that would, in my opinion, clearly constitute disembarkation. If, on the other hand, she slipped and fell in a cafeteria located in the terminal, that would probably not be an accident occurring in any of the processes of embarkation or disembarkation.

Miss Kotsambasis was taken to Paris airport by an Olympic Airlines aircraft.
If she was in the process of disembarking at Paris airport, then she was in the process of disembarking from an aircraft not belonging to the respondent.
If the injury occurred at that time, then it is by no means clear that
Singapore Airlines would be liable. If she was in the process of embarking, then she was in the process of embarking an aircraft to Singapore. Neither the evidence, nor the pleadings, disclose which carrier performed the Paris to
Singapore leg of the journey. The argument that the appellant was under the control of Singapore Airlines in having to go to Paris does not have to be considered because there is simply no evidence from which the question can be determined whether the accident causing injury occurred in the process of embarkation or disembarkation. There are numerous possibilities: i. If the accident occurred as a result of travelling from the Singapore
Airlines aircraft to the Athens terminal, then the appellant's claim against the respondent may have fallen within Article 17.
 ii. If the accident occurred in the Athens terminal, then that may have occurred in the process of disembarkation from the defendant carrier, allowing a claim; or, it might have occurred in the process of embarking the Olympic
Airlines aircraft, where the claim might lie against Olympic Airlines or
Singapore Airlines (I express no opinion); or, it might not have occurred in the process of embarking or disembarking, in which case there is no claim based on Article 17.
 iii. If the accident occurred as a result of travelling from the Athens terminal to the Olympic Airlines aircraft, then it is probable that the accident occurred in the process of embarking the Olympic Airlines aircraft.
Whether the appellant could be regarded as in the process of embarking a
Singapore Airlines carrier, because that carrier arranged for the appellant to board the Olympic Airlines aircraft, is a different question.

The possibilities go on and in a more complex fashion the further one travels from Athens.

It was for the appellant to prove that, on the balance of probabilities, the accident occurred on board the respondent's aircraft or in the process of embarking or disembarking from it. Judge Cooper did not make any supportable finding as to where the accident causing injury occurred. He did, however, make the finding that it occurred in the course of, or as a result of, carrying bags, not as a result of being jolted whilst on board the aircraft.
On the scant evidence before Judge Cooper, I am of the opinion that it is not more likely than not that the accident causing injury occurred on board the respondent's aircraft or in a situation which could be regarded as being one in which the appellant was engaged in one of the processes of embarkation or disembarkation from the respondent carrier.
 i. Appeal dismissed with costs.
 ii. Cross-appeal allowed.
 iii. The judgment and orders of Cooper DCJ of 6 March 1996 be set aside.
 iv. In lieu thereof order that the proceedings before Cooper DCJ be dismissed with costs.
 v. That the Cross-Respondent/Appellant pay the Cross-Appellant's costs of the
Cross-Appeal and to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) in respect thereof.

KOTSAMBASIS v. SINGAPORE AIRLINES LTD 
JUDGMENT 
POWELL JA: I have read in draft the Judgment which has been prepared by Meagher JA. 
Although I agree with his Honour that the appeal should be dismissed, I am unable to share his Honour's view that the evidence at the trial was not capable of supporting Cooper DCJ's finding that the appellant's back injury was sustained while she was carrying her bags at Paris airport. But whether or not that injury was sustained when the Appellant was carrying her bags at
Athens airport or at Paris airport, it is clear that at neither time was the
Appellant either embarking upon, or disembarking from either the Respondent's aircraft or the Olympic Airways aircraft.

For the reasons given by Meagher JA I agree that the cross-appeal should be upheld.

I agree with the Orders which Meagher JA has proposed.

KOTSAMBASIS versus SINGAPORE AIRLINES LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: I have had the benefit of reading the draft judgment of Meagher JA with which I agree. I would wish to make some brief remarks of my own. 
As Professor Rene Mankiewicz states in The Liability Regime of the
International Air Carrier, the rule in Article 17 of the Warsaw Convention cannot be restricted or altered by national law or by a stipulation between the parties to the contract.

Until the Supreme Court of the United States determined Eastern Airlines Inc.
v Floyd <case>; [499 US 530] (1991) there had been a considerable conflict of authority on the meaning of `bodily injury' in the US courts. Floyd held that there could be no recovery for `psychic' injury unaccompanied by physical injury. However where mental anguish follows and is caused by physical injury, recovery for both injuries is covered. I would agree with this latter statement. Moreover, if the psychological injury is proven to be a species of bodily injury, then it would constitute `bodily injury' within the Article.

The issue of whether `bodily injury' in Article 17 ought be construed as including psychological damage was recently raised before the House of Lords in Sidhu versus British Airways Limited <case>; [[1997] 2
WLR 26.]
However, because the point did not directly arise for decision and was not fully argued, Lord Hope of Craighead preferred to express no opinion.

On the appeal before us, reliance was placed by the appellant upon a decision of the Supreme Court of Israel, Daddon versus Air France; Air France versus Teichner
S&B Av. R, VII/141, which is to the contrary of Floyd. Levine J stated the question thus: 
In view of all the aforegoing, and particularly in the light of the rapid development of air transport, in all its branches, and the ever-increasing tendency which manifests itself around the world and in Israel to recognise the duty to compensate pure mental anguish, we must pose for ourselves the question- what is the desirable judicial policy we should apply in regard to a proper interpretation of the term `bodily injury' for purposes of art 17 of the convention.

In view of the objects of the convention as described below, and on the background of the abovementioned developments, it would be proper, in my opinion, from the point of view of the aforesaid judicial policy, to interpret art 17 of the convention in the widest possible way so that it would be possible in pursuance thereof to award compensation for pure mental anguish.
(at 153) 
It seems to me however that this poses the wrong question. It is impermissible to construe the convention in the light of the changes in civil aviation transport since 1929 and the current domestic law view of mental or psychological injury. Rather the construction should seek to ascertain the intention of the drafters and signatories as expressed by Marshall J in
Floyd. What may be seen as a desirable policy goal cannot be given effect to by the courts unless it was within the intention of the signatories to the convention. If domestic law notions are utilised by national courts as an aid to construction of the convention, the stated purpose of achieving uniformity will be diminished.

What is plain is that Judge Cooper found that Ms Kotsambasis did not suffer any form of physical injury on the airplane, but only a psychological one.
That is, she suffered a psychological injury unaccompanied by any physical injury within article 17. Cooper DCJ, it seems, found in favour of the appellant because he was bound by Georgeopoulos versus American Airlines (unreported, Supreme Court, 10 December 1993). However, the Court of Appeal remitted that matter back to the magistrate (who heard the original action) to make further findings of fact on the nature of the injuries suffered. In obiter Sheller JA (unreported, Court of Appeal, 26 September 1996) appeared to prefer the reasoning in Floyd over Daddon. To the extent that Ireland J found that purely psychological injury is `bodily injury' under article 17 of the convention, the decision is in my view erroneous.

I would favour the construction adopted by the US Supreme Court in Floyd in preference to Daddon. I agree with Meagher JA that `bodily injury' in article 17 was not intended to include purely psychological injury.
Accordingly, the cross-appeal should be upheld.

The other issue relates to where the appellant suffered a back injury and whether this is compensible under article 17. His Honour did not find that the injury to her back occurred on the aircraft. He found that it occurred while she was at Paris airport terminal. As Meagher JA points out, this finding may be unsustainable on the evidence. If the appellant injured her back carrying her heavy luggage then this must have occurred prior to Paris, possibly at the
Athens airport terminal. She may have aggravated her back in Paris. The problem for the appellant is that the evidence is silent as to where the accident causing injury to her back occurred. Meagher JA traverses some of the possibilities. It was, of course, for the appellant to prove that the accident happened aboard the plane or in the process of embarking or disembarking from it to bring her claim within article 17. There was either no evidence, or insufficient evidence that the injury occurred in the process of embarkation or disembarkation of the respondent's aircraft (or that of Olympic Airways).

It follows that the appeal should be dismissed. I agree with the orders proposed by Meagher JA.
 * * * 
