

Dahlenburg versus Dahlenburg [1996] NSWSC 293 (24 July 1996) 
DAHLENBURG versus DAHLENBURG /96 
WEDNESDAY 24 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a strange case because of the way in which it was presented. It could have taken two days to hear, but by experienced counsel cutting as many corners as they usefully could it was able to be dealt with in an hour.

I pay tribute to Mr C Harris who appeared for the plaintiff and Mr D Murr who appeared for the defendant for the manner in which they presented the case.
The problem for the judge in doing that is that there was some evidentiary gaps. However, having considered the matter overnight it seems to me whichever way one looks at this case one comes to the same result.

The first plaintiff is the mother of the second plaintiff and the first defendant. The first plaintiff is now seventy-six years of age. The two main disputants are the brothers, Ian and Colin Dahlenburg, who are respectively the second plaintiff and the first defendant. The brothers, together with their mother, were in partnership in rural pursuits in the Wagga Wagga/Junee area. They had difficulties with their partnership and the first defendant commenced proceedings to wind it up.

The parties took advantage of the services offered by the second defendant, a mediator, and with his assistance the dispute was mediated in the Riverina area on 26 March this year.

The evidence shows that the discussions between the parties lasted from 10 am until at least 7 pm and that the differences between the parties were negotiated with their solicitors and the mediator during that time. Colin became a little concerned at about 7 pm as to whether a deal could be done and he indicated that he would need to be satisfied that the list of what plant and equipment was owned by him personally and what was owned by the partnership was not being properly settled. There was then some further discussion and Colin finally left the room at about 9 pm. About half an hour before that time, Colin had signed the document being the deed of settlement of the dispute. This is the deed the subject of these proceedings to which I will simply refer as "the document". Mr Bogan, the mediator, then took the document to the other side. Mr Bogan was away for half an hour and Mr Dawson,
Colin's solicitor, stayed with him. Half an hour later Mr Bogan returned and said to Colin, "Look, it's done" and held up the document with both hands.
Colin did not see or examine the document and, indeed, says that he did not examine it until it was sent to him on 16 May by his former solicitor.

When he did see the document, he was upset because a number of items in the list of machinery had been deleted and initialled. He also says in his affidavit that when he signed the document he said to his solicitor, "There are a lot of things not settled in the agreement", to which his solicitor replied, "There will be other documents to be signed to cover those things".

The solicitors for Ian Dahlenburg have commenced the present proceedings by summons issued on 1 July 1996 for specific performance of the relevant deed.
The defences to that action are: (a) that because of the application of the rule in Pigot's case <case>; [(1614) 11 Co Rep 26b]; [77 ER 1177], the deed has become void and hence cannot be specifically performed; and (b) that it was premature to grant any specific performance because the appropriate assurance had not been provided by the real plaintiff to the real defendant.

The affidavit of Ian Dahlenburg set out a series of letters that passed between the lawyers for the various parties, commencing in April 1996 and flowing through to shortly before the proceedings were commenced, containing applications for the Minister's consent and with respect to the dealings of the partnership with the Wool Board, the Wheat Board and the Rice Marketing
Board, together with transfers from Colin to Ian and their mother of Colin's previous interest in the partnership.

The essential deal done by the parties with the aid of the mediator was that in consideration of the receipt of a sum of money Colin was to transfer to Ian and his mother or their nominee his interest in the net assets of the partnership. There were three covenants for further assurance. 2.2 was a covenant by Colin to do all acts and things necessary to effect the transfer.
.1 was a covenant headed "Further Assurances" and 13.1 provided: "A further document more fully encompassing the terms of this agreement may be requested by any party." 
If the only matter were the conveyancing problems the course which the court should take would be very clear. It should grant specific performance of the deed and refer the matter to the Master to implement the specific performance.
Costs could be reserved so that after the Master has in detail supervised the implementation of the specific performance one could see if either party was at fault in being overtechnical, or otherwise the costs would come equally from both sides because that is the normal result where a partnership is being wound up under the supervision of the court.

If partners have agreed during the lifetime of the partnership to share expenses equally, then they normally share the expenses of winding up equally as that is what they would have impliedly agreed to do. I have not seen the partnership agreement and if the partners were to share expenses in some other way then the costs of the winding up might have to be shared in that way too.

However, if the deed is void because of the alterations then there is nothing to refer to the Master, so that that course cannot be pursued.

The alterations are to the schedule of fixtures owned by the partnership or
Colin personally. It would seem that in the evening of 26 March Colin identified with an orange highlighter various items on the list of partnership assets, which he, Colin, claimed to be his. He also indicated that there should be a 1000 gallon overhead fuel tank on stand added to the list of his assets. After Colin signed the document it would seem that Ian crossed out from the partnership schedule the matters which Colin had highlighted in orange and initialled them, and then there was added in handwriting "1000 Gal
OH tank on stand" to the schedule of Colin's plant, but then this was struck out. There is, however, in the printed list the same entry. The evidence does not enable me to say one way or the other whether there was a duplication in that list or whether there were in fact two 1000 gallon overhead fuel tanks.

The rule in Pigot's case is stated in the English reports at p 1178 as: "when any deed is altered in a point material, by the plaintiff himself, or by any stranger, without the privity of the obligee, be it by interlineation, addition, rasing or by drawing of a pen through a line, or through the midst of any material word,... the deed thereby becomes void." 
The origin of the rule is as Bray CJ says in Armor Coatings (Marketing) Pty
Ltd versus General Credits (Finance) Pty Ltd [(1978) 17 SASR 259] at 275: "An archaic notion of the sacrosanct and talismanic effect of the seal of the obligor on the wax on the parchment of the deed. The deed was surrounded with a magic aura. Anything which violated its integrity destroyed its mana." 
Although that is undoubtedly its origin, it would seem to me that the rule by the middle of the nineteenth century had extended beyond the rule of evidence to a rule of substantive law. However, it is arguable that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s51.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), which simply states: "The principles and rules of the Common Law that relate to the means of proving the contents of documents are abolished." may well have abolished the rule in Pigot's case. However, neither counsel wish to argue that point and get involved in a point of law before the Court of Appeal, and wish me to decide the matter on other grounds, so I merely flag the matter for further consideration.

The South Australian Full Court in Armor's case, the New South Wales Court of Appeal in Warburton versus National Westminster Finance Australia Ltd (1988) NSWLR 238 and Farrow Mortgage Services Pty Ltd versus Slade & Nelson [(1996) 38 NSWLR 636] have taken the view that the rule is still applicable but that there is a: "need, in modern conditions, to confine the nullifying operation of the rule to cases which fall strictly within its ambit, and to interpret the rule as liberally and reasonably as possible." (Per Gleeson CJ in the Farrow case at p 640.) 
I also considered the operation of the rule in modern surroundings in Zisti v Ryde Joinery Pty Ltd, 2 May 1996, unreported, at pp 20-22.

Unfortunately, none of the exceptions that have eaten into the rule in
Pigot's case in modern decisions really apply to the instant case. One can say that insofar as what was alleged to be partnership property was struck out of the list and marked "CD" would not appear to be a material alteration because it was done in good faith for the benefit of the defendant and its effect was to do something that the defendant wanted; see per Cole JA in
Farrow's case at p 649. The matter, however, of the 1000 gallon overhead tank is a different matter if there are two such tanks. The evidence is completely equivocal on that. We do not even know who made the alteration, but it would seem to me more likely than not that as Colin and his solicitor stayed in the one room, and the mediator then took the document to another room where Ian was, that Ian or his solicitor, or the mediator on their instruction, removed the line.

One has got to work out whether this is a material alteration. The onus of showing that is on the person who so alleges and it does not seem to me that, where the evidence is completely equivocal, the matter has been proved.
Accordingly, it seems to me that the defence of Pigot's case has not been made out.

It would be a shame to decide a case which was so well thought out on such a small point of evidence. Accordingly, it seems to me I should turn now to what would be the situation if I had upheld the defence of Pigot's case.

One would have to classify the contract to see into which of the three (or four) categories of contract dealt with in Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353] at 360 this contract falls. It seems to me that the three covenants for further assurance, and the expectation of Colin that there would need to be further documentation, shows that it falls within the second class, that is where the parties had made a provisional contract which was binding, but they both considered that it might need fleshing out.

I do not consider on all the facts and circumstances contained in the affidavits that either party considered at the end of the day there was only a contract when the final deed was signed. There is, of course, some material that goes that way, such as the evidence given by Colin that the mediator came back into the room where Colin was, held up the document and said the deed is done, but I consider that when one looks at the facts in the affidavits the better view is that there was a provisional contract.

If there is a contract and the writing fails for some technical reason at law,
Equity may still enforce the underlying agreement. The maxim is Equity looks to the intent rather than to the form. As Snell's Equity 29th ed p 39 puts it (in another context) "Equity was never much impressed by a deed". Although, as far as my researches go, there has been no case where that has been directly decided, there are analogous cases where that has happened. In
Halsey versus Grant [(1806) 13 Ves 73] at 77; <case>; [33 ER 222] at 223, Erskine LC illustrated the point by saying that, at law, if there is a contract to sell a sublease for ninety-nine years and the vendor only has ninety-eight years, the purchaser would be non-suited at law, but Equity would enforce the contract with compensation. The rigid construction of the law is relaxed and: "the system is rendered perfect by this healing power of equity; preserving the substantial part of the contract, but not forcing upon the party something different; and the effect is substantial justice." 
The rule in Pigot's case only, as far as I can see, avoids the contract as a matter of law for formal reasons. It does not affect any underlying contract that there is. Even if the contract at law is required to be in writing because it deals with an interest in land, Equity merely orders a party to enter into the contract and so provide a document which is formally valid. As
Brennan J said in Walton Stores (Interstate) Ltd versus Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387] at 433, Equity does not create a contract, but Equity moulds a decree which operates on the conscience of the defendant to compel the defendant to execute and exchange a deed which will satisfy <case> of the
Conveyancing Act once it is brought into existence. His Honour pointed out that it is often not necessary to make so circuitous a decree, but that ultimately is the remedy in a borderline case.

The decree is often referred to in this Court as the Neismann v
Collingridge <case>; [(1921) 29 CLR 177] decree, whereby the court orders a party to enter into a contract containing such terms as the Master may settle. Here it is not necessary to settle the terms because, except insofar as there is a defective mechanism in the document, all that need be done, if it is appropriate to do so, is to order re-execution of the appropriate document.

Should that be done? The cases show that there is a well known Equity of peace. Where parties are members of a family and they are in dispute then
Equity, even if no consideration is given by a member of a family to settle a family dispute, will grant specific performance; see particularly Spence on
The Equitable Jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery (Stephens 1846) vol 2 p 288. The best instance of that Equity is Stapilton versus Stapilton <case>; [(1739) 1 Atk 2], 11; <case>; [26 ER ] at 6, where Lord
Hardwick said that a court of Equity will be glad to lay hold on any just ground to carry such an agreement into execution and establish the peace of a family. Again, as Spry Equitable Remedies, 4th ed LBC Sydney 1990 points out at pp 122-123 cases such as Stocker versus Wedderburn <case>; [(1857) 3 K&J 393], 403; <case>; [69
ER 1162] at 1166 make clear, Equity will almost invariably order the execution of a deed whether or not the provisions of the deed are such as the court can decree it be specifically performed.

In Stocker's case itself, Page Wood VC held that as other things were required as well as executing the deed he would not make a decree, but his
Lordship made it quite clear that that was the invariable rule. Accordingly, once it can be seen that there is a contract and the contract requires a deed,
Equity will order its execution.

Accordingly, whichever way one approaches this case there should be a decree for specific performance. Accordingly, I make order 1 in the summons, though the date should be 27 March, not 21 March.

I make order 2 in the summons. I refer implementation of these orders to a
Master and reserve further consideration and all questions of costs until after the Master has considered the matter.

The court is quite content for the Master to deal with all questions of costs if the parties agree that that occur.

Between the time these reasons were delivered orally and the time of their revision, the report of the Privy Council's decision in Goss versus Chilcott [1996] 3 WLR 180 has been received. In that case, the Privy Council considered that as the original oral agreement had become merged in the deed of mortgage "there could be no question of any such oral agreement having survived the discharge of the defendants from that liability" (p 186).

Lord Goff when giving the judgment of the Privy Council made it clear that the result flowed from the circumstances. It seems to me that the Privy Council did not exclude the possibility that, in an appropriate case, there might not be merger or that some doctrine close to the principle of defendant relative revocation of a will might apply.

Although, at first sight, my reasons are inconsistent with the Privy Council's decision, I believe on fuller examination, both decisions can be supported.

It should be noted that Goss versus Chilcott is an appeal from the New Zealand
Court of Appeal reported as Chilcott versus Goss [[1995] 1 NZLR 263.] It may be that the view taken in New Zealand and England of the rule in Pigot's case may be far stricter than the Australian attitude reflected earlier in these reasons though see [[1995] 1 NZLR 270] where the
Australian cases are considered.
 * * * 
