

Regina versus L L [1998] NSWSC 1027 (28 May 1998) 
REGINA v. L.L.
 /95 
SEVENTH DAY: TUESDAY 26 MARCH 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
HIS HONOUR: I have found the admissibility of the disputed material a question of much difficulty. The accused's point, under section 13 of the
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act, fails. There was undue delay in bringing the accused before a magistrate.

I am not satisfied, as required under section 84 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), as to the first
ERISP interview of 7 December 1994, the interviews of 7 December 1994 not on
ERISP, both parts of the second ERISP interview of 7 December 1994 and the recorded interview and demonstrations at the Police Boys Club, Bankstown. I decline to admit these. I admit the conversation between the accused and HK alone on 7 December 1994, between the two ERISP interviews.

My reasons are in the course of preparation and will be delivered within a few days.
 
REGINA v. L.L.
 /95 April 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
Introduction 
On 26 March 1994 following an extended voir dire as to the admissibility of certain confessional material I made the following rulings and statements:
I have found the admissibility of the disputed material a question of much difficulty;
The accused's point under [s.13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/s13.html) of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) fails;
There was undue delay in bringing the accused before a magistrate;
I am not satisfied as required under s.84 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) as to: a) the first ERISP interview of 7 December 1994; b) the interviews of 7 December 1994 not on ERISP; c) both parts of the 2nd ERISP interview of 7 December; d) the recorded interview and demonstrations at the Police Boys Club,
Bankstown.

I decline to admit these.
I admit the conversation between the accused and HK alone on 7 December between the two ERISP interviews.
My reasons are in the course of preparation and will be delivered within a few days.

Those reasons follow.

The Crown regarded the admission of this material, or at least, the admissions of guilt as essential to its case on the charge of murder. LL regarded its exclusion as essential.

One complicating factor is the age of the accused. He was born on 8 October and was thus aged 14 at the time of the incident and aged 15 at the time of the interviews and statements.

LL stands charged with murdering SV and maliciously wounding GT on 24
September 1994 whilst outside the Bankstown Police Boys Club. It is alleged that he stabbed both of them with a knife. There was no dispute that an incident occurred during that evening and that the two men were stabbed. The question is who carried out each stabbing. The Crown alleges that the accused was one of a number of people who attended a private party at the club. At one stage some of this group prevailed upon some others to go outside. The accused's group became aggressive, a fight erupted and the stabbings occurred at the entrance to the club. The accused was arrested on another matter on 29
September 1994 and interviewed about that matter and the stabbings. His interview was recorded by audio/video equipment. He was cautioned. He denied being at the club on the night, asserting that he was at a flat at Punchbowl with his girl friend. He denied being involved. He said that he did not go to
Bankstown on that night.

The police had made extensive enquiries. They endeavoured to ascertain who was at the club, what occurred and who saw what occurred. Statements were taken from potential witnesses and in some instances ERISP interviews were conducted. The police encountered difficulty in obtaining useful evidence.
There were a number of interviews on 29 September 1994. Police investigations continued.

JL and TH Nominate LL 
A few days before 21 November 1994 they reviewed the materials which they held. The main suspect for the murder was LL but the police felt that they had insufficient materials to charge him. The police did not have closed minds.
They were considering re-interviewing at least some of the witnesses. They decided to re-interview JL first. I do not accept the suggestion that this was a fortuitous co-incidence.

JL was in a vulnerable position. He faced serious charges to which he had no real answer and the likelihood of full time detention for a substantial period. He needed assistance to avoid that fate and obtain a bond.

In his recorded interview on 29 September 1994 JL described the fight which occurred outside the club including the hitting and kicking by various people and the men assaulted. On his account TH was in the thick of the fight. JL said that after the fight had commenced "Long" ran out and just stood where the steps were. JL did not see "Long" do anything else. JL said that at one point "Long", C and he ran from the club to Punchbowl Station and caught a taxi. JL said that in response to C's question "Long" said he stabbed the man and produced a fold-up knife. JL stated that "Long" said to C that he stabbed two men including the man in the blue blazer. JL claimed that "Long" indicated he had stabbed one man under the left breast and the other man on the side.

JL's bail conditions required him to report to Bankstown Police Station. When he did so on 21 November 1994 Det Doherty spoke with him. JL's account was to the following effect. Det Doherty said that he had been told that JL had more information. JL replied that he had already made a statement. Det Doherty stated that more information was needed and that if JL changed his statement and told the police who did the killing Det Doherty could make the charges easier and that he would try and get a probation order for JL. Det Doherty explained that he would give a letter to the judge telling of the assistance
JL had given with the stabbing. Det Doherty mentioned that "Long" had killed the man in the purple blazer. That man had been stabbed in the heart. JL agreed to a further interview.

These arrangements were made by Dets Doherty and Karras with JL. Once made,
JL's father attended and JL gave a recorded interview and attended at the club. He said that he had seen LL stab a man and that LL had said he had stabbed two men. Details were supplied.

JL agreed that what he said to the police was to help himself.

JL gave a full account of what allegedly occurred. Det Doherty could not recall all that was said prior to the interview. He had made no note and had a limited recollection.

Det Doherty denied that JL said initially that he had already made a statement and asked why the police wanted another statement.

Det Doherty said that he told JL that he wanted to see if he had anything further to offer police. JL's response was to the effect that if he helped the police how could they help him. Det Doherty said that he explained that the police could provide a letter to the court setting out the assistance given.
JL replied that he would participate in another interview. Det Doherty denied that he said anything about the discount or benefit JL might receive. The police then arranged for JL's father to attend.

Det Karras was present at the conversation with JL but could not recall the exact conversation. He thought that Det Doherty asked JL if he could assist further and JL wanted to know what was in it for him if he did. Det Doherty said that the police would be able to assist by way of a letter to the magistrate on sentencing. Det Karras was unable to recollect further details.
He could not recall if JL was told that his sentence would be reduced or be more lenient or that his assistance could or would result in probation. He did not think that words such as "reduced sentence", "discount" or "lesser sentence" were used. However, Det Karras thought that JL believed that if he received a letter of assistance he would get a lesser sentence. Det Karras could not recall JL speaking about getting a bond. Det Karras did not recall if Det Doherty said anything before the interview about the police believing
LL to be responsible. Det Karras was hampered by not having made a note of what was said.

JL impressed me as a wary and calculating youth. He is capable of being deliberately not forthcoming. Det Doherty would have had to make the running.
It is probable that Det Doherty told JL that the police believed (or knew) that LL stabbed the man in the purple blazer. JL would have understood that the police were looking for evidence against LL. JL would also have obtained a commitment from Det Doherty to assist him obtain a probation order if he helped the police. JL would not have been content with anything else.

A letter of assistance was provided to the court and in respect of offences of conceal serious offence, assault, kidnapping, 2 armed robberies, affray and stealing from a person he received 100 hours community service, 2 year good behaviour bond and supervision by Juvenile Justice for 2 years.

On 24 November 1994 Det Doherty attended at the Minda Remand Centre and spoke to TH who agreed to talk to the police further. TH was taken to Bankstown
Police Station and told that the police believed he had more to offer. TH asked how the police could help him. Det Doherty explained that a letter of assistance could be provided to the sentencing magistrate.

Det Karras had little recollection of what was said to TH. He knew that a letter of assistance was provided to the magistrate when TH was sentenced. He appears to have received 6 months detention for charges of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, seven counts of stealing and one of possess a firearm.
There may have been a charge of assault.

TH in his interview nominated LL as the person whom he saw stab a young man wearing a white shirt. TH gave an account of a conversation in a taxi in which
LL admitted that he had stabbed a man.

TH has left Australia and is not available to give evidence at LL's trial.

I have narrated the events surrounding these interviews and demonstrations at some length because the showing of the demonstrations and comments at the club of JL and TH and the police questioning upon them played an important part in what LL said to the police.

Police Briefing 
About 5 a.m. on 7 December 1994 a group of police officers comprising some stationed at Bankstown and some stationed in the city gathered at the
Bankstown Police Station for a briefing. Warrants had been obtained to search four different premises which the accused lived at or stayed or at which certain acquaintances of the accused lived. There were to be simultaneous police raids on 58 and 60 Glebe Point Road, Glebe and unit 158, Waratah
Apartments, 220 Goulburn Street, Sydney. The accused's parents lived at 58
Glebe Point Road, Glebe and he had a room there. Acquaintances lived at 60
Glebe Point Road. AL, a friend, had the unit in Waratah Apartments. LL's sister and her husband lived at 18 Highclare Avenue, Punchbowl. That was where the accused had lived and was living at 7 December 1994.

At the police briefing Det Doherty issued instructions that if LL was found he was to be arrested on a charge of murder and Det Doherty was to be notified so he could attend and take charge of the accused and the operation. Any potential witnesses were to be encouraged to return to the Bankstown Police
Station for interview and the making of statements.

All the relevant information was held at Bankstown Police Station and that was the headquarters of the police operation and murder investigation. Police officers said that the accused was to be taken to a police station and that which one had not been stated or decided. I have considerable reservations about that last mentioned evidence.

The Arrest 
The police involved in the Glebe raids met outside the Glebe Police Station.
About 6.30 a.m. police officers entered 58 & 60 Glebe Point Road and the unit in Waratah Apartments. Det Doherty entered 58 Glebe Point Road. He says that he spoke with HK and explained the search warrant to her and handed her the occupiers notice. The accused's parents and other relatives were in the house. The police were shown the accused's room. A search was conducted under
Det Doherty's supervision. The police were at 58 Glebe Point Road for about 15 to 20 minutes. While there a message was received that the accused had been arrested in the unit at Waratah Apartments. Det Doherty went next door to supervise and stayed there for about 5-10 minutes. He drove to the Waratah
Apartments. This would have taken about ten minutes. Det Doherty probably arrived there between about 7 a.m. and 7.10 a.m.

Dets Greiss, Irving, Szabo and Trick entered the unit about 6.30 a.m. LL, who had a retractable baton was ordered and pushed onto the floor face down and handcuffed with his hands behind his back. Det Irving said that he told LL that he was under arrest for the murder of SV at Bankstown on 24 September
LL agreed that he had been told that he was under arrest. He did not recall being given the reason but accepted that it was possible that he had.
Det Irving said that he cautioned LL who replied that he did not know what the
Detective was talking about.

Dets Doherty and Karras arrived a short time later. Det Karras searched LL.
The evidence of Dets Doherty, Karras, Irving and Szabo was to the effect that
Det Doherty said to LL that the police were going to take him to a police station so that they could speak to him about the murder and that they needed to have an adult present while they did so. Det Doherty asked LL whom he would like and he replied that his sister lived at Punchbowl. Det Doherty said that the police would take LL to Bankstown Police Station and contact his sister from there.

The Journey to Bankstown 
The accused was taken from the unit and placed in a police vehicle. The accused said that he remained in handcuffs in the vehicle. The police were not sure at what point the handcuffs were removed. They thought that he was not handcuffed in the car. As they gave their evidence on this point the police officers did not seem to have any real recollection. The accused was in a car driven by Det Karras. The accused sat in the back seat with Det Doherty. On this point I think that the accused has an actual recollection and that he is probably correct when he says that he remained handcuffed throughout the journey.

Det Doherty said that when nearing Bankstown LL stated that his sister at
Punchbowl was pregnant and that she should not be at a police station. Doherty said that he enquired who else he could get to act as a guardian and suggested
LL's parents. LL replied that they did not speak English, his "brother has gone to work but my sister, his wife, is home at Glebe." Det Doherty stated that he would contact her at Glebe when they got to the police station.

The detectives along with the accused probably arrived at the police station about 8 a.m. According to the detectives the accused was placed in the ERISP interview room.
 [Children (Criminal Proceedings)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) 
Det Doherty stated that on arrival he telephoned the residence at 58 Glebe
Point Road and spoke to HK. He had made no note of this conversation or of his efforts to obtain the attendance of a qualified person (a parent or an approved nominee) This was contrary to the Commissioner's instructions.

Det Doherty said that as best he could recall he explained to HK that the police had LL in custody, that they were going to interview him, that they needed a guardian, that they needed parents and somebody who could speak
English. He knew that the parents could not speak English. He said that she informed him that the parents could not speak English and were not available to come down. He explained that they could not get his sister. He asked for his brother (her de facto husband) who was apparently not there. (He was at work). She said that she would try to come down. He was left with the impression that she was going to come down with the mother or have the mother come down or come down herself.

LL denied the conversations alleged by the detectives as to the presence of an adult. He denied that Det Doherty spoke to him at the unit about the need for an adult to attend the police station and that there was any discussion in the car about his sister being pregnant and not coming to the police station and another person coming. LL said that the question of having an adult present did not arise until LL was placed in the interview room at the detective's office. Det Doherty asked him where LL was living. LL replied with his sister.
LL advised that she was pregnant and could not come and that the police should telephone his parents' place to bring them up or his brother. Det Doherty left but Karras remained. About 5 to 10 minutes later Det Doherty returned and advised that HK was coming and that LL's parents could not come.

HK said that she did not speak to Det Doherty on the telephone. She thought that while Det Doherty was at the house he asked for someone to go to
Bankstown Police Station. She was clear that the police wanted someone from the family to attend at Bankstown Police Station. She is Korean and her second language is English. She does not speak Vietnamese but has learnt some
Vietnamese words and manages a level of communication on a day to day basis with her de facto parents-in-law. HK said that LL's sister who also lived at Glebe Point Road translated the police requirements into Vietnamese for her parents.

HK said that she was not sure if her de facto parents-in-law gave her permission to go but she said she would go. HK said that if her parents-in-law had told her not to go to the police station she would not have gone. She thought the parents-in-law were quite pleased that she was going to attend.

She stated that her father-in-law drove her to the Bankstown Police Station, let her off and drove away.

It is possible that the detailed recollections of each of Det Doherty and Ms
HK are faulty. He may be correct or he may have spoken to her at the house about attending Bankstown Police Station. Det Doherty whose initial time estimates were astray said that "she took a while to come out, possibly an hour to come out." HK may have spoken to Det Doherty on the telephone and she may be confused about the time he asked for someone to go to the police station. It is possible that LL's sister spoke to Det Doherty on the telephone and relayed what he said to the others. I do not know exactly what happened.
However, I find that the parents knew that the police had LL in custody, wanted to interview him and that an adult from the family was needed and one who spoke English. HK seemed to proceed on the basis that the parents were unavailable because they did not speak English. HK's command of English was reasonable. She did not follow some of the questions, especially the longer and more complex ones and, at times, she used words which did not convey what she intended to say.

The words which Det Doherty said he used on the telephone did not convey that
LL was in custody for murder, but simply that LL was in custody. Given the level of understanding which probably existed I am not persuaded, despite the interview of 29 September 1994 that the parents were told or understood that
LL was in custody for murder and was to be interviewed for murder. LL had been involved in a number of matters and on 29 September 1994 he was questioned about another matter as well as the murder. At that interview both his mother and brother were present. Based on the evidence of HK as to what occurred amongst the family and the father driving her to the police station I find that she was present at the police interviews on 7 December 1994 with the consent of the persons responsible for LL, namely, his parents. Such consent was probably given by the parents knowing that LL was in police custody but not knowing that it was for murder. There was a belief that English was required and this requirement was probably conveyed by Detective Doherty. The parents were classed and classed themselves as unavailable as a result. If the father knew that his son had been arrested and was in custody for murder and was about to be interviewed about that it seems a little unusual, despite his lack of English, that the father would drive to the police station, leave the then 23 year old HK and drive off. She seemed a novice in matters such as these. The parents of LL were not called. They attended the hearing for part of one day.

I prefer the evidence of HK that she was told by Det Doherty on her arrival at the police station and just before the interview that she was not to interrupt or speak during the interview. That was the reason she did not do so. She was not seated beside LL or at the interview table but behind the back of LL and a little to one side. LL would not have been able to see her during the interview unless he turned his head around. Apart from a possible greeting or acknowledgment she did not speak privately or at all with him before the interview started. She did not know that LL had a right of silence. She thought that he had to answer the police questions.

From LL's point of view her presence at least provided someone other than a police officer who could say what occurred. It would also inhibit any potential unfairness or misconduct. Presence seems to be the critical factor:
R v. Dunn, CCA, Unreported, 15 April 1992.

Despite the reservations expressed I think that the presence of HK at a police interview of LL while in custody on 7 December 1994 was with the consent of the parents and that although that consent was not completely informed it was probably sufficiently informed. The parents would probably have realised from the 6.30 a.m. raid and prior events that serious matters were involved. I reject the submission that the interviews of 7 December 1994 are not admissible by reason of the alleged failure to comply with [s.13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/s13.html) of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) 
Alleged Delay In Bringing LL Before Court 
LL contended that there had been breaches of s.352 of the Crimes Act in that upon arrest LL had not been brought before a justice to be dealt with according to law without unreasonable delay and by the most reasonably direct route.

Counsel for LL submitted that the breaches commenced immediately after LL's arrest. Instead of Det Irving upon arresting LL making arrangements to bring
LL before a court he caused a message to be sent to Det Doherty and held LL waiting for Det Doherty to arrive. The Waratah Apartments were about 100 metres or less from the Sydney Police Centre where Det Irving and the other members of Task Force Oak was located. Surry Hills Police Station was close by. Det Irving and the three other detectives could have followed the
Commissioner's instructions and taken LL to the nearby police centre and arranged for him to be charged. Det Doherty could have joined them there. Such a course did not accord with the briefing instructions issued at 5 a.m.

Det Doherty said "there was a point where we were going to take him more than likely to the Bankstown Police Station depending on the circumstances of where he was found ... If he was found at Glebe he would probably be taken to Glebe, being in the city, and then after he told us his sister was at Punchbowl we decided to take him to Bankstown." Det Doherty knew when he arrested LL that his parents were at Glebe and that there were family members at that house who spoke English.

I think that the plan was always to take LL to Bankstown Police Station for further questioning. That was the headquarters for the investigation and where all the information as to it was held. Det Doherty had carefully planned the interview which he wished to conduct. I do not accept that it was decided to take LL to Bankstown because his sister lived at Punchbowl.

LL was arrested within a few minutes of 6.30 a.m. There were two short but serious charges. The preparation of the charges and the charging could reasonably have been completed by 7.30 a.m. at either the Sydney Police Centre or Glebe. A generous allowance would be 8 a.m. The preparation of the statement of facts for bail purposes and any other documents could reasonably have been completed by 8.30 a.m. A generous allowance would be 9 a.m. There is no good reason why LL could not have been brought before a court at 10 a.m. or as soon after that as the court could deal with the charges.

Even assuming that it was appropriate to take LL to Bankstown Police Station the police and LL arrived there about 8 a.m. There is no sufficient reason why
LL could not have been charged and brought before a court by 10 a.m. or as soon as the court's business permitted. Accused in custody receive priority.
Lidcombe Children's Court is a short drive from Bankstown Police Station.

LL had been interviewed at length on 29 September 1994 and questioned in detail as to his movements on 24 and 25 September 1994. He was told that the police were making inquiries as to the death of SV and the wounding of GT. LL was questioned as to how long his girl friend had been living with him, as to whether he had ever been to the club or knew where it was. It was put to him that the police had been told that he was at the club on the night of 24
September 1994 and was the person responsible for stabbing the two men. He denied these allegations. He declined to take part in an Identification Parade but agreed to give a blood sample.

Det Doherty did not believe what LL had said in his previous interview and intended to charge LL irrespective of whether he obtained useful admissions as a result of his further questioning.

Det Doherty said: "I had to get a guardian to speak to him, in fairness to speak to him and let him know the allegations put to him, let him answer them if he was willing to do so and then charge him and take him straight before a justice." 
LL already knew the allegations as it had been put to him on 29 September 1994 that he stabbed the two men at the club. According to the police, LL had been told that morning that he had been arrested for murder.

What Det Doherty wanted to do and did was take LL back over his account of the events as given on 29 September 1994. Det Doherty sought to elicit details as to how LL heard about the events at the club and of LL's friends. Det Doherty indicated some scepticism about what he was being told. When LL adhered to his version of 29 September 1994 and insisted that he was not responsible for the stabbings Det Doherty showed LL the two audio/visual demonstrations with comments, one of TH and the other of JL, nominating LL as the person responsible. Det Doherty asked LL to give any reasons why they might do so.

Prior to this interview Det Doherty would have realised that both TH and JL were dubious witnesses. They were involved in some serious offences. They had a particular interest in helping themselves in their own sentence proceedings.

Det Doherty would have realised that a Crown case which depended on these two witnesses would be a shaky one. There was a further problem. Either or both may not attend the trial or if they did they may resile from what they had said. For the Crown case to have any strength a confession from LL was needed.

There were no fresh allegations on 7 December 1994. It had already been put to
LL that he had done the stabbings. What the police wanted to do was to confront LL with what TH and JL had said and press LL upon their assertions and as to why TH and JL would have made such statements. That was somewhat ironic given that JL and TH had been promised assistance with their sentences if they assisted police with their case. That case was against LL.

The police plan was to hold LL for questioning and eventually to confront him with the audio/visual demonstrations - interview of each of TH and JL at the club in an endeavour to obtain a confession and perhaps further evidence of lies. Charging LL and taking him before a court was a secondary matter. Once
LL was taken before a court it was probable that a solicitor would come to act for him.

The Crown submitted that the accused was not charged until 1.55 p.m. because he desired to make a further statement and that any delay was at the accused's request. The fallacy underlying this submission is that it focuses upon the wrong point of time. The police efforts upon LL's arrest were not directed to charging him and bringing him before a court without undue delay but to interviewing LL and obtaining a confession.

In Williams v. The Queen <case>; [161 CLR 278] at -294 Mason and Brennan JJ reviewed the course of authority in New South
Wales. Their Honours referred with evident approval to the remarks of Jordan
CJ in R v. Jeffries <case>; [(1946) 47 SR 284] at 288 condemning the taking of arrested persons not to a magistrate to be charged but to a police station to be questioned in the hope of extracting something that can be used in evidence against them. The latter is the present case.

As their Honours said in Williams at 295: "It is therefore unlawful for a police officer having the custody of an arrested person to delay taking him before a justice in order to provide an opportunity to investigate that person's complicity in a criminal offence, whether the offence under investigation is the offence for which the person has been arrested or another offence." 
Wilson and Dawson JJ also stress the importance of personal liberty. At 305 they point out "a person who is arrested may be detained only for the purpose of bringing him before a justice ... to be dealt with according to law." At they continued: "This being the purpose of arrest, any delay in bringing a person under arrest before a justice, even if it is to effectuate some other purpose such as the questioning of that person in order to dispel or confirm the suspicion which was the basis of the arrest, is to defeat, however temporarily, the true purpose. Where no delay is involved, there can, of course, be no objection to the occasion of the arrest and subsequent detention being used for the purpose of further investigation of the offence in question or, for that matter, any other offences, provided the investigation is properly carried out and any necessary caution is given: see Hough v. Ah Sam. But to conduct an investigation which does not cut across the purpose for which a person is held under arrest is one thing; to disregard that purpose in order to carry out an investigation is another thing, however much the further investigation may be otherwise necessary or desirable. A person is not to be imprisoned otherwise than upon the authority of a justice or a court except to the extent reasonably necessary to bring him before the justice to be dealt with according to law. That, as we conceive it, is one of the foundations of the common law." 
At 312 their Honours acknowledged that the restrictions have on occasions hampered the police. Underlying both joint judgments is a recognition of the tension which exists between the protection of personal liberty and the efficient police investigation of criminal offences. They are by no means compatible. The common law and the Crimes Act attach greater importance to the former. The law insists upon persons arrested being brought before a magistrate without undue delay. Police questioning has to defer to this requirement. If an accused is agreeable legitimate questioning by the police can take place after he has been charged and brought before a magistrate.

I find that there was undue delay in bringing LL before a magistrate.
 
Alleged Misbehaviour in Police Car 
Dets Doherty and Karras said that apart from LL's statement about not asking his pregnant sister to come to Bankstown Police Station and contacting the house or family at 58 Glebe Point Road there was no conversation of consequence in the car on the trip from Goulburn Street, City to Bankstown.
The impression they created was of a trip in which not much was said.

However, LL alleged that during the car journey Det Doherty said "We know you did it and tell us now so we can get it over and done with it" and "We know you killed that bloke and wounded the other bloke." This was in reference to the Police Boys Club at Bankstown. LL denied that he had done it. LL said that
Det Karras said "Don't bullshit and don't lie." LL said that the matter was raised on more than one occasion. LL stated that Det Karras also said that LL was lucky that he (Karras) was not sitting in the back as he would have hit LL and that he should take the car into the bush, take LL out and hit him before taking him to Bankstown Police Station.

Dets Doherty and Karras denied that any of the alleged remarks were made. The car journey, which took place during the morning peak period, probably took about 45 minutes. I doubt if it was quite as uneventful as suggested. On the other hand I doubt if the threats were made. I think that LL may have been given to understand that the police officers thought that he had stabbed both young men, killing one and wounding the other but I am unable to make a positive finding one way or the other.

At The Bankstown Police Station 
Dets Doherty and Karras stated that on his arrival LL was taken to the low level building housing the detectives office and placed in the ERISP room.

LL claimed that he was taken to an interview type room on the first floor of the main police station building. It is a taller and bigger building and on the opposite side of a common driveway. LL stated that Det Doherty said that they both knew that LL had done it and that LL should tell them that he did it so he did not get a long time (sentence). LL insisted that he did not do it.
The police repeated their contention. Det Karras called him "you fucking little liar." The police told LL that even if he did not admit to doing it they would charge him any way and that he would get a long time.

LL maintained that, after Det Doherty left, LL was alone in the room with Det
Karras who repeated several times that he knew that LL did it, "so stop bullshiting to him". LL persisted with his denials. LL asserted that Det
Karras became angry and hit LL about three times with an open hand on the side/back of the head. LL stated that Det Karras has also kicked his chair.

LL claimed that he was then taken to the ERISP room in the detectives office.
LL said that it was then that the question of having an adult present was raised by Det Doherty.

The police officers at the Waratah Apartments brought DT and AL who had been in the unit back to Bankstown for interview and placed them in separate rooms.
At one stage LL heard the voice of DT.

LL did not complain to either of the reviewing police Sergeants about any violence. That does not surprise me. He was in police custody and regarded them as part and parcel of the one police force. He said that he was scared.
He did complain to HK when the police officers left the interview room of violence and, when LL subsequently decided to talk, LL asked to see Det
Doherty in the absence of Det Karras.

Det Doherty came across as an advocate while giving evidence. Det Karras had a gruff and tough manner. The Crown Prosecutor urged me to recognise their respective personalities and not to be sceptical about their evidence or the police evidence as a whole. Both officers were very involved with the Crown case and they had encountered much frustration in their investigation. On the other hand LL had a background of untrue statements.

I doubt if there was any significant violence or threats. If there was anything it was probably minor and I doubt if it had much effect.

I am unable to make a finding whether or not the police officers said to LL that he should tell them that he committed the crimes so he did not receive a long sentence. After considering the evidence and the demeanour of the witnesses I have been left in a state of balance and am unable to say on the balance of probabilities what happened.

Improper Questioning and Inducements 
As part of his submission that there had been oppressive conduct within [s.84](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s84.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) LL contended that there had been improper questioning on the part of the police and that they had held out inducements to him.

In McDermott v. The King [76 CLR 501] at 511 Dixon J said that if an accused's statement is a result of persistent importunity it cannot be voluntary. At 513 Dixon J stated: "The abuse of the power of arrest by using the detention of an accused person as an occasion for securing from him evidence by admission is treated as an impropriety justifying the exclusion of the evidence. So is insistence upon questions or an attempt to break down or qualify the effect of an accused person's statement so far as it may be exculpatory." 
At 517 Williams J stated: "But the mere asking by the police of a question which would only be asked in cross-examination at the trial does not, in my opinion, amount to cross- examination of the accused by the police. A cross-examination for this purpose would be an examination intended to break down the answers of the accused to questions put by the police to which they had received unfavourable replies." 
In R v. Amad <case>; [1962 VR 545] at -548 Smith J held that objectionable cross examination was not limited to putting words in the accused's mouth or to a desire to break down the accused's denials or extract damaging admissions from him. At 548 his Honour stated: "[the questioner] is nevertheless cross-examining in the sense relevant to the matters here in question when he proceeds, as in this present case, to submit the person in custody to a searching questioning in which disbelief is repeatedly expressed in his denials of complicity, his account of his movements is challenged and checked, he is confronted with evidence of its falsity, he is accused explicitly of lying, and his refusal of further information is met with a statement that there are questions which the interrogator must ask him. A person in custody is, by that fact, ordinarily under great stress, and for that reason the law for his protection holds it to be improper to subject him, even after caution, to any form of cross- examination the tendency of which is in fact to extort admissions or to overcome his mental resistance to making admissions. There is no exception from this principle in favour of an interrogator whose desire is solely to find out the truth and not to obtain evidence for use against the accused. It is what the interrogator does and not his state of mind that is decisive." 
Smith J. regarded the age, maturity and experience of the accused as important.

McDermott and Amad were applied by Smithers J. in the The Queen v.
Bankowski [18 FLR 179.] At 182 his Honour said: 
If the statements of the accused are flung back in his teeth with expressions of disbelief that is an improper form of cross-examintion. See Williams J. in
Smith versus The Queen. If his statements are refuted by an intimation that some witness had stated to the contrary, this is an improper form of cross- examination. Whether or not it be regarded as cross-examination the statement to the accused that such and such witnesses say this or that against the accused in a material particular is an independent impropriety. If it is done to induce a confession, as it obviously was in this case, it amounts to pressure on the part of a person in authority and is calculated to deprive any supervening confession of the quality of voluntariness.

In Van Der Meer v. The Queen <case>; [62
ALJR 656] the manner of investigation was unusual. There were significant departures from good practice. The trial judge was satisfied that the will of two of the accused had not been overborne by the police officers. Three of the accused were at pains to demonstrate their own innocence. The police had conducted a rolling investigation and it was not until quite late that a reasonably clear picture emerged as to what each of the accused had done.

At 666 Wilson, Dawson and Toohey JJ stated: "In considering whether a confessional statement should be excluded, the question is not whether the police have acted unfairly; the question is whether it would be unfair to the accused to use his statement against him:
Lee, at 154; Cleland, at 18. Unfairness, in this sense, is concerned with the accused's right to a fair trial, a right which may be jeopardised if a statement is obtained in circumstances which affect the reliability of the statement." 
This passage focuses attention upon the test being whether it would be unfair to the accused to use his statement against him. This must be kept in mind.
Both Amad and Bankowski are concerned with unfairness to the accused and with the accused's right to a fair trial. I do not regard Van Der Meer as affecting the principles which have otherwise been established.

In the present case I think that the questioner has in the first interview of December 1994 transgressed permissible limits in that: a) he has tried to break down the answers of the accused by way of denial or unfavourable replies; b) there was searching questioning in which scepticisms was expressed and in which it was suggested that he was not telling the truth; c) his account of his movements, his presence at the scene and his alibi were checked and challenged. His denials were tested.
 d) when he indicated that he did not which to comment upon the allegations in the audio/visual demonstrations further questioning continued; e) he was pressed to give reasons why JL and TH would say he was the stabber when they were 'friends' of his. In their settings these were not enquiries but suggestions of guilt. It was not disclosed that JL and TH had been offered assistance with their own sentences for furnishing information that LL had been the stabber.

I regard the questioning as unfair to the accused and objectionable. I accept that LL was not an ordinary 15 year old boy. He was street wise and followed a life style akin to that of a man of 18 or 19. He was experienced in the ways of the world including those which were undesirable. At some stages he appeared to be self possessed and in control of himself and his emotions. He had had relatively little education and his general understanding was limited.
I thought that LL had a false self confidence and that he did not possess the ability to handle matters and situations of the kind here in question. His age and his limitations cannot be ignored.

By the end of the first interview on 7 December 1994 LL had not made any admission as to stabbing either or both men. At the conclusion of that interview LL was told by Det Doherty that he would be charged with murder.

After Dets Doherty and Karras withdrew from the interview room LL and HK conversed. HK did not claim to have a detailed memory. She pointed out that the conversation took place a long time ago - over 15 months. She recalled that LL told her that he had stabbed a person but not the one who was dead.
She recalled that LL said he had been kicked. She agreed that she urged LL to tell the truth. She told LL that it would be better if he told the police that he did it. He would not get such a long sentence. It seems from her evidence that she asked LL why his friends said he did it and that LL replied that he did not know why they said this. There were a number of other matters which could possibly have been said. HK's recollection did not allow her to put the various exchanges with LL into any reliable sequence.

LL said that after he and HK were left alone in the room she asked, "Did you do it?" He replied, "No" and told her that he only stabbed one man but not the one who died. She said, "Why did your friends dob you in?" He replied "I don't know?" She said words to this effect "If you did it then tell the police you did it so you don't get such a long time" (in prison). They were sad and teary. He asked her to call the policeman in but not the one with the baldy head (Karras).

LL said that when Det Doherty continued with the questions about the assertions in the video/audio demonstrations-interviews of JL and TH, he (LL) believed he had to answer those questions. This appeared to be his specific re-action to those questions. He knew that he did not have to answer questions asked by the police.

LL said that in response to her question he told HK that Det Karras had hit him and kicked his chair. He thought that this exchange occurred after LL had told HK that LL had stabbed one of the men but not the one who died and before she asked why his friends had "dobbed him in". I would not attach importance to the sequence as I doubt whether it is able to be recalled accurately. LL did not seem to be sure about the sequence. He was trying to reconstruct.

I think it is probable that HK believed and said that it was best for LL to tell the police that he did it so he would receive a lesser sentence. I doubt if she kept the two stabbings separate. I further think that she believed that with JL and TH "dobbing him in" and no apparent reason for doing so LL had little chance. She seemed a rather gentle and relatively simple person of limited understanding who was out of her depth.

LL did not know why when Det Doherty was recalled to the interview room he told the detective that he had stabbed both men. It is strange because he had just told HK that he had only stabbed one man and not the one that died.

LL agreed that he appeared to be much happier and more relaxed in the second interview of 7 December 1994. LL agreed that he was happy to have that interview and that he wanted to tell Det Doherty the truth. LL agreed that he was happy to go out to the club and point out what had occurred. During this second interview LL said that he was not sure whether he had stabbed one or two men.

During the second interview of 7 December 1994 LL spoke very quickly. He had to be asked to slow down. I am not sure that he had complete control of himself and what he was saying.

Counsel for LL also placed reliance on Det Karras conveying to LL that the police had been watching him.

The Crown submitted that even if I were satisfied that there had been conduct of the kind forbidden by [s.84](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s84.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) that conduct did not influence the admissions. The Crown contended that as LL made no admissions of guilt during the first interview of 7 December 1994 he was not influenced in making the admissions to the police subsequently by anything that happened at an earlier stage.

I think that LL had felt pressure building up on him throughout the morning of December 1994. I am not able to exclude that on balance the remarks attributed by LL to the police that they knew he had done it and that he should tell them he did it so he did not get a long sentence were not made and did not influence LL. He was shaken by seeing JL and TH "dob him in" and even more shaken by the subsequent police questioning suggesting he had not been telling the truth and by being pressed for a reason why JL and TH, as friends, would say what they did if it were untrue. LL did not have the capacity to assess and deal with the questions which he was being asked.

LL was also influenced by HK repeating the police approach of why would his friends make these comments and advising him to say he did it so he would not receive so long a sentence.

Upon considering the whole of the evidence I am not satisfied that the admisssions of LL to the police were not influenced by oppressive conduct.
Pursuant to [s.84](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s84.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) I declined to admit the documents and items earlier mentioned. I have also considered whether I should admit parts of the statements to the police. The statements to the police after the first ERISP on 7 December 1994, the second ERISP (both parts) and the demonstration and comments at the Police Boys Club followed as a result of impermissible conduct under [s.84](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s84.html) and were, in my view, influenced by that conduct. The latter half of the first
ERISP on 7 December 1994 was similarly impugned. The objections to the first half of that ERISP were not so strong. It was the prelude to the second half and an integral part of the events on that day and was impermissible.

Counsel for LL also made submissions under [s.85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html), [90](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s90.html) and [138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), 1995. It is unnecessary for me to deal with these. The offence of murder is a grave one and the admission of the evidence was critical to both the Crown and the accused. There is a powerful public interest in the detection of serious crime and offenders being prosecuted and convicted. There is also a strong public interest in persons upon arrest being taken without undue delay before a magistrate. This applies particularly to young persons and others who are not able to protect themselves. There is also a strong public interest in questioning complying with established standards. In all the circumstances I would not exercise my discretion under [s.90](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s90.html) and [138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) so as to admit the admissions to the police.

I regard the admissions made to HK as being in a different category from those made to the police.

LL told her the truth when he said that he had stabbed one person. That direct statement to her was not influenced as a result of impermissible conduct.
There are no sufficient discretionary considerations which would warrant exclusion of that statement. The balance strongly favours its admission. The circumstances were such as to make it unlikely in the extreme that the truth of that statement was adversely affected.

REGINA v. L.L.
 /95 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
Remarks On Sentence 
The accused has pleaded guilty to maliciously wounding the male victim on 24
September 1994 at Bankstown. The accused is convicted of that offence. He was born on 8 October 1979.

On the evening of 24 September 1994 the prisoner and a group of his friends went to an engagement party which was in progress at the Bankstown Police Boys
Club. The prisoner was carrying a knife. They went inside the Club and were present at the party for a period. Some of the members of the prisoner's group spoke to RA who, at their insistence, went outside with members of the prisoner's group including the prisoner. Outside the front door and in the general entrance area an argument took place between the group and RA. He was accused of being someone else. He was elbowed to the face by one of the prisoner's group. A brawl erupted between the prisoner's group and three other males (RA, the now deceased SV who was stabbed to death in the fight and the male victim of the current charge).

The victim was stabbed to the right side of his body and admitted to Liverpool
Hospital. He required emergency surgery to control the bleeding in the chest.
A lung had collapsed. If the bleeding had not been brought under control promptly the injuries received would have become life threatening. There are no mitigating circumstances as to the attack nor any discernible reason for it other than a base one.

This is a very serious offence. It is very much at the upper end of the range of offences of malicious wounding for which there is a maximum penalty of 7 years. The prisoner is fortunate that the victim was able to receive emergency surgery.

The prisoner's family escaped from Vietnam when he was about 2 years of age.
They spent about two years in a refugee camp in Hong Kong prior to coming to
Australia. The police P.16 form states that the prisoner arrived in Australia on 1 January 1982. The prisoner is said to have behaved well until he reached high school. He made friends with older boys and started to neglect his school work and behave badly. He stayed out late at nights and refused to accept his parents' instructions. Eventually his father told the prisoner that he would have to leave home. Their understanding and expression in English were poor to non-existent. The father could no longer tolerate his son's conduct. The prisoner went to live with an older sister and her husband at Punchbowl. Her command of English is very limited.

The prisoner's command of English was reasonable to quite good and better than that of the other members of his family mentioned. He would have been able to move around and mix more freely. He found his parents' restrictions and limitations irksome. The prisoner spent his nights frequenting entertainment and snooker premises and in undesirable activities. It does not appear how he financed his activities. At the time of the events in question he was not attending school, not working and not receiving social security payments.
Although only 14 he was living with his girl friend at least intermittently.
While living with his sister the prisoner did as he pleased. He was known to be associated with an Asian gang with ties around the Sydney city area.

He was taken into custody on 7 December 1994. He escaped on January 1995 and was not re-arrested until 27 April 1995. I was told that he was to be dealt with separately in respect of his escape from custody. I do not take that matter into account.

The prisoner has a poor record. On 23 February 1993 the Bidura Children's
Court, on a charge of stealing, without proceeding to a conviction, placed him on a recognisance of $10 to be of good behaviour for 6 months. On 5 July 1994 at Newtown Children's Court he was dealt with on these charges:
Assault occasioning actual bodily harm;
Violent disorder; charges of assault; charges of assault occasioning actual bodily harm.

That court dealt with the prisoner with much leniency. On each charge without proceeding to conviction he was placed on a recognisance to be of good behaviour for 12 months.

On 4 November 1994 Bidura Children's Court dealt with the prisoner on these charges: charges of armed robbery; charges of break and enter with intent to commit a felony; kidnapping.

It was agreed that each of these offences had been committed prior to 24
September 1994. The prisoner was fortunate to be treated with great leniency again. The Children's Court on each charge, without proceeding to conviction, placed him on probation for 12 months to be of good behaviour with supervision by Juvenile Justice.

It is a great pity that the prisoner was not able to learn from his previous encounters with the law and to take advantage of the leniency extended to him.

It appears that at some stage in 1994 he attended Putland School attached to the Cobham Juvenile Justice Centre. The School Principal stated in a report of November 1994 that the prisoner presented as a hard working self motivated student who made positive attempts to be involved in all aspects of learning.
He was also reportedly working hard to improve his literacy skills. His oral reading and spelling were showing pleasing progress. The report continued that the prisoner's attitude was positive towards work and that he was co-operative and friendly. Given these comments it is curious that the prisoner should have escaped on 5 January 1995.

Girrakool School is attached to Kariong Juvenile Justice Centre. The prisoner has been a pupil since 15 May 1995. During 1995 he successfully completed the
School Certificate. He is currently in Year 11 studying for his Higher School
Certificate. In his letter of 24 April 1996 the Assistant Principal has written: "[L] is a capable worker who willingly participates in the whole school curriculum. He is able to work with minimal supervision, however he will readily seek advice wherever necessary. He is an attentive listener.
 [L] has displayed admirable personal qualities during his enrolment. He has been courteous and co-operative, and able to converse with students and staff in a mature manner. He uses humour appropriately." 
The report of Mr R Stephenson, a Juvenile Justice Officer states that the prisoner while on remand at Kariong has developed new interests including sporting activities, computers and cooking. He has an active interest in art, particularly drawing. He hopes to take an art course and to pursue an art orientated occupation. He intends doing a TAFE course.

Mr Stephenson's report records that all reports from the Kariong Centre staff indicate that he is co-operative, diligent and a positive influence in the
Centre. His conduct while in custody has been classed as exemplary. He has been placed in the most trusted category of detainee. Mr Stephenson continued: "Reports from the centre and observations made by this service indicate a young person highly motivated towards improvement on a personal, educational and ultimately vocational level." 
The prisoner is regarded as a model detainee and has related well to the other young people and staff and performed with distinction on all programmes. The
Juvenile Justice Centre will accept the prisoner until he attains the age of years.

The prisoner is well supported by his large family and is visited every
Saturday and Sunday. His de-facto sister-in-law (HK) and his sister at
Punchbowl (TL) state that he is a changed person. He wants to take his new ways back into the community.

I had the opportunity of observing the prisoner at some length while he gave evidence on the voir dire as to the admissibility of certain statements made to the police most of which were recorded audio-visually. In my reasons of 1
April 1996 at p.28 I wrote, amongst other things: "I accept that [L] was not an ordinary 15 year old boy [as at 7 December ]. He was street wise and followed a life style akin to that of a man of or 19. He was experienced in the ways of the world including those which were undesirable." 
I would not be prepared to accept that there has already been a permanent change in the prisoner's ways. There are good indications that a change is taking place but there needs to be considerable time to cement a permanent change. The prisoner's shrewdness and worldliness would make him aware of the advantages of pursuing his studies and exemplary behaviour.

Counsel correctly submitted that the prisoner must be given credit for pleading guilty and I do so, I was asked to treat it as a plea of guilty at a relatively early stage. Counsel contended that until my decision holding inadmissible certain statements of the prisoner attention had been concentrated on the murder charge against the prisoner arising out of the same incident and the malicious wounding charge had not received much attention. I accept that the murder charge had occupied most attention as it was the more serious charge but the malicious wounding was also serious. I do not think that I should treat the plea of guilty as being at a relatively early stage.
Counsel also submitted that it was not an overwhelming Crown case. In my opinion there was a strong Crown case on the malicious wounding charge and an acquittal would have been most unlikely.

Counsel stressed that the prisoner had a real sense of remorse and guilt and that this was best illustrated by the changes in his behaviour. The prisoner appreciates that his conduct was unacceptable. He greatly regrets being called to account. I do not feel able to express any further opinion on this point.

Having considered the Court's power of remission under [s.20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/s20.html) of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) I am of the opinion that the gravity of the offence requires the matter to be dealt with by this court and not the Children's Court.

I turn to [s.18.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/s18.html)
This is a matter which should be dealt with according to law and not in accordance with Division 4 of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/index.html#p3) of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/). The offence is a serious one and requires a sentence in excess of that which can be imposed under Division 4, [Part .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/index.html#p3)
Further, the prisoner's maturity and lifestyle were not such as to make it appropriate for him to be given the benefit of Division 4, [Part .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/index.html#p3)
What is required is a custodial sentence in a detention centre followed be a period on parole under supervision: see R v. WKR 1993 [32 NSWLR 447] at .

Counsel for the prisoner submitted that the prime consideration was the rehabilitation of this young offender and that considerations of deterrence should play a secondary role. In 
R v. Danielson, unreported 27 June 1995 I considered the authorities relating to young offenders. I agree that rehabilitation is very important.
However, the gravity of the offence is also very important. Despite the prisoner's youth deterrence cannot be dismissed. There is a need for the personal deterrence of the offender and public deterrence. Youths must understand that they must not go looking for trouble as members of a gang.
Fights should neither be sought nor provoked. Knives must not be used. If, regrettably, a fight erupts knives must not be produced. It is highly desirable that no one should carry a knife. There have been too many fights involving gangs of youths or young men in which knives have been produced.
This must cease. Sometimes, serious injuries have been inflicted. Young offenders must realise that gang attacks will not be tolerated and that the production and use of knives merits and results in stern punishment.

I have taken into account all that has been so well advanced on behalf of the accused including his unusual background, his plea of guilty, his associating with older youths and their bad influence, his good conduct since he was returned to gaol, his application to his studies and his setting of worthwhile objectives and the strong support of his family. He has a long way to go.
Despite all that can be urged on the prisoner's behalf the gravity of the offence remains.

I expect a great deal of the prisoner's rehabilitation to take place while he his in custody. He needs to apply himself to his studies and to equip himself for useful endeavour. He must learn to accept discipline and develop his own self discipline. Cementing a permanent change will take time and much effort.
The period immediatly after release will see him being supported and supervised as he pursues his further studies and training and fits into the community.
 
The prisoner will benefit from a slightly longer than usual period of supervision. When the prisoner is eventually released the conditions should provide that he does not associate with a gang or past associates, continues with his studies and training, endeavours to obtain apt employment consistent with the demands of his studies and training, does not carry a knife and resides in approved accommodation.

I sentence the prisoner to imprisonment for 4 years 6 months comprising a minimum term of three years two months and an additional term of 16 months.
The minimum term is to commence on 28 March 1995 and to expire on 27 May 1998.
The additional term is to commence on 28 May 1998. I have back dated the sentence to allow for the periods spent by the prisoner in custody.

The period of imprisonment is to be spent by the prisoner in a Juvenile
Justice Detention Centre. I recommend that the prisoner be encouraged to study for his Higher School Certificate during 1996 and 1997 and that he then be encouraged to undertake a TAFE course or other approved studies or training.
Assuming continued good behaviour and progress and subject to any sentences for other matters then upon his release on probation in late May 1998 he will need supervision and support for 16 months. He will have to adjust to his new found freedom and his new life style.

As the prisoner is 16 years of age and RA is either 16 or 17 the restrictions on publication in s.11 of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) apply and their names may not be published.

REGINA v. L.L.
 /95 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: I now proceed and deal with the matter of The Queen versus LL. The accused has pleaded guilty to maliciously wounding the male victim on 24
September 1994 at Bankstown. The accused is convicted of that offence. I have reduced my remarks on sentence to writing. I will not read them all. There will be copies available for everybody. I now pronounce the formal sentence.

I sentence the prisoner to imprisonment for 4 years 6 months comprising a minimum term of 3 years 2 months and an additional term of 16 months. The minimum term is to commence on 28 March 1995 and to expire on 27 May 1998. The additional term is to commence on 28 May 1998. I have backdated the sentence to allow for the periods spent by the prisoner in custody. The period of imprisonment is to be spent by the prisoner in a Juvenile Justice Detention
Centre. I recommend that the prisoner being encouraged to study for his Higher
School Certificate during 1996 and 1997 and that he then be encouraged to undertake a TAFE course or other approved studies or training. Assuming continued good behaviour and progress and subject to any sentences for other matters, then upon release on probation in late May 1998 he will need supervision and support for 16 months. He will have to adjust to his new found freedom and his new lifestyle.

As the prisoner is 16 years of age and RA is either 16 or 17 the restrictions on publication in s.11 of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) apply and their names may not be published. I publish by remarks on sentence.
 * * * 
