

Regina versus Rapley Matter No Cca 60625/97 [1998] NSWSC 252 (27 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 August 1998 
REGINA versus SHEA DOMINIC RAPLEY 
CCA 60625/97 May 1998 
Studdert J, Carruthers AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against severity of sentence 
FILE NO/S: CCA60625/97 
DELIVERED: 27 May 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 27 May 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Shea Dominic RAPLEY 
JUDGMENT OF: STUDDERT J; CARRUTHERS AJ 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: A C Haesler 
Crown: D M Carmody 
SOLICITORS 
Appellant: T A Murphy 
Crown: S E O'Connor 
RESERVED/EX TEMPORE Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO OF PAGES: 10 
REGINA versus SHEA DOMINIC RAPLEY 
JUDGMENT 
CARRUTHERS AJ: Shea Dominic Rapley seeks leave to appeal against a sentence imposed upon him by his Honour Judge Herron QC at the Goulburn District Court on 11 November 1997. 
On that day the applicant pleaded guilty to an indictment containing one count under [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s112.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) , that is to say of breaking, entering and committing a felony. This offence attracts a maximum penalty of fourteen years penal servitude.

His Honour imposed a sentence by way of a minimum term of twelve months penal servitude to commence on 11 November 1997 and to expire on 10 November 1998 with an additional term of eight months to commence on 11 November 1998 and to expire on 10 July 1999. It can be seen therefore that his Honour imposed a sentence of something under one-seventh of the maximum sentence for this offence.

The applicant was born on 10 March 1975 and accordingly was twenty-two at the date of sentence. His prior record contained no relevant offences. The applicant's parents separated when he was four years old. His mother married his stepfather, Garry Rapley, when the applicant was eight years old. They made their home at Murrumbateman. The applicant left home at age sixteen and travelled around Australia. He returned to Murrumbateman for brief periods and at times lived in a caravan on a local property.

He was aware of problems in his parents' relationship, that is to say between his mother and his stepfather, and developed the suspicion that his mother might be having an affair with another man. He said that he was told on the night of 20 May 1997 that they were to separate and they were to get a divorce. He alleges that his mother said to him that she was in love with another man. She then referred to a gentleman known to the applicant who lived with his wife and two young daughters also at Murrumbateman.

According to the applicant he was deeply upset by this information. His parents in fact separated and he helped his father take some of his mother's goods to her new residence at Belconnen. This was a very emotional experience for the applicant.

On the evening of 28 May 1997 the applicant then went to the home at
Murrumbateman of the person to whom his mother had allegedly made reference.
The house was empty at the time. Then, to use his own words, the applicant "trashed the place".

According to the facts sheet before the sentencing judge, when the police were later called to the residence, they found: "Extensive damage to the entire house including holes in walls, smashed windows and mirrored doors, photographs et cetera. Every item of furniture was overturned or thrown through windows. Personal possessions were strewn about the place. Damage to the house and contents has now been estimated at $45,000." 
After approximately one hour the applicant left the remains of the house and drove indirectly to Yass Police Station where he confessed freely to what he had done. There was no question of the applicant being under the influence of drugs or alcohol at the time, although he had prior to the offence consumed a relatively small amount of alcohol.

During the course of the record of interview he was asked by the police, "Why did you kick the doors open?" The applicant replied, "Anger, frustration, hurt." He later frankly explained his conduct by reference to "hatred", a sentiment which he endorsed on more than one occasion.

The sentencing judge was beset with a problem which has perplexed those concerned with the administration of the criminal law and the sentencing of offenders since time immemorial in that he was required to sentence a young man with no relevant prior criminal record, who was unquestionably suffering from what can conveniently be called an abnormality of the mind.

The extent of the applicant's abnormality of mind can be seen from the report dated 12 June 1997 of Dr Bruce Stevens, a clinical psychologist practising in
Canberra. Dr Stevens' conclusions were expressed thus: "Mr Rapley described a sometimes lonely childhood in which he withdrew into solitary pursuits. He has not been stable in relationships with females or in his work. He has abused alcohol and drugs for extended periods but presently appears to have recovered. It is possible that he believed his family to be the one stable factor in his life and he was surprised by the separation of his mother and stepfather. I had the impression that Mr Rapley feels things deeply and tries to contain his emotions but is then at risk to explode emotionally.

I have diagnosed a long-standing depression. He meets the criteria for Major
Depressive Disorder Recurrent in the moderate to severe range. He also reported psychotic thought processes but it was not clear that he has ever had a complete psychotic breakdown. I think that he has a personality disorder either Borderline Personality Disorder which is characterised by very unstable moods and outbursts of anger or Schizotypal Personality Disorder which is characterised by psychotic symptoms, bizarre behaviour and social withdrawal.
There may need to be a psychiatric consultation to more accurately make a diagnosis of personality disorder.

It is clear that Mr Rapley has significant mood problems with his depression and attempts to contain his emotions which tends to lead to explosive outbursts. He also has difficulties with his thinking processes and it is likely that he will briefly lose touch with reality and his judgment will be very impaired." 
The contents of this report concerned the sentencing judge very much. During the course of his remarks on sentence the judge made the following relevant comments: "The worrying feature of the matter is that I am convinced that this action on the part of the defendant was partly due to his unsound mind. But it is not suggested that a defence of insanity could ever have been raised in the matter, and indeed I suppose that is illustrated by the fact that the defendant himself not only admitted to having done this damage but confessed the matter to the police." 
Later referring to the conduct of the applicant on the night in question his
Honour said: "This conduct on his behalf to my mind illustrates that he was acting in an irrational, if not an insane, manner and it is obvious that he is suffering or has suffered from a psychiatric or psychological condition which is described by Dr Bruce Stevens, a clinical psychologist, in his report of 12 June 1997." 
Then his Honour went on to refer to the fact that Dr Stevens had reported that the damage was caused whilst the defendant was suffering a depressive episode.

Later his Honour said that he would accept that the applicant's criminal activity was such that one really could fairly confidently come to the conclusion that he indeed acted irrationally and to use Dr Stevens' words "lost touch with reality".

Referring again to Dr Stevens' report his Honour said: "And I think that that seems to be the case. But the problem that confronts me is that I must protect the community against this type of offence, albeit it was the product of an irrational mind and I think that that is my main aim in all this." 
His Honour went on to state that he did not believe that he would be doing his duty to the community if he did not impose a custodial sentence, notwithstanding that the applicant has no prior relevant criminal history and there were testimonials before the judge speaking well of the applicant.

Then his Honour specifically referred to relevant subjective matters, and the plea of guilty in particular. His Honour said that he believed there were special circumstances and therefore specified the additional term of eight months as against the minimum term of twelve months.

His Honour then indicated that Dr Stevens' report should be sent to the prison authorities for their attention and that consideration should be given to care of a medical nature so far as the respondent was concerned.

We have been referred both by counsel for the applicant and counsel for the
Crown to a number of leading authorities on this difficult sentencing problem.
Counsel for the applicant has emphasised the strong subjective case for the applicant consisting of his disclosure of unknown guilt, his surrender to authorities with a plea of guilty, his lack of relevant criminal history, his mental illness and the need for treatment rather than retribution. It was argued that all this called for a sentence not involving full-time custody despite the seriousness of the offence, the damage caused to the property and the extreme distress caused to the victims of the offence. That extreme distress I might parenthetically say, is spelt out very forcefully in a victim statement which was before his Honour, referring in particular to the deleterious effect upon the two young girls living in the victim's home with their parents.

Generally it was argued for the applicant that his Honour did not appreciate the full impact of the principle that general deterrence should play a lesser role than usual in determining the appropriate sentence when the offender was affected by a depressive illness and had a mental abnormality. It was said that although his Honour referred to the applicant's mental abnormality he did not give it full weight which oversight was reflected in the full-time custodial sentence.

Particular reference was made during the course of his helpful address by Mr
Haesler to that passage where his Honour said, and I have referred to this area earlier, "But the problem that confronts me is that I must protect the community against this type of offence." Mr Haesler submitted that this passage indicates that his Honour had the question of public deterrence so much in the forefront of his mind that it totally overwhelmed the more serious sentencing consideration, namely the mental abnormality of the applicant.
That, as I understand it, is a crucial aspect of his attack upon the approach of the sentencing judge.

The case which I find, if I may respectfully say so, of most assistance in this present application is the judgement of this Court in the matter of
James Peter Engert [(1995) 84 ACrimR 67.] In that judgment Gleeson CJ gave close consideration to the sentencing principles appropriate to dealing with an offender suffering from an abnormality of mind.
The opening paragraph of the Chief Justice's judgment at p 68 merits attention. His Honour said: "Persons suffering from mental disorders frequently come into collision with the criminal justice system. Sentencing such persons commonly confronts judicial officers with the need to make a sensitive discretionary decision.
Sentencing is essentially a discretionary exercise requiring consideration of the extremely variable facts and circumstances of individual cases and the application of those facts and circumstances to the principles laid down by statute or established by the common law." 
His Honour then referred to the purposes of criminal punishment as referred to by the High Court in Veen (No 2) <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 465] at 476 where the High Court referred to those purposes as: "Protection of society, deterrence of the offender and of others who might be tempted to offend, retribution and reform." 
At p 71 of the report in Engert the Chief Justice referred to comments by
Badgery-Parker J in Letteri (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 18 March ). In that case Badgery-Parker J said: "The principle then is clear enough. It is correctly stated as follows: That whereas general deterrence is a relevant consideration in every sentencing exercise, it is a consideration to which less weight should be given in the case of an offender suffering from a mental disorder or severe intellectual handicap. In an extreme case, the proper application of this principle may produce the result that considerations of general deterrence are totally outweighed by other factors. In every case it is a matter of balancing the relevant factors in a manner no different from that which is involved in every sentencing exercise." 
The Chief Justice in his judgment in that case emphasised the concluding sentence, namely: "In every case it is a matter of balancing the relevant factors in a manner no different from that which is involved in every sentencing exercised." 
Those words are the touchstone for the sentencing exercise which Judge Herron was required to undertake and in my respectful view his Honour did undertake such a balancing exercise. This was an exercise that was undertaken no doubt during the course of a very intensive criminal sittings of the District Court in Goulburn and one would be loathe, therefore, to criticise the manner in which Judge Herron explained his thought processes. Nevertheless in the passages to which I have referred in the context of the sentencing remarks as a whole, I am completely satisfied that his Honour undertook in this difficult case the balancing exercise demanded by the authorities.

He was extremely sensitive to the abnormality of mind from which the applicant was suffering and distinguished his criminal activity, if not explicitly certainly implicitly, from much of the clear cold-blooded criminality that comes before judges in the District Court on a day-by-day basis. However, he concluded that the balancing exercise nevertheless demanded a full-time custodial sentence. He imposed what I consider to be in all the circumstances a custodial sentence, both as to the minimum term and the additional term which was well within his discretion.

Bearing in mind the objective seriousness of the offence and the maximum penalty which this offence attracts, the length of the overall sentence which his Honour imposed is itself eloquent of the fact that in the balancing exercise he was very well aware of the obligations which the authorities imposed upon him.

For these reasons I would certainly grant leave to appeal but I would dismiss the appeal.

STUDDERT J: I agree. The orders of the Court then will be as proposed by
Carruthers AJ.
 * * * 
