

Dunn versus Jerrard & Stuk Lawyers [2009] NSWSC 681 (23 July 2009) 
Last Updated: 31 July 2009 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Dunn versus Jerrard & Stuk Lawyers <case> 
This decision has been amended. Please see the end of the judgment for a list of the amendments.  
JURISDICTION: 
Common Law  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /30078  
HEARING DATE(S):  July 2009  
JUDGMENT DATE:  July 2009  
PARTIES: 
PLAINTIFFS: 
Craig Dunn 
Motor Trades Finances Prestige Leasing Pty Ltd 
Motor Trade Finances Australia Pty Ltd 
Macburg Pty Ltd  
DEFENDANT: 
Jerrard & Stuk Lawyers  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Davies J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
R E Steele (Plaintiffs) 
M Castle (Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Noble Lawyers (Plaintiffs) 
Holman Webb Lawyers (Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
COSTS - assessment - costs assessor - review panel - adequacy of reasons - basis of assessment of all disputed costs must be explained - statement of reasons must be sufficiently precise to give meaningful content to rights of appeal - sufficient to specify how disputed costs of the same kind were treated - failure to provide sufficient reasons.  
LEGISLATION CITED: 
Legal Practice Act 1996 (Vic)  [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/)  [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/)  [Legal Profession Amendment (Costs Assessment) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpaaa1998454/)  [Legal Profession Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lpr2002270/)  
CASES CITED: 
Attorney-General of New South Wales versus Kennedy Miller Television Pty Ltd <case> 
Chapman's Limited versus Yandell <case> 
Frumar versus The Owners of Strata Plan 36597 <case> 
Honest Remark Pty Ltd versus Allstate Explorations NL <case> 
Kennedy Miller Television Pty Ltd versus Lancken (Supreme Court, 1 August 1997, unreported) 
Law Institute of Victoria Ltd versus Nagle <case> 
O'Connor versus Fitti <case> 
Randall Pty Ltd versus Willoughby City Council <case> 
Victorian Lawyers RPA Limited versus Bailey <case> 
Wentworth versus Rogers <case>  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Order that the appeal pursuant to [s
KL](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208kl.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) against the decisions of the Review Panel contained in the Certificate of
Determination of Costs and the Certificate of Determination of Costs of
Review, both issued 13 March 2008, be allowed. (2)Remit these decisions to the
Review Panel.(3) Order that the Review Panel redetermine the application.
Order that the application pursuant to [s
M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208m.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) for leave to appeal against the decisions of the Review Panel identified in the
Certificate of Determination of Costs and the Certificate of Determination of
Costs of Review, both issued 13 March 2008, be dismissed.  
JUDGMENT:  - 1 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DAVIES J 
THURSDAY 23 JULY 2009 /30078 DUNN & ORS V JERRARD & STUK LAWYERS 
JUDGMENT This is an appeal under [s
L](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208l.html) [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) and an application for leave to appeal under [s
M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208m.html) of the same Act from a Certificate of Determination of Costs by Costs Review
Panel and a Certificate of Determination of Costs of Review of 13 March 2008.
 The First Plaintiff, Mr Craig Dunn, is a director of the Second Plaintiff,
Motor Trades Finances Prestige Leasing Pty Ltd in Flinders Street, Melbourne.
 Mr Dunn, MTFPL, and an associated company, Motor Trade Finances Australia
Pty Ltd (the Third Plaintiff in the present proceedings) entered into a retainer agreement with the Defendants on 29 November 2004 for the Defendants to act for MTFPL in litigation already commenced by it against Elderslie
Finance Corporation Limited and two of its directors. On 17 November 2005 the
Fourth Plaintiff, Macburg Pty Ltd, accepted that it was also responsible for paying the fees due to the Defendants.
 It appears that the retainer agreement was entered into in Victoria and, perhaps for that reason, it did not comply with all aspects of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s175.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/). It estimated the legal fees between $7,700 and $13,200 excluding filing fees and disbursements.
 It is to be noted that the proceedings in respect of which the retainer agreement was entered into had been commenced on 6 April 2004 in the Supreme
Court of Victoria. At some stage they were transferred to the Commercial List of this Court.
 The Defendants provided two updated assessments of estimated costs for the conduct of the proceedings. The first of these was on 23 August 2005 where the solicitor's professional costs were estimated at between $45,000 and $70,000.
Counsel's fees were estimated to be approximately $3,500 a day for trial and preparation.
 The second letter reassessing the costs estimate was dated 17 October 2005 and assessed professional fees of the Defendants at between $42,000 and $72,000. Those figures did not include disbursements including counsel's fees which were still estimated at $3,500 per day. Both these assessments were based on the trial lasting ten days.
 The trial commenced on 14 November 2005 before White J. There were four days of evidence from 14 to 17 November and then the matter was adjourned to 21
November for submissions, finally concluding on 23 November 2005.
 The Defendants sent invoices containing their legal fees and disbursements from 30 November 2004 to 31 March 2006. The total legal fees, including disbursements, in these invoices was $360,881.29 of which $274,437.87 was the total of the Defendants professional costs. The Plaintiffs disputed the last eleven of the invoices commencing with the one dated 27 June 2005, the final invoice being dated 31 March 2006. The total legal fees, including disbursements, in those bills was $282,125.56. The Defendants' own professional costs in those bills totalled $216,498.16.
 On about 14 June 2006 Mr Dunn through his new solicitors, Noble Lawyers of
Melbourne, made application for the assessment of costs pursuant to the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/). The costs assessor appointed was Mr Richard Gulley. During the assessment process the Second Plaintiff filed and served Submissions and Objections to the bill of costs. It is not clear why the Second Plaintiff was referred to in that document. Although Mr Dunn seems to be the only Applicant I will not hereafter distinguish the Plaintiffs.
 On 12 October 2007 Mr Gulley issued a Certificate as to Determination of
Costs together with a Statement of Reasons. The Certificate relevantly said: "The application is determined by substituting for the disputed costs as a fair and reasonable amount of costs to be paid to the practitioner the sum of: two hundred and thirty nine thousand five hundred and nine dollars and two cents - $239,509.02" 
The Reasons annexed to the Certificate (to which I will return presently) disclose that of this sum, the Costs Assessor allowed $177,863.05 professional costs to the Defendants.

The Review Panel's determination On about 5 November 2007 the Plaintiffs lodged an Application for Review of
Determination of a Costs Assessor. In due course the Review Panel was constituted and consisted of Stephen John Lancken and John Bartos.
 The next correspondence received in relation to the matter by the
Plaintiffs and their solicitors was a letter dated 13 March 2008 from the
Review Panel informing them that the Panel had completed the review determination and had forwarded to the Manager the Certificates of
Determination and Statement of Reasons.
 The Certificate of Determination of costs by Costs Review Panel was dated March 2008, referred in its heading to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/s379.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/) and relevantly said this: "1. The review is determined by affirming the certificate of determination of costs assessor Richard Gulley issued on 12 October 2007.
 . The amount assessed excludes the cost of review for which a separate certificate has issue (s 379 of the Act).
 . The panel ends the suspension of the determination of the costs assessor (s 377 of the Act).

A statement of reasons accompanies and forms part of this determination." 
It is to be noted that the Act referred to in the Certificate was the [Legal
Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/). It is not suggested that anything turns on that.
 The document annexed was entitled "Reasons for Review Determination". It is not necessary to set out the whole of the document. It is sufficient to note that it referred in the Introduction to the assessment by Mr Gulley, the identity of the review panel, the Documents that the review panel had before it, and then, in a long section headed "Grounds for Review", set out certain provisions of the 1987 Act together with a reference to a judgment of Master
Malpass (as he then was) describing the panel's role, and the grounds for making the application for review in their entirety.
 The Reasons then went on to say this: "18. The Review Panel has considered all the material submitted by the parties.
 . In this matter the Review Applicant was the person who instructed the solicitors in the litigation. Most of the submissions that he made in this review and in the assessment were non-specific. Most items were conceded and where disputed the dispute appears in most cases to be that the time claimed was excessive. It is an assessor's role to consider the time spent and apply experience to determine if the time spent and the charge therefore incurred is fair and reasonable. Assessment is not a process requiring strict proof, it is not taxation.
 . In this case, the Review Panel has (as is its obligation) applied its own expertise to the task of assessing costs and disbursements and made its own assessment as it is obliged to do (see Kells above). The Review
Panel assesses the bill in the same manner as the Costs Assessor and agrees with his assessment. The Review Panel adopts and agrees with the Assessor's reasons.
 . The Review Panel has reconsidered the Bills of costs, the subject of the Review Application.
 . In the view of the Review Panel, the original Cost Assessor's assessment of what was fair and reasonable for work reasonably performed was appropriate and the Review Panel affirms that determination." (emphasis added) The present proceedings were commenced by a summons seeking leave to appeal under Part 50 Rule12 UCPR based on <case> of the 1987 Act. There were originally eleven appeal grounds which, in substance, identified what were said to be errors of fact by the review panel including matters such as the
Panel not taking into account the Plaintiffs' objections and submissions, that the costs allowed were disproportionate to the work undertaken and the estimates given, that the determination did not have regard to what was fair and reasonable and that the costs assessor's assessment was excessive.
 Because, apparently, there was confusion about the Transitional Provisions contained in the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/), the proceedings were transferred to the District Court because it was believed that court was the court that had jurisdiction. Whilst the proceedings were in that court, the Plaintiffs were granted leave to file an Amended Summons
Seeking Leave to Appeal. The Amended Summons added para 3 under the heading "Details of Appeal" saying: "This application is also brought under [s
L](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208l.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/)".
 Further, ground 12 was added which reads: "That the Review Panel erred in law by failing to provide reasons in accordance with [s
KG](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208kg.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) and [regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/lpr288/s68.html) of the [Legal Profession
Regulations](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolreg/lpr288/) (sic) ." There may be some doubt about the procedure which was followed in that regard. No point was taken by the Defendants and I will proceed on the basis that the Amended Summons is regularly before the Court for determination.

The statutory provisions Sections 208L and 208M are as follows: "208L Appeal against decision of costs assessor as to matter of law 
A party to an application who is dissatisfied with a decision of a costs assessor as to a matter of law arising in the proceedings to determine the application may, in accordance with the rules of the Supreme Court, appeal to the Court against the decision.

After deciding the question the subject of the appeal, the
Supreme Court may, unless it affirms the costs assessor's decision: make such determination in relation to the application as, in its opinion, should have been made by the costs assessor, or remit its decision on the question to the costs assessor and order the costs assessor to re-determine the application.

On a re-determination of an application, fresh evidence, or evidence in addition to or in substitution for the evidence received at the original proceedings, may be given.

M Appeal against decision of costs assessor by leave 
A party to an application relating to a bill of costs may, in accordance with the rules of the Supreme Court, seek leave of the Court to appeal to the Court against the determination of the application made by a costs assessor.

A party to an application relating to costs payable as a result of an order made by a court or a tribunal may, in accordance with the rules of the court or tribunal, seek leave of the court or tribunal to appeal to the court or tribunal against the determination of the application made by a costs assessor.

The Supreme Court or court or tribunal may, in accordance with its rules, grant leave to appeal and may hear and determine the appeal.

An appeal is to be by way of a new hearing and fresh evidence, or evidence in addition to or in substitution for the evidence received at the original proceedings, may be given.

After deciding the questions the subject of the appeal, the
Supreme Court or court or tribunal may, unless it affirms the costs assessor's decision, make such determination in relation to the application as, in its opinion, should have been made by the costs assessor." Section 208KI provides: "208KI Appeal against determination 
Subdivision 4B applies in relation to a decision or determination of a panel under this Subdivision as if references in Subdivision 4B to a costs assessor were references to the panel.

Subject to subsection (1), the panel's determination of an application for review of a costs assessor's determination is binding on all parties to the assessment that is the subject of a review and no appeal or other review lies in respect of the determination." 
Subdivision 4B is the Part of the Act in which ss 208L and 208M are found. The effect is, therefore, that those two sections can be invoked in respect of a determination of a review panel in the same way that they can be invoked in relation to the decision of a costs assessor.
 Section 199 gives a client who is given a bill of costs the right to apply for an assessment of the whole, or any part of, those costs. Sections 207 and deal with powers and restrictions on costs assessors. In particular, s (2) provides that a costs assessor is not bound by rules of evidence and may inform himself or herself on any matter in such manner as he or she thinks fit.
 Section 208A provides: "(1) When considering an application relating to a bill of costs, the costs assessor must consider: whether or not it was reasonable to carry out the work to which the costs relate, and whether or not the work was carried out in a reasonable manner, and the fairness and reasonableness of the amount of the costs in relation to that work.

A costs assessor is to determine the application by confirming the bill of costs or, if the assessor is satisfied that the disputed costs are unfair or unreasonable, by substituting for the amount of the costs an amount that, in his or her opinion, is a fair and reasonable amount.
 ..." Section 208J provides that on making a determination, a costs assessor is to issue to each party a certificate that sets out the determination. Section
JAA then provides: "(1) A costs assessor must ensure that a certificate issued under section 208J that sets out his or her determination is accompanied by: a statement of the reasons for the costs assessor's determination, and such supplementary information as may be required by the regulations.

The statement of reasons must be given in accordance with the regulations." Clause 61(2) of the [Legal Profession Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lpr2002270/) provides: "A Statement of Reasons for a costs assessor's determination that is required by <case> of the Act to accompany a certificate under <case> of the
Act must be accompanied by the following information: the total amount of costs for providing legal services determined to be fair and reasonable, the total amount of disbursements determined to be fair and reasonable, each disbursement varied by the determination, in respect of any disputed costs, an explanation of: the basis on which the costs were assessed, how the submissions made by the parties were dealt with, ..." Section 208KA gives a party to an assessment who is dissatisfied with a determination of a costs assessor, the right to apply for a review of the determination. The review is then referred to a review panel (s 208KB).
 Section 208KC provides: "1) A panel constituted under this Subdivision may review the determination of the costs assessor and may: affirm the costs assessor's determination, or set aside the costs assessor's determination and substitute such determination in relation to the costs assessment as, in their opinion, should have been made by the costs assessor who made the determination that is the subject of the review." Section 208KF(1) provides: "On making a determination in relation to an application for review of a costs assessment under this Subdivision, a panel is to issue to each party concerned a certificate that sets out the determination." Section 208KG provides: "(1) The panel must ensure that a certificate issued under section 208KF that sets out the determination of the panel is accompanied by: a statement of the reasons for the panel's determination, and such supplementary information, in relation to the determination, as may be required by the regulations.

The statement of reasons must be given in accordance with the regulations." Clause 68 of the [Legal Profession Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/lpr2002270/) governs the requirements of the Statement of Reasons for the review panel. It relevantly provides: "(1) A Statement of Reasons for a costs review panel's determination that is required by <case> of the Act to accompany a certificate issued under s 208KF of the Act must be accompanied by the following information: the total amount of costs for providing legal services determined to be fair and reasonable, the total amount of disbursements determined to be fair and reasonable, each disbursement varied by the determination, in respect of any disputed costs, an explanation of: the basis on which the costs were assessed, and how the submissions made by the parties were dealt with, a statement of any determination as to the person by whom and the extent to which either the fee paid or payable for the application for review or the costs of the costs assessor, or both, are to be paid, ..." 
The reasons of the Cost Assessor Since the Review Panel adopted and agreed with the Assessor's Reasons (para 20 of the Review Panel's Reasons), it is important to examine those
Reasons.
 The Cost Assessor identified the eleven bills the subject of the
Assessment. He set out what material he had available to him including itemised computer print outs applicable to the bills of cost. He then said: "The first thing I am required to determine in an assessment such as this is whether the Costs Respondent made disclosure to the Costs Applicant or not as required under the Act." 
He then discussed the provisions of the Act dealing with disclosure. He noted that there was a costs agreement between the parties (presumably the first letter of 29 November 2004 referred to earlier) and concluded: "In the circumstances I find that proper disclosure in terms of the Act was made by the Costs Respondent." The Assessor then noted that the next stage of the assessment obliged him to undertake to identify the disputed costs as defined in <case> of the Act and he referred to the decision of Master Malpass (as he then was) in
O'Connor versus Fitti <case> He continued: "In this matter the Costs Applicant has filed specific objections with me and I have no difficulty in identifying the disputed costs.
 
For the purposes of understanding reductions or otherwise made by me to the costs claimed I costed the work as follows: 
I note that no objection was made by the Costs Applicant to the rates as claimed by the Costs Respondent.

The objections as filed by the Costs Applicant submit to me that the bill of costs have no reference as to the time expended or the rate applicable to the person completing the work. By the time that I came to completing my assessment the Costs Respondent had filed with me the computer printout of the
Costs Respondent which provided to me the time spent, the rate applicable and the person completing the work. I therefore did not have the problem that the
Costs Applicant did in preparing the objections and I had no difficulty in taking the objections into account.

Where there were instances of duplication I have disallowed a number of items.

The bills of costs contain a substantial number of file attendances described by the Costs Respondent "as attendance as to current issues". The
Costs Applicant objects to many of these items and I accept those objections.

I have disallowed a number of items entitled "settling correspondence" which were objected to by the Costs Applicant.

The Costs Applicant objects to many items referred to as "attendance as to security for costs". I have allowed a reasonable number of those attendances and have disallowed others.

I have taken into account the objections in relation to excessive time concerning some attendances. I have disallowed a number of the items on this basis and reduced others.

I have taken into account the concessions made by the Costs Applicant.

I have made some reductions in relation to conferences and court attendance times as claimed by the Costs Respondent.

While I have individually assessed each bill of costs I have reached a total figure in respect to both costs and disbursements otherwise the process could have been lengthened by issuing individual determinations and reasons.

In accordance with the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) and
Regulation I certify as follows: 
The total amount of costs determined by me to be fair and reasonable is the sum of $177,863.05 inclusive of GST.

The total amount of disbursements determined by me to be fair and reasonable is the amount of $61,645.97 inclusive of GST.

In relation to the disbursements I have disallowed some minor claims however I have satisfied myself as to the disbursements by perusing the invoices supplied by me." The principal complaint put forward by the Plaintiffs in argument at the hearing of the appeal concerned the failure to provide adequate reasons. The
Plaintiffs did not submit that there was an error on the Review Panel's part simply by adopting the Reasons of the Costs Assessor. The Plaintiffs argued, however, that because the Review Panel did that, whether or not they provided proper Reasons would stand or fall by the Reasons of the Costs Assessor.
 Ms Castle, who appeared for the Defendants, suggested (somewhat faintly) that what appeared in para 19 of the Review Panel's Reasons were supplementary reasons and should be read as Reasons in conjunction with the Costs Assessor's
Reasons which they adopted and agreed with in para 20. In my opinion, nothing in para 19 amounts to additional Reasons. Rather, her alternative submission, that the material in para 19 informed the Reasons (being the adoption of the
Costs Assessor's Reasons) is more likely to state the position accurately. In considering the adequacy of the Costs Assessor's Reasons I will not put out of consideration the matters in para 19 but I do not consider that they take the
Costs Assessor's Reasons any further.

The obligation to give reasons In relation to the obligation to give Reasons, clear guidance has been given by the Court of Appeal in Frumar versus The Owners of Strata Plan 36597 <case> and by White J in Cassegrain versus CTK Engineering <case>
The judgments in both those cases make some detailed reference to the judgment of Sperling J in Kennedy Miller Television Pty Ltd versus Lancken (Supreme Court, August 1997, unreported) and the judgment of the Court of Appeal upholding that decision (Attorney-General of New South Wales versus Kennedy Miller
Television Pty Ltd [(1998) 43 NSWLR 729).] At the time of Sperling J's decision the legislation did not, in terms, require that a costs assessor should give reasons for his assessment. However,
Sperling J said (at 29-30): "In the case of a costs assessment, in the absence of reasons disclosing which items have been reduced, by what amount and for what reason or reasons in each case, an error of principle or a simple mistake (such as in arithmetic or looking at the wrong scale) or some other error of legal principle or of fact could go undetected and usually would. In the absence of reasons, the appeal rights provided by the statute would be ineffectual in the case of error of the most ordinary kind.
 
It cannot have been intended by the parliament that an error of law or an error of fact affecting the result should pass without remedy under a scheme which provides for an appeal in relation to a matter of law and leave to appeal generally. I would hold, for this reason, that there is an implied statutory obligation on the part of a costs assessor to provide reasons such as I have mentioned." His Honour said further (at p. 34): "Because of the appeal provisions in the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), I hold that a costs assessor is bound to give reasons for his determination, specifying the items which have been reduced, by what amount and for what reason in each instance." In Frumar, the Court of Appeal was considering the provisions under the Act after the amendments made by the [Legal Profession Amendment (Costs
Assessment) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpaaa1998454/) which is substantially the form of the Act now under consideration.
 Giles JA with whom Beazley JA and Ipp JA agreed said: "[42] The submissions did not address whether the reasons required by s
KG of the Act were only those to be given in accordance with the regulations. Proper compliance with reg 68(1) would be likely to fulfil the obligation under <case>, but would not necessarily do so; I incline to the view that the Regulation expressed a minimum extent of the reasons, with the possibility of a greater necessary extent if the circumstances so required.
But I do not think that in the present case it matters, and it is not necessary to come to a conclusion.
 [43] The extent of the obligation, whether by explication of reg 68(1) or by giving content to <case>, is informed by the general law concerning the duty of judicial officers to give reasons for their decisions discussed in cases such as Soulemezis versus Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd [(1987) 10 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281987%29%2010%20NSWLR%20247 "View LawCiteRecord" ), Mifsud versus Campbell [(1991) 21 NSWLR 725] and
Beale versus Government Insurance Office of New South Wales [(1997) 48 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281997%29%2048%20NSWLR%20430 "View LawCiteRecord" ) The extent of a judicial officer's duty depends on the circumstances.
Whether or not a costs assessor and a panel are acting administratively or judicially, which was left open in Attorney-General of New South Wales v
Kennedy Miller Television Pty Ltd, the extent of their duties must take into account the different nature of their task and their roles as legal practitioners bringing to bear their experience and judgment in evaluation of what work was reasonable and what is a fair and reasonable amount of costs; but it is also moulded by the basis for the obligation to give reasons in
Attorney-General of New South Wales versus Kennedy Miller Television Pty Ltd, thereafter taken up by the legislature.
 [44] The reasons must be such that a party dissatisfied with the costs assessor's or panel's determination "should have a real and not largely illusory right of appeal". These words in Attorney-General of New South Wales v Kennedy Miller Television Pty Ltd at 735 were qualified by "in regard to questions of law at least", but in my respectful opinion they apply equally to questions of fact: questions of whether the time engaged or an hourly rate are reasonable can be very important, and although subject to leave <case> permitted an appeal on those questions. The filter for an appeal as to fact is the Court's decision as to leave, not the cost assessor's or panel's expression of reasons, and whether leave should be granted can only be decided if it is known why the determination was made.
 [45] The delay and expense of an excessively onerous obligation to provide reasons is material, particularly when assessment of costs by costs assessors was intended to provide a faster, easier and cheaper system. In my opinion, however, the observations of Meagher JA in Beale versus Government
Insurance Office of New South Wales at 444 are applicable; that the balancing act in considering the sufficiency of a statement of reasons "involves the adoption of, at the least, a minimum standard which places the parties in a position to understand why the decision was made sufficiently to allow them to exercise any right of appeal"." Having then examined what the Costs Assessor and subsequently the Review
Panel did, Giles JA went on to say: "[59] It can not be seen from the costs assessor's reasons what work in items in the bill of costs, being co-ordination work or reporting work or perhaps other work, was thought by the costs assessor to have been unreasonably carried out. Indeed, it does not seem that the costs assessor identified that work and, applying the hourly rates, deducted an amount from the profit costs, whilst inferentially accepting that the rest of the itemised legal services had been reasonably provided. Rather, he seems to have begun again with his own assessment of an overall fee based on what he considered was reasonable work to be carried out. Since his assessment was less than the $79,492.20 in the bill of costs, and in the light of what he said about coordination work and reporting work, he did not accept that the whole of the work in the bill of costs was reasonably carried out. But it can not be seen what work the costs assessor thought was or was not reasonable work to be carried out, including by way of coordination work and reporting work, or its relationship to the work in the items in the bill of costs.
 [60] The panel's reasons do not make good these difficulties in the costs assessor's reasons. They add to them. The panel endorsed the costs assessor's reasons as setting out the basis for his determination, and his approach of assessing the bill of costs "as a whole" (under Ground 5), but in conducting its own assessment arrived at a relatively precise amount of $63,833 in lieu of the round figure. It can not be seen what work in the items in the bill of costs the panel thought was unreasonably carried out, or what work it thought was reasonable work to be carried out independently of the itemisation in the bill of costs and its relationship to the work in the items in the bill of costs. Maybe it accepted that the hourly rates were reasonable and applied them, but it did not say so: at least on the surface, in making its own assessment the panel could have applied different hourly rates.
 [61] The relatively precise amount suggests a calculation or an addition of items, but this is not explained. The assessment may or may not have been by adjustment of the bill of costs, but if it was the adjustments were not identified and if it was not there was no more than an end figure. The panel stated a figure as the result of its assessment and asserted that it was "in all the circumstances" a fair and reasonable amount of costs, but the content can not be seen.
 [62] In my opinion, this fell short of providing a statement of reasons for the panel's determination as required by <case> of the Act, and fell short of providing the explanation required by reg 68(1)(d). If either the claimant or the opponent wished to appeal to the Supreme Court, he or it could not do so when he or it did not know - whether the panel's assessment had been by taking the itemised bill of costs and allowing, disallowing or adjusting items, or by coming to its own view of work reasonable to be carried out; if the former, what items had been allowed, disallowed or adjusted and whether as to hourly rate or reasonable times or for some other reason; or if the latter, what work the panel thought reasonable and how it costed the carrying out of the work.
 [63] The claimant would need to know for appeal as to a matter of law pursuant to <case> of the Act, but plainly also for appeal pursuant to s
M. If the claimant had contemplated disputing the extent of unreasonable charging accepted by the costs assessor to have occurred in relation to coordination work and reporting work, how could he have done when he did not know what coordination work or reporting work had been excluded from the claim in the bill of costs, or what coordination work or reporting work the costs assessor had included in his own assessment as reasonable work to be carried out; or what the panel had done in these respects? How could he do so if he did not even know whether the panel had also accepted that there had been unreasonable charging in relation to coordination work and reporting work? The opponent also had an interest in the reasons, since it might have wanted to appeal against the cutting down of its costs, and it was equally in the dark." Cassegrain was an appeal under the provisions of the [Legal Profession
Act 2004](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/) but those provisions are relevantly identical with the provisions in the 1987 Act with which I am concerned. In that case White J noted (at [76]) that save in relation to an issue concerning the GST: "The panel contented itself with saying that it adopted and agreed with the reasons of the assessor".
 White J, having set out paras 59 to 63 from the Court of Appeal's judgment in Frumar, went on to say (and it is to be noted that in Cassegrain there were bills of costs): "[88] The present is not so extreme a case as was Frumar. It appears from the assessor's reasons at page 2 quoted in [44] above that he formed his own view of the work which was reasonable to be carried out and did so using the bill of costs as a guide. However, it appears from later in his reasons that he reached his ultimate assessment by making reductions to items claimed in the bill. One can identify from the assessor's reasons what hourly rates were considered to be reasonable and one can identify the kinds of work (classified by description, but without individual itemisation), where the charges claimed have been reduced. By recourse to the bill of costs and the parties' submissions, coupled with the assessor's statement as to the extent to which he preferred the submissions for the plaintiffs, one can identify the parameters of the reductions made. There remains uncertainty as to whether any reduction was made for the solicitors' costs on attendance at the hearings before Windeyer J. It is also not possible to say by what amounts there was a reduction from the costs claimed in respect of: attendances to file documents; attendances at conferences attended by the senior solicitor and the paralegal together; the derivative action; the security for costs application; attendances to send non-urgent facsimile transmissions, and preparation of the bill of costs.
 [89] It is also not clear whether any reduction was made in response to the objection to duplication of work between solicitors and counsel, excessive consultation with counsel and unnecessary attendances on the plaintiffs' father. The assessor said that "in the main" he rejected the submissions made on behalf of Claude Cassegrain in these respects. That implies that to some extent the submission was accepted. It is not possible to say how this was reflected in the costs allowed.
 [90] If the obligation to give reasons requires the specification of items which have been reduced, by what amount, and for what reason, in each instance (Kennedy Miller Television Pty Ltd versus Lancken per Sperling J), then it is clear that the reasons were inadequate. Mr Beech-Jones SC for the plaintiffs submitted that it was never intended when the system of taxation of costs was replaced with a system of assessment that a costs assessor should act as a taxing officer upholding, reducing or rejecting individual items of bills of costs. So far as that submission goes, I agree with it. It was not necessary for the assessor to indicate by reference to each of the 1,313 items in the bill of costs which was accepted, which rejected and which varied, and in the latter case, by what amount. However, it was incumbent on the assessor to specify the amount of the reductions for the matters in [88] above, whether costs were reduced for attendances at the hearing before Windeyer J, and if so by what amount, and whether any, and if so what, costs were reduced by reference to the three submissions which were rejected only "in the main".
By way of example, it would have been sufficient in my view for the costs assessor to say that instead of the amount claimed of $597 for attendances to file documents he allowed $200 (if that were the figure). It would have been sufficient for him to have said that he reduced the costs claimed by a particular amount where he considered there had been duplication in attendances of the senior solicitor and the paralegal at conferences.
Likewise, it would have been sufficient to say that he reduced costs by a particular amount in respect of the derivative action or the security for costs application. Without such specificity neither Claude Cassegrain nor the plaintiffs can know how their submissions on these areas of disputed costs were ultimately dealt with (reg 128(1)(d)(ii)).
 <case> ... In Frumar, Giles JA noted that that case provided no warrant for a panel (or assessor) making little more than a statement of the amount which was considered to be fair and reasonable (at [64], 335-336).
 [92] Both the costs assessor and the panel considered that the reasons were sufficient because in Frumar the Court of Appeal recognised the legitimacy of the approach of an assessor making his or her own assessment of what work was reasonable to be carried out without undertaking a taxation or a point-by-point analysis of an itemised bill of costs. However, in Frumar (at [62]), Giles JA emphasised that where an assessor proceeds by coming to his or her own view as to the work reasonable to be carried out, rather than by allowing, disallowing or adjusting items in an itemised bill of costs, it is necessary, in order that both parties be able to exercise rights of appeal, that they be informed what work the costs assessor thought to be reasonable and how he or she costed the carrying out of the work. The same applies to a panel. Where the costing of such work is made by reference to adjustments to items in a bill of costs, it is essential for the assessor or the panel to quantify the adjustments made in respect of costs that are disputed. That does not necessarily entail a line-by-line taxation of a bill. But it does require specification of what are disputed costs, for example, by reference to costs of a certain kind, and an explanation of what costs were allowed, or what was the amount of reduction from claimed costs, in respect of costs of that kind.
In my view, the costs assessor's reasons and the panel's reasons for allowing solicitors' profit costs in the sum of $119,859.95 are inadequate." 
The Review Panel process Before turning to consider the Costs Assessor's Reasons in the present case I should deal with a submission by the Defendants concerning the process that the Panel properly goes through by virtue of <case>. The submission is that there is a two stage process the first stage of which results in a decision and the second stage of which, if reached, results in a determination. It is only if the second stage is reached, on the basis of this submission, that the obligation to comply with <case> and clause 68 of the
Regulation is triggered.
 This two stage process is said to have been identified by Malpass AsJ in
Honest Remark Pty Ltd versus Allstate Explorations NL <case>
Malpass ASJ said: "[12] This structure reveals an intention that the first task for the panel is to conduct the review. Subject to any relevant statutory provision, rule or regulation, this is generally done by way of having a "second look" at the determination of the costs assessor. Such a process will see the panel having regard to the material that was before the costs assessor and the reasons for the determination.
 [13] After the review has been undertaken, the panel then has the two options set forth in (a) and (b) of subs (1).
 [14] If the panel decides on the second option, it is to conduct an assessment in the manner required by subs (3). ..." That analysis suggests that subs (3) only operates in the event that the
Review Panel decides to set aside the Costs Assessor's determination. However, with great respect to his Honour, subs (3) must concern itself with the whole process referred to in <case> because subs (3) refers to "the review" which is what <case> deals with generally. Under that sub-section, the panel is reviewing the determination of the Costs Assessor.
 The Defendants' submission on the two stage process then draws support from the later decision of Johnstone DCJ in Randall Pty Ltd versus Willoughby City
Council <case>
In that case the Defendant submitted that <case> (the identical provision to s 208KC(2)) only operates if and when the Review Panel has set aside the Costs
Assessor's determination under subs (1)(b) and proceeds to substitute its own determination. That was the submission being made in the present case by the
Defendants also. What is said to flow from that, as was submitted in
Randall, is that the Review Panel is only required to issue a statement of reasons and any supplementary information required by the regulations under s
KG where a certificate has been issued under <case>. It is said, therefore, that where the Review Panel merely affirms the Costs Assessor's determination under <case>(a), reasons are not mandatory (see Randall at [12]).
 Johnstone DCJ noted that the submission was based on there being a two stage process to <case> and it was in that context that he considered what
Malpass AsJ had said in Honest Remark. However, Johnstone DCJ took the matter further and said this: "[15] In the context of the present appeal, it is clear that the Review
Panel only undertook the first stage of the process. It follows that the plaintiff's grounds of appeal must fail insofar as they complain that the
Review Panel did not conduct the review in accordance with its statutory function as required by <case> of the LPA 2004 [208KC(2) of the 1987 Act], because it never got that far. The question then becomes, did the Review Panel undertake the first stage of the review under [s 208KC(1)] adequately, and were its reasons adequate, assuming it was required to provide any reasons at all.
 [16] What now falls to be considered in these proceedings is the practical effect of that two stage process of review, and what is required of the Review Panel when undertaking the first stage of the review, namely deciding whether to affirm or set aside the determination of the Costs
Assessor. There is no relevant statutory provision, rule or regulation that informs what Associate Justice Malpass describes as "a second look", except the Form that has been promulgated pursuant to which a review application is initiated. Obviously the decision will involve something different from the full re-determination contemplated by [s 208KC(2)]." With the greatest of respect to Johnstone DCJ I consider that this analysis is flawed. Although it may be true to say that, in the first instance, the
Review Panel must look at the Costs Assessor's decision to see if it wishes to affirm it or to set it aside, and if it does the latter it then needs to proceed to determine the costs assessment itself, nothing in subs (2) or (3) of <case> suggests that those functions apply only to the second stage. Those sub-sections both refer to either "the application for review" or "the review [that is to be conducted]", and that is what the whole of subs (1) is concerned with. It is only after the Review Panel has reviewed the Costs
Assessor's determination that it forms its first opinion whether to affirm it or to set it aside.
 Secondly, even if some distinction is to be drawn by the use of the two words "decision" and "determination" in ss 208KI, 208L to 208NB, the certificate required under <case> is one made when the Review Panel makes a determination "in relation to an application for review" which must be a reference back to <case> and in turn to <case>. It is noteworthy that s
KF(2) commences with the words "If the panel sets aside the determination of the Costs Assessor", suggesting that <case> is not solely concerned with that eventuality but includes a decision to affirm the Costs Assessor's determination under <case>(a).
 Ultimately, the Defendants in the present case accepted that, even if the distinction they made between "decision" and "determination" was correct, there would be an obligation to give reasons at common law why the decision was made by the Panel to affirm the Costs Assessor's determination. Whilst that would arguably mean that clause 68 of the Regulation did not need to be complied with, the common law reasons would need to satisfy at least what
Sperling J said in Kennedy Television and Frumar at [43].
 If I am wrong in rejecting the distinctions made by Johnstone DCJ in
Randall, the alternative view must be that the Court is required to examine the reasons of the Costs Assessor in circumstances where a review panel has no obligation to provide reasons (whether at common law or by statute) and did not do so as in the present case. Otherwise, the appeal rights that are clearly available by virtue of <case> would be rendered illusory for the reasons already discussed in the authorities.

Were the Costs Assessor's reasons adequate? The bills on which the assessment was made were not bills of costs in the old terminology. That is to say, they were not itemised bills but they merely listed what was done on each day with the total at the end.
 The approach of the Plaintiffs when preparing the Submissions and
Objections to the Costs Assessor was to go through each item listed by reference to the date of the item and to put alongside it a code (a number from 1 to 6) which had been given a specific meaning. The code was set out in the section headed "Objections" as follows: "The Tax Invoices are not prepared in a Taxable Form and are not referenced by an item number so the objections have been referenced to the date for each item billing.
 
The items of work as listed on the Tax Invoices have no reference as to time spent or the rate applicable to the person completing the work therefore there is no actual cost for each listed in the bill.

The basis of disputing the item of work is as follows: = no instructions were given to perform the work.
 = there was no requirement to perform the work.
 = the work could have been performed by secretarial staff rather than a legal practitioner.
 = the amount of time taken to perform the work was excessive and therefore the amount charged was excessive.

Work not disputed.
 = Not disputed conceded at six minutes per item.

Disbursements = Copy of tax invoice required in order to assess the charge." Item 5, which assumed some importance, was intended to mean that the identified work was done but should not have taken any more than one unit of six minutes. Pages 4-28 of the Submissions and Objections consisted of the application of the code to each date item in the eleven disputed bills.
 As the Costs Assessor noted, because of the specific objections filed by the Plaintiffs, there was no difficulty in identifying the disputed costs and the Cost Assessor noted further that he had no difficulty in taking the objections into account. However, precisely how he did that is shrouded in the generality of such statements as: "I have disallowed a number of items" of duplication (para 3); "I have disallowed a number of items" relating to settling correspondence objected to by the Plaintiffs (para 5); "I have allowed a reasonable number" of attendance as to security for costs "and have disallowed others." (para 6); "I have disallowed a number of the items" concerning "some attendances" and "reduced others (para 7); "I have made some reductions" relating to conferences and court attendance (para 9).
 This approach does not accord with what Sperling J said in Kennedy Miller (paras 39 and 40 above) nor with what Giles JA said in Frumar at [60] to [63] (para 43 above) is required.
 To compound the error the Costs Assessor then went on to say that although he had individually assessed each bill of costs, he simply reached a total figure for both costs and disbursements to avoid what he said would have lengthened the process by issuing individual determinations and reasons.
Identifying how he dealt with each bill would have been a useful step along the way of elucidating his reasoning.
 In short, therefore, the Plaintiffs do not know from the reasons of the
Costs Assessor: which instances of duplication were disallowed; which items entitled "settling correspondence" were disallowed; (c ) which items entitled "attendances to security for costs" were disallowed; which items in relation to excessive time concerning some attendances were disallowed; what the reductions were in relation to conferences and court attendance times; how much each bill was reduced by.
 In relation to disbursements the Costs Assessor said that he had "disallowed some minor claims" but had otherwise satisfied himself as to the disbursements by looking at the invoices. From this, the Plaintiffs do not know which disbursements were disallowed. This was in clear breach by the
Costs Assessor of clause 61(2)(c) of the Regulation and, subject to the argument raised by the Defendants about the two stage process, a breach by the
Review Panel of clause 68(1)(c).
 Even if it is accepted that the two stage process identified in Honest
Remark and developed in Randall is correct, and there was no statutory obligation to provide reasons by the Review Panel, this would not affect the conclusion that I have reached in relation to the solicitor's costs (as opposed to the disbursements). Ms Castle conceded that, even if the two stage argument in all its fullness was correct, there was a common law duty to provide reasons as to why a decision had been made to affirm. The position is, therefore, that the Review Panel failed in its duty to provide those common law reasons. Alternatively, it is left with the reasons of the Costs Assessor which clearly do not satisfy the common law test as formulated by Sperling J and approved subsequently, nor the obligations imposed by <case> and clause (2) of the Regulation.
 Ms Castle properly conceded that if I held that the reasons of the Review
Panel were inadequate that would amount to an error of law. I have found that, by the process the Review Panel adopted, it is the Costs Assessor's Reasons which must be judged as adequate or not. For the reasons I have given, the
Reasons of the Costs Assessor were inadequate whether judged by the requirements of <case> and clause 61 or judged by what the common law required independently of those statutory provisions. Both parties accepted that if such an error of law was found the assessment would need to be remitted to the Review Panel so that the Review Panel could properly carry out its responsibilities pursuant to <case> and the following sections.

Leave to appeal The Plaintiffs also seek leave to appeal based on two matters. First, it is said in relation to the concession made by the Plaintiffs in Item 5 of the code contained in the Submissions and Objections that the Costs Assessor made an error of fact in determining what was disputed and conceded. What the
Plaintiffs submitted was that the Costs Assessor mistakenly viewed the
Plaintiffs' concessions as general concessions to the relevant items, such that he did not assess those items at all. The Submission was based on the inference that the Costs Assessor would not have been able to reduce the professional costs by as little an amount as he did if the concession had been properly understood given the number of times that code 5 was placed against items in the bills.
 Given the inadequate detail contained in the Costs Assessor's Reasons, I do not think it is possible for me to come to a view one way or the other about whether this ground would be made out if leave were granted. However, as the whole determination will be remitted to the Review Panel, I do not intend to say anything further about this ground.
 Secondly, it is said that there is an error of fact about the conclusion that there was adequate disclosure within the meaning of <case> of the Act.
Since the Costs Assessor's conclusion was that there was a proper costs disclosure (in accordance with <case>) it is likely that this at least (if made out) is a mixed error of fact and law. The significance of it is that under s if a legal practitioner fails to make a disclosure of the matters required to be disclosed by <case>, the client is not obliged to pay the costs unless the costs have been assessed and the costs of the assessment are payable by the legal practitioner seeking to recover the costs. Section 208A(4) goes on to provide that in such circumstances the Costs Assessor is to determine the amount of the costs of the Costs assessment and the costs are to be deducted from the amount payable under the bill of costs.
 The Plaintiffs submitted that there was not adequate disclosure in accordance with <case> because subs (2)(d) was not complied with. Sub-section (d) provides: "(2) The following matters are to be disclosed to the client: ...
 the client's rights under Division 6 in relation to a review of costs," ..." The issue turned on whether the Defendants were practising law in New South
Wales. In that regard, <case> provides: "(1) A person who holds a current interstate practising certificate issued or given by a regulatory authority in any other State or a Territory is, by and subject to this Act, entitled to practise law in this State: as if the interstate practising certificate were a practising certificate issued under Part 3 by the Bar Council or the Law Society Council, ...

Without limiting anything in this Part, a person is entitled to practise law in this State only if the person does so: in compliance with any applicable requirements of this and any other
Act relating to the practice of law that would apply to a local legal practitioner holding a practising certificate to which conditions corresponding to those attached to the interstate practising certificate were attached, ..." If the Defendants were practising law in New South Wales, subs 2(a) would suggest that they were obliged to comply fully with <case> in making their costs disclosure.
 The principles concerned with applications for leave to appeal under <case> have been discussed in Chapman's Limited versus Yandell <case> and Wentworth versus Rogers <case>
In the former case, it was said (at [12]) that the enquiry is whether there is some other matter (apart from the right to appeal from an error of law) which in justice requires that leave to appeal be granted to allow that matter to be re-litigated. If leave is granted, an appeal is to be by way of new hearing with the availability of fresh evidence being led (s 208M(4)).
 At the hearing before me, little attention was given to the factual basis for the assertions that the Defendants either did or did not practise law in
New South Wales by virtue of having acted for the Plaintiffs in this litigation. The evidence in Mr Dunn's affidavit was vague as to when the proceedings were transferred to this Court from the Supreme Court of Victoria and, in particular, how that occasion related in time to the retainer of the
Defendants by the Plaintiffs in November 2004. There was certainly evidence that a senior associate of the Defendants and, at times, a partner of the
Defendants, was present in Court in Sydney to instruct counsel and to confer with the client and counsel at other times. It is not clear how much of the trial preparation work done by the Defendants was done in Sydney or Melbourne.
There are occasional references in the disputed memoranda of costs to attendances in Sydney to confer with counsel and to instruct in Court. All of this material is very general and does not permit any proper conclusion on the factual matters concerned with the issue of whether or not the Defendants were practising law in New South Wales.
 Certainly a prima facie inference is available that in conferring as solicitors with counsel in Sydney and instructing at the hearing in this Court in Sydney, the Defendants were practising law in New South Wales. But there is little guidance as to what amounts to "practising" law in a particular place.
Victorian decisions such as Victorian Lawyers RPA Limited versus Bailey <case> and Law Institute of Victoria Ltd versus Nagle <case> provide only limited assistance particularly because <case> of the Legal
Practice Act 1996 (Vic) which prohibits a person from engaging in legal practice in Victoria unless the person is admitted and holds a Practicing
Certificate, provides in subs (4): "For the purposes of this section engaging in legal practice may consist of a single act." 
There does not appear to be anything in the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) equivalent to <case> - certainly [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s25.html) and [48B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s48b.html) which deal with the right to practise and the need for a practising certificate do not attempt to define what "practice" might be constituted by.
 Because of the absence of evidence about this matter and because, as I have found, the determination of the Review Panel will be remitted to it because of the error of law already found, I consider it is inappropriate to grant leave to appeal in respect of this matter (see in this regard Cassegrain at [130]). It would be open to the Plaintiffs to apply to the Review Panel to make submissions or tender further evidence under [ss
KC(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208kc.html) and [208L](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208l.html)(3) and, in light of the history of the costs assessment process in this matter, the Review Panel may consider it appropriate to receive further submissions and evidence although the decision is ultimately one for the Review Panel under [s
KC(3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208kc.html) 
Orders For these reasons I make the following Orders: 
Order that the appeal pursuant to [s
L](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208l.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) against the decisions of the Review Panel contained in the Certificate of
Determination of Costs and the Certificate of Determination of Costs of
Review, both issued 13 March 2008, be allowed.

Remit these decisions to the Review Panel.

Order that the Review Panel redetermine the application.

Order that the application pursuant to [s
M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208m.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) for leave to appeal against the decisions of the Review Panel identified in the
Certificate of Determination of Costs and the Certificate of Determination of
Costs of Review, both issued 13 March 2008, be dismissed.
 I will hear the parties on costs.
 
AMENDMENTS:  /07/2009 - Changed title of matter from all capitals to proper format -
Paragraph(s) Title page  /07/2009 - Paragraph 75 Order 1 amended - section 208L of [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) was incorrectly typed as [s
KL.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208kl.html) - Paragraph(s) 75  
LAST UPDATED:  July 2009 * * * 
