

Hokit Pty Ltd and Ors versus Banno and Ors No. 50220/94 [1995] NSWSC 11 (28
August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
GILES CJ Comm D
HRNG
SYDNEY, 18-20 April 1995 #DATE 7:7:1995 #ADD :8:1995 
Counsel for the plaintiffs:      Mr I Barker QC/Mr R E Dubler 
Instructed by:            Messrs
Corrs Chambers Westgarth 
Counsel for the third defendant:   Mr B C Oslington QC/Mr N Rein 
Instructed by:       
Messrs Dibbs Crowther and
Osborne
ORDER
Judgment for the plaintiff
JUDGE1
GILES
CJ Comm D:  The plaintiffs Hokit Pty Ltd (Hokit), Ryntip Pty Ltd and Maurice A Cordony and Sons Pty Ltd (Cordony) had cheque accounts with the third defendant National Australia Bank Ltd (the Bank). The first defendant Mrs Joanne Banno was employed by one or other of the plaintiff's and acted as their bookkeeper and office administrator. The Bank paid a large number of cheques drawn on the accounts bearing forged signatures of the authorised signatories; in addition, it paid two cheques drawn on the account of
Cordony which had no signatures at all. The plaintiff's alleged that Mrs
Banno had forged the signatures and caused the unsigned cheques to be negotiated. Some of the cheques bearing forged signatures had discharged liabilities of the plaintiff's, but many had not. The plaintiff's claimed from
Mrs Banno and from the Bank the amounts of the cheques which had not discharged their liabilities.
 
The cheques in more detail
Mr Peter Cordony and Mr Mark Cordony operated through Cordony a hairdressing salon at Parramatta and through Ryntip two hairdressing salons at
Castle Hill. Through two other companies, Fynoss Pty Ltd and Liberty Salons
Pty Ltd, they operated about seventeen other hairdressing salons in Sydney and surrounding centres. The group of companies was administered from an office at
Parramatta, consisting of one large room occupied by Mr Peter Cordony, Mr Mark
Cordony, and an administration manager
Ms Debbie Ward. Approximately ninety employees worked at the various salons, each of which had a manager and staff.
Ms Ward proposed to leave in early 1990, and advertisements were placed for a bookkeeper/business administrator. Mrs Banno was one of the applicants.
She was then aged nineteen, had completed the School Certificate, and had worked for thirteen months as a bullion settlement clerk with Macquarie Bank and twelve months as a settlement reconciliation clerk with Funds Transfer
Services. She was interviewed by Mr Peter Cordony and Ms Ward. They were impressed by her references, and she was taken on from a time in February .

Mr Peter Cordony and Mr Mark Cordony were the authorised signatories on the account of Ryntip. Together with their father Mr Maurice
Cordony, they were the authorised signatories on the account of Cordony. Of the cheques in respect of which the plaintiffs claimed, in the period July 1990 to August cheques bearing the forged signatures of Mr Peter Cordony were paid from the accounts of Ryntip (a total of $7,920.55) and Cordony (a total of $7,225.59) and a cheque bearing the forged signature of Mr Mark Cordony was paid from the account of Cordony ($222.51).
In the latter part of 1991 there was a division of the salons between Mr
Peter Cordony and
Mr Mark Cordony. Mr Peter Cordony took about half the salons operated through Fynoss Pty Ltd and Liberty Salons Pty Ltd. Mr Mark
Cordony took the salons operated through Cordony and Ryntip and the other salons operated through Fynoss Pty Ltd and Liberty Salons
Pty Ltd, in the case of the latter salons taking up their operation through Hokit. From about October 1991
Mr Mark Cordony had effective control of Cordony and Ryntip and control of
Hokit. Mrs Banno continued in her employment at the Parramatta office, administering the changed group of companies through which Mr Mark Cordony operated hairdressing salons.
Mr Mark Cordony and Mr Maurice Cordony continued as the authorised signatories on the account of Cordony, Mr Mark Cordony became the sole authorised signatory on the account of Ryntip, and Mr Mark Cordony and his wife Mrs Vicki Cordony were the authorised signatories on the account of
Hokit. Of the cheques in respect to which the plaintiff's claimed, in the period October 1991 to May 1994 cheques bearing the forged signatures of Mr
Mark
Cordony were paid from the account of Hokit (a total of $356,862.03),
Ryntip (a total of $125,208.62) and Cordony (a total of $71,591.49).
In
October and November 1993 the Bank paid two unsigned cheques drawn on the account of Cordony (a total of $628.78).
In late
May 1994 Mr Mark Cordony had difficulty in obtaining from Mrs
Banno records of bankings earlier in that month from one of the salons.
He was suspicious, and examined Hokit's cheque books. Noting a cancelled cheque, he asked the Bank to produce it, and upon production found what he thought was his forged signature on a cheque to Holiday Inn Crown Plaza. He knew that Mrs
Banno had recently been at the Holiday Inn Crown Plaza, and concluded that she was the forger. He found other forged signatures. In early June 1994 he challenged
Mrs Banno, and she confessed to taking money but said that she did not know how much money she had taken. There was then a full investigation.
The forged cheques were of various kinds. In some cases the cheque butts recorded a cancelled cheque with nil value but the cheques were in fact made out and negotiated. In other cases the cheques were made out to different payees (including to cash), for different amounts, or both, from the payees and amounts recorded on the cheque butts. The payees recorded on the cheque butts were appropriate for normal business expenditure. In other cases again, in relation to cash wages cheques, the cheques were made out for different amounts from the amounts recorded on the cheque butts. It should be remembered that as well as cheques of these kinds there were forged cheques - cheques signed in the name of Mr Peter Cordony or Mr Mark Cordony - which went to pay legitimate expenses of the plaintiff: presumably the payees and amounts on these cheques corresponded with the payees and amounts recorded in the cheque butts. As I have said, the plaintiffs did not claim in respect of the lastmentioned cheques.
The plaintiff's claimed in respect of a total of 479 cheques bearing forged signatures, of which 244 were drawn on the account of Hokit, 153 were drawn on the account of Ryntip, and 82 were drawn on the account of Cordony.
The total amount for which the plaintiffs claimed, after allowing for the "genuine" amount of the cash wages cheques on the basis that they also went to pay legitimate expenses of the plaintiff's, was $569,030.79, plus the two unsigned cheques.
There was uncontested evidence that the forged signatures were forged, in the sense that they were not the signatures of Mr Peter Cordony or Mr Mark
Cordony, that the relevant cheque butts were completed in the handwriting of
Mrs Banno, and that the payees, amounts and other written contents of the cheques were in the handwriting of Mrs Banno. As I have indicated, when challenged Mrs Banno confessed to taking money. I find that she signed the relevant cheques in the name of Mr Peter
Cordony or Mr Mark Cordony. The two unsigned cheques and their butts were also completed in the handwriting of Mrs
Banno, the cheques (as distinct from the butts) were made out to payees other than creditors of the plaintiff's and apparently used for Mrs Banno's benefit, and I find that she caused them to be negotiated.
 
Mrs Banno's position
Mrs Banno did not defend the claim against her. Unless she was authorised to sign in the name of Mr Peter Cordony or Mr Mark Cordony, she is liable to the plaintiffs in respect of the cheques bearing forged signatures and the two unsigned cheques.
 
The Bank's position
Having paid cheques not signed by an authorised signatory, and not signed at all, prima facie the Bank was liable to the plaintiff's: so much was acknowledged.
The Bank defended the claim against it on three grounds. First, as a partial defence it contended that some of the cheques bearing forged signatures were drawn with the authority of the relevant plaintiff, albeit not signed by an authorised signatory, because
Mrs Banno had been authorised to sign them in the name of Mr Mark Cordony. Secondly, as a wider but related defence, it contended that the plaintiff's knew that Mrs Banno was signing cheques in the name of Mr Mark Cordony, acquiesced in that practice, did not tell the Bank of what was occurring, and were precluded from denying the regularity of the cheques signed in his name. Thirdly, the
Bank contended that the plaintiff's owed to it a duty, as an implied term of the banker-customer relationships or under the general law in tort, to take care to prevent forgery of cheques and detect unauthorised cheque transactions, that they were in breach of that duty by at least September 1991, and that damages for that breach equal to the amounts of the forged cheques in respect of which the plaintiff's claimed from that time could be set off against, and nullified, most of the plaintiffs' claim.
 
Authority to sign in the name of Mr Mark Cordony
If the Bank's defence in this respect be made out, it would also provide a partial defence to the claim against Mrs Banno. Why signature by Mrs Banno in the name of Mr Mark Cordony and with his authority would provide a partial defence to the claim against the Bank was not the subject of submissions, but as I understand it the plaintiff's accepted that it would. The Bank treated it as a question of whether the signature of the cheques had been authorised, apparently relying on a principle similar to that taken from West versus Commercial
Bank of Australia Ltd <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 315] to which I later refer. The plaintiff's treated it as a question of whether the Bank had established that the cheques went to the benefit of the plaintiff's. In that event, the Bank accepted that it bore the onus, see National Bank of New Zealand versus Walpole and
Patterson Ltd [(1974) 2 NZLR 7] at 12. Given the agreement on the result, it is unnecessary to go into why the result would follow.
The relevant cheques were forged cheques for head office wages, cash cheques drawn on the account of Hokit in the period October 1991-December
The excess of the amounts on the cheques over the amounts on the cheque butts was $21,524.15. Although I think Hokit initially claimed for the full amount of the cheques, Mr Mark Cordony agreed that in part they discharged legitimate expenses of Hokit: in the end no claim was made to the extent that cheques were cashed in amounts "greater than that indicated by the books of the company". It was not entirely clear whether this meant that the ultimate claim was only to the excess described above, although the Bank so described the claim in its submissions and there was no dissent from that description.
Thus this defence went to $21,524.15 of the plaintiffs' claim.
The Bank submitted that it should be found that the relevant cheques were signed by Mrs Banno in the name of Mr Mark
Cordony with his knowledge and authority. In brief, the Bank said that the head office wages cheques (genuine signatures, forged signatures, corresponding amounts and noncorresponding amounts) were all authorised, and so far as for amounts greater than recorded on the cheque butts were a means of making cash payments to Mr Mark Cordony or, with his knowledge, to Mrs Banno.
Over the period encompassed by these cheques some of the head office wages cheques bore genuine signatures and some of the head office wages cheques bore forged signatures, some of the cheques bearing genuine signatures were for amounts greater than recorded on the cheque butts, and some of the cheques bearing forged signatures were for amounts greater than recorded on the cheque butts. As to the cheques bearing genuine signatures for amounts greater than recorded on the cheque butts, Mr Mark Cordony said that they must have been cheques which he signed in blank and left for Mrs Banno to complete on occasions such as when he would not be at the head office on pay day.
His explanation of inability to complete the amounts in these cheques when signing them, whereby he left them with Mrs Banno signed in blank, was unsatisfactory; indeed, he himself agreed that one part of it was not credible. How he could have thought head office wages were being duly paid when for weeks on end there were no wages cheques other than those bearing forged signatures was also not satisfactorily explained.
It emerged that Mr Mark Cordony had been paying Mrs Banno cash in addition to the wages recorded in the wages book, and his explanation that he did so from his own drawings for wages and why he did so strained credulity.
When
Mr Mark Cordony was questioned concerning the sources of payment of his own living expenses it became clear, in my view, that he was taking for himself significant cash from the companies' funds or entitlements. In my opinion, on the whole of the evidence it should be concluded that the head office wages cheques were a means by which he did so, including to pay Mrs
Banno the additional cash, and that at least the cheques signed by Mr Mark
Cordony for amounts greater than recorded on the cheque butts were known by him to be for the greater amounts.
That does not mean that Mr Mark Cordony also knew that the head office wages cheques signed by Mrs Banno in his name were so signed. The Bank seemed to say that a general inference that Mr Mark Cordony knew that head office wages cheques were drawn in amounts greater than shown on the cheque butts was sufficient for its defence in the respect presently under consideration, but the defence requires a finding upon whether he knew that Mrs Banno was signing head office wages cheques in his name. In my opinion that conclusion also should be drawn, in particular because Mr Mark Cordony agreed that he received his drawings for wages every week and must have been alive to whether head office wages were duly paid; in order that the head office wages were duly paid on the many occasions when Mr Mark Cordony did not sign the cheque, including for weeks on end, the most likely explanation is that Mrs Banno signed the cheque in his name with his authority.
It follows that neither Mrs Banno nor the
Bank is liable to the plaintiffs to the extent of $21,524.15.
 
Knowledge of and acquiescence in signing in the name of Mr Mark Cordony
It is not so clear that, if the Bank's defence in this respect be made out, it would also provide a partial defence to the claim against Mrs Banno.
It does not matter, since I do not think that the defence has been made out.
This defence went beyond the head office wages cheques, and extended to all cheques signed in the name of Mr Mark Cordony. It was not sought to extend it to the cheques, for a relatively insignificant total amount, signed in the name of Mr Peter Cordony. The Bank submitted that the authority given to Mrs
Banno to sign the head office wages cheques, or at least knowledge that she was doing so, together with her (forged) signature of a large number of cheques for legitimate expenses of the plaintiff's, should lead to the conclusion that Mr Mark Cordony authorised her to sign cheques generally and knew that she was doing so. It was said that this would preclude the plaintiffs from denying the regularity of the cheques signed by Mrs Banno in the name of Mr Mark Cordony on the principle found in West versus Commercial
Bank of Australia Ltd. There the customer knew that the bank was paying cheques signed by only one of the two necessary signatories, but did nothing to stop that practice or complain to the bank. It was said (at 322-3) - "When at the end of September 1930 he learnt that money had been drawn out of his account as on his behalf but not in conformity with his actual authority, he might have been at liberty to disown the drawings. But it must have been apparent to him that the bank had been acting and was continuing to act upon the assumption that, although the drawings were irregular in form, it might safely allow them.
He was not at liberty to acquiesce in the assumption, watch his son continue the practice and then, when his son could get no further advantage from it, to depart from the assumption and so obtain immunity, if not enrichment, at the expense of the bank.

Departure from an assumption upon which another person has acted to his detriment is not permitted to a party who, knowing or believing the other labours under a mistake in adopting it, has refrained from correcting him when it was his duty to do so.
 
For the appellant it was contended that the respondent bank laboured under no mistake of fact, under none upon which it acted to its detriment, under none to which the appellant's silence contributed and under none which was incumbent upon the appellant to correct.

The mistake lay in supposing that his son's cheques might be properly or safely paid out of the account. It might not have been clear to him why the bank entertained this belief, but no one in his place could have doubted its existence. The detriment consisted in the bank's continuing day by day to meet cheques, and, later, relying upon the arrangement to pay 10 pounds a month and refraining from any attempt to enforce liability against West junior or to follow the money. It is incredible that, but for the appellant's silence the bank would have gone on paying cheques on one signature. If he had made a protest of any sort to the bank, there can be no doubt the practice would at once have ended.
It was clearly his duty not to remain silent and thus allow the bank to pay out moneys to his account. Indeed, what he did affords evidence from which the inference of fact might be drawn that from September onwards the son had his authority for drawing cheques without his mother's signature and that he was content to adopt the drawings already made."
I do not think that the wider authority or knowledge in relation to Mrs
Banno signing cheques generally should be found.
As to authority or knowledge concerning cheques for legitimate expenses of the plaintiff's, there were shown to be about sixty-three forged cheques in that category, drawn on the accounts of Hokit, Ryntip and Cordony over the period January 1992 to November 1993, to a total value of about $105,000, and mostly in payment of suppliers of hair care products. It was apparent that Mr
Mark Cordony did not keep up with the detail of such payments, and I do not think that he had such familiarity with the state of accounts of the suppliers that he must have realised that payments were being made otherwise than on his signature. Further, some of the forged cheques in payment of legitimate expenses bore the forged signature of Mr Peter Cordony, it was not suggested that Mr Peter Cordony had known of or authorised signing by Mrs Banno in his name, and if Mrs Banno acted wrongly in that respect it tends to support that she acted wrongly in signing in the name of Mr Mark Cordony. As to knowledge or authority concerning cheques not in payment of legitimate expenses of the plaintiff's, but in fact applied for payment of liabilities of or otherwise for the benefit of Mrs Banno, there were many such cheques, for a significant total amount, and it is unlikely that Mr Mark Cordony knew that Mrs Banno was appropriating a lot of what was in substance his money and did not put a stop to it. His evidence of the challenge to Mrs Banno in early June 1994, and her response, indicates that he did not know. Ultimately the Bank stated in submissions, in substance, that it did not assert that
Mr Mark Cordony had actual knowledge that Mrs Banno was forging his signature on the cheques to the plaintiffs' creditors or the cheques shown on the butts to be to the plaintiffs' creditors: the latter class of cheques included many of the forged cheques in fact applied for payment of or otherwise for the benefit of Mrs
Banno. On the whole of the evidence, I am not persuaded that Mr Mark
Cordony knew of and acquiesced in Mrs Banno signing in his name che ues other than for head office wages.
That presents an interesting question. Within the principle found in West v Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd, where Mr Mark Cordony knew of and acquiesced in Mrs Banno signing in his name the cheques for head office wages does that preclude the plaintiff's from denying the regularity of all the other cheques signed by her in his name?
The basis of the principle is estoppel. In West versus Commercial Bank of
Australia
Ltd the customer impliedly represented to the bank that it could properly or safely pay out of his account because, knowing (or being taken to know) that the bank believed that it could pay cheques signed by only one of the two necessary signatories, he remained silent; the bank acted to its detriment by continuing to pay cheques signed by only one of the two necessary signatories. The cheques affected were those drawn after the customer knew of the bank's belief. In Greenwood versus Martins Bank Ltd [(1933) AC 51], to which reference was made in West versus Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd, the equivalent conduct lay in the customer knowing that his wife was forging his signature on cheques but remaining silent, and the detriment was the prejudice to the bank's ability to proceed against the forger. The cheques affected were those drawn before the customer knew of the forgery, but the different detriment supported the estoppel. The significance of the customer's contribution to an assumption on which the bank relied to its detriment is underlined in the modern law of estoppel, see Silovi Pty Ltd versus Barbaro [(1988) 13 NSWLR 466] at and The Commonwealth versus Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394 at 409-12, 444-6. The mere fact that Mr Mark Cordony knew of and acquiesced in Mrs Banno signing in his name the cheques for head office wages does not generate an estoppel.
In the present case there was no evidence of, or argument for, detriment to the Bank other than the payment of the forged cheques. There was no evidence at all of reliance upon an assumption to which the plaintiffs' conduct contributed, although that may not be fatal: in West versus Commercial
Bank of Australia Ltd there was no evidence explaining why the bank paid the cheques on the sole signature, but it was said that however careless the bank was there was little doubt that it was supposed that the customer's approval had been obtained or would not be withheld (see at 319). But the difference between the present case and West versus Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd is that in the present case there was no reason to conclude that the Bank had any view about the signatures which its customer's silence caused it to put aside.
There was no evidence that the Bank had recognised that signatures in the name of Mr Mark Cordony were not genuine and laboured under the mistake that all cheques bearing similar non-genuine signatures might be properly or safely paid out of the plaintiffs' accounts. From the viewpoint of Mr Mark Cordony, the highest assumption known to him could have been that the Bank believed that it could properly and safely pay the cheques for head office wages signed in his name by Mrs Banno. He did not know of the other forged cheques, and had no reason to believe that the Bank was acting on the assumption that other cheques signed by Mrs Banno in his name could properlyand safely be paid. I do not think that the estoppel would extend to the forged cheques other than for head office wages.
This conclusion is, I think, consistent with Brown versus Westminster Bank Ltd <case>; [(1964) 2 Ll R 187.] On 5 October 1960 the bank queried with the customer a number of cheques paid to one Carless, and was told that they were genuine.
The bank acted on that in paying further cheques made payable to Carless. All the cheques were forged. It was held that the customer was estopped from asserting the forgeries because the bank had acted to its detriment in paying the further cheques. It is not entirely clear how that detriment affected the cheques paid prior to 5 October 1960, but for present purposes the point is that there was a representation that cheques made payable to Carless could be paid. There was no analogous representation in the present case. The conclusion is also consistent with Tina Motors Pty Ltd versus Australian and New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd <case>; [(1977) VR 205.] over a period of months a number of forged cheques were cashed at the bank by the customer's employee. During the period the bank queried with the customer the genuineness of the signatures on two of the cheques, and was told that any cheque presented for cashing by the employee could be paid. The bank acted on this. It was held that the customer had represented that the signature on any cheque presented by the employee was genuine and was estopped from asserting to the contrary. Following Brown v
Westminster Bank Ltd, the detriment was said to give rise to an estoppel with respect to the one cheque paid prior to the representation. Similar comments may be made.
No other cases relevant to this defence were cited in submissions. It follows from the foregoing that the defence has not been made out.
 
Breach of duty owed to the Bank
The Bank submitted that the plaintiffs owed to it a duty - to exercise reasonable precautions to prevent forged cheques being presented to the Bank; to have in place, and implement, systems by which senior management of the plaintiffs could ascertain within a reasonable time whether their accounts were being debited with amounts not authorised by the plaintiffs; if the plaintiffs' accounts were not audited by external accountants, to carry out audits or checks by appropriately qualified officers of the plaintiffs; and if the directors of the plaintiffs were not sufficiently qualified or experienced to carry out an audit or check of the accounts, to engage external accountants to carry out audits.
 .
The plaintiffs submitted that the only duty owed to the Bank was to refrain from drawing cheques in such manner as might facilitate fraud or forgery (London Joint Stock Bank Ltd versus MacMillan [(1913) AC 777)] and to inform the Bank of any forgery upon becoming aware of it (Greenwood versus Martins Bank
Ltd).
Based principally upon London
Joint Stock Bank versus MacMillan and Greenwood v Martins Bank Ltd, in Tai Hing Cotton Mill Ltd versus Liu Chong Hing Bank Ltd [(1986) 1 AC 80] the Privy Council rejected the existence of a duty to exercise such precautions as a reasonable customer in his position would take to prevent forged cheques being presented to the bank, and of a lesser duty to check periodical bank statements so as to be able to notify the bank of any unauthorised transactions. It was held that neither duty was to be implied as a necessary incident of the banker-customer relationship or imposed by the general law of tort. In National Bank of New Zealand versus Walpole and Patterson
Ltd the
Court of Appeal of New Zealand had rejected a duty to exercise reasonable care in the conduct of the customer's business so as to prevent forgeries on the part of his employees. The Supreme Court of Canada rejected broadly similar wider duties in Canadian Pacific
Hotels Ltd versus Bank of Montreal DLR (4th) 385. These cases provide a significant foundation for the plaintiffs' submission.
But the position they affirm has been criticised (see eg Ellinger (1984)
Lloyds Maritime and Commercial Law Quarterly 134;
Moens [15 University of
Queensland Law Journal 185], and in Westpac Banking Corporation versus Metlej (1987) Aust Torts Rep 102 Priestley JA observed that the Court of Appeal in this State was not bound by Tai Hing
Cotton Mill Ltd versus Liu Chong Hing Bank Ltd and that there was some force in the submission that the duty had a wider content than there affirmed: see at ,646-7- "It seems rather strange that two duties and two only could spring from the bankercustomer relationship upon the customer: why those two? What gave -rise to them? Could not the -relation which gave birth to those duties in particular circumstances give rise to somewhat different duties in somewhat different circumstances?
After the conclusion of the oral argument our attention was drawn (by consent of counsel) to West versus Commercial Bank of Australia
Ltd <case>; [(1935) 55 CLR 315] which at least arguably provides an example of a different duty upon a customer arising out of the circumstances of that case.

In opposition to my tentative view that there is much to be said for the approach of (the submission) two other thoughts have to be borne in mind; banking practice has proceeded for a long time on a footing of customer's duty no wider than that stated in Tai Hing
Cotton Mill Ltd versus Liu Chong Hing Bank Ltd; the reasons given in that case at pp 105H106B perhaps provide a good explanation why.
Even a final appellate court might not wish to disturb a long-established and understood situation in order to impose upon bankers' customers by judicial statement a duty a bank can impose by contract but does not. Further, even if the duty contended for by Westpac in this case be held to be appropriate to impose upon a customer, for the reasons again, given in Tai Hing Cotton Mill Ltd v Liu Chong Hing Bank Ltd at pp 105-106, it would appear to be a duty very easily discharged."
The cases earlier mentioned are not binding on me (see Cook versus Cook <case>; [(1986) CLR 376] at 688), although the decision of the House of Lords in London Joint Stock Bank versus MacMillan may be particularly persuasive (ibid) and the combined stance of the House of
Lords, the Privy Council, the Court of Appeal of New Zealand, and the Supreme
Court of Canada must deserve the utmost respect. The plaintiffs submitted that
Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia versus Sydney Wide Stores Pty Ltd <case>; [(1981) 148
CLR 304], by which I am bound, so accepted London Joint Stock Bank versus MacMillan that it was not open to me to accede to the Bank's submission, but I do not think that the Court excluded a wider duty than that recognised in London
Joint Stock Bank versus MacMillan (see at 316-7; perhaps cf Murphy J at 318). In the present case the facts are such that it is necessary to go into whether a wider duty should be held to exist.
Without being exhaustive, the following matters may be considered.
A bank is under a heavy obligation to its customer, in that if it pays a forged cheque it is prima facie liable to its customer because it has acted in the absence of a mandate, no matter how skilful the forgery: London and River
Plate Bank versus Bank of Liverpool [(1886) 1 QB 7]; London Joint Stock Bank v
MacMillan. The days when the banker-customer relationship was a personal relationship, in which the banker was likely to be familiar with and able to verify his customer's signature, are long gone, and the volume of cheque transactions in modern times is such that it is unrealistic to expect a bank always to detect forgery. That a customer owes at least a limited duty to the bank in relation to the drawing of cheques is recognised in the cases culminating in Tai Hing
Cotton Mill Ltd v Liu Chong Hing Bank Ltd, and it may fairly be asked why a duty to exercise reasonable care in the manner of drawing a cheque is a
necessary incident of the banker-customer relationship but a duty (say) to exercise reasonable care to prevent the unauthorised drawing of a cheque is not. Even if the route of an implied term not be available, cases such as
Hawkins versus Clayton (1988) 164 CLR would suggest that, contrary to the approach in Tai Hing Cotton Mill Ltd versus Liu Chong Hing Bank Ltd, a duty of care in tort can be found notwithstanding that a corresponding contractual term can not be found, and that a duty of care might be found in particular circumstances on the general principles relating to duty of care to avoid economic loss as expounded in Jaensch versus Coffey <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 549] and San Sebastian Pty Ltd v The Minister administering the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 340.] Thus would a more equitable balance between banker and customer be arrived at.
On the other hand, the position as established in England, Canada and New
Zealand has been the accepted position for a great many years. It is desirable that there be uniformity in banking law, and an accepted position should not lightly be altered. Especially is that so when it is open to the bank to alter it by appropriate terms in the contractual relationship, and the argument for superimposing a general duty of care is weakened where it is open to the bank to include appropriate contractual terms. Further, to impose in broad terms a duty such as a duty to take reasonable care in relation to the conduct and working of the account, extending even to the manner in which the customer arranges and maintains his staff and records, could be said to lead to undesirable uncertainty in the commercial relationship, and there is great difficulty in picking out additional particular acts or omissions to be given duty-status; the difficulty is the greater when the duty can impact on a wide variety of customers from the major, well resourced and knowledgeable to the minor and all but illiterate.
It may be thought that competition has brought about a situation in which banks have refrained from modifying their burden, and that it is not for the courts to intervene.
To hold that there is a duty wider than that presently accepted would in a real sense change the law, notwithstanding that I am not bound by the decisions whereby the position is as submitted by the plaintiff's. As the two preceding paragraphs demonstrate, considerations in favour of the change are matched by considerations against change. I have concluded that, in proper recognition of my role as a single judge faced with broadly consistent decisions of the highest courts in England, New Zealand and Canada and with no domestic decision to the contrary, I should not accede to the Bank's submission. If a wider duty is to be held to exist, that must be done by an appellate court.
I should, however, make appropriate findings of fact. If the duty be no greater than as submitted by the plaintiffs, there was no breach of duty on their part. If, on the other hand, there was a duty as submitted by the Bank, it was breached by the plaintiff's in each of its elements. There was a degree of conflict between the expert evidence of Ms Jacqueline Davies, called for the Bank, and Mr Stephen Sherman, called for the plaintiff's.
It was, I think, a difference in emphasis, and in my view the general approach of Ms Davies was preferable to that of Mr Sherman.
However, even if the aspects of the plaintiffs' operations thought adequate by Mr Sherman be put aside, there remained a significant absence of procedures and controls reasonably to be expected of the plaintiff's.
It should be said that the plaintiff's did not seriously submit that Mr
Mark Cordony had not been relevantly negligent, contenting themselves with the bald assertion at the end of their submissions that there was, for the reasons given by Mr Sherman, an adequate system of control in place. Even on Mr
Sherman's evidence, there was not. It is sufficient to note the following. Mr
Mark Cordony had no qualifications enabling him effectively to supervise or check what Mrs Banno did, he was in the head office only about 20 per cent of the time, and he neither endeavoured to check what she did nor engaged a suitably qualified person to do so. He did not even check bank statements against cheque butts or a cash book, something which would have immediately disclosed the fraud. Nothing was done to have financial statements of Ryntip and Cordony prepared for the financial years 1991, 1992, 1993 and 1994 until after June 1994. While financial statements for Hokit were prepared, Mr Mark
Cordony knew that there was no auditing or independent verification of the financial information provided, that those who prepared them were not given bank statements or cheque butts, and that they were only given the information produced by a computerised accounting system which was maintained by Mrs
Banno. If his own evidence be accepted, Mr Mark Cordony was in the habit of leaving signed blank cheques with Mrs Banno and did not follow them up to verify that they were completed in the manner and used for the purpose for which he had left them with her. Nor did he seek proper supporting documentation for cheques he did sign. So far as there was any control to detect fraud, Mr Mark Cordony's inspection of monthly income and expenditure statements,
Mr Mark Cordony did not perform that task adequately and on the few occasions when he questioned expenditure he did not question it effectively by going to primary records.
These matters in particular, but regard generally to the evidence of Ms
Davies and Mr Sherman, demonstrate that the plaintiffs were in breach of each of the (assumed) elements of the duty for which the Bank contended.
But for their breach, Mrs Banno's conduct would have been detected no later than the end of 1991. However, because of my view of the extent of the duty the Bank is not assisted by these findings.
I should note that the plaintiffs' reply included that, if they owed a duty to the Bank, there should be apportionment by reason of the Bank's contributory negligence. This was notdeveloped in submissions. Such evidence as there was going to the matter was not in dispute.
 
The result
The plaintiff's are entitled to judgment for most of their claim. The precise amount, including interest, must be calculated. I stand the matter over for mention at 9.30 am on Friday 28 July 1995, and direct that the parties bring in short minutes to give effect to these reasons.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/11.html  
