

Farnell Electronic Components Pty Ltd Matter No 3434/97 [1997] NSWSC 527 (30 October 1997) 
Farnell Electronic Components Pty Ltd /97 October 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 - FARNELL ELECTRONIC COMPONENTS PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by the plaintiff company for an order pursuant to <case> of the Companies Code 1981, validating an allotment of three and a half million redeemable preference shares of $1 each on 5 June 1990. Section 122 is virtually identical with <case> of the Corporations Law. 
The company, which was incorporated in 1986, is a subsidiary of an English company, Premier Farnell plc. The whole of the ordinary shares in the plaintiff are beneficially owned by Farnell Overseas Ltd, a 100% owned subsidiary of Premier Farnell plc.

On 5 June 1990, the plaintiff company purported to issue three and a half million redeemable preference shares to the company that is now called Farnell
Overseas Ltd.

The minutes of directors of the plaintiff company of 5 June 1990 show that there were present at the meeting Mr Oxborough and also "Allan Daniel (by telephone from ... Leeds, West Yorkshire, England)." The resolution recorded that "Application being received and agreement that payment be satisfied by reduction of ... loan account, it was resolved to approve and register the following allotment of shares:- ...

Type and No. of Shares: 3,500,000 Redeemable Preference shares of $1.00 each.

Special Terms and 
Conditions: Preferential in return of Capital only." 
The company lodged a statutory return stating that the allotment was for a consideration other than cash, namely the capitalization of three and a half million dollars worth of debt. Unfortunately, as at that date its authorized capital was only $100,000.

The plaintiff company's Articles of Association are Table A to the 
Companies Code with various amendments. Regulation 3 of that Table A (which I will cite as "1981 Table A") reads: "3. Subject to the Code, any preference shares may, with the sanction of a resolution, be issued on the terms that they are, or at the option of the company are liable, to be redeemed." "Resolution" appears to mean resolution of the directors.

The company search in evidence shows that the 1991 annual return described the shares issued as three and a half million cumulative preference shares.
However, in the 1992 return and subsequent returns, the shares are described as redeemable preference shares. The balance sheet of the plaintiff company for the year ended 31 January 1991 contains a note that "During the year the company issued $3,500,000 redeemable preference shares. These shares are redeemable at call and preferential in return of capital only. The purpose of the issue was to provide additional working capital for the company." 
The only relevant document from 1990 which has survived is the minutes of the so-called directors' meeting. The 1991 annual return appears to be a mistake though it was a mistake which excited my suspicion. The evidence, when it was first presented, was also incorrect in that the secretary of the company swore to various matters which he later had to retract. All in all, the administration of the regal affairs of the company does not appear to be in a very satisfactory state. This is of concern because corporate privileges are provided on the basis that there will be proper compliance with the
Corporations Law. Furthermore, it is of concern that when I was recently sitting as the Companies Judge for a four week period, there was at least one application made to validate an invalid allotment of shares each week. The administration of the companies law must never get to the stage where people cut corners and then expect the court later to validate what they have done merely because it is then convenient for that to occur. Indeed, the Court of
Appeal has said recently in Moran versus Moranco Enterprises Pty Ltd [(1996) ACLC 1669], 1674, that unless there is something further, an irregularity arising from disregard of basic procedures should not be validated.

Furthermore, it is settled law that one cannot convert issued preference shares into redeemable preference shares, Re St James' Court Estate Ltd [[1944] Ch 6.]
Whilst I had some suspicions at one stage that this is what had happened in , now that all the corrected evidence is in, this seems unlikely. However, the court must be careful to ensure that it does not permit in effect an ex post facto conversion of redeemable preference shares to take place by means of a validation of a purported issue of redeemable preference shares where the parties did not direct their minds to the precise conditions.

However, although it is necessary to state what I have just stated, I must also bear in mind that the present company is one which is wholly owned by an overseas company. It has traded profitably and at present has very substantial assets and no substantial creditors. Its assets are approximately 25 million dollars and it has total liabilities of about 4 million dollars, that being on a consolidated basis, rather than referring just to the plaintiff.
Accordingly, having delivered myself of the general warning, I must deal with this case on the merits with a predeliction to do that which would cause nobody any harm, namely, to validate what has happened.

The first problem is whether the alleged meeting of directors was properly held. Regulation 69 of 1981 Table A provides that "The directors may meet together ... as they think fit." Articles such as 69 have been construed as requiring a meeting of the minds of the directors rather than their bodies; see Wagner versus International Health Promotions [(1994) 15 ACSR 419] and Re
Ferguson [(1995) 58 FCR 106.]
Accordingly, there is no barrier to the effectiveness of the resolution because the meeting was held by telephone.

The next problem is whether the plaintiff is obtaining an unfair advantage by seeking validation. Had the plaintiff complied with the then rules in 1990, it would have been necessary to have provided in the Articles for the terms and manner of the redemption (s 120 of the Code, which is virtually identical to s of the Corporations Law). The shareholders seem to consider that the shares were redeemable at call. They did not specify who was to make the call.

Section 128 of the Companies Code which is substantially identical with s 200 of the Corporations Law, prohibits the allotment of preference shares unless there were set out in the Memorandum or Articles of Association the rights of the holders of those shares in respect to repayment of capital, participation in surplus assets and profits, cumulative or non-cumulative dividends etc. It would seem that the shares were preferential in return of capital, but otherwise had no preferential rights to dividends. They are described, however, in the return of allotment as cumulative preference shares, this being another mistake.

On 5 May 1997, resolutions were passed altering the Memorandum and Articles of
Association by increasing the capital to $13,500,000 and providing for the rights of the redeemable preference shares though the minute of that meeting shows that the preference shares may be redeemed at par at the request of the holders. Even though there must be strong arguments against such a condition as to the redemption of redeemable preference shares, there is a decision of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia favouring it, namely,
TNT Australia Pty Ltd versus Normandy Resources NL <case>; [(1989) 1 ACSR 1], and in accordance with policy, I should follow the decision of a Full Court of another State on the construction of the Code and the
Corporations Law.

The next matter is whether I must look for some particular reason why I should validate the allotment. As I have already mentioned, the Court of Appeal in
Moran's case suggested that one does need to find something justifying validation where there has been simply a disregard of basic procedures. Mr
Studdy for the plaintiff, says that that is too strict a way of reading the
Court of Appeal's decision. He says that there is nothing in Moran's case which goes against the policy adopted by courts exercising jurisdiction under the Corporations Law that if it is just and equitable to validate, then the court will do so. He cited, amongst other cases, Kokotovich v
Wallington [(1993) 11 ACSR 759], which was upheld by the Court of Appeal <case>; [(1995) 17 ACSR 478.] In the Court of Appeal, Kirby, ACJ, with whom Priestley and
Handley JJA agreed, made it clear that <case> of the Corporations Law was to be widely read.

I consider that the true rule is that a court does have a wide jurisdiction under <case> of the Corporations Law or its predecessor in the Code. If there is an ex parte case where all interested parties join in and no-one is prejudiced, then the court may very well make an order for validation notwithstanding that there has been some extremely casual work done at the time of the allotment. However, if there is a contested case and the parties do not all agree that a validation is proper, then it is necessary for the person seeking the validation to point to some factor which justifies it over and above the fact that there was a careless allotment.

In the present case, because no-one is detrimentally affected, I should make the order validating. I should make it clear, however, that I do not favour Mr
Studdy's submission that the problem occurred through mere inadvertence. With respect, it seemed to me that the degree of culpability of those who carried out this exercise was much greater than that.

Accordingly, conditionally upon the plaintiff amending its Articles of
Association in accordance with the affidavit of John Arthur Deering sworn 9
October 1997 and filed herein, the court makes order 1 in the amended summons of 22 September 1997.
 * * * * 
