

Collier versus Howard [1996] NSWSC 84 (30 April 1996) 
Collier versus Howard /96 
Tuesday, 23 April 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were commenced in the Common Law Division by statement of claim filed on 5 August 1994, by which the plaintiff sought from the defendant possession of a home unit known as unit 4, 230 Rainbow Street,
Coogee, of which the plaintiff was the registered proprietor. The plaintiff and the defendant had lived together in the unit for some months in 1991 and then for a short period in mid-1993, following which the plaintiff departed, leaving the defendant in occupation.

In his statement of claim the plaintiff alleged that the defendant had occupied the unit as a tenant, or alternatively as a licensee, of the plaintiff and that the tenancy or licence, as the case may be, had been terminated in January 1994.

The proceedings have had a complex history, to most of which it is unnecessary to refer. On 20 June 1995 the defendant filed an amended defence and cross- claim in which she claimed inter alia equitable interests of various kinds in the unit, said to be inconsistent with the plaintiff's claim to be entitled to possession, and also that the plaintiff was estopped from seeking possession of the unit from her.

By notice of motion filed 21 November 1995 the plaintiff applied inter alia for summary judgment for possession. That application came before Master
Malpass who, on 14 December 1995 after a contested hearing, directed the entry of judgment for possession, gave leave to the plaintiff to issue a writ of possession and postponed the issue of the writ to 1 February 1996. Judgment for possession was, in fact, formally entered with effect as of 14 December .

By notice of appeal filed on 25 January 1996 the defendant appealed to the
Court constituted by a Judge from the decision of Master Malpass of 14
December 1995. That appeal came before Dunford J who, on 22 February 1996 after a contested hearing during which the defendant by leave adduced further evidence, dismissed the appeal, affirmed the orders of Master Malpass except those relating to a writ of possession, and granted the plaintiff leave to issue a writ of possession forthwith, but ordered that the writ not be executed before 21 March 1996.

In his reasons for judgment Dunford J considered inter alia whether any of the matters alleged in the cross-claim could give rise to a defence to the claim for possession and held that they could not. A writ of possession was in fact issued on 18 March 1996. By notice of motion filed 22 March 1996 the defendant applied inter alia for (a) a stay of execution of the writ of possession pending the hearing of the cross-claim; (b) an interlocutory injunction to restrain the plaintiff from dealing with the subject unit; (c) transfer of the proceedings to the Equity Division. That application also came before Dunford J who, on 26 March 1996, ordered the transfer of the proceedings to the Equity Division, but otherwise dismissed the notice of motion.

Among other things his Honour said: "The substance of my judgment on 22 February was that none of the matters raised in the cross-claim gave rise to a defence to the plaintiff's claim for possession of the property. That being the case, it follows that it would be inappropriate to stay execution of the writ of possession pending the hearing of the cross-claim." 
At some time towards the end of March 1996 the defendant received a written notice dated 22 March 1996 from a Sheriff's officer addressed to her, stating that the Sheriff was commanded to place the plaintiff in possession of the subject unit and warning all occupants that they must vacate the premises without delay and in any event not later than 12:00 noon on 2 April 1996, otherwise action to evict would proceed without further warning.

On 1 April 1996 the defendant made an application ex parte to Brownie J, the
Duty Judge in the Equity Division, in which she sought and obtained: an order staying execution until and including 4 April 1996; and leave to file in Court a notice of motion returnable on 4 April 1996 for a stay of the writ of possession: until the determination of the cross-claim; or pending the determination of an appeal to the Court of Appeal; or pending determination of an application for legal aid.

On 2 April 1996 the plaintiff applied to Brownie J to discharge the orders of April 1996. On that occasion, at his Honour's suggestion, attempts were made to give notice of that application to the defendant. Faxes were sent to her at the subject unit at 10.22 am and 1.07 pm. However, it appears that she did not become aware of those faxes and she did not appear. In the event Brownie J made orders on that day: that the orders of 1 April 1996 be varied by providing that the stay of execution will terminate at 10.30 am on 3 April 1996; that the fixture for the hearing of the defendant's motion for stay of execution for 4 April 1996 be vacated; that the defendant's motion for a stay of execution be adjourned to 10.00 am on 3 April 1996; and that service of the order be made by facsimile transmission.

The orders of 2 April 1996 were faxed to the defendant at the subject unit at .50 pm on 2 April 1996. The defendant says that she did not become aware of that fax or of the two earlier faxes until about 7.30 am on 3 April 1996, following which she left the unit to appear before Brownie J at 10.00 am on that day.

Each party appeared or was represented on that occasion and in the result
Brownie J dismissed the defendant's application for a further stay of execution. When the defendant returned to the unit later that day she found herself excluded from the premises. The locks had been changed and the unit was occupied by Ms Samantha Burton, as agent for the plaintiff. Ms Burton is a friend of the plaintiff. In fact, the writ of possession had been executed by the Sheriff at about 12.40 pm that day. Heated words were exchanged between the defendant and Ms Burton and it might be said that there was a confrontation between them, insofar as a confrontation can take place on either side of a locked door.

It is not possible to make precise findings as to what occurred on that occasion. However, one thing that is clear is that the defendant demanded entry to the unit to collect some of her belongings and in particular some papers and documents, and was refused. It appears that by then Ms Burton had commenced to pack quantities of the defendant's personal belongings into garbage bags and there is disputed evidence as to whether on that occasion she offered to provide to the defendant such of the garbage bags as had already been packed. It is probable that she did make an offer on that occasion to leave some of the garbage bags outside the unit for the defendant to collect, but the heated exchanges on that occasion and the high state of emotion of those involved make it difficult to reach any particular conclusion as to what precisely was communicated on either side.

I think it is reasonably clear that the defendant's position, as was probably communicated to Ms Burton on that occasion and which she has maintained since then, is that she should be permitted entry to the unit in order herself to locate and remove such items as she thought fit and in particular the papers and documents which she said that she urgently required.

Whatever may have been said on that occasion, the position subsequently taken up by the plaintiff through his legal representatives has been that any goods of the defendant in the unit will be made available to her outside the unit when they have been packed up and the defendant is prepared to take delivery of them.

On 4 April 1996, pursuant to leave granted to her on that day by Brownie J, the defendant filed a notice of motion returnable on 10 April 1996 for orders as follows: that possession of the premises be returned to the defendant; and that the occupant Samantha Burton refrain from converting goods and possessions the property of the defendant and return all goods removed from the premises.

It is that notice of motion which is presently before the Court.

I turn first to the defendant's application that possession of the unit be restored to her. The question whether, pending the determination of her cross- claim, the defendant should be permitted to occupy the unit has already been determined adversely to the defendant by Dunford J on two occasions, namely 22
February 1996 and 26 March 1996.

Generally speaking, the interests of justice as between the parties, fortified by the public interest in the finality of litigation and the efficient deployment of judicial resources, require that where an application for interlocutory relief has been made, heard on the merits and refused, a further application for substantially the same relief should not be entertained, unless it is founded on a material change of circumstances since the original application was heard, or the discovery of new material which could not reasonably have been put before the Court on the hearing of the original application (see the extended discussion of these principles by Sperling J in Wentworth versus Rogers, 28 April 1995, unreported). This rule of practice reflects judicial experience as to what is ordinarily appropriate to the attainment of procedural justice. I am not persuaded that there is sufficient reason for departing from the rule in the present case, and I therefore refuse the first of the orders sought by the defendant.

I turn now to the question of the defendant's goods left by her in the subject unit. It is, I think, appropriate to deal with that question by motion in the present proceedings, since it arises directly out of the execution of the writ of possession in these proceedings. As I have already said, the defendant's primary claim since 3 April 1996 has been that she should be permitted entry to the unit at least for the purpose of locating and removing her own property and in particular her own documents. In my opinion, she has no legal entitlement to enter the unit for that purpose, in the absence of a refusal by the plaintiff to comply with a formal demand by her for delivery of her goods at the entrance to the unit, or at some other reasonable place she may nominate, transportation of the goods to which would not place any appreciable burden on the plaintiff. The defendant is not in the position of a tenant or licensee of premises, whose tenancy or licence is terminated without sufficient warning to enable her to remove her goods from the premises prior to such termination (cf as to the right of entry for that purpose within a reasonable time, of a tenant, Coke upon Littleton section 69;
Stodden versus Harvey (1608) Cro Jac 204, [79 ER 178]; Doe versus McKaeg <case>; [(1830) 10 B & C 721];
Clarke versus Tresider (1867) 4 W W and a'B 164, 171-2; and Haniotis v
Dimitriou <case>; [[1983] VR 498] at 501, and as to a licensee, Fowler versus Begg [(1953) 53 SR ]; Minister of Health versus Bellotti [[1944] 1 KB 298];
Australian Blue Metal versus Hughes [(1962) 79 WN 498] at 508-9, affirmed [[1963] AC 74).] 
The judgment for possession in favour of the plaintiff established that any tenancy or licence to occupy, which the defendant had prior to the commencement of these proceedings, had terminated by 5 August 1994.
Furthermore, she had ample prior notice of the execution of the writ of possession. Her right to recover her goods from the plaintiff depends upon the making by her of a formal demand upon him to make those goods available to her or her agent at the entrance to the unit, or some other place designated by her which, as already stated, would not place any appreciable burden on the plaintiff, or to which the plaintiff is prepared to have them taken, and failing which, to permit her to enter the unit and remove them (see
Fitzgerald versus Kellion Estates (1977) 2 BPR 9181, Thorogood versus Robinson <case>; [(1845) 6 QB 769]; [115 ER 290]; Deeble versus McMullen (1857) 8 Ir C L Rep 355, 362). No such formal demand has yet been made by the defendant. Indeed, as I understand her position, the taking of delivery of any substantial quantity of her belongings would present a severe practical problem for her at present because she has no storage facilities for them. The matter of particular concern to the defendant at the present time is the recovery of documents which were in the unit on 3
April 1996, which she says she urgently requires for the purposes of this, and perhaps other, litigation and matters ancillary to such litigation including, in particular, a pending application for legal aid. One complicating factor is the existence of a high degree of personal animosity between the plaintiff and
Ms Burton on the one hand and the defendant on the other. The practical difficulties to which this gives rise are exacerbated by the existence of an apprehended violence order which, I am informed, restrains the plaintiff from coming within 100 metres of premises in which the defendant resides. It appears that the defendant is presently (and I assume temporarily) residing in unit 5 immediately above the subject unit in the same block.

The defendant is suspicious, perhaps understandably, that Ms Burton has been going through her documents in the unit and providing some of them to the plaintiff. Ms Burton's evidence is that she has, in fact, been endeavouring to sort out which documents in the unit belong to the plaintiff and which to the defendant and has given to the plaintiff some documents which she says clearly do belong to him. The evidence does not justify a finding that either the plaintiff or Ms Burton has, in fact, converted the defendant's documents or other goods, but the position, at least in relation to documents, is obviously unsatisfactory. Since the question of documents is said to be a matter of some urgency and since the difficulties arise out of the execution of a writ of possession issued pursuant to a judgment in these proceedings, I think it is appropriate that regardless of the precise relief sought by the defendant in her notice of motion, the Court should intervene to endeavour to resolve the position in that regard as far as it is possible to do so in a summary way, and I have indicated to the parties the kind of orders that I would contemplate making to endeavour to bring that about. It has not been easy to devise machinery which is likely to produce a satisfactory result in this regard. However, I have formulated orders which I propose to make and before stating them I should say this: I think there is some force in the defendant's contention that since she has been in sole occupation of the unit for a period of what amounts to two and a half years, she is entitled to have it inferred that any documents which were in fact in the unit at the time of execution of the writ of possession are more likely to be hers than anyone else's. That, of course, is not to say that some documents may not be hers, but merely to lay a foundation for the approach that I think ought to be adopted to the matter.

I propose in the orders that I have formulated to try and keep matters as simple as possible, realising that one's endeavours in that direction may not be completely successful.

Collier versus Howard /96 
Tuesday, 30 April 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
HIS HONOUR: There are two matters relating to costs. One is what should be done about the costs of the notice of motion filed by the defendant on 4 April 1996 in respect of which I gave judgment on 23 April 1996. The second relates to the costs of implementation of the procedure which the Court, in effect of its own motion, put in place in relation to the custody of documents which remained in the premises after the execution by the sheriff of the writ of possession on 3 April 1996. In my judgment of 23 April 1996 I indicated that I thought that by reason of the circumstance that any disputed question as to the proper custody of those documents arose out of the execution of writ of possession issued by the Court, it was appropriate that by summary order in these proceedings the Court should do what it could to resolve that situation.

The question of the custody of the documents appears to some degree to be connected with the cross-claim which has not been yet dealt with. It was in an attempt to preserve her situation pending the hearing of that cross-claim that the defendant was required to attend Court on the day on which the writ of possession was executed, which was executed before her return to the premises after attending Court. In one sense that is a consequence of her ignoring the effect of the judgment for possession, of the leave granted for the issue of a writ of possession, and of the notice to vacate which she received from the sheriff some time prior to the date of execution of the writ. On the other hand, she had to attend Court at short notice by reason of the events that occurred before Brownie J during the week commencing 1 April 1996.

In relation to the relief specifically sought by her in her notice of motion of 4 April 1996, that relief was refused and I think it should follow that she pay the plaintiff's costs up to and including the date of disposal in a substantive sense of the specific relief sought in that notice of motion, which was 23 April 1996.

As to the costs subsequent to that and in particular those of yesterday and today, I think that probably the best course is to order that those costs be treated as part of the costs in the cross-claim.

The formal orders I make, in addition to those I have already pronounced, are: Order that the defendant pay to the plaintiff his costs of the defendant's notice of motion filed on 4 April 1996 up to and including 23 April 1996.
 Order that the costs of the implementation of the orders in relation to documents made on 23 April 1996 including the costs of 29 and 30 April 1996 be treated as costs in the cross-claim.
 * * * 
