

Regina versus Malass Matter No 60403/97 [1998] NSWSC 21 (3 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 31 March 1998 
REGINA versus SAMIR MOHAMAD MALASS /97 March 1998 
Wood J, Smart J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA versus SAMIR MOHAMAD MALASS 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: In this matter a notice of appeal against conviction and an application for leave to appeal against sentence was filed. However, the appeal against conviction was not argued. 
The applicant was charged on one count of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm. He was tried before Coleman DCJ and a jury at Liverpool District
Court in May 1997. The jury found him guilty of the offence as charged. The offence was committed on 16 December 1995. The victim was Const B Wyber.

The maximum penalty for the offence is seven years penal servitude.

On 8 August 1997 Coleman DCJ sentenced the applicant to penal servitude for three years, comprised of a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of eighteen months.

It appears that a brawl involving some forty to sixty people occurred at and adjacent to the home of the applicant's uncle in Punchbowl. The police were called. Const Wyber was one of the police who attended. He was struck in the face by a piece of wood.

Counsel for the applicant argued that the sentencing judge erred in a number of respects.

The first asserted error on the part of the sentencing judge was that his
Honour erred in finding that the injury was caused intentionally, as he undoubtedly did. The following is an extract from the remarks on sentence: "I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Const Wyber intervened in a fight between three men in an attempt to separate them. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that while he was so engaged the prisoner approached him with a piece of wood in his hand which he was holding above his right shoulder with his left hand towards the front of the piece of wood and his right hand at the rear and that he approached the police officer directly from the front and pushed the piece of wood, blunt end first, into the constable's face, striking him, in particular, on the nose." 
Counsel for the appellant did not dispute that there was evidence upon which those findings were open. Indeed, the findings I have quoted were virtually a verbatim adoption of Const Wyber's account of what occurred as given by Const
Wyber in his evidence at the trial. His evidence in that regard was corroborated by Const Dyer who was present and who also gave evidence.

On those primary findings of fact, a finding of intention to inflict grievous bodily harm as distinct from mere recklessness was open to the sentencing judge, if not inevitable.

It was argued, however, that such a finding was precluded by reference to the way in which the case was left to the jury. His Honour told the jury in the course of his summing-up that it was sufficient for the purpose of the element "maliciously" in the charge that the act was done recklessly rather than intentionally.

The case turned on whether it was the applicant who was wielding the piece of wood or someone else. The issue was the identity of the assailant. The trial judge was correct in directing the jury that whether the injury was intentional or was caused recklessly, the charge was made out subject to the issue of identity.

The fact that the jury was not required to draw a distinction between intentional and reckless injury did not, however, relieve the trial judge from having to do so when sentencing the applicant. He was obliged to find the facts relevant to sentence, subject to consistency with the jury's verdict and subject to proof beyond reasonable doubt insofar as the facts were adverse to the applicant. His Honour was not obliged to take the facts at their lowest against the applicant. The way the case was left to the jury was not materially relevant.

The first point, accordingly, fails.

Secondly, it was submitted in the appellant's written submissions that the sentencing judge infringed the principles laid down in De Simoni <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383] which, it was said, preclude a sentencing judge from taking into account "factors which go beyond the facts reflected in the jury's verdict and which amount to a finding of a more serious crime." 
What was decided in De Simoni appears in the following extract from the judgment of Gibbs CJ (with whom Mason and Murphy JJ agreed) at 389.
 "However, the general principle that the sentence imposed on an offender should take account of all the circumstances of the offence is subject to a more fundamental and important principle, that no one should be punished for an offence of which he has not been convicted. ...The combined effect of the two principles, so far as it is relevant for present purposes, is that a judge, in imposing sentence, is entitled to consider all the conduct of the accused, including that which would aggravate the offence, but cannot take into account circumstances of aggravation which would have warranted a conviction for a more serious offence." 
The finding by the sentencing judge in the present case that the injury to
Const Wyber was deliberate was not a finding of fact which made out an offence more serious than the offence for which the applicant was convicted, namely, the offence of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm. There was no infringement of the principle in De Simoni.

Thirdly, it was submitted that the sentence was excessive having regard to the range of sentences imposed for this offence. That could be seen as a concession - I would say it was an unavoidable concession - that the sentence was within the range for this offence generally. The complaint was that the sentence was at the high end of the scale and should not have been. There can be no complaint about that in the case of an assault upon a police officer acting in the execution of his or her duty.

The courts have properly taken a very serious view of such assaults: Crump (CCA , 7 February 1975, unreported); Myers (CCA , 13 February , unreported). There is an obvious need to give full weight to the objective of general deterrence in sentences of this kind as a warning for others.

Const Wyber was in uniform. The applicant must have known he was assaulting a police officer acting in the execution of his duty.

Fourthly, it was submitted that the trial judge failed to have regard or sufficient regard to certain mitigating facts. However, the sentence was not excessive having regard to all relevant objective and subjective considerations including those mentioned in written and oral argument by the appellant's counsel. A relevant and important consideration was the extent of the injury caused to Const Wyber. He suffered a broken nose, a wound necessitating sutures and a chipped tooth. He had undergone two surgical procedures and, at the time of giving evidence, continued to suffer from headaches and from pain in the nasal area. He had also lost most of his sense of smell which, as one knows, contributes substantially to the sense of taste.
This was a very serious case that warranted the sentence imposed.

The submission that the sentencing judge failed to have regard, or sufficient regard, to the factors which had been specified by the appellant's counsel fails. There is no reason to suppose that his Honour failed to have regard, or sufficient regard, to any such factors.

There is one aspect of the submissions that have been made that I feel should be mentioned. It was submitted that his Honour erred in depriving the applicant of leniency by reason of "his minor criminal record." The applicant's record includes a conviction in 1993 for driving in a manner dangerous, for which he was fined and for which he was disqualified from driving for three years. Later in 1993 he was again convicted of dangerous driving, sentenced to 75 hours of community service, fined and again disqualified from driving for three years. In 1994, the applicant was convicted of driving while disqualified and sentenced to a fixed term of imprisonment of four months and his disqualification was extended for a further period of twelve months. On appeal from that result a recognisance was substituted for the prison sentence. The recognisance was current at the time of the offence with which this court is now concerned.

That is not a "minor criminal record." It is a record which demonstrates disdain for the lives and welfare of other members of the community and for the law. The trial judge was right in his observation that the applicant's criminal record did not entitle the applicant to leniency.

I would propose the following orders:
Appeal against conviction (not argued) dismissed.
Leave to appeal against severity of sentence.
Appeal against severity of sentence dismissed.

WOOD J: I agree. 
SMART J: I also agree. 
WOOD J: The orders of the court will accordingly be as proposed. * * * 
