

Ledgerwood V Perpetual Trustee Company Limited [1997] NSWSC 142 (17 April )
 `LEDGERWOOD V PERPETUAL TRUSTEE COMPANY LIMITED` `3818/95` ``Friday 4 April 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff seeks a declaration that upon the true construction of the will of Marion Pollock Bentley and in the events which have happened she is beneficially entitled to all of the articles, effects of personal, domestic or household use or ornament, furniture and jewellery and any motor vehicle belonging to the testatrix. 
Marion Pollock Bentley died on 2 February 1995, having first made and published her last will and testament on 15 August 1988 to which there was one codicil made 29 December 1990. The executors named in the will, namely David
Ronald Osborne and Ian David Osborne who are both solicitors, renounced probate and letters of administration with the will annexed were granted to the defendant on 20 June 1995.

Clause 3 of the will is as follows:-
I GIVE free of all duties all my articles and effects of personal or domestic or household use or ornament, furniture and jewellery and any motor car belonging to me to my Trustees with the request that they will dispose of the same in accordance with any existing or future Memorandum written or signed by me but the foregoing expression of my wishes shall not create any trust or legal obligation even if communicated to any person in my lifetime." 
No memorandum was produced by the testatrix until after she had made her codicil. On 1 March 1991, the testatrix signed the following document:- "TO: MY TRUSTEES 
This is the written Memorandum referred to in 
Clause 3 of my Will dated 15th August, 1988.

I GIVE (free of all duties) my contents contained in Unit 21 "Murilla" Double Bay, , my jewellery and other articles and my effects of household domestic personal use or ornament to MY FRIEND SHIRLEY MINELL and if she should not survive me THEN for her daughter CHARMAINE LEDGERWOOD absolutely." 
Shirley Ellen Minell died on 6 May 1991 and hence predeceased the testatrix.
Charmaine Ledgerwood is the plaintiff.

The defendant trustee filed a cross claim seeking construction of the will and asking whether it was the plaintiff, the residuary beneficiaries, the Messrs
Osborne or the next of kin or some other person who took the property referred to in clause 3 of the will.

At the hearing, Mr Willmott of counsel appeared for the plaintiff, Mr
Blackburn-Hart for the administrator cta, Miss Anastasi for the residuary beneficiaries, Mr d'Apice for the representatives of the next-of-kin and the
Messrs Osborne submitted to any order that the court might make.

There were previous proceedings in this court over this will in the Probate
Division No 103200 of 1995. The Registrar or Deputy Registrar in Probate determined that the memorandum of March 1991 was not a testamentary document.
An order was made by the Probate Division as a result of the Registrar's decision whereby "THE COURT DECLARES that it is not satisfied that the testator intended that the document dated 1 March 1991 constitutes a codicil to or amendment of her will dated 15 March 1988 (sic)." 
There has been no challenge to that determination.

Mr Willmott's primary submission is that the gift in clause 3 of the will should be deemed to be a gift to the Messrs Osborne whereby they take, not beneficially, but as trustees pursuant to a half secret trust. Alternatively it is put that the Messrs Osborne have a general power of appointment or have the beneficial interest in the personalty free of any encumbrance or trust.
This last submission is made because there has been an assignment from the
Osbornes to the plaintiff. I will deal with each of these matters in turn. It is only if all of these submissions fail that I need turn to whether the property is held on behalf of the residuary beneficiaries or the next-of-kin.
That matter will depend on the proper construction of clauses 5 and 6 of the will, but I will come to that in due course.

Mr Willmott submits that equity has long held that if a testatrix in her lifetime communicates to another that she has left that other property in her will to be held by the other for the use of a third person, and that other accepts the communication and the testatrix dies without any repudiation of the communication, the confidence is fastened upon the conscience of the other who cannot appropriate the property to his own use or dispose of it otherwise than in the accordance with the wishes of the testatrix. He cites as authority for that proposition Voges versus Monahan <case>; [(1954) 94 CLR 231], 240. Indeed, Mr Willmott's proposition really derives from the judgment of Lord Davey in French versus French [[1902] 1 IR 172], 230, which
Fullagar and Kitto, JJ said in Voges' case was "probably as clear an exposition of the principle as is to be found in the books." 
Mr Willmott puts there are thus three ingredients to consider: 
The testatrix's intention; 
The testatrix's communication; and 
The beneficiaries' acquiescence.

Mr Blackburn-Hart does not cavil with the general principles of law which I have just set forth, but says that there could not be any secret trust in the instant case. He says that on the proper construction of clause 3 of the will there was no absolute bequest to the Osbornes, and in any event, their renunciation would have put an end to any right that they might have.

It is necessary thus to turn to clause 3 of the will and to analyse it more closely. It can be seen that on the face of it there is a gift "to my
Trustees". "Trustees" are defined in clause 2 of the will as the Osbornes, but then the will continues that the expression "my Trustees ... shall include the
Trustee or Trustees for the time being hereof". One has to disregard this definition in order to take the words "my Trustees" in clause 3 as referring only to the Osbornes and not to the trustee for the time being.

Clause 5 of the will gives the rest and residue of the property "to my
Trustees UPON TRUST ... ". Clause 6 of the will again directs "MY TRUSTEES shall hold my residuary estate in trust" and it seems to me that when one sees the constant use of the expression "my Trustees" throughout the will meaning trustee for the time being, it is extremely difficult to give the expression any special meaning in clause 3. Accordingly, I find it difficult to see how there is a gift to the Osbornes in clause 3.

There is, however, a principle that renunciation by an executor named in the will should not have any effect on any trust under the will. By [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s10.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/), the effect of renunciation is to operate as a disclaimer of the trusts contained in the will. However, the person to whom the grant of letters of administration with the will annexed is made is deemed by that section to be appointed trustee of the will.

In Re Maddock [[1902] 2 Ch 220], 231, Cozens-
Hardy, LJ said that disclaimer by a fully secret trustee would cause the fully secret trust to fail. However, in Blackwell versus Blackwell [[1929] AC ] at 328,
Lord Buckmaster would not treat disclaimer as invalidating the secret trusts making it equitable fraud for the secret trustee to renounce a legacy.
Underhill and Hayton, Law of Trusts and Trustees 15th ed (Butterworths
London 1995) p 236, adopts this view and says that it would only be "if the testator's communication to his legatee were construed not as imposing trusts but as conferring a gift subject to a condition" that the result would be otherwise.

Other academic writers take the same view. Pettit, Equity and the Law of
Trusts 7th ed (Butterworths London 1993) p 117-8, says, "Where it is the secret trustee and not the beneficiary thereunder who predeceases the testator, or where the secret trustee disclaims the devise or legacy, the better view is, perhaps, that the secret trust fails in the case of a fully- secret trust, on the ground that it only affects the property by reason of the personal obligation binding the individual devisee or legatee. In the case of a half-secret trust, however, the trust may well be good, on the principle that equity will not allow a trust to fail for want of a trustee." Ford and
Lee, Principles of the Law of Trusts 3rd ed (LBC 1996)[6330] says, "In a half-secret trust it is arguable that the failure of the named legatee-trustee to take should not prejudice the beneficiary since equity will not allow the trust disclosed by the will to fail for want of a trustee. Since the basis of enforcement of secret trusts seems to be wider than preventing the person who gave the undertaking to the deceased from benefiting from failure to carry out the undertaking and to extend to the need to carry out the intentions of a deceased who has acted on the face of an undertaking ... the identity of the trustee should not be material." 
Accordingly, it does not seem to me fatal to Mr Willmott's argument that the
Messrs Osborne renounced probate. Furthermore, if it can be plainly seen that the testatrix made a gift to her trustees on a certain basis which was accepted by the persons named in the will as trustees after it had been duly communicated to them, there is no reason why either the persons who actually became trustees of the will or, alternatively, the person who by operation of law would take the gift would not be affected by the trust because to hold otherwise would allow them to take advantage of the equitable fraud of another. An analogous case is Moss versus Cooper <case>; [(1861) 1 J & H 352], ; <case>; [70 ER 782], 789, where Page-Wood, VC said, "If, on the faith of a promise by A, a gift is made in favour of A and B, the promise is fastened on to the gift to both, for B cannot profit by A's fraud." Likewise if there is equitable fraud on the part of the person renouncing the trusteeship, then the new trustee or the beneficiary who would otherwise take at law cannot take advantage of that fraudulent act to their own benefit.

Mr Blackburn-Hart relied on the well known principle that generally speaking a gift to an executor is conditional upon the executor taking up office; see
Re Steele <case>; [(1915) 15 SR 247.]
However, that rule is merely a prima facie rule of construction and where there is other matter in the will which indicates otherwise such as appointing "my dear friend Agnes Rice" executrix, a different view will be taken: Re
Wirth [(1903) 47 WN 188.]
A different view again would be taken where it is clear that the executor is to hold on secret trust; alternatively the proposition as to equitable fraud enunciated above would cover the situation. Thus I need say no more about this argument.

It is now necessary to look at the law of half secret trusts and in particular the rule that applies in England enunciated in Re Keen [1937] 1 236, but which has its genesis in at least one of the judgments in Blackwell v
Blackwell [[1929] AC 318], 339 and which has been reinforced by the recent decision of
Re Bateman's Will Trusts [[1970] 1 WLR 1463] that unless the communication is made in the case of a half secret trust at or before the time the will was made, no valid trust is created.

The academic writings show that there are two competing theories as to the juristic basis for half secret trusts. One is that the trust flows from the will itself and the other is that the trust flows from the effect on the conscience of the person who has acquiesced in the half secret trust. The views are canvassed by the learned academic authors but the prevailing view is the latter. Because the trust flows from the effect on the conscience of the fiduciary, it matters not that there are problems with the formalities under the [Wills Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/) or delegation of testamentary power or that there is a technical problem such as the beneficiary of the half secret trust witnessing the will. The main academic writings are Underhill and Hayton at p 235 and Fleming "Secret
Trusts" (1947) 12 Conveyancer (NS) 28.

Thus Megarry, VC could say in Re Snowden [[1979] Ch 528], 535, "... The whole basis of secret trusts, as I understand it, is that they operate outside the will, changing nothing that is written in it, and allowing it to operate according to its tenor, but then fastening a trust on to the property in the hands of the recipient." Despite the fact that the equitable fraud view has prevailed, there are still some qualms that to take the doctrine of half secret trusts too far, one may in fact do too much violence to the spirit of the [Wills Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wa91/). This is well illustrated by the principle in Re Keen to which I will return.

Because the doctrine of half secret trusts operates independently of the will, it matters not that a beneficiary under the will either witnessed the will or the memorandum of wishes: Re Young [[1951] Ch 344], 350. In so far as Re Fleetwood [(1880) 15 Ch D 594], may have decided contrary to this proposition, the decision in Fleetwood was erroneous. As Danckwerts, J points out in Young's case at 351, the point was not actually argued in Fleetwood and the decision made by Hall, VC on the point was contrary to the House of Lords' decision in Cullen versus Attorney
General for Ireland [(1866) LR 1 HL 190] and was not followed in Ireland in O'Brien versus Condon [[1905] 1 IR 51], 59.

Another small point which should be got out of the way before dealing with the main objection to the half secret trust is that the communication of 1991 was clearly communicated to Mr Osborne Senior, but it was not clearly communicated to Mr Osborne Junior. Mr Willmott says that as the Osbornes were partners in the same firm of solicitors, notice to one is notice to the other. However, he does not have to go this far because it is quite plain that where there is a joint gift communication to one of the joint donees is sufficient: Moss v
Cooper and Re Young at 349 are authorities for this proposition.

I then turn to the question as to whether the communication of the secret trust has to be made by a memorandum before or at the time of the will. It is plain that the communication in the instant case was made afterwards.

In England there is no doubt at all about the point. Re Keen following what Lord Sumner had said in Blackwell's case has laid down the rule. It is a rule that has been followed in New Zealand in Re Karsten [[1953]
NZLR 456] and in Canada Re Mihalopulos [(1956) 5 DLR (2d) 628] and see Waters, Law of Trusts in Canada 2nd ed (Carswell Toronto 1984) pp and following. The rule has, however, been severely criticised by the highest authority. Professor Holdsworth, in his article "Secret
Trusts" [(1937) 53 LQR 501], makes a powerful case that there can be no logical distinction between a secret trust where the communication can be at any time before death and a half secret trust. He says (p 506) the distinction appears to rest "upon a confusion of thought in the reasoning of Parker, VC in the case of Johnson versus Ball <case>; [(1851) 5 De G & Sm 85](/cgi- bin/LawCite?cit=%281851%29%205%20De%20G%20%26%20Sm%2085 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 91; <case>; [64 ER 1029], 1032 which arises from a failure to distinguish a gift which is an absolute post-mortem gift from a gift which is not ...". Professor
Holdsworth suggests that a court should "simplify the law by getting rid of a distinction which is unreasonable and works substantial injustice." See also
Perrins "Secret Trusts: The Key to the Dehors" (1985) 49 Conveyancer 248.

Waters says, op cit, p 224 of the Re Keen line of authorities, "One would have thought that this opinion brings much of the law of secret trusts into question, for at this point the conflict between probate rules and secret trusts is most evident, but Canadian courts have accepted the English authority without question." 
Sheridan, in an article in [(1951) 67 LQR 314], 329, analyses the English and Irish cases and suggests that whilst Re Keen contains preferable legal reasoning, the Irish solution provides rules which disappoint the intentions of the testator less than is done in England.

The law in Ireland as to secret trusts was stated by Monroe, J in Re King's
Estate (1888) 21 LR Ir Ch 273, 277. Although he found that there was no secret trust arising in that case, Monroe, J laid down seven propositions summarizing the law of Ireland. These have been repeated on many occasions since and can usefully be found in Delany, Equity and the Law of Trusts in
Ireland (Sweet & Maxwell Dublin 1996) p 94. The fourth proposition is that there can be a valid half secret trust even if the communication is made subsequent to the execution of the will.

In Re Browne [[1944] Ir R 90], the testator in 1935 had made a will leaving the whole of his estate to George Ward on the basis that "I relying on his carrying out the wishes which I have expressed to him and/or may do so hereafter." In 1942, the testator gave to Mr Ward a document headed "Instructions" dated 23
November 1939 which he said contained the manner in which the estate was to be distributed. The testator died later the same day. Overend, J upheld the trust. He said at p 97 that, "It is also immaterial that the trusts were communicated after the execution of the will, so long as they were communicated to the legatee, and accepted by him, in the lifetime of the testator." Although he mentioned Keen's case he did so in another connection and seemed to think his proposition flowed from Re King's Estate and that the English had only just caught up with the law in Re King's
Estate in the House of Lords' decision in Blackwell.

In Keane's Equity and the Law of Trusts in the Republic of Ireland (Butterworths London 1988) p 94, the author considered that Monroe, J's fourth proposition only applied to fully secret trusts and pointed out that in Re Browne Overend, J's words should be considered as obiter and their authority was weak because the Judge did not discuss Re Keen on this point. The learned author thought that the law in Ireland should be the same as it was in England on this matter.

Delany points out at p 96 of her book that the High Court in Ireland had the opportunity of clearing the matter up in Prendiville versus Prendiville 5 December 1990, unreported (proceedings 1989 No 597Sp), where the point came before Barron, J. The case is unreported, but it is the subject of an extensive note by Mee in (1992) 56 Conveyancer 202. Barron, J followed Re King's Estate and Re Browne and held that there was no difference in the rules applicable to fully secret and half secret trusts on the subject of communication. Unfortunately, he then, in the words of Mr Mee, "embarked on an ill-advised attempt to demonstrate that, far from opposing his conclusion, the English cases in fact supported it." Although Prendiville was the subject of an appeal to the Irish Supreme Court, as far as my research has gone, no appeal was ever heard.

Delany says at 98, "Certainly the view of Barron J that the principles to be applied to fully and half secret trusts should be the same has much to commend it and is based on sound practical arguments. The passing of the beneficial interest in respect of either type of trust is not a testamentary disposition and so it should not be relevant where the communication and acceptance of a trust occurs prior to the execution of the will. The argument is re-enforced if one accepts the modern justification for the enforcement of secret trusts and on this basis the approach of the Irish courts cannot be faulted either on policy grounds." 
Scott on Trusts 4th ed Vol 1A para 55.8 strongly criticises the Re Keen rule as illogical (see pp 87 and 88) but in America there seem to be cases which go either way on the point. There is very little on secret trusts in Australia. I have already referred to the High Court's decision in Voges' case on fully secret trusts and, apart from this, there appears only to be Re Tilley <case>; [(1918) 25 Argus LR 6]; Dixon versus White Holland, J, 14 April 1982, unreported and my decision in Public Trustee versus Gecker 5 December 1990, unreported, but noted in [1991] ACL Rep 430 NSW 6. 
Of these cases, only Guest versus Webb mentions the present point. In that case, the testatrix executed a will in which she stated that her executor shall distribute her estate in accordance with discussions between them. She gave the will to the executor but retained the letter saying she intended to make alterations to it. Starke, J at 429 followed Blackwell's case and then said at 430, "Where the gift on the face of the will is to the donee as trustee the communication of the testator's wishes and intentions must be prior to or contemporaneously with the execution of the will. Where, however, the donee on the face of the will takes beneficially communication may be at any time up to death ...". He cites, amongst other cases, Re Keen. 
However, this is really prefatory averment because the learned Judge came to the conclusion that the testatrix had intended to alter her letter of instruction and as it had not been found as at her death she must have revoked any benefaction.

Hardingham, Neave and Ford, Wills and Intestacy in Australia and New Zealand 2nd ed (LBC 1989) at [733] p 187, says of Lord Wright's judgment in Re Keen , "With respect, it may be noted that a secret trust is not constituted simply by notification but rather by notification coupled with the giving of an undertaking, and it is this factor which distinguishes an effective secret trust from an abortive attempt at incorporation by reference." With respect, I agree.

In the present case it would seem that the solicitor who was entrusted with the task of looking after the testatrix's affairs was of the view that a memorandum of her wishes could be changed at any time, and if communicated to the executor (himself and his son), could operate as a trust. His knowledge of this branch of the law may have been imperfect which is understandable, but there is no doubt at all that the person named as trustee and his partner and son knew and undertook that they would carry out the testatrix's wishes. The comment made by Hardingham, Neave and Ford applies a fortiori in this case.

Because of the state of these authorities, a judge in Australia is entitled to decide the matter on first principles. Whilst decisions of English courts are usually followed to provide for common thought throughout the common law world especially when those decisions are followed by courts in New Zealand, it seems to me the present situation is one where the matter should be dealt with on first principles for Australian law.

I cannot get away from the view that the Irish position is the one which carries out the policy of this part of the law, that is, that it is against the conscience of the donee that the donee should be permitted to have undertaken to the testatrix to carry out her wishes and then not to have done so. Accordingly, I follow the decisions in Re Browne and Prendiville's case and do not follow the decision in Re Keen.

I have not overlooked the point that although the trust binds the conscience of the putative trustee (and anyone else who takes the property with knowledge of the matter which binds the conscience), it is not until the testatrix dies that there is property over which the trust operates. This problem is, I believe, one I have already dealt with earlier in these reasons and disregarding dicta of Cozens-Hardy, LJ in Re Maddock and accepting the general principle that no person however innocent may profit by the fraud of another, I agree with Hardingham, Neave & Ford's view in para 738 that this fact does not affect the result. 
It follows that either the defendant holds the property covered by clause 3 on trust for the plaintiff, or alternatively, the defendant holds the property on trust for the residuary beneficiary or the next-of-kin who in turn hold on trust for the plaintiff. It matters little which it is.

Because of what I have just said, it is unnecessary to devote too much time and attention to whether the gift if the trust fails is to the residuary beneficiary or whether there is a partial intestacy. The court, of course, leans against partial intestacies though if such an answer is compelled the court will, of course, so hold. The general rule is that a residuary bequest prima facie includes the subject matter of legacies which fail for some reason: Leake versus Robinson <case>; [(1817) 2 Mer 363], 393; <case>; [35
ER 979], 990. In the instant case, the only possible argument as to why this rule does not apply is that it is possible to construe the words "rest and residue of my property" in clause 5 of the will as referring to all the property not included in clause
However, if this were a proper method of construction it would virtually mean that the rule had no application at all. Thus, in my view, if the trust failed the property would go to the residuary legatees.

I should add that Mr Blackburn-Hart did address an argument on the basis that clause 3 was an invalid delegation of will-making power. That there is such a principle is beyond doubt; see Horan versus James [[1982] 2 NSWLR 376.] However, where a testatrix does give the property to a person and that person has already agreed to hold the property on trust, then there being a completely constituted trust, the rule is not infringed. In any event, as I held in
Gregory versus Hudson (in which reasons for judgment were also handed down today), the rule against delegation does not affect the case where the testatrix has given her money to a trustee to hold on the terms of a valid existing trust.

Finally it was urged that the memorandum of 1991 was really a testamentary instrument because it was to operate after death and accordingly was invalid because it had not been executed in the same way as the will or in a way which would attract the informal will provisions of the Wills, Probate and
Administration Act; see Bird versus Perpetual Executors & Trustees
Association of Australia Ltd <case>; [(1946) 73 CLR 140.] However, this cannot be an answer to the present problem because immediately on acquiescence of the nominated beneficiary the trust was constituted subject to the property falling in.

Accordingly, I make order 2 in the amended summons filed 4 March 1997. I dismiss the cross claim because it is unnecessary to make any orders on the cross claim in view of the finding I have made and the order I have made on the claim. I have already made a representative order. The proper order for costs is that the costs of all parties on the appropriate basis come out of the estate. There may be some argument as to from what part of the estate the costs should come and if necessary, I will hear argument on that matter.
Unless my Associate hears from counsel no later than 14 April 1997, I will have the matter listed before me for short minutes to be brought in at 9.30 am on Thursday 17 April 1997. There is no need for all counsel to attend provided that a barrister or solicitor representing the plaintiff and the first defendant either concur in short minutes or appear on the next occasion.
 * * * 
