

Lane versus Jurd and Anor [1996] NSWSC 122 (13 May 1996) 
Lane versus Jurd & Anor /94 
Monday, 13 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff was born in 1915. Both his parents died when he was young and he left school at the age of 15. Thereafter he worked as a pipe fitter's assistant and a process worker, and after a period of war service in the 1940's, as a telephone technician for some thirty years until he retired in May 1980. He is in receipt of a war service pension. The plaintiff never married. From 1940 he lived with an aunt, Irene Lane, in her house at North Bondi. Irene Lane died in 1979, in consequence of which the house was sold and the plaintiff moved into a rented flat at Clovelly. The plaintiff inherited approximately $20,000.00 from his aunt's estate. It appears that he had no other substantial assets.

During approximately the first half of 1980 an arrangement was in contemplation between the plaintiff and a cousin, Barry Egan, under which the plaintiff was to contribute his $20,000.00 and obtain secure accommodation in a home unit for the remainder of his life. Other elements of the proposed arrangement were never finally settled. The plaintiff asked the first defendant, who was the plaintiff's nephew and a qualified lawyer in the
Commonwealth Public Service, to look after the plaintiff's interests from a legal point of view in relation to the proposal, and the first defendant agreed to do so. However, in about mid-July 1980 Mr Egan declined to proceed with the proposed arrangements, which were abandoned.

A few days later the first defendant spoke to the plaintiff about an alternative proposal under which the plaintiff would be accommodated in a terrace house at 15 Bridge Street, Erskineville which was owned jointly by the first defendant and his wife, the second defendant. The Erskineville property had been purchased by the defendants in August 1979 for $24,000.00, of which $16,000.00 had been borrowed by them on the security of a mortgage over the property. After carrying out some renovations the defendants had in September let the property to tenants at a rent of $60.00 per week.

Shortly after the initial approach to the plaintiff by the first defendant concerning the Erskineville property, the plaintiff inspected the property and further discussed the proposal with the first defendant. A consensus was reached, the essential elements of which were (a) that the plaintiff would pay the defendants the sum of $20,000.00; (b) that the plaintiff would have the right to occupy the Erskineville property for the remainder of his life rent- free; (c) that the defendants would carry out certain renovations to the property including in particular the replacement of the bathroom and laundry and some improvement to the kitchen; and (d) that the plaintiff would pay the rates on the property during the period of his occupation. During these discussions there was reference by the first defendant to the proposal being similar to the arrangement with Barry Egan, but I do not consider that this was intended by the first defendant, or understood by the plaintiff, to indicate anything more than the concept of a right of lifetime occupancy for a payment of $20,000.00.

The defendants gave notice to quit to their tenants and, in early August 1980 the plaintiff commenced occupying the Erskineville property. A few days later the plaintiff paid $20,000.00 to the defendants, and a week or so later again the first defendant asked the plaintiff to sign a hand-written form of agreement which the plaintiff then read and signed. The agreement was also signed by each of the defendants. The terms of the hand-written agreement were as follows: "Agreement made this 16th day of August 1980 between Paul Desmond Jurd of 24
Nicholson Avenue Thornleigh Family Court Officer and Veronika Maria Jurd of the same address, his wife (hereinafter call "the landlords") of the one part and Terrence Lane of 15 Bridge Street Erskineville, Service Pensioner (hereinafter call "the tenant") of the other part 
Whereas: 
A The landlords are the registered proprietors of premises known as 15 Bridge
Street Erskineville being a 2 storey terrace house and being the whole of the land in certificate of title volume 11378 folio 82 (hereinafter call "the premises").

B The landlords are desirous of permitting the tenant to occupy the premises on the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth.

It Is Hereby Agreed and Declared that in consideration of the compliance by the tenant with the conditions here following the landlords shall provide the tenant with exclusive occupation and quiet enjoyment of the premises until th day of August in the year 1990 and thereafter to occupy the premises in shared accommodation with such person or persons as are approved from time to time by the landlords until 16th day of August in the year 2015.

The Conditions being: The tenant shall pay as rent to the landlords yearly a sum equal to the council rate and water rates for each of such years, until 16th day of August , that the tenant is in occupation.
 The tenant shall permit the landlords to enter the premises and carry out such maintenance renovation and improvement as the landlords see fit.
 The tenant shall forthwith notify the landlords of any damage defect or breakdown to or in the premises." 
The plaintiff was not invited to, and did not, seek any independent advice about this agreement. When he read it, it seemed to him to be different from what had been earlier discussed, but he made no complaint because he had already moved in and paid his money, and thought that if he made a fuss it might delay getting the property "fixed up" so that a female friend with whom he had intended to share the property could move in. In the event the friend did not move into the property with the plaintiff, and the plaintiff has been the sole occupant of the property since that time. After the plaintiff commenced his occupation, the defendants arranged for the bathroom and laundry to be replaced and effected other renovations to the property and have from time to time carried out maintenance on the property. The plaintiff says that the replacement of the bathroom and laundry took a very considerable period of time and he attributes the decision of his friend not to reside there with him to the absence of a bath. Nothing however turns on this for the purpose of the present proceedings. The plaintiff has not sought to have anyone else live in the property with him and the defendants have not sought to disturb the plaintiff's sole occupation of the property. The plaintiff has continued to pay the rates. It may be noted (a) that in a letter dated 8 December 1988 to the plaintiff, the first defendant asserted an entitlement to have another person share the property with the plaintiff after 16 August 1990, and (b) that during the course of the hearing before me the defendants through their counsel gave an undertaking to the Court that they would not force the plaintiff to share accommodation with any person with whom he does not wish to share accommodation. In a letter to the plaintiff of 10 January 1992 the first defendant said: "Our tenancy agreement said that after 10 years there would be shared accommodation and you would not have to pay the rates. Since you are occupying the place alone I think it is fair that you continue to pay the rates. I believe that you do not want to share." 
The appears to have been accepted and acted upon by the plaintiff.

The present proceedings were commenced on 23 September 1994. By his statement of claim as amended the plaintiff claims that both the written agreement of 16
August 1980 and the oral agreement which preceded it were unjust in the circumstances relating to them at the time they were made and were entered into in breach of a fiduciary duty owed by the first defendant to the plaintiff. The orders sought by the plaintiff (as set out in the statement of claim) are as follows: "(a) A declaration that pursuant to a constructive trust, the Defendants' hold on trust for the Plaintiff a three quarter interest in the terrace house, or such other interest as the Court deems appropriate.

Alternatively, a declaration pursuant to an express trust, [that] the
Defendants hold the terrace house on trust for the Plaintiff during the
Plaintiff's life time.

A declaration that the oral agreement was unjust in the circumstances relating to the oral agreement at the time it was made.

A declaration that the tenancy agreement was unjust in the circumstances relating to the tenancy agreement at the time it was made.

Alternatively to (a) and (b): i An order setting aside both the oral agreement and the tenancy agreement; and ii Pursuant to Schedule 1 of the [Contracts Review Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) such orders as the Court deems just in the circumstances, including an order that the Defendant pay the Plaintiff money by way of compensation.

Costs.

Such further or other orders, relief or direction as to this Honourable
Court may seem fit, including if appropriate an order for interest pursuant to section 94 of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) on any compensation which the court may order.

Equitable compensation." 
The claim for "equitable compensation" in subparagraph (h) is based on allegations that the first defendant owed a fiduciary duty to the plaintiff and breached that duty by: "(i) Failing to expeditiously document the arrangements between the plaintiff and Mr Egan; 
Entering into the oral agreement; and/or 
Entering into the tenancy agreement" 
It is convenient at this point to deal with the question of alleged breaches of fiduciary duty. Although the first defendant was, in my view, in a fiduciary relationship to the plaintiff so long as he was advising or acting for the plaintiff or looking after his interests in connection with the proposed arrangement with Barry Egan, any failure by the first defendant to expeditiously document those arrangements would not constitute a breach of a fiduciary duty, but rather might found a claim in negligence. Be this as it may, I would not be prepared to find on the evidence that the first defendant had in this respect failed to take reasonable care to protect the interests of the plaintiff. Indeed, so far as the evidence reveals why the proposed arrangement with Barry Egan did not proceed, it suggests that the cause may well have been Mr Egan's impatience with a reasonable and proper insistence by the first defendant on those arrangements being satisfactorily documented before the plaintiff parted with his money, rather than any undue delay on the first defendant's part.

Although the first defendant's proposal to the plaintiff came very soon after the termination of the proposed arrangements with Barry Egan, I am not satisfied that the fiduciary relationship between the first defendant and the plaintiff which arose in connection with those proposed arrangements with
Barry Egan still remained extant after their abandonment. Of relevance here is the fact that at about the time of the withdrawal by Barry Egan, the plaintiff consulted other solicitors in connection with the Barry Egan proposal, namely
Mr L Major (who was the second defendant's father), and a Mr R Farmer, the principal of the firm in which Mr Major worked. According to the plaintiff's evidence this occurred after the first defendant had said to him: "The discussions between Barry Egan's solicitor and me are not getting to a stage where any agreement can be finalised. Because it is at this stage, I will have to hand you over to another solicitor. I will send you to a firm on the corner of King and Castlereagh Streets where my father-in-law Laslo Major works." 
Although the first defendant did not give evidence, in a written witness statement by him which was tendered by the plaintiff, he denied having discussed with the plaintiff his attending at the office where Mr Major worked, or having been aware in advance that the plaintiff was going to see Mr
Major. There is also in evidence a witness statement by Mr Major (who died shortly prior to the hearing) which gives some particulars of consultations between the plaintiff and Mr Major and Mr Farmer, but makes no reference to the first defendant. It is difficult to reconcile this material, particularly in the absence of oral evidence from the first defendant, Mr Major or Mr
Farmer. However, in the light of the plaintiff's own evidence, I do not find that at the time of the first defendant's proposal to the plaintiff, there was any subsisting fiduciary relationship between them. That is not to say that their earlier fiduciary relationship in connection with the proposed arrangements with Barry Egan is irrelevant to their later dealings in questions arising under the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). That relationship provided part of the background to those later dealings, as did their family relationship and relative circumstances, and it is likely that the plaintiff continued to repose a degree of reliance on the first defendant.

It has been submitted for the defendants that relief under the [Contracts
Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) is now precluded by [s.16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s16.html) of that Act which provides: "16 An application for relief under this Act in relation to a contract may be made only during any of the following periods: the period of 2 years after the date on which the contract was made; the period of 3 months before or 2 years after the time for the exercise or performance of any power or obligation under, or the occurrence of any activity contemplated by, the contract; and the period of the pendency of maintainable proceedings arising out of or in relation to the contract, being proceedings (including cross-claims, whether in the nature of set-off, cross-action or otherwise) that are pending against the party seeking relief under this Act." 
I reject this submission. The true analysis of what happened as between the plaintiff and the defendants in July and August 1980 is that there was an agreement between them which came into existence either when the plaintiff commenced occupation of the Erskineville property or when he paid his $20,000.00 to the defendants, and which was varied by the execution by all parties of the written document of 16 August 1980, so that as from that date the agreement was that in consideration of the payment by the plaintiff to the defendants of $20,000.00 the plaintiff was entitled to occupy the Erskineville property on the terms set out in the document of 16 August 1980. Under that agreement there are powers continually available to be exercised and obligations continually to be performed, and the agreement contemplates continuing activities (including the occupation of the property by the plaintiff). The commencement of the proceedings was clearly within a period stipulated in [s.16(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s16.html) [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the Contracts Review Acts provides that where the Court finds a contract or a provision of a contract to have been unjust in the circumstances relating to the contract at the time it was made, the Court may, if it considers it just to do so, and for the purpose of avoiding as far as practicable an unjust consequence or result, (a) decide to refuse to enforce any or all of the provisions of the contract, (b) make an order declaring the contract void, in whole or in part, (c) make an order varying in whole or in part, any provision of the contract, (d) make an order for the execution of an instrument varying, terminating or otherwise affecting the operation or effect of an instrument transferring title to land, creating an estate or interest in land, or which is a dealing within the meaning of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). Where the Court makes a decision or order under s.7 it may grant such ancillary relief as may be just in the circumstances including orders of the kind specified in Schedule 1 (s.8). Section 9(1) provides that in determining whether a contract or a provision of a contract is unjust for the purposes of s.7, the Court is to have regard to the public interest and to all the circumstances of the case including consequences and results arising in the event of compliance, or non-compliance, with, or contravention of, any provision of the contract. Section 9(2) sets out specific matters to which the
Court is to have regard to the extent to which they are relevant in the circumstances. Section 9(4) provides that the Court is not to have regard to any injustice arising from circumstances that were not reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was made. The expression "unjust" is defined in [s.4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s4.html) to include "unconscionable, harsh or oppressive" and "injustice" is to be construed in a corresponding manner. These are not exhaustive definitions.

There can be little doubt that in the course of the dealings between them in
July and August 1980 the plaintiff was at a substantial disadvantage vis a vis the first defendant in respect of education, business experience, and legal knowledge. Furthermore, as already mentioned, the plaintiff was still to some degree relying on the first defendant to have regard to the plaintiff's interests in a general sense, given the history of the Barry Egan negotiations and the first defendant's participation therein, their family connection and their personal relationship. The document of 16 August 1990 was not presented to the plaintiff for signature until after he had gone into occupation of the property and paid his $20,000.00, and it was never suggested to him that he should seek independent advice about the arrangements with the defendants.
This is in sharp contrast to the procedural proprieties which the first defendant had (quite properly) insisted upon in relation to the plaintiff's dealings with Barry Egan, including in particular his advice to the plaintiff not to hand over his money before the proposed arrangements had been properly documented. These circumstances encourage a careful scrutiny of the terms and effect of the agreement between the plaintiff and the defendants. In this regard four elements stand out. The first is that the plaintiff was disposing permanently of substantially the whole of his capital assets. The second is that the agreement contained no provision to deal with circumstances in which it might become impracticable eg by reason of illness, accident or other disability, for the plaintiff to continue to occupy the Erskineville property.
This might have occurred within a relatively short time after the commencement of his occupation, yet the plaintiff would have had no contractual right to recover any of his money. The third is the obscure provision of the document of 16 August 1980 changing the regime after 16 August 1990, from a tenancy to a non-exclusive licence, which was not the subject of prior discussion. The fourth is the absence from the document of 16 August 1980 of any provision as to particular renovations to be made by the defendants.
 
These considerations lead me to the conclusion that the agreement between the parties was in several respects unjust in the circumstances relating to it at the time it was made within the meaning of [s.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).

The next question for consideration is whether it would now be just to grant relief under that Act for the purpose of avoiding as far as practicable an unjust consequence or result.

The position in which the plaintiff now finds himself is that because of his increasing age and deteriorating health the property is becoming increasingly less suitable for him. He suffers from heart disease and fluid retention and has difficulty traversing the staircase in the premises, which is quite steep.
The two bedrooms are on the upper floor and the bathroom is on the ground floor. Although this was not explored in any detail in evidence, it is conceivable that he might be able to utilise the ground floor dining room as a bedroom. The plaintiff has (in 1994) made application for a Housing Commission home, and is able to remain living in the Erskineville property for the time being, in contemplation that a Housing Commission home may become available.
There is no evidence as to when, or if, it is likely that he would receive a
Housing Commission home, and no doubt his ability to remain living in the premises is dependent upon their being no incapacitating deterioration in his medical condition. It is a real possibility (although there is no specific evidence about this) that before the plaintiff is able to secure suitable alternative accommodation (if he ever does) he will need assistance or care from some other person, perhaps on a constant basis, and that the only practicable way of his being able to secure such assistance or care will be to have that other person occupy the property with him.

The chief factor militating against the granting of relief under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) (or otherwise) involving the plaintiff's becoming entitled to any transmissible interest in the property, or to the payment of any money, is that in consequence of the agreement the plaintiff has enjoyed the benefit of occupation of the property, paying only the rates, for a period in excess of fifteen years, and the defendants have suffered the corresponding detriment of loss of the income which they would otherwise have been able to obtain from letting the property at market rates during that period. The evidence indicates (a) that the total of the water and municipal rates paid by the plaintiff over the period from August 1980 until the end of 1995 is approximately $5,600.00, and (b) that the aggregate of the rent which would have been obtainable by the defendants from letting the property over the same period was approximately $95,000.00. Another relevant financial consideration is that the $20,000.00 received by the defendants from the plaintiff in 1980 would have been tax-free in the hands of the defendant, and the major part of it was used by them to discharge the $16,000.00 mortgage over the property which saved them $2,080.00 per annum in interest payments under that mortgage (at 13% per annum) and interest payable under any further mortgage which may have been taken out to finance the discharge of that mortgage (which interest would no doubt have been deductible from rental received, for income tax purposes).

It cannot be concluded that the agreement with the plaintiff has resulted in any net financial gain to the defendants: on the contrary it seems likely to have resulted in a substantial net financial loss to them. It is undoubtedly true that the defendants have derived a very substantial gain from the increase in the value of the property between the time they acquired it in and the present time, since its market value as at 11 April 1995 was $160,000.00. But there is nothing to suggest that this capital gain was attributable to the agreement with the plaintiff. There could be no suggestion that without the plaintiff's $20,000.00 the defendants would not have acquired the property: in fact they acquired it a year or so before any agreement with the plaintiff was in contemplation. If the defendants had not received the plaintiff's $20,000.00, no doubt the discharge of the $16,000.00 mortgage debt would have been funded in some other way.

I have reached the conclusion that only in one respect would it now be just to provide relief to the plaintiff under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), namely in respect of the duration of the plaintiff's rights as a tenant pursuant to the agreement. The document of 16 August 1980 appears to vest in the plaintiff an equitable tenancy of the property until 16 August 1990, and thereafter a non- exclusive licence to occupy the property until 16 August 2015 (by which date the plaintiff would, if still living, be 100 years of age). I have already referred to the undertaking to the Court on behalf of the defendants during the hearing that they would not force the plaintiff to share accommodation with any person with whom he does not wish to share accommodation. I do not consider this undertaking to be sufficient to remove what I perceive to be a continuing unjust consequence of that provision of the agreement, which I think was both reasonably foreseeable at the time the agreement was made, and unjust in the circumstances relating to the agreement at that time for reasons already given. I have in mind the possibility, already referred to, that the plaintiff will need to have some other person occupying the property with him to provide assistance or care. Under the agreement as it stands, that would appear not to be possible without the consent of the defendants, which might be unreasonably withheld.

In my opinion the justice of the case would be met by an order varying the agreement so that it is clear that the plaintiff is to be, and remain, (in equity) the tenant of the property for his life, or until his earlier ceasing to be in occupation of the property. (It is unnecessary to consider whether such an estate is strictly to be regarded as leasehold or freehold - see
Borambil versus O'Carroll [[1972] 2 NSWLR 302], affirmed [1974] 1 WLR 561, [[1974] 1 NSWLR 1], and Greco v Swinburne <case>; [[1991] 1 VR 304.)] As tenant the plaintiff will be at liberty to make such arrangements as he may wish for someone else to occupy the property with him.

Because the property is under the provisions of the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), the plaintiff's tenancy can be effective only in equity, in the absence of registration of an appropriate dealing. In the circumstances revealed by the evidence I do not consider that a registered dealing is necessary. If circumstances change, the plaintiff can apply for an order for the execution and registration of an appropriate dealing pursuant to the general liberty to apply which I will reserve. He may of course protect his equitable estate by lodgement of a caveat.

At the conclusion of the hearing counsel for the defendants asked that if I were to conclude that there should be some variation of the terms of the agreement, he be given the opportunity of making submissions as to costs.
Subject to any such submissions, my tentative view is that there should be no order as to costs. Counsel may also make submissions, if they wish, as to the precise terms of the order to be made. Subject to any such submissions I would propose orders in the following terms: Order pursuant to [s.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) that the agreement between the parties of which the document of 16 August 1980 forms part be varied with effect from the date of this order: by deleting from the said document the phrase "exclusive occupation" and substituting the phrase "exclusive possession"; by deleting from the said document the passage commencing "until 16th day of August in the year 1990" and concluding "until 16th day of August in the year 2015", and substituting "for the life of the tenant or until his earlier ceasing to be in occupation of the premises".
 Order that the proceedings be otherwise dismissed.
 Reserve liberty to apply.
 No order as to costs.
 * * * 
