

Kijumnuayporn versus Reinforced Plastics/Composites P/L [1996] NSWSC 642 (20
December 1996) 
Kijumnuayporn versus Reinforced Plastics/Composites Pty Ltd /96 December 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 20 September 1991, the plaintiff suffered personal injury in a work incident. He suffered injury to his left arm and shoulder. He now wishes to commence proceedings for the claiming of Common Law damages.

On 21 October 1996, he filed a Summons. The Summons claims, inter alia, leave pursuant to section 151D(2) of the Workers Compensation Act, 1987 (the
Act). The limitation period for the commencement of the proposed proceedings expired on 20 September 1994. The Summons came on for hearing on 5 December .

In support of the application, the plaintiff has placed two affidavits before the Court. There is an affidavit sworn by the plaintiff himself. There is an affidavit sworn by Mr Loupos (his present solicitor). Both deponents have been cross-examined. The defendant has not relied on any affidavit evidence. The parties have tendered documentation.

In a number of respects, the material provided by the affidavit evidence may be described as being sparse. To some extent, it was supplemented by material that was adduced during cross-examination and re-examination. It could be said that some of the oral material may be seen as being inconsistent with affidavit evidence.

A considerable part of the material is devoted to evidence of a medical nature. Certain of the history is to be found in the affidavits. It is not necessary to repeat much of that detail in this judgment. The affidavits annex a number of medical reports (from Drs Smith, Cunningham, Perko and Giblin).

It seems that Dr Teng was the general practitioner for the plaintiff. For many years (for at least a period during 1991 to 1995), he was treated by Dr Smith (an orthopaedic surgeon). The plaintiff has undergone a number of operations (including about five during 1994 and 1995). Many months after the expiry of the limitation period, he was referred to Dr Giblin for a second opinion and to Dr Perko for a third opinion. Dr Giblin saw the plaintiff on 16 June 1995.
It is not clear when Dr Perko saw the plaintiff. Dr Perko provided a report dated 30 October 1995. Dr Giblin provided a report dated 24 November 1995. The report from Dr Giblin, inter alia, contained an estimate of permanent loss of efficient use of the plaintiff's left arm.

The plaintiff says that, since the incident, he has regarded himself as having suffered a serious disability. He says that the advice given to him by Dr
Smith led him to believe that his condition would improve with time. The plaintiff says that his condition has not improved. Indeed, he says that his condition appears to have become worse.

The plaintiff has seen two solicitors. Since May 1992, his claim has been in the hands of legal advisers. On or about 8 May 1992, he consulted Messrs
Frisina & Associates. In about December 1993, he consulted his present solicitor.

In March 1993, the plaintiff was advised by Mr Frisina that it would be safer to bring proceedings in the Compensation Court rather than in Common Law because the plaintiff's condition had not stabilised at that time. The plaintiff gave written instructions to Messrs Frisina & Associates. A copy of the Instructions, which is dated 15 March 1993, is annexure `A' to his affidavit. The firm was instructed to proceed with a workers' compensation claim. The document contains the following: "I acknowledge that should proceedings not be commenced by 20 March 1993 in the Supreme Court and it is subsequently found that I have a permanent incapacity greater than 25% then proceedings may then be commenced in the
Supreme Court only with a full and satisfactory explanation for delay to the
Court. Action cannot be commenced more than three years after the date on which the injury was received except with the leave of the Court." 
Proceedings were brought in the Compensation Court. The Application for
Determination was filed on 19 March 1993. At some stage, those proceedings were allowed to lapse by reason of the non-filing of a Certificate of
Readiness. It would seem that nothing has been done to revive those proceedings.

On 30 December 1993, the plaintiff had a discussion with Mr Loupos. Mr Loupos advised him in the following terms:- "There is a danger of making an election to proceed at common law whilst your doctors are unable to give an assessment of permanent loss of use of the left arm." 
Mr Loupos was then instructed to pursue the plaintiff's workers' compensation rights. If anything was done to complement those instructions, the affidavits are silent as to the steps taken.

Although his affidavit does not deal with the matter, it seems that Mr Loupos was aware that the limitation period was about to expire. Its expiration was preceded by some frantic activity. By letter dated 1 September 1994, an urgent medical report was sought from Dr Smith. The letter (which enclosed the report fee) contained the following:- "PLEASE FURTHER NOTE THAT OUR CLIENT MAY A COMMON LAW ACTION AGAINST HIS
EMPLOYER. SUCH ACTION WILL BECOME STATUTE BARRED ON 9th SEPTEMBER, 1994 AND
YOUR REPORT IS REQUIRED AS A MATTER OF URGENCY SO COUNSEL'S OPINION MAY BE
OBTAINED AS TO THE LIKELY SUCCESS OF SUCH ACTION." 
Dr Smith provided a report dated 5 September 1994. It contained the following:- "In regard to your dilemma referred to on 1.9.94, I feel that his injuries are a direct consequence of his accident. It is not possible to give an accurate prognosis but I feel that he will be left with some permanent disability affecting the left upper limb. I cannot put a figure on it at this stage, but would predict that it will be such that it will be worthwhile making a claim on his behalf." 
Although it is not mentioned either in the affidavits or the oral evidence of the plaintiff, Mr Loupos says that, following the receipt of that report, he gave advice to the plaintiff and received instructions not to commence Common
Law proceedings. The affidavits do not mention any approach to Counsel. Mr
Loupos now concedes that he had erred as to the date of expiry of the limitation period.

I should digress to add that, during his oral evidence, the plaintiff said that he did not become aware of the limitation period until during 1995.

The evidence is largely unhelpful as to what may have happened in late 1994 and early 1995 (save for, inter alia, the operations that were had in and about 1994 and 1995). Little seems to have been done towards the prosecution of his claim. Some activity seems to have taken place in about mid-1995. He saw Dr Giblin in June 1995. Further reports were not obtained until late 1995.
Lack of funds is advanced as a reason for the delay in getting further reports.

In late 1995, according to his oral evidence, Mr Loupos sought advice from
Counsel. On or around 30 April 1996, he commenced the taking of steps for the arranging of an inspection of the machine which the plaintiff was operating at the time of his injury. On 26 July 1996, a Notice of Motion was filed in the
Compensation Court to obtain orders to enable a view of the defendant's premises to be carried out. The orders were made on 20 August 1996 and an inspection was carried out on that day and Dr Adams prepared a report.

Mr Loupos says that, by 23 August 1996, he was in a position to advise the plaintiff concerning his Common Law claim and that he then gave advice to the plaintiff to pursue the prospect of Common Law proceedings. Subsequently, the present Summons was filed on 21 October 1996.

The plaintiff has continued to receive compensation benefits since the accident. His employment with the defendant came to an end on 19 November .

The plaintiff has some capacity to both speak and read English. He did not have his affidavit translated prior to the swearing of it. He had the assistance of an interpreter during the giving of his oral evidence.

The Court has a judicial discretion to grant the relief sought by the plaintiff. The approach to be adopted in dealing with applications for the extension of a limitation period was recently considered by the High Court in
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866.] The onus of satisfying the Court that the discretion should be exercised in favour of an applicant lies on the applicant.

It is not said that the plaintiff does not have an arguable cause of action.
There is material which indicates that evidence is available to him which supports his claim.

In applications of this nature, the Court bears in mind that an extension of a limitation period will deprive a defendant of the statutory defence to the plaintiff's claim. It also bears in mind that, if relief is refused, the plaintiff will be barred from prosecuting his claim.

The defendant has identified three matters which it says should lead the Court to the view that the application should be refused.

Firstly, there is the matter of lack of forensic diligence or delay. Secondly, there is the failure to provide a satisfactory explanation for delay. Thirdly, there is the matter of prejudice.

The delay is substantial. This application is now brought about two years after the expiry of the limitation period. The prosecution of the plaintiff's claim has been in the hands of solicitors since about 8 May 1992. The evidence reveals that, at least since about March 1993, his solicitors were aware of the existence of the limitation period. A decision was made not to commence proceedings at Common Law shortly before the expiry of the limitation period.
At that time, a report had been received from the treating surgeon which advised that it would be worthwhile to make a claim on behalf of the plaintiff.

The evidence adduced on behalf of the plaintiff does not seek to provide a full or detailed explanation for the delay. Certain matters are advanced to excuse the delay by way of general explanation. It is said that there was a belief that the plaintiff's condition would improve. It is said that there was difficulty in obtaining an assessment of the permanent loss of the use of his arm and difficulty or danger in making an election to pursue the Common Law remedy prior to the expiry of the limitation period.

Whilst these matters explain some of the delay, it seems to me that the material relied on by the plaintiff falls well short of providing a satisfactory explanation. On any view, the prosecution of the claim has taken a leisurely course since September 1991. There seems to have been many periods of inactivity and there are many deficiencies in the explanation that is offered.

It may be that there is other material available to the plaintiff which could have been placed before the Court to deal with this matter. If so, the plaintiff and his advisers have chosen not to rely on it. The Court can only do its best on the material that is made available to it.

There is no evidence of actual prejudice. The defendant relies on presumptive or inferred prejudice only. The considerable delay in the prosecution of the claim in this case does give rise to a general presumption of prejudice (see
Taylor at p 873).

In my view, on the material that has been placed before the Court, the plaintiff has not discharged the onus of satisfying the Court that the discretion should be exercised in his favour.

If the plaintiff does have other material, he can always bring a fresh application.

I dismiss the Summons. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Summons. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
