

Regina versus Pattenden Matter No 60097/97 [1997] NSWSC 453 (1 October 1997) 
Regina versus Christopher Robert Pattenden /97 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Sully J, Bruce J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Christopher Robert PATTENDEN 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: At 5.30pm on Saturday 4 November 1995, Mr and Mrs Coleman were driving south along Wakehurst Parkway in a motor vehicle that was being driven by Mr Coleman. Mrs Coleman was aged sixty-six. The age of Mr Coleman does not appear from the evidence. They were on their way home from visiting their daughter at Roseville. They were driving safely at about 70 km per hour. It was a clear afternoon and the roadway was dry. 
A vehicle being driven by the appellant came towards them in the other direction. It veered onto the wrong side of the road and there was a head-on collision. Mr Coleman was killed and Mrs Coleman suffered serious injuries.

The appellant was a person who, being addicted to drugs, had been visiting a hospital for the purpose of obtaining methadone treatment. When his blood was analysed it was found to contain .28 milligrams per litre of morphine, .02 milligrams per litre of codeine, one milligram per litre of temazepam and .024 grams per 100 litres of alcohol.

The learned sentencing judge said, in the course of his remarks on sentence, about that matter: "Insofar as the morphine is concerned, the prisoner said that he could not remember taking any heroin and that he had not been using heroin again before the accident and that he was maintaining himself on his methadone program. He, however, also said that he could not remember what had occurred after his visit to the methadone clinic at St Leonards. It is also clear that the time of the collision was almost an hour and three-quarters after the visit to the clinic and, making various allowances, it is impossible to avoid a conclusion that he went somewhere else or did something else after he went to the clinic, because of the time lapse.

There was also a statement from his de facto wife to say that she had received a call from him when his voice sounded somewhat blurred and the circumstances of the accident itself would all tend to indicate that it was caused by his ingestion of drugs, probably heroin, which caused his concentration to lapse so that this accident occurred." 
The appellant pleaded guilty to two charges of driving a motor vehicle in a manner dangerous, one charge alleging that he caused the death of Barry
Coleman and the other charge alleging that he caused serious bodily injury to
Helen Coleman. The maximum penalty in each case was then years imprisonment.

The appellant was sentenced by Justice Blanch, the Chief Judge of the District
Court, as follows. In respect of the first charge the appellant was sentenced to imprisonment involving a minimum term of two years and an additional term of three years. In relation to the second offence, the appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for a fixed term of two years to commence on the same date as the commencing date of the first sentence.

Senior counsel for the appellant acknowledges that the carefully considered remarks on sentence of the learned judge disclose no error either of fact or law and that his Honour dealt sensitively and fairly with all the considerations that had been urged on behalf of the appellant.

One of the particular matters that had come up for consideration in the sentencing proceedings was the effect that the sentence to be imposed on the appellant would have upon his eight-year-old son. His Honour said of the appellant: "His background is that he comes from a respectable and responsible family.
He grew up. He got married when he was 22 years of age. Ultimately he got a job with Telecom. Unfortunately for him the marriage fell apart when their son was 12 months old and his wife walked out and left him with the child and he has been the sole parent for the child ever since. That child is now eight years of age.

He has since formed a de facto relationship which is a stable relationship and he intends to be married and his de facto wife has come to Court and she is obviously standing by him. She has three daughters and he has been a father figure to those daughters.

Of particular concern is the eight-year-old boy who is now left parentless, with his father in gaol. The boy is living with the prisoner's parents who are prepared to look after him, but they are getting on in years and obviously the responsibility of an eight-year-old boy is going to weigh heavily with them, and although in the ordinary course of events it is not appropriate to take into account the impact on other people of a gaol sentence, unless that impact is profound, it does appear to me that the boy is another innocent victim of all of this and it can only be hoped that in some way the impact on that boy can be minimised. I do believe it is appropriate to bear that in mind in fixing the minimum term." 
It appears from the foregoing that the judge imposed a lesser sentence than he would otherwise have imposed by reason of the considerations relating to the child of the appellant.

The sole ground of this appeal is that it appears from certain further evidence that the parents of the appellant are suffering even greater difficulty than had been anticipated in caring for the eight-year-old boy and that for that reason the adverse effect foreseen by the sentencing judge is of even greater magnitude than had been anticipated by him.

In support of that proposition we have before us two affidavits of the appellant's mother and two affidavits of a medical practitioner dealing with some serious health problems that have been experienced by the appellant's father.

The appellant has now been in prison for approximately ten months. Senior counsel for the appellant has acknowledged, in answer to a question from the
Bench, that the effect of the evidence which has been filed in support of this appeal is that, unless the appellant is released from prison either immediately or within the next month or two, the difficulties for the boy disclosed or foreshadowed by that evidence will not be solved.

In a number of cases in recent years this Court has had to deal with the principles that apply to considerations of hardship to third parties which flow from sentencing. I refer in particular to Regina versus Edwards, CCA, unreported 17 December 1996; and Regina versus Scott, CCA, unreported 27 November
In the latter case, the following observation was made: "There is a substantial body of material before the Court tendered by consent relating to events that have occurred since the sentencing proceedings in relation to the boy Matthew. That evidence shows that the incarceration of the appellant, Matthew's mother, has caused serious family dislocation and indicates personal stress to the child. Without question this is a very sad circumstance. It needs to be remembered, however, that it is by no means uncommon for hardship, and sometimes grave hardship, to be caused to third parties by sentencing a person to prison.

Judges and magistrates are routinely required, in the course of their duties, to sentence to prison parents of children, people who are carers of others who are weak or vulnerable, employers upon whom workers depend for their livelihood, and others, in a variety of circumstances, whose incarceration will cause hardship to third parties." 
In my view, there are four reasons why the present appeal must fail. The first is that in the present case the learned sentencing judge took into account in favour of the appellant, and in mitigation of the penalty, the effect that sentencing the appellant to prison would have upon the boy to whom reference has been made. The evidence demonstrates that problems which were foreseen have eventuated. The precise nature and the precise extent of those problems was not something that was capable of being proved before the sentencing judge, but the issue of the effect of sentence upon the boy was fairly and squarely before him. Some would take the view that the learned judge may have been over generous to the appellant in the manner in which he took account of that consideration and that the sentence imposed upon the appellant was inappropriately lenient. It is, however, unnecessary to resolve that issue. It suffices for present purposes to say that the matters which have been agitated before this Court relate to a subject which was squarely before the sentencing judge and in respect of which his decision involved no error adverse to the appellant.

The second reason why the appeal must fail is that the circumstances disclosed by the fresh evidence before this Court do not demonstrate hardship which is sufficiently exceptional within the principles referred to in the cases that I have mentioned and the other authorities on the matter to require or justify extending additional leniency to the appellant over and above that extended by the sentencing judge. As was pointed out in the passage quoted above, it happens over and over again that severe, sometimes tragic, hardship is caused to third parties as a result of an offender being sentenced to prison.
Nevertheless, the duty of sentencing judges and magistrates is to deal even- handedly in the administration of justice.

The third reason why the appeal must fail is that the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant, if accepted, would prove too much. As has been mentioned, it has been acknowledged on behalf of the appellant that a resolution of the problems for the boy demonstrated in the evidence would require the release from prison of the appellant almost immediately, or at least within the next month or two. To do that, however, would result in the appellant being sentenced to a term of imprisonment which would be quite disproportionate to the objective seriousness of the offences which he committed. In that respect, it is unnecessary for me to do any more than make the observation that we have before us no evidence as to the consequences of this matter for Mrs Coleman. We know perfectly well what the consequences were for Mr Coleman.

The fourth matter is that I would accept a submission made by the Crown
Advocate to the effect that the evidence before the Court in relation to the possibilities available for care of the boy, and in particular in relation to the role that might be able to be played by the appellant's de facto spouse in that regard, is, in certain respects, lacking in cogency and completeness.
That, however, I regard as the least important of the four reasons I have assigned.

In my view, the appellant should have leave to appeal but the appeal should be dismissed.
 
SULLY J: I entirely agree.
 
BRUCE J: I agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as I have proposed.

REGINA versus Christopher Robert PATTENDEN 
SENTENCING - hardship to third parties - effect on appellant's parents and son of appellant's incarceration taken into account by sentencing judge - fresh evidence filed - HELD - the further evidence did not justify showing additional leniency. 
O R D E R S Leave to appeal granted.  Appeal dismissed.
 * * * 
