

I and J Foods Pty Limited versus Bergzam Pty Limited [1997] NSWSC 118 (9 April )

I & J FOODS PTY LIMITED versus BERGZAM PTY LIMITED /96 DC 6771/93 APRIL 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, GILES AJA, SIMOS AJA 
CATCHWORDS: WORKERS COMPENSATION - RECOVERY AGAINST EMPLOYER & THIRD PARTY - OBLIGATION OF THIRD PARTY TO INDEMNIFY EMPLOYER 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:ALLOWED 
WORKERS COMPENSATION - RECOVERY AGAINST BOTH EMPLOYER AND THIRD PARTY -
OBLIGATION OF THIRD PARTY TO INDEMNIFY EMPLOYER - Worker injured at premises of appellant - employer paid workers compensation - employer sued appellant to recover the amount of the payment pursuant to s151Z(1) [Workers Compensation
Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) - trial judge found for the employer - On appeal: (1) whether negligence of the employer contributed to the worker's injury; (2) whether the phrase "entitled to recover damages" in [s151Z(2)(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) has a different meaning to the phrase "creating a liability ... to pay damages" in [s151Z(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) and consequently whether the employer was precluded from claiming indemnity from the supplier by reason of the decision in Public Transport Commission of
New South Wales versus J Murray-More Pty Ltd <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 336.] 
Held: (1) the employer was in breach of its duty to instruct its employee as to safe practice to avoid the risk of injury; (2) the words of [s151Z(2)(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) had the effect of deeming the limitation in Public Transport Commission of New South Wales versus J Murray-More Pty Ltd <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 336] out of existence and the employer was entitled to indemnity from the supplier.

Electricity Commission of New South Wales versus Yates [(1991) 30 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281991%29%2030%20NSWLR%20351 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Grljak versus Trivan Pty Ltd <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 672.] 
O'Connor versus Commissioner for Government Transport <case>; [(1954) 100 CLR 225.] 
Public Transport Commission of New South Wales versus J Murray-More Pty Ltd <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 336.] 
ORDERS 
Appeal allowed.

Judgment set aside.

Proceedings to be remitted to the District Court for a new trial on the footing that negligence of the respondent and the appellant to Mr Price is established and that the new trial be limited to the only part of the matter remaining in controversy, viz the assessment of Mr Price's damages and of the contribution recoverable by the appellant from the respondent and to the consequential amount of indemnity.

Written submissions on costs to be lodged within seven days with Priestley
JA's associate.

Orders 1, 2 and 3 to operate from today's date.
 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Giles AJA.
 
GILES AJA: Bergzam Pty Ltd (Bergzam) employed Mr Warren Price as a truck driver. On 13 October 1987 it sent him to the premises of I & J Foods Pty Ltd (I&J) to pick up some goods. Mr Price parked his truck on the apron outside the premises, some little distance from and with its back to the cold store from which the goods were to come. I&J's employee, Mr Gardener, brought the goods out in boxes on a pallet carried by a forklift. Mr Price opened the rear doors of the truck and stood aside while Mr Gardener brought the goods close to the truck, with the forklift directed towards the open doors. The pallet could not be placed directly into the truck, and Mr Price stepped between the forklift and the truck and began to load the boxes from the pallet on the forklift into the truck. While he was doing so the forklift moved forward and struck him, pinning him against the back of the truck and causing injury. It was found that the probability was that Mr Gardener negligently allowed the brakes of the forklift to become disengaged so as to cause or permit it to move forward.

Bergzam paid workers compensation to Mr Price. It sued I&J to recover the amount of the workers compensation payments pursuant to [s
Z(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151z.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (the
Act), which provided - "151Z (1) If the injury for which compensation is payable under this Act was caused under circumstances creating a liability in some person other than the worker's employer to pay damages in respect of the injury, the following provisions have effect: ...
 if the worker has recovered compensation under this Act, the person by whom the compensation was paid is entitled to be indemnified by the person so liable to pay those damages (being an indemnity limited to the amount of those damages); ... ." 
The proceedings were heard by Herron DCJ on 11 March 1996. In Public
Transport Commission of New South Wales versus J Murray-More Pty Ltd <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 336] it was held in relation to <case> of the Workers'
Compensation Act 1926, the predecessor to <case> of the Act, that an employer whose negligence contributed to the occurrence in respect of which the right to compensation arose was not entitled to indemnity pursuant to the provision. It was accepted before Herron DCJ that the position was the same for <case> of the Act, and the sole issue posed for his Honour was whether negligence of Bergzam had contributed to Mr Price's injury. It was held that
Bergzam had not been relevantly negligent, and accordingly Bergzam obtained judgment for an agreed sum of $119,779.04. His Honour considered that the risk of injury to Mr Price by careless driving of a forklift at I&J's premises was foreseeable, but that it was reasonable for Bergzam to respond to the risk (see Wyong Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47) by relying on I&J to conduct its activities at its premises so as not to injure visitors, and in particular so as not to injure persons in the position of Mr Price. His Honour's view necessarily involved rejection of the submission by I&J that Bergzam should have instructed Mr
Price not to load boxes from a forklift when it might by the driver's carelessness or misadventure move forward and cause injury.

I&J appealed. At the hearing of the appeal, and until the supplementary written submission to which I later refer, it was still accepted that the sole issue was whether negligence of Bergzam had contributed to Mr Price's injury, and the question on the appeal was whether Herron DCJ had been correct in holding that Bergzam had not been relevantly negligent. I&J submitted that a response of reliance on it to take care for the safety of Mr Price was not open in the face of decisions such as Kondis versus State Transport Authority <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 672.] Rather, it said, the duty owed by Bergzam to Mr Price to devise, institute and maintain a safe system of work could not be delegated, and extended to a system of work put in place by others; even if, therefore, the breach of duty was a casual act of negligence by Mr Gardener, an employee of I&J, there was a breach by Bergzam of its duty of care. Alternatively, in fulfilment of its own duty
Bergzam should itself have given instructions to Mr Price whereby he would have loaded from the side of the forklift, or required it to be positioned so that it could not accidentally move and pin him against the truck.

In Kondis versus State Transport Authority the employee was injured when part of a crane fell on him while its jib was being extended. The crane was operated not by the employer but by an independent contractor to the employer, and it was found that the contractor had deliberately dropped the part and had failed to keep a proper look-out or to warn of its intention to drop the part. The employee's foreman had not instructed him not to stand under the jib during the extension operation. The employer was held liable to the employee. There were two grounds for this result. One was that the employer's duty to provide a safe system of work was non-delegable, and it was liable for any negligence on the part of the contractor in failing to adopt a safe system of work. The other was that the employer had itself been negligent in failing to direct the employee not to stand under the jib of the crane during the extension operation.

It is unnecessary in the present case to enter into whether Bergzam's duty to provide a safe system of work was non-delegable so that it was liable, without more, for negligence on the part of Mr Gardener. It is sufficient to consider
Bergzam's duty so far as its duty to take reasonable care for the safety of its employees extended to giving them directions in the performance of their work where directions might reasonably be thought to be required to secure them from danger of injury: O'Connor versus Commissioner for Government Transport <case>; [(1954) 100 CLR 225] at 229;
Kondis versus State Transport Authority at 689, 693-4.

In Kondis versus State Transport Authority at 689 Mason J, with whome Deane and
Dawson JJ agreed on this point, stated that the giving of such directions remained within the ordinary prerogative of the employer despite the engagement of the independent contractor. In my opinion, the present is a similar case. Bergzam had obtained goods from I&J on a number of prior occasions, and must be taken to have known of the use of a forklift at those premises: so much is inherent in the foreseeability earlier mentioned. An obvious and simple response to the foreseeable risk of injury was for Bergzam to instruct Mr Price, generally or specifically before sending him to
I&J's premises, that he should not load his truck standing between the truck and the front of the forklift (or otherwise in its path if it was so placed that movement would take it towards the truck), but should do so from the side (or otherwise from a point away from its path of movement) in order to avoid the risk of injury from carelessness or misadventure in the operation of the forklift. Bergzam submitted that Mr Price had been placed under the control of I&J, as the occupier of the relevant premises, and that it had ceased to have any power or opportunity to give directions as to the manner in which the work in question was to be undertaken. I do not agree.
To adapt the words of Mason J in Kondis versus State Transport Authority, the giving of an instruction of the kind mentioned remained within the ordinary prerogative of Bergzam despite the involvement of I&J and its employee Mr
Gardener. In the circumstances of this case, I do not think that a reasonable response of Bergzam to the foreseeable risk of injury was to rely on I&J's conduct of its activities, without itself giving reasonable instruction to Mr
Price intended to secure him from risk of injury if I&J conducted its activities negligently.

Bergzam submitted that there was no evidence to support an instruction to load from the side of the forklift as a practicable response to the risk, or as a response which, if followed, would have prevented the injury to Mr Price. Even without specific evidence, it is clear enough that the loading could have been undertaken from the side of the forklift, and that on the probabilities if that had been done the untoward forward movement of the forklift would not have caused injury to Mr Price. Bergzam also submitted that it had given an appropriate instruction to Mr Price: the evidence on which it relied was in Mr
Price's cross-examination - "Q Did your employer give you any advice or instructions as to how you should conduct yourself around forklifts? 
A With care of course, always.
 
Q There's always a risk that a forklift may - or any vehicle indeed that's being operated may act unexpectedly. That's right, do you agree? Somone else driving -- 
A If things move, they move for a reason.
 
Q Quite, but it may be unexpected by someone who's in the vicinity? 
A It was certainly unexpected by myself. I had my back to the forklift, I had no idea as to what was going to happen or what.
 ...
 
Q Were you ever told that you should not place yourself between your vehicle and a forklift which was being operated? 
A No, I wasn't. That forklift was not being operated, it was stationary at the time, and I saw no danger." 
It is patent that the instruction to conduct himself with care around forklifts was inadequate, since Mr Price saw no danger in the circumstances which in fact obtained and did not pay heed to the possibility of accidental movement of the forklift even though it was not being operated: he was not given the more specific instruction intended to secure him from danger of injury in that event.

In my view Bergzam was in breach of its duty of care owed to Mr Price, and the breach of duty contributed to Mr Price's injury: it was not contended that the breach of duty was causally unrelated to the injury because Mr Price would have ignored the instruction if given. On the basis on which the proceedings had been conducted before Herron DCJ, there should have been judgment for
I&J.

By a supplementary written submission delivered after the hearing of the appeal Bergzam contended that amendment of <case> of the Act by the WorkCover
Legislation Amendment Act 1995 (the 1995 Act) had overcome the operation ascribed to <case> in Public Transport Commission of New South Wales versus J
Murray-More Pty Ltd, and that it was entitled to partial indemnity from
I&J even if its negligence had contributed to the occurrence out of which the right to compensation arose. The date of commencement of the provision making the amendment was 1 February 1996, about five weeks prior to the hearing before Herron DCJ, and it may be inferred that the possible significance of the amendment was overlooked at the time.

The amendment on which Bergzam relied was to <case>(a) of the Act, and according to the submission meant that the ambit of <case>(e) was extended to encompass the present situation. The amendment inserted "or is entitled to take" after "takes" in <case>(a), whereby <case> read (with the amendment emphasised) - "(2) If, in respect of an injury to a worker for which compensation is payable under this Act: the worker takes or is entitled to take proceedings independently of this Act to recover damages from a person other than the worker's employer; and the worker also takes or is entitled to take proceedings independently of this Act to recover damages from that employer, the following provisions have effect: ...
 if the worker does not take proceedings against that employer or does not accept satisfaction of the judgment against that employer, subsection (1) applies as if the worker had not been entitled to recover damages from that employer, except that: if the compensation paid by that employer exceeds the amount of the contribution that could have been recovered from that employer as a joint tortfeasor or otherwise - the indemnity referred to in subsection (1)(d) is for the amount of the excess only; and if the compensation paid by that employer does not exceed the amount of that contribution - subsection (1)(d) does not apply and the employer has, to the extent of the compensation so paid, a defence to an action for such a contribution." 
Section 110 of the 1995 Act provided that the amendment was made for the purpose of avoiding doubt and that <case> was taken to have been amended from the commencement of that section, save that the amendment did not affect any decision of the Court with respect to an action on an indemnity provided for by <case>(d) made before its commencement.

I&J's response to the supplementary written submission did not oppose its consideration in the appeal, no doubt with Electricity Commission of New
South Wales versus Yates [(1991) 30 NSWLR 351] in mind.
It accepted that the insertion of "or is entitled to take" caused <case> to extend to the present situation, but said that <case>(e) nonetheless did not avail Bergzam because it made <case> apply "as if the worker had not been entitled to recover damages from [the] employer": this was not good enough, because (it was said) <case> drew a distinction between taking proceedings and recovering damages, the former concept was what mattered for s
Z(1), and hypothesising the latter concept did not negate the effect of the decision in Public Transport Commission of New South Wales versus J Murray-More
Pty Ltd.

It is necessary to see the development of <case>.

Section 151Z addresses the situtation of an injured worker entitled both to compensation under the Act or at common law from his employer and to damages at common law from a third party. It regulates the worker's rights against the employer and the third party and the ultimate burden as between the employer and the third party. In its full current form, it provides - "151Z (1) If the injury for which compensation is payable under this Act was caused under circumstances creating a liability in some person other than the worker's employer to pay damages in respect of the injury, the following provisions have effect: the worker may take proceedings both against that person to recover damages and against any person liable to pay compensation under this Act for payment of that compensation, but is not entitled to retain both damages and compensation; if the worker recovers firstly compensation and secondly those damages, the worker is liable to repay out of those damages the amount of compensation which a person has paid in respect of the worker's injury under this Act, and the worker is not entitled to any further compensation; if the worker firstly recovers those damages the worker is not entitled to recover compensation under this Act; if the worker has recovered compensation under this Act, the person by whom the compensation was paid is entitled to be indemnified by the person so liable to pay those damages (being an indemnity limited to the amount of those damages); if any payment is made under the indemnity and, at the time of the payment, the worker has not obtained judgment for damages against the person paying under the indemnity, the payment is, to the extent of its amount, a defence to proceedings by the worker against that person for damages; if any payment is made under the indemnity and, at the time of the payment, the worker has obtained judgment for damages against the person paying under the indemnity (but judgment has not been satisfied), the payment, to the extent of its amount, satisfies the judgment; all questions relating to matters arising under this section are, in default of agreement, to be settled by action or, with the consent of the parties, by the Compensation Court.
 
If, in respect of an injury to a worker for which compensation is payable under this Act: the worker takes or is entitled to take proceedings independently of this Act to recover damages from a person other than the worker's employer; and the worker also takes or is entitled to take proceedings independently of this Act to recover damages from that employer, the following provisions have effect: the damages that may be recovered from the person by the worker in proceedings referred to in paragraph (a) are to be reduced by the amount by which the contribution which the person would (but for this Part) be entitled to recover from the employer as a joint tortfeasor or otherwise exceeds the amount of the contribution recoverable; the amount of the contribution that the person is entitled to recover from the employer as a joint tortfeasor or otherwise is to be determined as if the whole of the damages were assessed in accordance with provisions of
Division 3 as to the award of damages; if the worker does not take proceedings against that employer or does not accept satisfaction of the judgment against that employer, subsection (1) applies as if the worker had not been entitled to recover damages from that employer, except that: if the compensation paid by that employer exceeds the amount of the contribution that could be recovered from that employer as a joint tortfeasor or otherwise - the indemnity referred to in subsection (1)(d) is for the amount of the excess only; and if the compensation paid by that employer does not exceed the amount of that contribution - subsection (1)(d) does not apply and the employer has, to the extent of the compensation so paid, a defence to an action for such a contribution.
 
This section applies to proceedings taken independently of this Act by a person to whom compensation is payable under this Act in respect of the death of a worker as a result of an injury.
 
If a worker is liable under subsection (1)(b) to repay any money out of damages recovered by the worker, the worker is not liable to repay the money out of any damages payable after the date of recovery by way of periodic or other payments for loss of future earnings or earning capacity or for future expenses.
 
For the avoidance of doubt, this section applies and is taken always to have applied to the recovery of compensation or damages, whether or not the compensation or damages were paid under an award or judgment. For example, compensation or damages may be paid under an agreement." 
Section 151Z(1) applies where the worker is entitled to compensation under the
Act from the employer and to damages at common law from the third party. It is a lineal descent of <case> of the Workers' Compensation Act 1926 and <case> of the Act as enacted in 1987, and is in much the same terms as its predecessors: the subject-matter was not affected by the abolition and subsequent restoration in modified form of the worker's entitlement to damages at common law from the employer. The worker cannot have double recovery (paras , (b), (e) and (e1)), and as between the employer and the third party the primary burden falls on the third party (paras (c) and (d)). But this regime is limited by the opening words in <case>, and if <case> be looked at alone it does not apply where the employer is liable to the worker for damages at common law. The reasoning in Public Transport Commission of New South Wales v
J Murray-More Pty Ltd was that the entitlement to indemnity pursuant to s 64(1) was conditioned upon the injury for which compensation was payable being caused under circumstances creating a liability in "some person other than the worker's employer" to pay damages in respect of the injury, and that the condition was not satisfied when there was liability in the employer as well as the other person: see at 341, 348, 351, 352, 354.

Section 151Z(2) applies where the worker is entitled to compensation under the
Act from the employer and to take proceedings for damages at common law from both the employer and the third party: note the language of taking proceedings not creating a liability in damages, which I&J submitted was significant.

The immediate predecessor to <case>, <case> of the Act as enacted in , had been in rather different terms. It read - " (2) If, in respect of an injury to a worker for which compensation is payable under this Act - the worker takes proceedings independently of this Act to recover damages from a person other than the worker's employer; and but for section 149, the worker would also have been entitled to recover damages independently of this Act from that employer, the following provisions have effect: the person is not entitled to recover from that employer as a joint tortfeasor or otherwise any contribution for damages recovered from the person by the worker in the proceedings referred to in paragraph (a); the damages that may be recovered from the person by the worker in proceedings referred to in paragraph (a) shall be reduced by the amount of the contribution that (but for paragraph (c)) the court determines that the person would otherwise have been entitled to recover from that employer as a joint tortfeasor or otherwise.
 where the compensation paid in respect of the injury under this Act exceeds the amount of that contribution - the indemnity referred to in subsection (1)(d) is for the amount of the excess only; where the compensation paid in respect of the injury under this Act does not exceed the amount of that contribution - sebsection (1)(d) does not apply." 
The Act as it stood in 1987 abolished the worker's entitlement to damages at common law from the employer. Section 150(2) was concerned to preclude recovery of contribution by the third party from the employer as joint tortfeasor (para (a)) and to reduce the worker's damages from the third party by the amount which could have been so recovered (para (b)), presumably with a view to leaving what was thought to be an appropriate burden on the third party at the expense of the worker. In that context, it operated where the worker took proceedings, rather than where there was a liability or the worker was entitled to damages, and by paras (e) and (f) adjusted the employer's indemnity pursuant to <case>(d) so that the burden of the compensation paid under the Act would remain with the employer to the extent of the employer's fault which would otherwise have led to the employer paying contribution to the third party. Paragraphs (e) and (f) did not enlarge the employer's entitlement to indemnity from the third party, or free it from Public
Transport Commission of New South Wales versus J Murray-More Pty Ltd.

When <case> replaced <case> in 1989 it was necessary to accommodate the restoration in modified form of the worker's entitlement to damages at common law from the employer. But the task to be performed was of the same kind.
Section 151Z(2) was concerned to adjust recovery of contribution by the third party from the employer as joint tortfeasor to reflect the modified entitlement of the worker to damages at common law from the employer (para ) and to reduce the worker's damages from the third party by the excess over the amount which could be so recovered (para (a)). It still operated where the worker took proceedings, and para (e) adjusted the employer's indemnity so that the burden of the compensation paid under the Act would remain with the employer to the extent of the employer's fault which led to the employer paying contribution to the third party. The difference was that para (e) was introduced by words apt to enlarge the employer's entitlement to indemnity from the third party and free it from Public Transport Commission of New South Wales versus J Murray-More Pty Ltd, necessarily so because any effect of <case>(e) was predicated upon the worker taking or being entitled to take proceedings against the employer for damages at common law (see para ). Thus <case>(e) took effect by providing that <case> should apply "as if the worker had not been entitled to recover damages from" the employer, a tolerably clear statement that the limitation declared in Public
Transport Commission of New South Wales versus J Murray-More Pty Ltd should be deemed out of existence so as to permit partial indemnity.

To return to I&J's response to the supplementary written submission, it said that the circumstances creating a liability still defeated Bergzam's reliance on <case>, because although Bergzam's negligence meant that it was liable to Mr Price, it may be that no damages would be awarded. The two concepts were different, an entitlement to recover damages did not correspond to a liability to pay damages, and the language of <case>(e) was insufficient to deem the limitation out of existence. That the two concepts were different, it said, was demonstrated by Grljak versus Trivan Pty Ltd [(1994) NSWLR 82.] The worker received compensation under the Act, and also brought proceedings at common law against the third party. His damages were reduced by 10 per cent pursuant to <case>(c). On appeal, he contended that s 151Z(2) did not apply because the worker was not "entitled to take proceedings to recover damages" from his employer; he was not so entitled because the provisions of the Act limiting recovery to where the worker had suffered substantial injury meant that, had the worker brought proceedings against his employer, he would have recovered nothing. Mahoney JA, with whom
Kirby P and Priestley JA agreed, said (at 88) - "It was then submitted that Mr Grljak was not `entitled to take proceedings' to recover damages from Gawa because, as the event showed, the result of such a proceeding would be that no damages would be recovered. I do not think that this is the intended operation of par (b). The test which in this regard par applies is `entitlement'. The entitlement is entitlement `to take proceedings' not `to recover damages'. It looks, I think, to the existence of what conventionally is described as a cause of action rather than to whether the enforcement of the cause of action will result in an award of damages. I am conscious that, in principle, a right of action in negligence or for breach of statutory duty involves the proof not merely of duty and breach of duty, but also of loss by the plaintiff. I do not think that it was the intention of the 1989 amendments to alter the nature of a proceeding of this kind at common law. The purpose and effect of the 1989 amendments was to change and, in many respects, to limit the damages which could be awarded and the way in which they were to be quantified. But that, in the relevant sense, does not go to the `entitlement' to bring the proceeding; it goes rather to the quantum of the damages which (if any) may recoverable. Accordingly, the fact that, in the proceeding to recover damages, the assessments made by the trial judge are such that, in the event, no damages are awarded does not mean that, within par , the worker was not `entitled to take proceedings ... to recover damages from' the employer." 
I do not think that this means that entitlement to recover damages in s
Z(2)(e) is different from creation of liability to pay damages in s
Z(1). I&J submitted that <case>(e) looked at "whether the enforcement of the cause of action will result in an award of damages" whereas <case> looked at "what conventionally is described as a cause of action", but there is no necessary gulf between the language of the provisions. Grljak versus Trivan Pty Ltd decided that there can be an entitlement to take proceedings even if no damages would be recovered; consistently with that, no entitlement to recover damages can mean no liability to pay damages.
It is plain from the references to <case>(d) in <case>(e) that the latter was intended to enliven the operation of the former, which I&J's submission would not permit, and in my opinion the submission should not be accepted.

What inhibited the extent to which the operation of <case>(d) was so enlivened, prior to the amendment in the 1995 Act, was <case>(a): it was necessary that the worker take proceedings against the third party. Perhaps that was an unthinking survival from the circumstances addressed by <case>.
In any event, the amendment in the 1995 Act removed the inhibition. The words are clear, and para (x) in the explanatory note to the WorkCover Legislation
Amendment Bill 1995 leaves no room for doubt - "(x) It is made clear that, under section 151Z, the entitlement of a workers compensation insurer (who has paid compensation to an injured worker) to be indemnified by a negligent third party responsible for the injury extends to cases where the worker's employer was partly responsible for the negligence." 
So in my view Bergzam's contention in the supplementary written submission is correct, and it may be entitled to partial indemnity even if its negligence contributed to the occurrence out of which the right to compensation arose.

It follows that, going beyond the basis on which the proceedings had been conducted before Herron DCJ, there should not necessarily be judgment for
I&J. Rather, Bergzam may be entitled to partial indemnity from I&J.
There must be an assessment of the damages which could be recovered by Mr
Price from I&J and of the contribution which I&J could recover from
Bergzam. If the amount of the contribution is less than $119,779.04, the difference can be recovered by way of indemnity.

The case as fought before Herron DCJ did not involve any assessment of damages or contribution, and will need to be re-pleaded. It seems a cumbersome way of adjusting the position as between employer and third party, but one required by the legislation. I propose that the appeal be allowed, the judgment below set aside, and pursuant to Pt 51 r 16 subrr (3) and (4) of the Supreme Court
Rules, that the proceedings be remitted to the District Court for a new trial on the footing that negligence of the respondent and the appellant to Mr Price is established and that the new trial be limited to the only part of the matter in controversy, viz the assessment of Mr Price's damages and of the contribution recoverable by I&J from Bergzam and to the consequential amount of indemnity. As there may be some complications in regard to costs orders, and as the Court has not had the benefit of submissions on costs, I propose that the parties be requested to file written submissions on costs within seven days, to be lodged with the Associate to Priestley JA. The other orders I have proposed should operate from today's date.

SIMOS AJA: I agree with Giles AJA.
 * * * 
