

Regina versus Bubev Matter No 72289/98 [1998] NSWSC 727 (17 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
REGINA versus NIKOLA BUBEV /98 July 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: Nikola Bubev seeks bail. He had bail for the offences for which he was arrested on 19 April 1998 which included offences of assault police and resist arrest. He had bail when he committed, so it is alleged, the offence of larceny on 23 April 1998. He had bail when he committed, so it is alleged, the offence of goods in custody on 2 May 1998, the offence of possess implements and goods in custody on 18 May 1998 and most importantly the offence of 5 June 1998 of use weapon to prevent apprehension which is the only charge presently against him on which he has been refused bail. He has, on his own admission, on a number of occasions breached his bail conditions by failing to comply with the 7.00 pm curfew. 
In addition, he has a record which is simply appalling and which is obviously related to a most severe drug habit which he admits. He is currently receiving methadone and he is currently detained in protective custody where he has been for six weeks and where he is locked up, it is said in evidence, 22 hours per day, mostly alone, not because of something he has done but because of threats by others to him. He has been on the methadone programme for a couple of years. He was, until he was most recently arrested, attending drug and alcohol counselling that has not avoided the allegations of further offences being committed during that time.

He was, until he was recently, arrested under the supervision of the Probation and Parole Service and indeed he was on parole at the time of the commission of most of these offences, so it is alleged. That has not avoided the allegation that he has committed these offences during that time.

He has offered to reside at home. His father has given evidence and offered to go surety in a most substantial sum and to commit himself to most substantial responsibilities to attempt to ensure that his son does not breach bail conditions. His father has gone so far as to give evidence he would turn in his son were he aware of breaches of the conditions. I am not sure I entirely accept that. His father has given evidence that he would take his son to the police station to report, to the Probation and Parole Service to report and to the methadone clinic.

There has been an offer that he would submit to a curfew while residing at home, report to police twice daily and subject himself to urinalysis. But when
I look at the offence that he is presently charged with, which involved an apprehension of him by a police officer with a police dog, where it is alleged that the applicant was in effect seeking to obtain the wherewithal to feed his habit and seized upon such weapon as he might have had available to prevent apprehension at the spur of the moment, I have to have regard to the Crown's submission, that a person in this man's circumstances, with this man's record, is not likely to be deterred from the commission of what might be serious offences involving, as in an earlier offence, a syringe, or as in this alleged offence, a knife, by those processes of rational thought in relation to the forfeiture of security provided by a surety that might affect others.

During the application I have raised with Mr. Gartelmann, who appears for the applicant, the prospect of a full time residential, institutional rehabilitation facility for this applicant. I am told it is simply not available, either because there is no provision of such care whatsoever, or because it is unavailable to persons who are still on methadone. If so, this is a most tragic thing. It is appalling that this man should have to be detained in protective custody and I would expect that in those circumstances every possible step would be taken to bring forward his trial to as early a date as possible.

It is submitted that there is not a strong Crown case of this offence and that
I should have regard only to this offence because it is the one in respect of which bail is refused. I reject both of those submissions. It is a matter which, plainly taken in the context of the record and of the other offences, is such that I am satisfied that, although his father might wish to prevent him from committing further offences and although he might have a present intent not to commit further offences, he is likely to commit such further offences if granted bail and I am satisfied that there is a strong likelihood he would not use rational thought processes but would use that which he is likely to have to hand and his record suggests that to be syringes, at the least. I am satisfied, therefore, that likelihood of the commission of further offences, together with the likely consequences of the commission of those offences outweighs the applicant's general right to be at liberty.

I am, however, seriously concerned about the applicant's present custody and what it is likely to do to the applicant's prospects for the future. I am seriously concerned as to the length of time that he might be subjected to that custody because he is on remand and because he otherwise cannot be placed in some portion of the gaol system where he might not be at risk and where, at the same time, he can be afforded rehabilitative care. I make these remarks, lest it should be sought to bring again before the court an application for bail on this applicant's behalf, so that in those respects at least what I now say would not be an impediment under s.22A to a future application, but notwithstanding that, as matters stand, bail is refused.
 * * * 
