

Regina versus Grayndler Matter No 71706/98 [1998] NSWSC 736 (27 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
REGINA versus MICHAEL PATRICK GRAYNDLER /98 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: In the matter of Michael Patrick Grayndler, application has been made for bail in respect of some charges of culpable driving causing death and associated charges listed for trial on 6 October 1998 at Campbelltown District Court. 
Bail has been refused on those charges. There are, in addition, earlier charges, including charges for which the applicant was arrested on 22 August , of take and drive conveyance without consent, drive in a manner dangerous and unlicensed driving, presently listed for mention at the
Sutherland Local Court on 15 October 1998.

On that latter group of charges the applicant was granted bail, however he was arrested six days later, in August 1997, on a charge of take and drive conveyance without consent and drive in a manner dangerous, together with associated charges. Those matters are also listed at Sutherland Court on 15
October.

It was a matter of only a week later that in a stolen car he drove, so it is alleged, through a red light, colliding with a vehicle (the whole episode being caught on red light camera) killing the driver.

When I look at the applicant's extensive record and his personal circumstances, I regret that it appears very clear that for the protection of the community, and bearing in mind the likelihood of further offences being committed whilst on bail, that bail should be refused.

Mr. McIntyre, who appears for the applicant, has sought bail, and has assured me from the bar table that the applicant's spouse is prepared to have the applicant at home, that the applicant is prepared to consent to conditions that he not drive (he is unlicensed) and appropriate reporting conditions.

I have heard what Mr. McIntyre has said, and I have no doubt that those who wish to support the applicant and assist him have come forward out of loyalty and commitment today to provide their assistance to him. Regrettably, as a matter of law, I am unable to grant bail, since I am satisfied that notwithstanding his intentions not to offend again, he in my view would not be able to comply with those intentions.

In the circumstances, bail is refused.
 * * * 
