

Sharp versus Holbourn and Anor Matter No 12213/92 [1998] NSWSC 488 (31 July )

Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
SHARP versus HOLBOURN & ANOR /92 July 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were last before me on 28 November 1997. On that day, I delivered a reserved Judgment on an application for summary dismissal of certain of the Cross-Claims. 
On 9 June 1998, the defendants filed a Notice of Motion. The defendants seek leave to withdraw certain of the admissions made, by operation of the rules as a consequence of the failure to put into dispute matters specified in a Notice to Admit Facts and Authenticity of Documents dated 4 April 1997 served by one of the cross-claimants (the GIO). On 30 June 1998, the Deputy Registrar specially fixed this application for hearing on 10 July 1998. The application is supported by an affidavit sworn on 5 June 1998 by Mr O'Reilly (the solicitor for the defendants).

In the earlier application, a belated and unsuccessful attempt to agitate this matter was made. The summary application had been founded, inter alia, on the admissions. It was brought to the attention of the parties that for such a matter to be entertained it should be initiated by the filing of a Notice of
Motion (page 2 of the Judgment).

I do not propose to repeat material which has been set forth in the earlier
Judgment. Much of it remains relevant to this application. A copy of the relevant Notice to Admit Facts and Authenticity of Documents is annexure `A' to the affidavit sworn by Mr O'Reilly. The admissions that are sought to be withdrawn are identified in the Notice of Motion itself. In substance, it is sought to withdraw admissions that have been made to the effect that the plaintiff was accompanying and/or assisting and/or preparing to assist Miss
Coops-Blume with the task of leading cattle and that the injuries were incurred as a result of or in connection with the carrying on by the defendants of the business and/or trade and/or profession of farming.

The defendants are desirous of maintaining the cross-claims against both insurers. It is said that the admissions are consistent with one interpretation of the factual circumstances surrounding the plaintiff's accident. Further, it is said that the admissions are inconsistent with alternative interpretations of the factual circumstances surrounding the plaintiff's accident. Further, it is said that these circumstances are open to at least three alternative views. These views are expressed in paragraph 20 of
Mr O'Reilly's affidavit.

The application is made pursuant to Part 18 rule 2(3). This provision confers a discretionary power on the Court. In exercising that power, the Court has regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before it. The
Court is concerned to see that justice is best served between the parties. The applicant bears the onus of satisfying the Court of an entitlement to relief.

The exercise of the power has been the subject of consideration in a number of cases. The parties have referred to Ell versus Hunter District Water Supply and
Sewerage Board <case>; [(1927) 27 SR 437],
Coopers Brewery Ltd versus Panfida Foods Ltd [(1992) 26 NSWLR 738],
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd versus Bechely-Crundall (Sperling J, June 1996) and Drabsch versus Switzerland General Insurance Co Ltd & Ors (Santow J, 16 October 1996). What has been said in other cases may provide guidance in the exercise of the discretion in the particular case before the
Court.

Whilst the relevant discretionary considerations may vary from case to case, it is usually of importance for the applicant to explain how it came to pass that the specified facts were not disputed and the admissions were made. Such a consideration is of importance in this case.

Generally speaking, the evidence is sparse. It borders on the negligible in respect of this important consideration. The Notice was served on or about 8
April 1997. The affidavit sworn by Mr O'Reilly contains the following:- "15. The Defendants did not respond to this Notice.' `18. The Defendants in not responding to the Notice to Admit Facts and
Authenticity of Documents may have inadvertently adopted the version of the factual circumstances surrounding the Plaintiff's accident as asserted by GIO the Second Cross Defendant in their Notice to Admit Facts." 
This is the only material advanced which deals with the matter of how the admissions came to be made. The material fails to offer a satisfactory explanation. It does not make clear whether the failure to respond was a product of considered decision or of error or oversight. The admissions were made during the conduct of the litigation. The Notice was served on the defendants' present solicitors subsequent to the filing of the Cross-Claim against the insurers and the Defence. Relevant contents of these pleadings may be found in the earlier Judgment. The inference is open that the admissions were the product of considered decision after having had the benefit of legal advice.

There has been delay in the bringing of the application. The matter of withdrawal of the admissions had been agitated in the previous application (which was heard in November last year). Ultimately, an application was not brought until more than twelve months after the failure to respond. No explanation is offered for delay.

In my view, this state of affairs of itself could lead to a dismissal of the present application. However, the submissions did see the ventilation of other arguments. The defendants have handed up a written outline of submissions. I shall expressly refer to some of the other matters raised during the debate.

It is said on behalf of the defendants that the Notice did not seek admissions as to the primary facts of the accident, but admissions about how those primary facts should be characterised for the purpose of the competing claims for indemnity. It is said that the defendants had simply wrongly characterised the circumstances of the accident and that the admissions are defective in any event and ineffective. The submissions did not appear to be concerned with that part of the admissions which related to the giving of assistance in activity involving cattle.

It seems to me that these submissions (if correctly founded) do little more than reinforce what appeared to be obvious in the course of submissions. The exercise may have little utility. Ultimately, the admissions which are of concern to the defendant may be of very little moment. It may not matter much whether or not leave is given. Whilst it wasn't the subject of argument, I should also add that there could well be a real question as to whether or not activities involving the riding of a horse and/or the mustering of cattle can be characterised as farming.

In any event, an admission (if it is tendered) is only one piece of evidence.
The weight that may be given to it will depend on the other evidence that is led. It will be left to be assessed in the light of the whole of the material placed before the Court. It seemed to be accepted that there will be significant other evidence of the circumstances of the accident and it would seem to be likely that this evidence will be the determinative material.

Both the defendants and the GIO assert prejudice. I have difficulty seeing how the defendants maintain that stance when the present situation arises from their own act or omission. The GIO has acted on the admissions (it brought the application for summary dismissal).

If a party seeks relief from this Court, it should be appreciated that it is up to that party to put before the Court the evidence that is necessary to support an application for that relief. In this case, the defendants have failed to meet that test.

In my view, the defendants have failed to discharge the onus. The Notice of
Motion is dismissed. The defendants are to pay the costs of the Notice of
Motion.
 * * * 
