

Regina versus Nelson Matter No Cca 60430/97 [1998] NSWSC 122 (28 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
REGINA versus RAYMOND JOHN NELSON /97 April 1998 
Studdert J, James J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Tupman DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60430/97 
DELIVERED: Tuesday 28 April 1998 
HEARING DATE: Monday 30 March 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus RAYMOND JOHN NELSON 
JUDGMENT OF: STUDDERT, JAMES, HIDDEN JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - A C HAESLER 
RESPONDENT - W G DAWE QC 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - T A MURPHY 
RESPONDENT - S E O'CONNOR 
RESULT: DISMISSED 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - evidence of child by closed circuit television facilities - father present - whether grounds for reasonable apprehension of interference with complainant in closed circuit television room.

CRIMINAL LAW - sexual offence charged - complainant child - whether verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory.

NO. OF PAGES: 15 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: Following his trial in the District Court the jury found the appellant, Raymond John Nelson, guilty of an offence of aggravated indecent assault under <case> of the Crimes Act. The appellant's conviction resulted in a sentence of two years imprisonment with a minimum term of twelve months. The circumstance of aggravation was that the complainant was only seven or eight years of age at the time of the commission of the offence charged. 
The appellant has appealed against his conviction.

There are two grounds of appeal: that the trial fundamentally miscarried because of interference by the supportive person with the complainant; that the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

In relation to the first ground, by reason of her age the complainant gave her evidence by closed circuit television pursuant to <case> of the Crimes Act.
Section 405DB of the Crimes Act therefore applied and sub-ss (2) and (3) of that section are in the following terms: "(2) If a child's evidence is given from a location outside a court, or outside a place at which a tribunal is sitting, (by virtue of section 405D or
DA), the court or tribunal may order: that a court officer, or an officer of the tribunal, be present at that other location; and that any other person be present with the child as an interpreter, for the purpose of assisting the child with any difficulty in giving evidence associated with a disability, or for the purpose of providing the child with other support.

Any such order does not limit the entitlement that a child has (under section 405CA) to choose another person to be present with him or her when giving evidence." 
Section 405CA provides in sub-ss (2) and (3) as follows: "(2) A child who gives evidence in any such proceedings is entitled to choose a person whom the child would like to have present near him or her when giving evidence.

Without limiting a child's right to choose such a person, that person: may be a parent, guardian, relative, friend or support person of the child, and may be with the child as an interpreter, for the purpose of assisting the child with any difficulty in giving evidence associated with a disability, or for the purpose of providing the child with other support." 
Section 405E(1) provides: "(1) Closed circuit television facilities or similar technology used for the giving of evidence by a child are to be operated in such a manner that the persons who have an interest in the proceedings are able to see the child (and any person present with the child) on the same or another television monitor." 
Her Honour Judge Tupman presided at this trial. Her Honour later presided at a further trial of the appellant concerning the complainant's brother, against whom it was alleged the appellant had committed a sexual offence. Before the subsequent trial began on 28 July 1997, her Honour made some comments to counsel in the absence of the jury panel: "I have some difficulties in relation to this Mr McKay (the Crown Prosecutor at the trial) because I recall during the last trial (that being the subject trial) certain things were brought to my attention by the sheriff's officer about what they suspected might have been going on in the room with chairs being knocked by [the father's] foot. Nothing could be seen and that's why I constantly put the video back on to the full room view. This is a circumstance, Mr McKay, where there's already been a conviction. There are three children in the one family who've made complaints about this accused. My recollection is that when the mother gave evidence on the last occasion she appeared very distraught and my recollection also is that one of the reasons why she appeared to be distraught was because she hadn't seen some of the children, who were not in her care but in the care of the man who's going to be the support person. A lot of those factors together give me some cause for concern about him being the support person during the closed circuit evidence.
It's just those sorts of dynamics that occur in families where there's a break-up like there has been in this one and disputes between parents and having seen Mrs Brown and the degree of upset she evidenced on the last occasion...

I'm very dissatisfied about the arrangements that are available in this Court for closed circuit television in any event. After the last trial I went up to have a look at the room because I think that the quality of light is appalling. This will be about the third or fourth closed circuit television trial I have done here. On one occasion with a dark skinned child the jury couldn't even make out the facial features of the child. I think that's unforgivable. It's a question of having a proper closed circuit television room available and that hasn't been done in this Court or any other court in this State. Unlike other States of this country." 
Those comments prompted Miss Anderson, the solicitor for the appellant at his trial, to interview the sheriff's officer who had been present in the room with the complainant whilst she gave her evidence. The Court has received an affidavit from Miss Anderson that annexed her draft of a statement which she intended for the signature of the sheriff's officer. However, the sheriff's officer, after considering the draft statement, made some alteration to it but then declined to sign it. Although it would seem that Miss Witmer, the appellant's solicitor on this appeal, understood that the sheriff's officer had told her that the complainant's father kicked the complainant's chair at one point during her evidence, the sheriff's officer later corrected a statement presented to her indicating that that part of it was not correct. In due course though the sheriff's officer swore an affidavit on 6 March 1998 in these terms: "1. I was the Sheriff's officer and representative of the Court in the Closed
Circuit television room when the Complainant...gave evidence during the trial of Raymond Nelson which commenced on 11 June 1997.
[The complainant's] father...was the support person. I recall that at some point during [the complainant's] evidence I moved [the father's] chair and my chair back, so that we were further away from [the complainant].
On 28 July 1997 Judge Tupman asked me whether I could remember telling her, during the trial, that [the father] had kicked [the complainant's] chair.
I could not recall then, and cannot recall now, telling the Judge any such thing during the trial." 
The appellant's submission is that by reason of what occurred in the closed circuit television room this trial miscarried because there is a reasonable apprehension that the complainant's evidence was influenced by her father's behaviour in kicking the chair.

Mr Haesler, counsel for the appellant, informed the Court, and the Crown accepted, that there was only one television screen capable of being observed from the Bar table and from the jury box, although the presiding judge had available on the Bench monitoring facilities to see at the same time a close- up view of the witness and a more distant view that took in both the witness and the support person. Section 405E strictly requires that the monitoring facilities display both the witness and the support person; the section requires that the facilities be operated in such a manner that those with an interest in the proceedings "are able to see the child (and any person present with the child) on the same or another television monitor". Whilst the facilities provided in the court afforded the presiding judge with a satisfactory close-up view of the witness at the same time as a view of the support person was presented, this was not the case for others in the courtroom. The judge, as the only person with access to the control switch, could elect to provide the close-up view of the witness for others in the courtroom but when this was done it was not possible to see the support person on the screen.

Where a child is giving evidence by closed circuit television, it is plainly desirable that those charged with the task of assessing the witness have constant access to the close-up view of that person and a judge presiding would be alert to this. However, the section imposes a requirement that there be an ability to see both the child and the support person, and as I understand the section, to display them at the same time. As the facilities available for the subject trial were explained to this Court, it would not appear that they afforded an opportunity for compliance with <case> unless the more distant view was constantly displayed, in which case counsel, their instructing solicitors, the jury and all other persons interested in following the evidence would have been constantly deprived of the advantage of a close- up view of the child giving the evidence.

However in this case no point was taken at the trial that the requirements of s 405E were not being complied with, and, indeed, had there been a monitor that at all times showed the support person, it could not be assumed that that monitor would necessarily have shown his foot striking the chair of the witness, if that happened. The thrust of Mr Haesler's submission, nevertheless, is that if the available facilities at all times showed the support person, some action or actions by him may have been observed in the court room by counsel and/or by the jury such as may have led to a different assessment of the credibility of the complainant.

Whatever may have been her Honour's understanding at the time of making the comments attributed to her on 10 June 1997, the affidavit of the sheriff's officer does not support any inference that the complainant's father interfered with the manner in which his daughter gave evidence. It is reasonable to infer there may have been some event which led to something being said by the sheriff's officer to the judge before 10 June 1997, but had it justified an inference of interference the sheriff's officer would surely have remembered it. If it be the fact that the father's foot came in contact with his daughter's chair at one stage whilst she was giving evidence, and this is as far as the sheriff's officer went according to what she told Miss
Anderson, that would not justify the inference that this was some form of deliberate interference with the child's evidence or some attempt to prompt her in what she should or should not say.

Section 405D(4) and (5) provide: "(4) A child must not give evidence by means of closed circuit television facilities or any other prescribed technology if the court or tribunal orders that such means not be used.

The court or tribunal may only make such an order if it is satisfied that it is not in the interests of justice for the child's evidence to be given by such means or that the urgency of the matter makes their use inappropriate." 
Whilst her Honour later expressed the misgivings earlier recorded about the closed circuit television facilities, those misgivings were not such as to prompt her to make an order that the facilities not be used for the purposes of the trial of the appellant.

There are in my opinion no grounds for a reasonable apprehension that there was any interference with the complainant in the closed circuit television room such as to affect the credibility of her evidence.

This first ground of appeal has not been established.

I turn to the second ground of appeal.

The particular features upon which this ground of appeal focuses in its expression in the notice of appeal are these: that the events described by the complainant as occurring under the bed were inherently implausible and physically impossible; the inconsistencies in her evidence; her denial to the social worker, Miss Kennedy, that anything had happened to her; events described by her being too poorly particularised as to time; the delay in reporting the matter; the taint of interference referred to in ground 1.

The complainant was born on 26 June 1985 and the offences were alleged to have occurred "between 1 January 1993 and 31 January 1994 at Crookhaven Heads".
The appellant was about nineteen years old at the relevant time and the complainant's family and the appellant's family were very good friends who were accustomed to go away on holidays together. They stayed together at a caravan park at Crookhaven Heads.

The evidence given by the various witnesses may be shortly summarised.

According to the complainant, there was an occasion on one of these holidays at some time in the period mentioned when the complainant, her brother, her sister and the appellant played hide and seek. The complainant said that it was her turn to be "in", and she was rolling around on her parents' double bed in their caravan, counting, before going off to search. In the course of doing so, she fell off the bed and rolled under it. She said that the appellant then came under the bed, pulling his pants down at some time about which she was uncertain, and he got on top of her. The complainant was lying on her back and the appellant pinned her hands down. He then rubbed his penis against her genital area over her clothes and he ejaculated. The complainant said that the appellant had put his hand over her mouth. After the offence had been committed, the appellant got off the complainant and said to her: "Don't tell anyone and I'll give you lollies." The complainant said that she was left with "white stuff" on her tracksuit and she put her pants at the bottom of the washing bag. She said she did not tell her parents because she was scared.
Indeed she did not tell her mother what had happened until October 1995.

The complainant's older sister gave evidence of playing hide and seek with the complainant, her brother and the appellant on occasions during their holidays at the caravan park.

The complainant's mother told the court that her family were friends with the appellant's family and on occasions they had gone away to Crookhaven Heads to stay at the caravan park together. In 1995 the appellant and his girlfriend and their children moved in to live with the complainant's family, staying with them for about seven weeks. However, within days after the appellant and his girlfriend and their children moved out, the complainant told her mother what the appellant had done. She told her mother that he had his pants down, that she had undies on and that "white stuff came out of his thing." 
Detective Senior Constable Harcombe was notified of the child's complaint in
October 1995 and she later attended at Crookhaven Heads to take photographs of the caravan, and measurements were taken of the double bed in the caravan under which the complainant said the offence had been committed. The metal edge of the bed was 350 mm from the floor and the distance from the base of the bed to the slats under the bed was measured at 370 mm. The police officer later spoke to the appellant and an interview was recorded in which he denied ever having played hide and seek with the complainant or her siblings and he denied the allegation made by the complainant.

Some six weeks after the complainant first told her mother what had happened, the complainant saw a social worker, Miss Kennedy. The social worker saw the complainant twice, once in December 1995 and once in January 1996, and it was on the second of these occasions that the social worker raised the matter which had brought the complainant to her. The complainant indicated to Miss
Kennedy that nothing had happened between herself and the appellant. When cross-examined about this, the complainant said that she did not mention it "because I was a bit scared." 
The appellant gave sworn evidence. He said that he went to the caravan park at
Crookhaven Heads three or four times for periods of two to three weeks each time. He said whilst he was holidaying there he went fishing and to the beach with his family and friends. He denied the complainant's allegations and said that he had never played hide and seek in the caravan with the complainant or her brother and sister. He said that he had enjoyed a good relationship with the complainant and her family. He agreed that he was a young man of slender build.

The inconsistencies in the complainant's evidence to which the ground of appeal refers were the subject of attention in her Honour's summing-up between pp 9 and 14. They were these: the complainant in her evidence said that the appellant was wearing a tracksuit and that the white stuff came out on her tracksuit, but she had told her mother, in October 1995, that the white stuff had got on her underpants; then there was the assertion to the social worker that nothing had happened; then there was the assertion by the complainant when she saw the police officer that the appellant turned her over onto her back when he came under the bed. Yet in the complainant's evidence, she said that she was already on her back when the appellant came under the bed.

There was then the circumstance that no explanation was advanced as to why there was such a delay. In addition, the appellant relied upon the circumstance that the date of the commission of this offence was not specified, and the time frame within which it was alleged to have occurred was so vague.

Finally, there is the added feature of the place in which this offence is alleged to have been committed. There was not a great deal of room under this bed for the appellant to lie on top of the complainant or to do what the complainant says that he did. Indeed, it was contended in the notice of appeal that the complainant's description was inherently implausible and physically impossible.

The circumstances in which this Court should act to disturb a jury's verdict upon the basis that it is unsafe and unsatisfactory are well established: see
M [(1994) 181 CLR 487] Kurtic [(1986) 85 A Crim R 57] and
Jones (1997) 72 ALJR 78. In the joint judgment of Gaudron, McHugh and Gummow
JJ in Jones, their Honours said (at 78): "...the test formulated by the majority in M must now be accepted as the appropriate test for determining whether a verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory." 
Was it open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant? That question is not to be answered "merely by examining the transcript of evidence and the exhibits": see Jones, at 85.
Rather, the question is to be answered by reference to what Mason CJ, Deane,
Dawson and Toohey JJ said in M (at 493): "...in answering that question the court must not disregard or discount either the consideration that the jury as the body entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the jury has had the benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses. On the contrary, the court must pay full regard to those considerations." 
The inconsistencies in the complainant's evidence to which I have referred were presented for the jury's consideration in her Honour's summing-up, and the delay in complaining, the vagueness of timing and the denial to the social worker were all matters to be weighed. The jury had the benefit of a clear and concise summing-up about which no complaint has been made in this Court. The jury also had the opportunity of seeing the complainant give her evidence and of seeing the appellant give his evidence. This was critical for the jury in making an assessment of the credibility of each witness and in that task the jury had the advantage not shared by this Court.

The possibility of the appellant doing what the complainant claimed he did under the bed was clearly a very important issue at the trial and the jury was reminded of the appellant's submission (summing-up pp 18-19): "that it is inherently implausible that in so confined a space, the accused could have laid on top of [the child], moved up and down in some way, whilst at the same time pinning down her hands and having his hand over her mouth at some stage as well." 
In considering this issue the jury had the benefit of a piece of timber measuring 330 mm and photos of the bed which showed the space under it. More importantly though the jury was in a position to determine the plausibility of the complainant's account having observed the build of both the complainant and the appellant. The appellant was present in this Court and is a man of slight build but this Court has not seen the complainant and there is no evidence as to her relevant measurements as a young child of seven or eight years. This being so, in my opinion, the jury was better placed than this
Court to decide whether what the complainant claimed to have happened could have occurred within the confined space under the bed and I do not consider that the decision the jury reached in this regard could properly be disturbed by this Court.

Weighing all the matters relied upon by the appellant, I do not regard this as being a case in which the verdict should be disturbed as being unsafe and unsatisfactory. In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed.

The appellant was refused bail in relation to this matter on 10 June 1997 and the judge backdated the minimum term of twelve months to commence on that date. Having served part of the minimum term, the appellant was admitted to bail on 16 February 1998 because of this pending appeal. He must now be taken into custody and serve the balance of his sentence.

JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of Studdert J. 
HIDDEN J: I agree with Studdert J. * * * 
