

I D Jackson versus Nrma Insurance Ltd [1996] NSWSC 268 (12 July 1996) 
IAN DAVID JACKSON versus NRMA INSURANCE LIMITED /94 
Friday 12 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This action requires assessment pursuant to the Motor Accidents Act only. I should first record my favourable impression of the plaintiff whose seemingly indomitable optimism I would not wish to injure by some of the gloomier findings that I have felt compelled to make. For obvious reasons, the defendant submitted that the plaintiff's intentions and persistence should improve his situation and be predicted to result in economic achievement at least to some markedly assessable degree. I do not accept that submission.

The plaintiff was born on 10 November 1955. He is married and has one child who was born in 1990. He was educated to intermediate certificate standard and had some training after that. His parents had run a hotel in Broken Hill. He worked in a bank and in the Commonwealth Public Service. He and his brother ran a service station - for a time two of them - in Broken Hill. When the accident occurred he was employed by Peters Foods as a van salesman. He enjoyed this work and was comparatively well paid. I accept his evidence that he intended to continue in this career. There had been some reorganization and consequent retrenchments in this sector of the employer's business. No doubt the mobility of population and marketing methods of modern supermarkets contracted the scope of call for van salesmen who serviced independent retail outlets but I am satisfied that there would remain ample opportunity for the continued employment of the plaintiff in that field over the balance of his working life. An incidental advantage of sitting on circuit was the ability to observe apparently thriving rural general stores of the type which would be serviced by van salesmen dotted about the countryside away from the larger population centres. I note that within half an hour of the central business district of Wagga Wagga such stores of prosperous appearance were in Gumly
Gumly, Uranquinty and The Rock and I have no reason to doubt that there exist sufficient similar businesses to result in the service provided by the plaintiff's employer through him to continue.

The plaintiff was in good health when he was injured on 7 August 1993. The driver of an oncoming car is presumed to have fallen asleep when he suddenly crossed the centre of the road into the path of the vehicle driven by the plaintiff and violently collided with it.

The horrendous accumulation of the plaintiff's injuries can to some extent be indicated by simply reading the letter dated 26 October 1993 signed by Dr
Myott of Wagga Wagga Base Hospital. Within that document the chronicle of fractures alone is as follows: depressed fracture to the right temporal bone; comminuted fractures to the middle third of the face; fracture of the mandible; fractured right ribs 4-7; fractured left ulna; fractured right radius; fractured right femur; fracture to the right ankle/talus and fracture to the left talus. Added to these were internal injuries and ocular damage.
The lastmentioned is of critical significance in my assessment. The plaintiff's left eye has no remaining light perception and will never see again. The right eye was reported as suffering some degree of permanent damage from the tearing of the root of the iris and the creation of some lens instability. In March 1995 Dr Barnes the attending ophthalmologist reported that as a result of this damage there was a theoretical long term increased risk of glaucoma, cataract and/or retinal detachment. Shortly before the hearing he reassessed this theoretical risk as a fifty percent chance of the need of glaucoma treatment. An adjournment was granted to enable the defendant to investigate this change and the plaintiff was further examined on its behalf. No relevant challenge to this evidence was forthcoming. The fact is that the plaintiff's eye pressure has been rising. The efficacy of treatment, if and when it is required, cannot be the subject of precise forecast. The plaintiff must in any event so far as regards his remaining vision live, as it were, on the precipice of catastrophe. I assess the risk involved as substantial and it follows that damages must be compatible with that extent of risk.

The evidence persuades me that the plaintiff is determinedly trying to rehabilitate himself both personally and into the workforce. As to the latter
I consider it highly unlikely that the plaintiff will be able to obtain and retain more than some minor amount of remunerated activity. Should the risk to the sight of his remaining eye fall due to the fullest extent realistically he will have become unemployable.

I do not need to recite the content of medical reports which speak for themselves. On behalf of the plaintiff a bundle consisting of some twenty nine documents was tendered. On behalf of the defendant there was tendered a report from Dr McGrath, a specialist in occupational medicine, who sought to identify occupations for which he estimated the plaintiff to have probable or possible capacity. These were apparently derived from a study entitled "Transferable
Work Skills Analysis". Also tendered was a comprehensive report from Dr
McEwin. Neither of these doctors had been fully informed concerning the deterioration of the plaintiff's eye pressure levels and consequently they did not have the opportunity to turn their attention to any risk factor involved.
Of course, the knowledge was only available shortly before the hearing but in the circumstances I cannot know what, if any, qualifications they would make to their opinions. I do conclude that by reason of the gap in the information available to them their opinions would necessarily have been overly optimistic and I prefer the evidence tendered on behalf of the plaintiff.

I turn to the ingredients of damage.

Out of pockets to date have been agreed as have been the estimated costs of future medical treatment in the sums of $42,140, and $17,500 respectively.

Exhibit F presents a calculation based upon the earnings of a comparable employee and from the date of accident to 27 March 1996 there is proposed a resultant loss of $88,224. I find that the plaintiff was as a result of accident unable to earn this sum and I award it to which I add $7,987 representing the twelve ensuing weeks at the current rate of $665.63 per week shown on the exhibit. This brings these damages up to date.

The plaintiff is now forty years of age. But for the accident I estimate his future span of working life at twenty five years. I am conscious of the submission that the earnings of van salesmen fluctuate not only as between themselves but in the earnings of an individual and I do not ignore the evidence of the reorganization of areas consequent upon some apparent contraction in the business available from client stores. The evidence persuades me that the employer was responding to the situation by reducing the number of employees but then redistributing the "runs" so as to maintain viability of occupation for those whose services who continued. My impression of the plaintiff in the light of his overall work history and with Peters was that he would be very likely to survive any redundancy imposed upon some of the van salesmen.

I consider it appropriate to use the weekly nett figure from Exhibit F of $665.63 as a primary guide. If the plaintiff were totally incapacitated for a working life of twenty five years his loss would capitalize at the authorized discount rate (5 percent) into a damages ingredient of $501,685. The plaintiff is not totally incapacitated but I have found that his residual capacity is very small. I make allowance for the possibility of the exercise of this and for the possibility that the plaintiff may have encountered adverse vicissitudes in any event if he had remained uninjured by the tort. I award the plaintiff $375,000 for the ingredient of damage usually and conveniently referred to as future economic loss.

A claim is made for loss of superannuation benefit. From Exhibit G (the report from Towers Perrin) I can derive a present value of nett superannuation entitlement. The plaintiff's present gross salary - taking the assumption from the comparable earnings in Exhibit F- would be $877.63 and the value of the lost superannuation subsidy would lie between $46,219 and $55,803 in accordance with the table on p 7 of Exhibit G. The assumption relates to persons such as the plaintiff aged forty and intending to retire at age sixty five and the range is derived from gross income between $750 and $1,000 per week. Having regard to the plaintiff's notional gross weekly income of $887.63
I conclude that it is appropriate to award $50,500 for this part of his claim.

I finally have to deal with non economic loss. I have already scheduled the multiplicity of the plaintiff's bone fractures. As a further result of injury but more especially necessary surgery, his body has been extensively scarred.
The scarring was viewed at the hearing. I accept the evidence of the plaintiff and his wife and in particular the descriptions of his personality change, the deterioration in his capacity for maintaining relationship, his apparent concentration and memory defects and his overall manifestations of frustration. Of cardinal significance there are added to these deficits, the blindness in one eye and the ever present and real threat to the integrity of the other.

The award for non economic loss is governed by <case> of the Motor Accidents Act and effectively I am required to assess the proportion which the plaintiff's circumstances represent when applied against a (and I emphasis "a" and not "the") most extreme case. The sum fixed as award for the latter is $235,000. I assess the plaintiff's entitlement as 80 percent of a most extreme case and $188,000 will be included in the judgment sum.

For ease of reference I will recapitulate the ingredients of award: 
Out of pocket expenses  $42,140.00  
Future expenses  $17,500.00  
Economic loss to date  $88,224.00 $7,987.00  
Future economic loss  $375,000.00  
Lost superannuation benefit  $50,500.00  
Non economic loss  $188,000.00  $769,351.00  
I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $769,351.00. Costs should ordinarily follow that event and I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of the action. Should there be any reason that either party seeks variation of the costs order, I grant liberty to apply forthwith or upon two days' notice to the opponent in respect thereof provided such application may be made within twenty one days of this date.
 * * * 
