

Bayeh versus Attorney General for NSW and Another No. 30040/1995 Royal
Commission [1995] NSWSC 4 (23 August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION
DAVID HUNT CJ at CL
HRNG
SYDNEY 26 June 1995 #DATE 3:7:1995 #ADD 23:8:1995 
Counsel for the plaintiff:   BW Collins QC and EG Romaniuk 
Solicitors for the plaintiff:  Caldecott and
Williams 
Counsel for the Attorney General: K Mason QC SG and VM Bell 
Solicitor for the Attorney General and the Hon Justice
Wood:     IV Knight, Crown Solicitor
ORDER
The plaintiff's Summons is dismissed.
Liberty to apply in relation to any declaration which may be sought by the first defendant and in relation to costs.
JUDGE1
DAVID HUNT CJ at CL By his amended Summons, the plaintiff (Mr Louis Bayeh) seeks declaratory and other relief in relation to the manner in which his evidence is to be given before the current Royal Commission into the NSW
Police Service. He has named both the Attorney General and the Royal
Commissioner (the Hon Justice Wood) as defendants. The Commissioner has filed a submitting appearance.
 
The background
The factual background may be stated very shortly. Justice Wood has been appointed as Royal Commissioner to inquire into, relevantly, the nature and extent of corruption within the Police Service, particularly of an entrenched or systemic kind.
Evidence has been given in public before the Commission by a witness known only by the pseudonym "KX6" that the plaintiff did, between the years 1984 and , collect money from (amongst other businesses) brothels and massage parlours in various part of Sydney in return for ensuring that the police did not raid those establishments, and that such protection was obtained by the plaintiff making corrupt payments to police officers.
The plaintiff's activities were described by KX6 as a "protection racket" and the plaintiff himself was described as a "fix-it man" and as being "protection or standover". He was alleged to have been collecting $20,000 or more each week from such establishments during this period from 1984 to 1990. The evidence of
KX6 received widespread publicity in the media.
Shortly before this evidence was given by KX6, the plaintiff (who had already been summoned to give evidence before the Royal Commission) was committed for trial on thirteen charges of demanding money with menaces.((1) [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), [s 99.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s99.html) The maximum penalty for each offence is penal servitude for ten years.) The Crown case in support of those charges is that, between and 1992, the plaintiff had received payments from the proprietor of a number of brothels and a massage parlour (one Antoine
Richard Martin Debruyne) to protect his businesses against interference by criminals, police and other
Government authorities. The payments consisted of money and sexual services; the money paid by Debruyne to the plaintiff during this period ranged from $400 to $1200 per week. The payments were made by Debruyne against his will, believing that if he did not do so his businesses would be closed; he also feared for his own and his family's personal safety.
Application was then made to the Royal Commissioner on behalf of the plaintiff for orders: (1) that his evidence before the Commission be heard in private, (2) that his evidence not be published by the media, (3) that nothing be published in the media by which he might be identified as a person who may be going to give, or has given, evidence before the Commission, or as a person who had made such applications, (4) that he be referred to at all times by a pseudonym in any evidence before the Commission and in any report made by the
Royal Commissioner, and (5) that no further report of the evidence given by
KX6 be published in the media. The application was based upon the provisions of [s 38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s38.html) and [s 27](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rcsa1994334/s27.html) of the [Royal Commission (Police Service) Act 1994](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rcsa1994334/), ((2) I shall refer to this statute as "the 1994 Act".) to the relevant terms of which
I will refer shortly. The application was refused.
 
The application in this Court
The relief sought in the proceedings in this Court is: . a declaration that the plaintiff's right to a fair trial upon the thirteen charges of demanding money with menaces will be prejudiced by evidence given by him in public before the
Royal Commission; . an order restraining the Royal Commissioner from hearing the evidence of the plaintiff otherwise than in private; or an order that the Royal Commissioner hear and determine the plaintiff's application to have his evidence heard in private according to law.
The issues raised by this application are narrower than those litigated before the Commissioner. The proceedings in this Court are nevertheless in substance, although not in form, an appeal from the Commissioner's decision refusing a substantial part of the plaintiff's application to him. The law does not provide for any appeal from the decision of a Royal Commissioner.
The scope of the jurisdiction of this Court to grant declaratory relief is very wide.((3) [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), [s 75](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75.html); Forster versus Jododex Aust Pty Ltd <case>; [(1972) 127 CLR 421] at 51, 56, 62) The exercise of that jurisdiction is, however, discretionary - a discretion which is limited only by the responsibility to ensure that judicial pronouncements should not be issued unless there are circumstances which call for their making.((4) Ibenewka v
Egbuna [(1964) 1 WLR 219] at 448; Forster v
Jododex Aust Pty Ltd (at 437-438)) Except in special circumstances, the jurisdiction will not be used to provide an alternative means of appeal,((5
Bacon versus Rose [(1972) 2 NSWLR 793] at 487-488; affirmed on appeal: [(1975) 1 NSWLR 212] at 215-216) although (it seems) the absence of any formal avenue of appeal is a matter which may be taken into account if it is necessary to ensure that the matter in issue is not finally determined in a manner which is not according to law.((6 Forster versus Jododex Aust
Pty Ltd (at ))
The Commissioner's decision to grant or to refuse any application that evidence be given in private is to some extent necessarily tied to the proper construction of <case> of the 1994 Act. This is the first occasion upon which that issue has arisen for determination and, in the circumstances, it is unlikely to be the last. It raises a question of law which is itself of general importance. A decision as to whether the evidence of a witness who faces criminal charges which may touch upon the subject matter of those charges is to be given in public or private is not - as with so many matters to be decided by a Royal Commissioner - one which is advisory only and in any event of no effect until the Commissioner has reported to the Governor.((7 cf
Jackson versus Slattery [(1984) 1 NSWLR 599] at 580-582, 595-596) Rather, it is one which may wen affect his right to a fair trial. It is true that relief of a prerogative nature is available in relation to a Royal Commissioner.((8 Ferraro versus Woodward <case>; [(1978) 143 CLR 102] at 106. It is agreed between the parties that <case> of the [Royal Commissions Act 1923](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/) applies only where <case> of the Companies Act also applies, and that it has no current application.) But a declaration is a more satisfactory remedy than orders of a prerogative nature, being quicker, simpler and attended by less doubts, ((9 Forster v
Jododex Aust Pty
Ltd (at 438)) so that the mere availability of relief of such a nature should not usually stand alone in the way of granting declaratory relief. ((10 Pyx
Granite Co Ltd versus Ministry of Housing and Local Government [(1960) AC 260] at ; Forster versus Jododex Aust Pty Ltd (at 438)) It seems to me, therefore, that there are special circumstances in this case warranting at least a consideration of the proper construction of <case>.
 
Interpretation of Section 38
The High Court has held that the examination by a Royal Commission of a witness upon matters in relation to which the witness has been charged amounts to a contempt of court. ((11) Hammond versus The Commonwealth (1982)152 CLR 188 at -199, 202-203, 206) It was to meet this situation that <case> was enacted.
Section 38(1) permits the Commissioner to carry out his inquiry, to report upon that inquiry and to do "all such acts and things as are necessary or expedient for those purposes" notwithstanding the existence of any proceedings which may be before a legal tribunal at the time. Subsections (2) and (3) are in the following terms: " (2) If the proceedings are proceedings for an indictable offence and are conducted by or on behalf of the Crown, the
Commissioner may, to the extent to which the Commissioner thinks it necessary to do so to ensure that the accused's right to a fair trial is not prejudiced: order any hearing or other matters relating to the inquiry are conducted in private during the currency of the proceedings: and give directions under section 27 (Publication of evidence etc), having effect during the currency of the proceedings.

Subsection does not apply: (in the case of committal proceedings) before the commencement of the committal hearing, that is, the commencement of the taking of the evidence for the prosecution in committal proceedings; and (in any other case) after the proceedings cease to be proceedings for the trial of a person before a jury." (Emphasis has been added to the word "may".) Section 27 provides, so far as is here relevant: "27. (1) The Commissioner may direct that: any evidence given before the Commission; or the contents of any document, or a description of any thing, produced to the Commission, or seized under a search warrant issued under this Act; or any information that might enable a person who has given evidence before the Commission to be identified, or the fact that any person has given or may be about to give evidence before the Commission, must not be published or must not be published except in such manner, and to such persons, as the
Commissioner specifies.

The Commissioner is not to give a direction under this section unless satisfied that the direction is necessary or desirable in the public interest."
The plaintiff's argument is that the word "may" in <case> which I have emphasised should be interpreted as "shall" or "must", so that, once it is shown that the giving of evidence in public by a witness who has been charged with an indictable offence - or that the publicity which will be given to the evidence of such a witness - will prejudice his fair trial before a jury, the
Royal Commissioner is obliged to make the order referred to in <case>(a) and to give the directions referred to in <case>(b).
[Section 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s9.html) of the [Interpretation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) provides: "(9) (1) In any Act or instrument, the word "may", if used to confer a power, indicates that the power may be exercised or not, at discretion.

In any Act or instrument, the word "shall", if used to impose a duty, indicates that the duty must be performed."
That provision must, of course, be read subject to what is otherwise indicated or required by the context or the subject matter of the statutory provision in question. ((12) [Interpretation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/), [s 6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s6.html) The plaintiff says that the object sought to be achieved by [s 38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s38.html) couples the power granted to the
Commissioner to act in accordance with [s 38(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s38.html) with a duty to exercise that power when called upon to do so. ((13)) Julius versus Lord Bishop of Oxford [(1880) App Cas 214]; [(1994) 126
ALR 1] at 25-26
In the present case, the plaintiff says, he has the right to a fair trial - or (more accurately) a right not to be tried unfairly, but it is convenient to refer to an accused's positive right to a fair trial. ((14) Jago versus District
Court of NSW <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 23] at 299, 326, 353, 362) A common law right such as the right to a fair trial cannot be abrogated unless a contrary intention is clearly expressed or necessarily implied in the statute. ((15) Davern versus Messel <case>; [(1984) CLR 21] at 238. See also "Statutory
Interpretation", (1990) Dr DJ Gifford, at 185-186.) So, the plaintiff says, the Legislature could not have intended the word "may" in [s 38(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s38.html) to be interpreted as leaving it to the discretion of the Royal Commissioner to require the evidence to be given in public by a witness in his position notwithstanding that doing so will prejudice his fair trial before a jury.
The Attorney General says that effect should be given to [s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s9.html) of the [Interpretation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/). He says that the use of the permissive word "may" in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s38.html) must be taken to have been deliberate. This is because its legislative history makes it clear that there was a conscious departure from the earlier legislative model. ((16) As to the propriety of such an approach, see
Commissioner of State Revenue versus Royal Insurance
Aust Ltd (at 7, 23-24).) When the Bill for the 1994 Act was introduced in Parliament, clause 38(2) was different in form in one significant respect and in two less important respects. It provided that, if the criminal proceedings are for an indictable offence, the Commissioner "must" - not "may" - act in the way set out in the clause. There was thus a duty imposed upon the Commissioner to act in that way, although it was not to make the order now referred to in <case>(a); rather, it was to "ensure that, as far as practicable", the hearing was conducted in private during the currency of the criminal proceedings. There was also a further duty imposed in the clause, that the Commissioner - "must ...
 defer making a report in relation to the Commission's inquiry or any part or aspect of that inquiry during the currency of the proceedings."
In that form, clause 38(2) of the Bill Was in all relevant respects identical to [s 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/s18.html) of the [Independent Commission Against Corruption Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/) (to which the side note to [s 38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/s38.html) refers),
According to Hansard, paragraph (c) in clause 38(2) was deleted on the motion of the then Government (at the request of Justice Wood). This deletion was not, in my view, of any particular importance to the interpretation of the section. The amendment replacing "must" with "may" was, however, of vital importance. Again according to Hansard, this amendment was moved by the then
Member for South Coast (Mr Hatton), whose part in initiating this Royal
Commission is well known. His motion was supported by the then Opposition and opposed by the Government. Such a legislative history thus supports the
Attorney General's contention that the use of the permissive word "may" was deliberate.
[Section 34](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s34.html) of the [Interpretation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) permits consideration of certain extrinsic material in order, amongst other things, to confirm that the meaning of a provision in an Act is the ordinary meaning conveyed by the text of the provision. That extrinsic material includes the speech of the Minister when he moves that the Bill for the Act be read a second time. That is not of assistance in the present case, because the Minister did not move the amendment in question. Section 34 also, however, permits consideration of "any relevant material ... in any official record of debates in Parliament. " The speech of Mr Hatton when moving the amendment replacing "must" with "may" would therefore appear to be of much the same relevance as that of the
Minister who proposes the Bill. What Mr Hatton said when moving that amendment was this: "In giving full support to the Police Royal Commission it is important that we recognise the overriding public duty that the Commissioner has in looking at the structural problems which have caused corruption to flourish in some sectors of the New South Wales Police Force. One of the problems that
Members on both sides of the House are wrestling with is: to what extent should a Royal Commission interfere with the rights of people who have cases before the courts? This has been a subject of discussion between me, the other
Independents, Mr Crooke QC, who came to the Royal Commission from the
Fitzgerald inquiry, and Mr Justice James Wood." 
The terms of clause 38(2) are then quoted, and Mr Hatton continues: "The job of the Royal Commission is to get to the bottom of corruption. It will on occasion run into problems because in the continuity of its inquiries it will look at matters which are going to impinge on the rights of other people who may be before the court, even on criminal matters. To what extent then should the Royal Commission proceed with its business uninterrupted when at the same time this may prejudice the rights of the accused before the court? That is the difficulty we face. The Royal Commissioner has the problem that when hearing an application for him not to proceed because proceedings are afoot in another place he may not have all of the matters before him in context as to whether what he is doing will prejudice the trial, whereas when the trial comes on further down the track, whether it is six months, a year or eighteen months, the judge concerned will have all the evidence before him or her and will be able to decide whether the action has prejudiced the case and whether there should be a stay of proceedings.
I feel that is inadequate; nevertheless, the higher public duty must take precedence.
However, I am further assured that, if the clause is amended by substituting "may" for "must", this particular Commissioner, in whom
I have the highest confidence, will act responsibly and not impinge on a fair trial unnecessarily."
I should interpolate that the 1994 Act ((17) (by <case>)) is applicable only to the Royal Commission into the NSW Police Service being conducted by
Justice Wood.
Mr Hatton then expressed some views concerning the similar inquiry conducted by the then Mr Fitzgerald QC in Queensland, and he continued: "I acknowledge that considerations regarding the right to a fair trial and civil liberties issues are involved, but my faith in this Royal Commissioner is such that I believe action will not be taken by him such as to seriously prejudice a fair trial. Nevertheless, he must have the freedom to move to pursue the higher public duty."
Similar views were expressed by the Member for Ashfield (Mr Whelan) when supporting the amendment on behalf of the Opposition. He referred with approval to the concerns expressed by Justice Wood that the Commission's proceedings should be heard in public so as to reinforce confidence in the
Commission, to encourage potential witnesses to come forward, and to demonstrate to corrupt police officers who are waiting to be called the futility of giving false evidence. He said that, for the Opposition, it "was important to avoid as far as practicable (the Royal Commission) being tied up in litigation challenging decisions made under sub clause (2)". He went on to say: "Having considered the matter, it is our view that eighteen months down the track of a criminal trial a judge is in a better position to adjudge whether there has been fairness and equality in a particular criminal matter. For those reasons alone the Opposition supports the amendment.

The important issue of fairness in a trial, such as the guilt or innocence of a person involved in a Royal Commission, should be left to the criminal court to decide. No trial will take place if the court is of the opinion that it cannot be a fair trial. The Fitzgerald inquiry revealed that fair trials could still be held after a Royal Commission."
The amendment was opposed by the Government. The Minister stated that its reasons essentially related to its paramount concern "to ensure that individuals receive a fair trial", which it thought was "paramount in the legal system". It did not believe that -
"a sufficient case had been made out to justify stripping clause 38 of its safeguards - safeguards that are fundamental to our legal system, to protect the rights of the individual." 
He concluded: "It would not appear unreasonable to require the Royal
Commissioner to have ongoing regard to the maintenance of a balance between the rights of individuals to a fair trial and the public's interest in an open inquiry. While the Government has the greatest confidence in Commissioner Wood - after all the Government appointed him to this important Commission - it believes the principle that must be unswervingly upheld is that the rights of an individual to a fair trial must always be protected. Accordingly, the Government does not accept the honourable Member's proposed amendment."
The amendment was agreed to.
The second amendment of less significance - amending the terms of par (a) in clause 38(2) - was also moved by Mr Hatton who, according to Hansard, appears to have thought it was necessary in order to give the Royal
Commissioner greater power to conduct the Commission's hearings in private when doing so to ensure a fair trial. Minds may, with respect, differ as to whether the amendment was necessary for that purpose, although it provides a neater form of draftsmanship. The amendment was unopposed.
If consideration is given to what was said in the debate, there can be no doubt whatsoever that the word "may" in <case> was intended to mean just what its says. It was not intended to mean "shall" or "must". In my view, that conclusion is convincingly dictated by the bare legislative history of <case> to which I referred earlier even without reference to the debate in
Parliament. Notwithstanding the submission by the plaintiff to the contrary, this is not a case where it could be said that the clear intention of
Parliament as expressed in either the debate or the legislative history of the statute has failed to be translated into the text of that statute. ((18) cf
Re Bolton; Ex parte Beane <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 514] at 518) That is because the plaintiff's argument necessarily requires the word "may" to be read in a sense different to the ordinary meaning which it conveys.
The express terms of <case> permitting the Commissioner to carry out his inquiry notwithstanding the existence of proceedings before a legal tribunal at the time, coupled with the deliberate use of the permissive word "may" in relation to the steps to be taken to avoid prejudicing those proceedings, necessarily imply that the common law right contended for by the plaintiff has been abrogated to the extent indicated. I am satisfied that the Commissioner has a discretion to refuse an application under <case> notwithstanding that, as a result of evidence being given in public, there may be prejudice to the fair trial of a person charged with an indictable offence.
The Attorney General also submitted that the other terms of <case> assist in such a construction. If the criminal proceedings are for an indictable offence, the Commissioner may - "... to the extent to which the Commissioner thinks it necessary to do so to ensure that the accused's right to a fair trial is not prejudiced..." act in the way set out in pars (a) and (b). The Commissioner's judgment, the
Attorney General says, becomes the determinant as to the extent to which an order should be made notwithstanding that there may be prejudice. The plaintiff responds to that argument by saying that the words which have been quoted do no more than indicate that the Commissioner may order that only parts of the hearing are to be conducted in private or are not to be published. In other words, the word "necessary" relates to what is necessary in order to ensure that there is no prejudice, not to what is necessary in order for the Commission to act effectively and successfully. In my view, the plaintiff's argument is correct, but that conclusion does not affect the strength of the Attorney General's argument based upon the legislative history of <case>.
 
The Commissioner's approach
It is obvious that, as contemplated by the Legislature, such a discretion under <case> must be exercised responsibly and not unnecessarily. In fact,
Justice Wood stated that, even if s (2) be construed as giving him a discretion, he took the view that in this case it would not be appropriate to exercise that discretion to refuse to order that the plaintiff <case> be given in private if he were satisfied that the plaintiff <case> to a fair trial required the evidence to be so given, and that he should make the orders of the class which <case> specified to the extent which he thought it "necessary to do so to ensure that Mr Bayeh's right to a fair trial is not prejudiced." Such an approach is not required by the terms of <case>, but it is one which was wholly in the plaintiff <case>. The fact that the
Commissioner took such an approach in the present case indicates the sensitivity with which he has exercised his discretion. Certainly, the plaintiff cannot complain of such an approach.
The Commissioner went on to decide that an order under <case> was unnecessary to preserve the plaintiff's right to a fair trial in this case, although he made it clear that it remained open to the plaintiff to renew his application at any time in relation to any particular parts of his evidence.
What he was refusing was a blanket order in relation to the plaintiff's evidence as a whole. Attack on the Commissioner's decision
The next step of the plaintiff's argument is that this decision was manifestly unreasonable, the so-called "Wednesbury" unreasonableness ground for judicial review. ((19) Associated Provincial
Picture Houses Ltd v
Wednesbury Corporation <case>; [(1948) 1 KB 223] at 230, 233-234) The formulation of this ground has been well accepted in Australia, ((20) The decisions of the
High Court doing so are collected in Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko-Wallsend Ltd <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 24] at 41.) but it is worth emphasizing the point made by Lord Greene MR in that case, ((21) (1948) 1 KB (at 230-231, )) that a court exercising its power of judicial review interferes with such a decision not because the court itself thinks that the decision was unreasonable - because the true arbiter is the decision maker not the court - and that, if the decision maker has acted within the four comers of his or her jurisdiction in coming to that decision, the court will not interfere. The power of this Court to interfere with such a decision of the Commissioner is not as an appellate authority over him, but rather as a judicial authority with supervisory powers ((22) This Court has a general supervisory jurisdiction over all tribunals: John Fairfax and Sons Pty Ltd versus McRae <case>; [(1955) CLR 351] at 116,) which is concerned, and concerned only, to see whether the Commissioner has acted in excess of the powers which
Parliament has given him. ((23) Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v
Wednesbury Corporation (at 234); and see AG versus Quin <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 1] at 130) The "Wednesbury" unreasonableness ground leaves the merits of the Commissioner's decision unaffected unless he has so acted.
((24) AG versus Quin (at 36)) In order to succeed in this Court, the plaintiff must establish that the Commissioner's decision was so unreasonable that no reasonable person could have come to it; that is a heavy burden indeed. ((25) Associated Provincial Picture
Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation (at 230, 234))
When he gives evidence before the Commission, the plaintiff win not have the benefit of the usual privilege otherwise available to him of refusing to answer questions on the ground that his answer may incriminate him, or may tend to incriminate him, although such answers are made inadmissible in evidence against him in any criminal proceedings.
((26) [Royal Commissions Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/), [s 17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/s17.html), which the Commissioner's Letters Patent declare to be applicable to this Royal Commission.) The Commissioner has stated that it is not his intention to examine the plaintiff directly in connection with the thirteen charges of demanding money with menaces. The plaintiff points out that questions relating to those charges have already been asked of the witness KX6 by counsel assisting the
Commissioner, ((27) Transcript, pages 7005-6) but there will obviously be the opportunity for stricter control over counsel when the plaintiff is giving evidence because, I assume, he will be legally represented at the time.
The plaintiff says that, notwithstanding the fact that he will not be required to make admissions in relation to the thirteen charges themselves, it is reasonable to assume from the evidence of KX6 that he will be asked questions in relation to a large number of transactions of a similar kind which took place over the same period as that covered by the charges. An undertaking has been given on his behalf that he intends to give evidence before the Commissioner fully and freely directly concerning its investigation into the corrupt activities of members of the Police
Service. He may therefore be obliged to admit his guilt of similar offences involving protection rackets where payments are made to corrupt police officers. Such evidence will inevitably be given wide publicity in the media, and it may wen be recalled by jurors at his trial - which is expected to take place some time in the first half of next year.
Even if the plaintiffs guilt of such other offences would have been admissible in his trial as similar fact evidence (which is not conceded by him), ((28) cf Pfennig v The Queen <case>; [(1995) 127 ALR 99] at 114) his admissions in evidence before the Commission are inadmissible at the trial because of the restriction imposed by [s 17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/s17.html) of the [Royal Commissions Act 1923](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/), and (he says) it could not be expected that the Crown would be able to prove his guilt of those other offences from other sources.
The real or definite possibility that publicity given to his admissions of guilt of similar offences will be recalled by his jurors necessarily prejudices him in that trial. That is so notwithstanding that the emphasis at his trial on these charges will be upon whether the threats were made in order to obtain payment rather than upon the subsequent payments to corrupt police officers. It is fundamental to the fairness of a trial that the jury should reach its verdict by reference only to the evidence admitted at the trial and not be reference to facts or alleged facts gathered from the media or some outside source. ((29) Maxwell versus DPP
AC at 317; Murphy versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 94] at 98-99) Whatever effect a robust direction by the trial judge may have in relation to the publicity already given to the evidence of KX6, the imprint upon the mind of the jurors of such admissions out of the mouth of the plaintiff himself would (he says) be ineradicable.
((30) cf "Contempt" [(1987) ALRC 35](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/alrc/publications/reports/35 "View Case" ), pars 285-287)
There is thus prejudice, because the inevitable publication of media reports of his admissions will have the clear tendency, as a matter of practical reality, to interfere with the due course of justice in his trial. ((31) Hinch v AG (Vic) <case>; [1987 164 CLR 15] at (where a number of authorities relating to confessions are collected); AG v Time Inc Magazine Co Pty Ltd (Court of Appeal, September 1994, unreported) at 4-5; Registrar, Court of Appeal versus John Fairfax Group Pty Ltd (Court of Appeal, 21 October 1994, unreported) at 3.) The Commissioner's offer to consider renewed applications in relation to particular parts of the plaintiff <case> is of no benefit because, the plaintiff says, the whole of his evidence upon the matters raised by KX6 will be prejudicial to him in that sense.
 
Some issues arising
The plaintiff's argument raises a number of issues which need to be examined before turning to the Commissioner's decision. I should point out, however, that there was no examination before me of the question as to whether the evidence of KX6 would be in proper form (that is, not hearsay) in order to establish at the plaintiff's trial the other transactions to which he has referred in his evidence before the Commission (which is not bound by the rules of evidence) or, if his evidence were in such form, the question as to whether such evidence would be admissible in that trial as similar facts. I have accordingly proceeded upon the basis that those other transactions will not be established at the plaintiff's trial.
One issue is to identify what it is which brings <case> into operation.
Accepting that the word "may" really does mean "may", and assuming that an application has been made pursuant to this section, does the Commissioner's obligation to consider whether he should exercise his discretion to act in the way set out in the subsection arise merely because the proceedings in existence are proceedings for an indictable offence?
In my view, he is not obliged to do so unless he is also satisfied that the accused's right to a fair trial will be prejudiced if such action is not taken. That seems to me to follow necessarily from the wording of <case>.
A second issue is what is meant by the accused's right to a fair trial being prejudiced. The plaintiff's argument is that it is sufficient - as in the law of contempt - that there is a real or definite possibility of prejudice because the publicity afforded to his evidence will have the clear tendency, as a matter of practical reality, to interfere with the due course of justice in his trial. ((32) I cited the relevant authorities in the previous footnote.) Contempt of court, however, is not necessarily co-extensive with a fair trial being prejudiced.
 .
The difference is between whether there is a real or definite possibility of prejudice because the publication in question is of such a nature (or tendency) that, if it comes to the notice of the jury, it will prejudice the fairness of the trial and whether the publication in fact prejudices the fair trial of the action.
The difference is strikingly illustrated by what happened in the so-called "Love Boat" trial, in which the accused was charged with attempting to pervert the course of justice by unlawfully endeavouring to influence a person to enter a plea of guilty to a charge of making a false statutory declaration. In support of his denial that he had sought to influence her to do so, the accused called a witness to say that the declarant had come to the view that she ought to plead guilty independently of anything which the accused had done. The witness gave evidence that he personally had advised her to plead guilty because, if she persisted in the lies contained in her declaration, the risk of her going to gaol was increased. His evidence was thus important to the accused's case. At the end of the sixth week of the trial, and at the stage when final addresses were under way, a Sunday newspaper published an article about the accused's witness referring specifically to the evidence which he had given in the trial (a trial which had received considerable publicity), and it repeated a judicial observation concerning evidence in another case that the witness was a hit man or enforcer for a group of violent criminals; it also said that the witness had been found not guilty of conspiring with others in that gang to murder a drug dealer and that another judge had rejected his evidence, describing it as an insult to his intelligence. None of this had been brought out in evidence at the trial; indeed, it would seem to have been wholly inadmissible.
The article was thus clearly of such a nature (or tendency) that, if the jury had become aware of it, the accused's chances of an acquittal would have been seriously damaged. He was in fact found guilty. The newspaper was subsequently convicted of contempt by the Court of Appeal. ((33) Registrar,
Court of Appeal versus John Fairfax Group Pty
Ltd (Court of Appeal, 21 April 1993, unreported)) An appeal from the conviction based, amongst other matters, upon the trial judge's refusal to discharge the jury as a result of the publication was, however, dismissed by the Court of Criminal Appeal. ((34) Regina v Joseph
Ladislaus Meissner (CCA, 27 November 1992, unreported)) It was held ((35) (at -61)) that there had in fact been no prejudice because, in answer to formal written questions, the jurors had replied that, although some of their number had seen the headline (which referred only to the witness's "interesting career") and the photograph of the witness in the newspaper, none had read the material which made it clear that he was a violent criminal. ((36) This procedure is permitted by [Jury Act 1977](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/), [s 55D.)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s55d.html) In the Court of Appeal,
Sheller JA (with whose reasons on this issue Priestly JA agreed generally) pointed out: ((37) (at 6)) "The courts are concerned with the tendency of the publications and the risk of prejudice that follows. ((38) AG v TCN Channel
Nine Pty Ltd (at 382)) Such is the tendency and risk if publication of the article may bring matter critical of the reputation and credibility of a witness at a trial to the jury's attention other than to the extent and in a manner decided by the court.
Responsibility does not depend upon whether or not as events turn out the publication resulted in prejudice to the fair conduct of the trial."
A third issue which is raised by the plaintiff's argument is what is involved in the question as to whether the accused's fair trial will be prejudiced if action is not taken by the Commissioner pursuant to [s 38(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s38.html) The argument put by the plaintiff at one stage was that, if the Commissioner concluded that the nature of the evidence to be given was such that the publicity given to it would prejudice the trial if that trial were to take place immediately, then action had to be taken pursuant to [s 38(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s38.html) even though the trial was not expected to take place for a considerable time. That is manifestly incorrect. By analogy to the law of contempt, ((39) AG versus John
Fairfax and Sons Ltd and Bacon [(1985) 6 NSWLR 695] at 710-711; John Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd versus Doe (Court of Appeal, 21 June 1995, unreported) per
Kirby P (at 28)) the Commissioner must consider the probabilities - as at the date the application for action to be taken under [s 38(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s38.html) is heard - that the trial at the time when it is likely to take place will in fact be prejudiced.
Common sense dictates that that must be so. The plaintiff went on to put an alternative argument in relation to how the Commissioner gave consideration to that question, but it is more appropriate to deal with that argument after referring to the way in which that decision was reached. The Commissioner's decision
The Commissioner's decision attacked as being so unreasonable that no reasonable person could have come to it was that an order under [s 38(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s38.html) was unnecessary to preserve the plaintiff's right to a fair trial in this case. In reaching that decision, the Commissioner took into account a number of facts:
It is not his intention to examine the plaintiff directly in connection with the thirteen charges of demanding money with menaces, the focus of his inquiry being the corrupt conduct of the police officers to whom the plaintiff paid money rather than the plaintiff's conduct in extracting money from the owners of brothels and massage parlours before paying it to the police.

Memories of media publicity given to the plaintiff's evidence will have faded away by the time his trial takes place in the first half of next year, because of - the lapse of time involved, and the media publicity given to the evidence of and relating to other persons involved in corrupt conduct in the same and other areas of police work, so that the impact of the immediate coverage will be spent - if not swallowed up - by equally if not more dramatic later developments.

If (contrary to the Commissioner's expectation) the effect of the media publicity has not dissipated by the time the plaintiff's trial is listed for hearing, there are adequate measures available within the justice system to overcome any prejudice still in existence - either by delaying the trial (the Plaintiff is on bail) or by a strong and unequivocal direction to the jury by the trial judge to put out of their minds anything which they may have heard previously about him.
Each of these factual matters are challenged.
 
The plaintiff's challenge
I have already referred briefly to what has been put concerning the first of those matters. The focus of the Commission's inquiry is not, of course, determinative of the impression conveyed by media reports of its proceedings.
The publicity which will be given by the media to the plaintiffs evidence of transactions of a similar kind to those upon which the charges are based is very likely to be of such a nature that the effect upon those who read or see or hear the reports will ignore the distinction which the Commissioner intends to apply.
But the Commissioner's decision to refuse the order sought by the plaintiff did not depend upon this matter alone. It was based upon the cumulative effect of all three matters.
The second factual matter was challenged upon the basis that it was simply not open in law to the Commissioner to find that subsequent media publicity concerning equally if not more dramatic later developments will swallow up the impact of the immediate coverage of the plaintiff's evidence.
The attack was made on several fronts. It was said that the Commissioner was unable to speak for the collective or individual intentions of the media as to what was to be published, that he was not qualified to judge the newsworthiness of what was to happen in the future proceedings of the
Commission, that he ignored the prospect that the media may refer again to the plaintiff's evidence at some stage closer to the trial, and that he wrongly assumed the existence of a limitation upon the intellectual capacity of prospective jurors to retain within their minds more than one important fact at a time.
This particular argument does, of course, point up the difficulty which the plaintiff has in challenging the Commissioner's factual findings. As he stated in his ruling, the Commissioner's considered assessment in relation to what was to happen in the future in his inquiry was made in the light of intelligence and future planning which, realistically in the circumstances, he was unable to disclose. His assessment that future developments would be equally if not more dramatic than the disclosures of KX6 must therefore be accepted. Once that is accepted, I see no reason why an inference is not available that those developments would receive publicity in media equal to if not more dramatic than that afforded to the evidence of KX6. The newspaper component of that publicity is in evidence before me, and it was certainly presented in a dramatic fashion.
It is true that the Commissioner made no express reference to the prospect that the media may again publicise the plaintiff's evidence at some stage closer to the trial. It is already apparent that some journalists, rather than merely reporting the current proceedings before the Commission, are publishing regular articles which convey, amongst other things, the authors' impressions of the impact made by witnesses called, the conflicts between the evidence of various witnesses and the direction in which the inquiry is headed.
Such articles inevitably contain references to evidence given by witnesses some time previously. That could not occur in relation to the plaintiff's evidence if it is not given in public.
If such a subsequent article repeating the plaintiffs admissions that he had committed offences similar to those charged were published at a time when there is a real or definite possibility that it would prejudice his trial, it seems to me that that article would amount to a contempt notwithstanding that the plaintiff had earlier given such evidence before the Commission. A fair report of the proceedings of the Commission cannot itself amount to a contempt of court notwithstanding that it may prejudice a party to civil or criminal litigation, ((40) Ex parte Terrill; Re Consolidated Press
Ltd (1937) 37 SR 255 at 257-258; AG versus John Fairfax and Sons Ltd and Bacon (at 714)) but articles of the nature (or tendency) which
I have described would not even purport to be reports of the earlier proceedings. They may perhaps escape amounting to a contempt if it could be shown that they were published in the course of discussing a question of public concern, ((41) Ex parte Bread Manufacturers
Ltd; Re Truth and Sportsman Ltd (1937) 37 SR 242 at 251; Registrar, Court of
Appeal versus Willesee [(1985) 3 NSWLR 650] at 654, 676-677, 681-682; Hinch versus AG (at 21-26, 36-37, 46, 66, 83)) although that defence is difficult to establish where the proceedings affected are criminal in nature. ((42)
Registrar, Court of Appeal versus Willesee (at 678-679); DPP versus Wran [(1986) 7 NSWLR ] at 629; Hinch versus AG (Vic) (at 28, 48-49, 86))
Be that as it may, the Commissioner is entitled to assume that such journalists - or, more correctly, the newspapers which publish such articles - are aware of the dangers of publishing such material where it could prejudice pending trials, and that mechanisms are in place to ensure that those dangers do not eventuate. ((43) Many of the decisions upon the penalties to be imposed in contempt cases discuss the availability of these mechanisms.) He did advert to the situation should (contrary to his expectation) the effect of the media publicity afforded to the plaintiff's evidence had not dissipated by the time his trial is listed for hearing. The position would be the same should a journalist publish an article which - whether or not it amounted to a contempt - was likely to prejudice the plaintiff <case> trial. It would equally be the same if evidence implicating the plaintiff were given before the Commission at such a time - although, in such a position, the Commissioner himself could take appropriate action under [s 38(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s38.html) or under [s 27](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s27.html) to avoid publicity being given to it.
The plaintiff placed the greatest weight upon the last of the complaints which I have identified, that the Commissioner misjudged the intellectual capacity of jurors to retain a memory of publicity relating to his likely admissions of guilt of similar offences to those with which he has been charged. I accept the plaintiff <case> that a recollection of such admissions would create far greater prejudice to him than would a recollection merely of the allegations made by KX6 in his evidence. ((44) AG versus Times
Newspapers Ltd, The Times" 12 February 1983. The relevant passage of the judgment of Lord Lane CJ is quoted in "Contempt of Court" (2nd Ed, 1989) CJ
Miller, at 157; cf ICAC versus Chaffey [(1993) 30 NSWLR 21] at 26.) But I do not accept that it was not open to the Commissioner to conclude that the recollection of prospective jurors of reports of the plaintiffs evidence will be swallowed up by the effect of publicity relating to subsequent dramatic developments. As Wilson
J said in Victoria versus Building Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation: ((45) <case>; [(1982) 152 CLR 25] at 136) "...the growth both in range and intensity of mass media coverage in modern times carries with it a greater liability to transience in its hold on the public mind "at is news today is no longer news tomorrow."
In AG versus John Fairfax and
Sons Ltd and Bacon, McHugh JA quoted this passage as supporting his statement: ((46) (at 711)) "... it is legitimate to take into account the effect on juries of coverage in the mass media of other sensational events."
He quoted also what was said by the High Court in John Fairfax and Sons
Pty Ltd versus McRae, ((47) <case>; [(1955) 93 CLR 351] at 372) that the matter "must also be read in the light of the allegations which had been publicly made against certain members of the police force over a considerable period". It is true that these were all contempt cases, but the process of inference involved must be available in relation to any fact to be proved. ((48) See also the judgment of Priestley JA in John Fairfax Publications
Pty Ltd versus Doe (at 3-4))
I see no basis upon which any of the facts found by the Commissioner can be challenged by way of judicial review. The plaintiff nevertheless maintains that, even based upon those facts, the Commissioner's conclusion that a blanket order under [s 38(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s38.html) was unnecessary to preserve his right to a fair trial in this case was so unreasonable that no reasonable person could have come to it. I do not agree. In my judgment, the conclusion was open to the
Commissioner in the light of the facts which he found.
 
The alternative claim
The Commissioner was also asked to consider a claim by the plaintiff - in his capacity as a witness rather than as an accused - that, by reason of threats made to his safety, an order should be made and a direction given pursuant to <case>, or arrangements made for his protection pursuant to <case> of the 1994 Act. Section 26 provides that the Commissioner may - " ...
make such arrangements as are necessary to avoid prejudice to the safety of any (witness) or to protect any from intimidation or harassment."
His refusal to do so was intended to be comprehended within the relief sought in the plaintiff s amended Summons. Complaint is made by the plaintiff in this Court that the Commissioner's refusal to act was palpably unreasonable - again, the "Wednesbury" unreasonableness ground.
Before dealing with the factual material upon which the plaintiff relied, the Commissioner referred to a number of general considerations. Many witnesses give evidence in criminal proceedings fearful of retaliation on behalf of the accused. The justice system is perfectly capable of dealing with such cases without the need to hear the evidence of such witnesses in private or to suppress the publication of that evidence. There are various offences of threatening to cause or causing harm to witnesses, including witnesses before a Royal Commission. ((49) See, for example, [Royal Commissions Act 1923](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/), [ss
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/s18a.html)-[18D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1923224/s18d.html).) There are also available various forms of witness protection schemes. I do not understand the plaintiff to challenge the relevance of any of those general considerations. The Commissioner also referred to one further general consideration which is disputed, and to which further reference will be made later. To take evidence in secret invites suspicion and mistrust of the Commission. ((50)
Victoria versus Australian Building Employees' and Builders
Labourer's Federation (at 95)) This seems to me to be of critical importance in a Royal Commission inquiring into allegations of police corruption.
The Commissioner then considered the evidence before him. It consisted of a confidential statutory declaration and evidence given before the Commission in private. It is accordingly necessary to be somewhat circumspect in revealing that evidence beyond the extent to which it was revealed by the
Commissioner in his ruling, although it is necessary (at the request of the plaintiff) to go a short distance further in this judgment.
It was claimed by the plaintiff that, at various times in 1990 or 1991, following complaints by him that he had been "loaded" by the police, he was informed either that "contracts" on his life were in existence or that attempts were being made to secure such contracts.
Only on one occasion was there anything done which could be construed as resulting from such a contract. In mid 1993, following the arrest and charging of certain persons associated with criminal activities in the Kings Cross area, shots were fired into his home.
The plaintiff claimed to the Commissioner that he has been informed by a named police officer that the shots were fired by two named criminals who were close associates of two further named police officers. The plaintiff told the Commissioner that he is fearful for his own safety and that of his family if he gives evidence before the Commission.
He has asserted that he was informed by a named police officer of the identity of the person holding the contract on his life, and by that person himself that he had been asked by an unnamed police officer to kill him. Some months later, he was informed (by whom the evidence before me does not relate) that an attempt on his life was being arranged by two named police officers.
The inference which the plaintiff sought to have the Commissioner draw was that corrupt police officers would have him killed if he gave evidence.
The Commissioner did not accept a very important part of the plaintiff s evidence. He said that no cogent evidence had been placed before him linking any of the alleged contracts on the plaintiff's life to police officers. Upon the basis of other evidence already given before the
Commission, he said, the shooting was more consistent with a dispute between persons involved in unlawful activities in the
Kings Cross area than an attack instigated by present or former police officers. He recognized that a different face may be placed upon the evidence following further exploration of it, however it was at this stage "less than convincing".
It is not for this Court to say that such evidence ought to have been accepted by the Commissioner. It was clearly open to him not to do so. The
Commissioner went on to say that he was far from persuaded that the plaintiff had genuine or credible fears for his safety in the event of him giving evidence. Without that evidence which was not accepted, and without a finding that the plaintiff's fears were genuine and credible, there could be no basis for a finding by me that the Commissioner's refusal of the relief sought by the plaintiff for his protection as a witness was so unreasonable a decision that no reasonable person could have made it.
The Commissioner made other findings - that the plaintiff had been made aware of various threats and, by his own response, had been able to defuse them, that he has by his lifestyle widespread connections and ready access to street intelligence, that he is regularly accompanied by at least one bodyguard and sometimes two, and that, despite the threats of which he spoke, he had not seen it as being necessary for him to enter a witness security scheme or significantly to change his lifestyle. Various complaints have been made in relation to each of those findings, but what I have said in the previous paragraph makes any further investigation of those complaints unnecessary.
The Commissioner went on to refer to a number of further considerations of a practical significance to his inquiry which he took into account: 
If the plaintiff were to give evidence in private, those against whom he gave evidence (and of whom, by implication, he said that he was fearful) would be unable to confront him by cross-examination and, if appropriate, to give evidence in rebuttal. This would reduce the value of the plaintiff s evidence, and it would be unfair to those whom he accused. If they were permitted to take part in the private hearing in order to instruct their legal representatives for his cross-examination, their presence (or their knowledge of his evidence) would give rise to the very problem identified by him.

Suppression of the plaintiff <case> by hearing it in private, or by hearing it in public with the use of a pseudonym or preventing publication of it, would be likely to inhibit the flow of information from those who may possess relevant information or intelligence and who would become aware of the potential value of their assistance to the Royal 
Commission only through media coverage.

Suppression of the plaintiff <case> would also give rise to very real practical problems in framing a report based upon his evidence, and a secret supplementary report would not satisfy the public interest.
The plaintiff's only real complaint in relation to the Commissioner taking these further considerations into account was directed to the second of them, the effect which any suppression of the plaintiff's evidence would have on the flow of information to the Commission. It was said that this was an irrelevant consideration in the decision which the Commissioner had to take, and thus that this Court should interfere with the decision by way of judicial review. ((51) Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury
Corporation (at 229, 233)) It is important to note that the Commissioner did not take this factor into account when refusing to act under <case> by reason of the suggested prejudice to the fairness of the plaintiff's trial. He has done so only in relation to considering whether the plaintiff's evidence should be suppressed in order to protect him as a witness.
In relation to any "suppression" order which the Commissioner may make pursuant to <case>, however, he is required ((52) (by sub <case>)) to be satisfied that it is "necessary and desirable in the public interest" to do so before giving directions under that section.
In my view, the Commissioner is entitled to take account of the likely effect of directions given under <case> upon the flow of potentially valuable information to the Commission in determining whether it is necessary and desirable in the public interest to give such directions.
When dealing with a similar provision in the [Independent
Commission Against Corruption Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/), although not one in an identical context, ((53) [(s 31))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/icaca1988442/s31.html) Gleeson CJ said: "Considerations of public interest which support an open hearing, and which were taken into account by the
Commissioner, include the need for public confidence in the operations of the Commission, and the assistance to the investigative process which might be gained from the giving of wide publicity to the allegations being investigated. It was for the Commission to determine the weight to be given to such considerations." ((54) ICAC versus Chaffey (at 30))
The Chief Justice went on to refer to, and to quote, what was said by the
Rt Hon Lord Justice Salmon in his report as Royal Commissioner into Tribunals of Inquiry, ((55) (1966) Comnd 3121, pars 115,118,119) stressing the greatest importance that hearings before such tribunals should be held in public in order that "the public will have complete confidence that everything possible has been done for the purpose of arriving at the truth". This supports the validity of the disputed general consideration to which reference was made earlier. The Chief Justice held ((56) (at 31)) that this was a relevant consideration to be taken into account in determining pursuant to the relevant section of that Act whether the proceedings before the ICAC should be in public or in private. I am satisfied that they are relevant also to the
Commissioner's decision under <case> of the 1994 Act.
There is therefore no basis to interfere with the Commissioner's decision refusing relief to the plaintiff upon any basis available by way of judicial review.
 
The result
It follows from what
I have said that the plaintiff is not entitled to the declaration which he seeks. It is common practice in such cases, where appropriate, to make a declaration to the effect of the argument put by a successful defendant. No such declaration was sought in the present case, nor do I presently see it as an appropriate one in which to do so as the rulings are clear. I will, however, grant liberty to apply in case argument is to be put in relation to that issue. Without his right to the declaration which he seeks, the plaintiff is not entitled to the order restraining the Royal
Commissioner from hearing his evidence otherwise than in private. No relevant error has been demonstrated justifying the order sought that the Royal
Commissioner hear and determine the plaintiffs application to have his evidence heard in private according to law. The plaintiff's amended Summons must therefore be dismissed. I have not heard any argument as to why the plaintiff should not be ordered to pay costs, but I will grant liberty to apply in the event that the issue of costs cannot be agreed.
 
Another issue
I have not dealt with every argument which was raised before me. To do so where it was unnecessary for the purposes of my decision would usually be of no utility. There is, however, one issue which was argued and as to which there is some utility in dealing with it even though what I say is unnecessary for the purposes of my decision.
Section 38(2), it will be recalled, provides that, if the criminal proceedings are for an indictable offence, the Commissioner may - "... to the extent to which the Commissioner thinks it necessary to do so to ensure that the accused's right to a fair trial is not prejudice: order any hearing or other matters relating to the inquiry are conducted in private during the currency of the proceedings; and give directions under section 27 (Publication of evidence etc), having effect during the currency of the proceedings." (Emphasis has been added to the word "and".) It was held by the Commissioner that, in that particular context, the conjunctive word "and" should be treated as if it were the compound conjunctive "and/or", meaning that he may act in accordance with either par (a) or par (b) or with both. This interpretation was disputed by the plaintiff, but supported by the Attorney General.
Courts have on occasions read the word "and" as meaning "or" in a statute. One such example is the decision of the High Court in Associated
Newspapers Ltd versus Wavish, ((57) <case>; [(1956) 96 CLR 526)] where a statutory definition was in these terms: "In this Part -'obscene'... includes - tending to deprave or corrupt persons whose minds are open to immoral influences; and unduly emphasizing matters of sex, crimes of violence, gross cruelty or horror."
It was held ((58) (at 528)) that the use of the word "and" did not mean that what was stated in pars (a) and (b) provided cumulative conditions which must both be fulfilled before something was obscene. In such a case, the clear intention of the Legislature was to provide a cumulative but dispersive list of matters to be considered, any one of them being sufficient in itself. That was the categorization given to that decision by Blackburn J in Re The
Licensing Ordinance, ((59) [(1968) 13 FLR 143] at 107) and by the Northern Territory Court of Criminal Appeal in Sullivan versus The Queen.
((61) (1987) 47 NTR 31 at 36) I adopt it also.
The Commissioner's decision was dictated by the introductory words in the passage from <case> which I have most recently quoted, that he may act "to the extent to which (he) thinks it necessary to do so to ensure that the accused's right to a fair trial is not prejudiced". If all that the
Commissioner thought was necessary in order to achieve that result was to give a direction under s 27 that certain evidence must not be published in the media except (for example) by referring to the witness only by a pseudonym, it would be absurd (he said) if he would also be obliged to make an order that the evidence be given in private. In my opinion, the
Commissioner was entirely correct in his interpretation of <case> upon this issue.
 
Postscript
Finally, it is appropriate that I say something about the jurisdiction of this Court being invoked by persons appearing before, or due to appear before, the
Royal Commission to give evidence. The exercise of declaratory relief is, as I said earlier, discretionary. I would not have exercised my discretion to embark upon a review of the Commissioner's decision in this case had it not been for the existence of special circumstances warranting a consideration of the proper construction of <case>. None of the remaining issues raised in argument would have caused me to do so; they were not matters of sufficient importance to interfere with the proceedings before the Commission. I have dealt with them in this case only because, once I embarked upon the task of that review, it became convenient (if not also necessary) to do so. Nor is an order in the nature of mandamus such as sought here automatically made. That procedure does not provide a form of general appeal upon questions of law.
((62) Rex versus War Crimes Entitlement Appeal Tribunal; Ex parte Bott <case>; [(1933) 50
CLR 228] at 71-72) And, just as in relation to committal proceedings, it is undesirable to interfere beyond what is strictly necessary - whether by declaration or by orders of a prerogative nature - in the conduct of a Royal Commission. ((63) cf Sankey versus Whitlam <case>; [(1978) 142 CLR 1] at 235) That is particularly so in relation to a Royal Commission of this nature, where those who are required to give evidence before it may well have both a lot to hide and a lot of money to spend in avoiding having to disclose it.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/4.html  
