

Commonwealth Bank of Australia -v- Andrew Roubas and Anor [1997] NSWSC 475 (13 October 1997) 
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA -v- ANDREW ROUBAS & ANOR /96 
Thursday, 27 March 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were instituted by summons in which the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (the bank) seeks possession of premises situated at 56 Mortlake Street, Mortlake (the Mortlake property) by reason of the alleged default of Andrew Roubas (Roubas) and his wife Anna Roubas (A Roubas) under mortgage dated 28 October 1977 (the Mortlake mortgage) over the Mortlake property, in addition to default under agreement between the bank and the Roubases of 25 July 1991 (the July 1991 agreement) to repay on demand a fully drawn loan of $950,000 and the further default under personal covenants of a trader's bill of sale dated 2 August 1991 (the bill of sale). The bank claimed an indebtedness as at 19 March 1997 of $883,446 together with interest accruing at a daily rate of $342.23. The defence admitted the formal parts of the bank's contentions. No issue was raised in the proceedings, in relation to the evidence adduced by the bank, as to the amount outstanding under the subject loan facilities.

The substantial defence, however, is by way of cross-claim in which the
Roubases seek relief pursuant to the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) and damages for negligent advice.

The cross-claim relates to the acquisition by the Roubases of a property situated at 38-62 Walder Street and 6 Stewart Street, Hammondville (the
Hammondville property) in May 1988.

The background facts are as follows. Roubas was educated in Greece being born there on 23 April 1945. His education consisted of "five years part time at
High School ... (and) a three year Art course with a view to making a career as a commercial artist". He came to Australia in 1970 at the age of twenty five. At the age of twenty nine he married A Roubas who thereafter assisted him in his sign writing business. At that time A Roubas had a half interest in the property at 4 West Parade, West Ryde (the West Ryde property) which was jointly owned with her father. In the year following their marriage, the
Roubases purchased the Mortlake property for $31,500 from savings and a gift from the father of A Roubas, with the balance being provided by way of loan funds. It appears that from about the time of his arrival in Australia Roubas had an account with the bank. Repayment of loan funds was secured by the
Mortlake mortgage. While the Roubases recall having given the mortgage each testified that they were not aware that by giving that mortgage it would secure repayment of any later loans by the bank. In the light of the terms upon which later loan facilities were made available to the Roubases by the bank, that claim needs to be viewed with some scepticism.

In about 1979 the Roubases borrowed a further $11,000 from the bank to enable them to pay for alterations and additions to the residence erected on the
Mortlake property.

By 1987 the borrowings in respect of the Mortlake property had been substantially repaid and Roubas had acquired the half interest in the West
Ryde property held by the father of A Roubas. It was subject to "a small mortgage to a private lender". On 26 March 1987, in consideration of an option fee of $5,000, the Roubases gave an option to purchase the West Ryde property to an intending developer, Pedome Pty Ltd (Pedome). The term of the option was six months and the exercise price was $500,000. It appears that the option was taken to enable Pedome to combine a number of adjoining properties for the purpose of a major development. Roubas considered that the price was above the market price of property in that area.

In September 1987 Pedome sought an extension of the option. The Roubases were only prepared to give an option for a further six months at an increased price of $600,000 and for the further option fee of $95,000. This was accepted by
Pedome. The time within which the option could be exercised expired on 29
April 1988. It is common ground between the parties that the option fee could be applied towards the purchase price of the property upon exercise of the option.

Armed with this windfall option fee Roubas entered into an option to purchase property at 47-51 Rooty Hill Road, Rooty Hill (the Rooty Hill property) on 26
September 1987 for the sum of $500,000. The Rooty Hill property was a development of shops and residential accommodation which was occupied by tenants. The purchase price was partly funded by a loan of $375,000 from
Security Pacific Central Mortgage Limited (Security Pacific), repayment of which was secured by first mortgage over the Rooty Hill property. Further loan funds in the sum of $58,000 were obtained from the bank. The Rooty Hill property had been purchased by a company known as Topden Pty Ltd (Topden) which had been acquired by the Roubases on the advice of their accountant for the purpose of purchasing the Rooty Hill property. The security for this loan was described as follows: " DOCUMENT(S) 
Guarantee by you and Andrew Roubas in respect of the indebtedness of Topden
Pty Limited, liabilities under which are secured by mortgage by you and Andrew
Roubas over property at 56 Mortlake Street, Mortlake." (Exhibit C, p 62) 
A few months after the acquisition of the Rooty Hill property, Roubas became interested in another commercial development, the Hammondville property, which was in the nature of a shopping centre comprising some thirteen retail shops a house, some residents of flats and a house, all of which were occupied by tenants. The Roubases obtained from the bank an initial loan of $30,000 to enable them to make a payment towards the purchase of the Hammondville property. The contract for that purchase was entered into on 21 March 1988 and the $30,000 was paid as a deposit under that contract. The completion of the purchase was effected on 24 May 1988. To enable this purchase to proceed the bank approved a fixed rate bill endorsement facility of $1,600,000 (the May FRB) and a bridging bill discount facility of $430,000 (the bridging loan) supported by security consisting of the mortgage over the West Ryde property; a second mortgage over the Mortlake property; a first mortgage over the Hammondville property and a second mortgage by Topden over the Rooty Hill property. In the period between contract date of 21 March 1988 and completion of the purchase of the Hammondville property, the period for the exercise of the option over the West Ryde property had expired without notice of exercise by the developer.

In the first half of 1989 the Roubases obtained further loan facilities totalling $160,000 from the bank to enable them to purchase a yacht (the boat loan).

Since that time the financial position of the Roubases has deteriorated and, notwithstanding sale of the Hammondville property and the West Ryde property in December 1990 and September 1992 respectively, the indebtedness of the
Roubases to the bank remained substantial. The mortgagee of the Rooty Hill property has taken possession.

In substance, the Roubases say that, unbeknown to them, the subject transactions and borrowings were improvident; that they had provided full financial material to the bank; that they had for many years relied upon the bank for financial advice and had done so in relation to these transactions and that they should have been advised of their financial incapacity to service their loan commitments, particularly after the lapse of the option over the West Ryde property. They contend that they were comparatively uneducated and ill equipped to understand the financial implications of the commercial decisions taken by them and this was well understood by the bank.
In support of this case of the improvident nature of the transactions there was adduced the evidence of Paul Dovico (Dovico) a chartered accountant retained by the Roubases to analyse the various transactions which preceded the collapse of their commercial interests.

In order to evaluate the relationship between the bank and the Roubases and the nature of the transactions entered into, Dovico traced the dealings of the
Roubases with the bank from the time of an extension of their bank overdraft facility in July 1984. His report dated 16 January 1997 (the Dovico report) was responded to in the report of 4 March 1997 (the Sherman report) of Steven
John Sherman (Sherman), the chartered accountant retained on behalf of the bank. The record of the transactions involving the bank and the Roubases has been covered by the evidence of various witnesses who were officers of the bank at the relevant times. The period from the second half of 1977 to mid is covered by the evidence of John Weldon (Weldon) as manager of the bank's Concord branch: the first half of 1985 is covered by the evidence of
Anthony Ronan (Ronan) as manager of the bank's West Pennant Hills Branch at that time: the period from the beginning of 1986 to the end of 1987 is covered by James Ernest Baker (Baker) as the bank's branch manager at West Pennant
Hills: the period from December 1987 to December 1989 is the subject of the evidence of Robert Harold Bolt (Bolt), the manager of the bank's West Pennant
Hills branch at that time: the evidence of Ian Cummerford (Cummerford) the manager of that branch in February 1990 until the first half of 1991 (in the few months prior to that appointment the West Pennant Hills branch was under the control of relieving managers): from the beginning of 1993 the account of the Roubases at the West Pennant Hills branch was under the control of Harold
Chia (Chia) as branch manager until he was retrenched in February 1995. Roger
John Nee (Nee) who was district manager of the bank's Northern division and in that capacity carried responsibility for the approval of the May 1988 FRB and the bridging loan.

Before embarking on an examination of these facts it will be of assistance to restate the approach that the Court should adopt in examining the position of financiers such as the bank in its dealings with a borrower under common law concepts of negligence and under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). As a starting point I think little assistance is to be obtained by searching for broad principles of liability that may be thought to attach to the relationship of banker and borrower in this context. In other words I think the question both at common law and under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) requires in each case a fresh appraisal of the particular relationship existing between the bank and its borrower to ascertain, for example, if at common law there has been in the particular circumstances of the case an assumption of responsibility and, for example, in the case of considerations arising under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) whether the circumstances are such as to require the bank to make "adequate and candid assessments as to the ability of such borrowers to repay such loans" (per
Kirby ACJ in Arbest Pty Ltd & Ors versus State Bank of New South Wales
Limited [(1996) ATPR 41-481] at 41-982: and see Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd versus Karavas [(1991) 23 NSWLR ]
at 268 and Gough versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia (Court of Appeal, unreported, 31 May 1994 at 23)).
 
Further, the very nature of the circumstances to which attention is directed by the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) makes it clear, I think, that that the relief provided for under that Act is not readily equated with equitable principles or common law concepts of duty. In this case the Roubases have sought to establish that there was an assumption of responsibility by the bank to advise them in relation to their borrowings for commercial purposes and further that there was a particular relationship created over many years between themselves and the bank by which the bank became fully aware of their dependence upon the bank in these matters. In these particular circumstances it is said that the transactions into which the
Roubases entered were so improvident as to require the bank to make an informed assessment of their ability to service the proposed borrowings and if that called upon the bank to provide advice which may have conflicted with the bank's interest in the transactions, then, at the very least, they should have been advised by the bank of that matter and urged to obtain independent financial advice before proceeding further with these transactions.

However the Act was never intended to negate risk taking by a borrower and more particularly was not intended, as a general principle, to transfer the entirety of the risk of borrowing to the lending bank.

The principles which should apply in considering whether a contract is unjust in the circumstances relating to it at the time of its making were reviewed in
Elders Rural Finance Limited versus Smith & Ors (Court of Appeal, unreported November 1996) particularly in the judgment of Mahoney P. There the
President of the Court examined the concept of what that which is deemed unjust and related those concepts to some of the factual elements involved in that case in the following terms: "Under the Act, the Court may give relief only when it "finds a contract or a provision of a contract to have been unjust in the circumstances relating to the contract at the time it was made ...": [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) If it so finds, it may, " ... if it considers it just to do so, and for the purpose of avoiding as far as practicable an unjust consequence or result, do any one or more of ..." the things referred to in [s (1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html)
The central question to be addressed in any application under the Act is whether the contract or a provision of it (I shall use "contract" to include both) was, at the relevant time, unjust. The Act does not define "unjust". It indicates that it "includes unconscionable, harsh and oppressive": <case>. It provides in addition for matters which are to be considered by the Court. In considering the central question, " ... the Court shall have regard to the public interest and to all the circumstances of the case, including such consequences or results as those arising in the event of ..." compliance with the contract or non-compliance with it: <case>. The matters to which the Court shall have regard shall include the matters referred to in <case>(a)-(1).

Each of these matters is of assistance. They together give some insight into what "unjust" is intended to mean and, perhaps, the extent of the burden which, in the legislature's opinion, it was unjust that the applicant bear.
"Unconscionable, harsh or oppressive" may perhaps evidence the legislative intention that "unjust" is no small thing and that a finding of it should not be made unless the contract was not merely burdensome but fairly to be described in a manner analogous to "unconscionable, harsh or oppressive".

But, in the end, the meaning of "unjust" is not to be determined by reference to such matters. The Court must determine what was meant by the term having regard to its use in the context of the Act as a whole and against the background of the mischief with which it was intended to deal. It is, in my respectful opinion, not appropriate for the Court to make a judgment as to the wisdom of the legislation. It is the function of the Court to apply the Act according to its true intendment as appearing from its terms. If it be ill- advised (a matter on which I express no opinion) it is proper to recall that it has been said that the way to deal with such an Act is to apply it strictly in accordance with its terms.

In considering the meaning of "unjust" this Court has consistently applied the view of McHugh JA that "it is not the transaction but the contract which must be initially examined": West versus AGC (Advances) Ltd [(1986) 5 NSWLR 610] at 621.
In that case, McHugh JA quoted with approval the statement that the Act was: "... intended to confer on the courts a new and wide discretion to determine the existence and extent of harshness in a contract, and thereby develop a doctrine of unconscionability suitable to present and future business and community needs and standards".

His Honour's view has been applied by this Court in Baltic Shipping Co Ltd v
Dillon [(1991) 22 NSWLR 1], in Beneficial Finance Corporation Ltd versus Karavas [(1991) 23 NSWLR 256] and in Nguyen versus Taylor [(1992) 27 NSWLR 48.] 
The notions which the term conveys have been said to be "more readily to be associated with administrative than with judicial decisions" but to be "not so indefinite as to be insusceptible of strictly judicial application": R v
Commonwealth Industrial Court; Ex parte the Amalgamated Engineering Union,
Australian Section <case>; [(1960) 103 CLR 368] at 383 per Kitto J. The dictionaries add little to an understanding of the content of the term: cf Re Kempthorne Prosser & Co's
New Zealand Drug Co Ltd [(1964) NZLR 49.] I shall not extend this judgment by attempting to draw out the elements of the term or to mark out its boundaries. In the end, the meaning of injustice lies in the reaction of the individual judge, informed by what has been said to (sic) those to whom he should pay regard.

Without limiting the ambit of the term - what I say should not be seen as a paraphrase of it - regard may be had in the application of it to the present facts to matters such as the following. The contract had a potential "at the time it was made" to result in the future in the imposition on the plaintiffs of great burdens and, perhaps, benefits of significant dimensions. The likelihood, at that time, of its doing so - particularly the likelihood of its imposing burdens - and the possibility that the burdens would be heavy was substantial. The capacity of the plaintiffs to appreciate these possibilities, to assess them, and to determine whether they should be accepted and with what safeguards, was limited. The position of the parties, particularly their financial position, and accordingly their capacity to bear burdens which might result from the contract, was a matter of importance. It was important that, if the contract proved to be burdensome rather than beneficial, the plaintiffs might well be financially destroyed. It was relevant in considering the justice of the contract in the circumstances in which it was made that one of the parties, Elders, knew and appreciated the extent of the risks and what might happen to the plaintiffs and that the other party, the plaintiffs, did not understand this or the real implications of it. And I think that, knowing what they did, Elders were under a duty, not legal but in justice, to ensure that the plaintiffs appreciated the extent of the burdens which might fall upon them and the likelihood that they would. I do not mean by this that there was, in law or in judging the justice of the contract, a duty on Elders to dissuade the plaintiffs from the contract. The judge held that the figures and the significance of them were discussed with some of the plaintiffs and the projections were made in consultation with them. But Elders were much more pessimistic of the outcome of the matter than the plaintiffs and they were so because they understood better the reasons for their pessimism. I do not mean that business is, within the contemplation of the Act, to be conducted upon the basis of compassion or even charity. But the Act requires that the Court is to look at the justice of a contract which results from its conduct. In determining what is just, it is in my opinion proper to have regard to what one person knew and the other did not of the potential consequences of the contract." (At pp 2-4) 
I do not understand the parties to disagree on the applicability of that approach to the issues raised in this litigation. Indeed, there are many points of similarity between the circumstances under consideration in Elders and those alleged by the Roubases in these proceedings.

The first record of the Roubases borrowing from the bank relates to an overdraft facility of $2,000 the repayment of which was secured by second mortgage over the Mortlake property. The purpose of the facility was given as "working capital". There was a first mortgage in favour of "CSB" in the sum of $19,912. The Roubas' affairs reflected a surplus of assets over liabilities of approximately $38,500, consisting mainly of the Mortlake property and assets associated with the sign writing business. The preliminary application for advance stated that the Roubases were "excellent types" and that Roubas was "an excellent tradesman" with a satisfactory history as a borrower. It was noted that the Roubases had "heavy medical expenses" and that the account of the Roubases had been "out of order for some time and (had) been continually overdrawn since 2/9/77". The medical expenses were related to hospital and medical expenses involved in the birth of a child. It was also noted that there was "quite some money outstanding" in relation to the sign writing business which had led to a shortage of working capital.

The overdraft accommodation was extended to $4,000 in December 1979. The reason for the increase was given by the Roubases as arising from the growth in their business which now required them to carry more stock and book debts.
Again, the bank's appraisal of the application noted that they were "excellent types" and a "young couple who have always met their commitments". The bank had no hesitation, it would seem, in increasing the overdraft limit. Their statement of assets and liabilities provided to the bank showed a modest improvement in the position of the Roubases with a surplus of approximately $75,000, arising, mainly, from an increased value attributed to the Mortlake property.

This extended facility was followed by an additional loan of $8,000 approved on 15 May 1980, repayment of which was secured by the second mortgage over the
Mortlake property.

It seems that the need for this increased borrowing arose out of the performance of "extensive" alterations to (the Mortlake) property at a cost of approx $26,000, portion of which had been advanced by the first mortgagee.
They had also been assisted financially by a relation in the payment of these alterations and that money was required to be repaid.

By letter of 12 October 1982 to the Roubases, the bank advised approval of a further increase in the overdraft limit to $10,000. This increased overdraft accommodation was required to meet the needs of further growth in the Roubas' business and to offset slow payment by some larger clients. In March of 1994 it was found that the overdraft limit was exceeded as a result of the cost of replacing the Roubas' motor vehicle. In noting the sign writing business of the Roubases had grown over the previous two years, with the consequent increase in stock commitments and the amount of outstanding debtors, the bank considered that the existing overdraft limit of $10,000 was justified and that the overdrawn amount could be transferred to the Roubases fully drawn account which had been reduced from May 1980 from $8,000 to $536. This resulted in a fully drawn account of $4,536.

In approving this arrangement on 8 March 1984, the bank reminded the Roubases that the indebtedness was covered by the existing security. On 2 July 1984 the
Roubases sought further overdraft accommodation. The reason for this increase, it was stated, had arisen through the illness of Roubas' mother. This necessitated their return to Greece for some two months, with the result that earnings from the sign writing business virtually ceased. The bank noted that they had completed work to the value of approximately $7,000. In considering the loan it was recorded by the bank that Roubas was "well and favourably known to the branch manager". By letter of 9 July 1984 the Roubases were advised in writing by the bank that the overdraft limit had been increased to $15,000 "for a six month period to say 31st December 1984". The letter of advice noted that the current interest rate "may vary ... at any time".
Previous advances carried a similar warning.

In the Dovico report, Dovico remarked on this financial assistance by the bank as follows: "As early as July, 1984, our clients were approaching the bank with cash flow problems and requesting an extension to their overdraft from $10,000 to $15,000 since at this stage they were overdrawn way beyond their limit." 
In my view, that is a distorted description of the subject banking relationship and of the true financial position as disclosed by the Roubases to the bank. The record so far as I have traced it shows a responsible young couple engaged in the establishment of a business, being highly regarded by the bank for their commercial responsibility, who suffered the usual financial vicissitudes experienced by many young married couples. The increased borrowings and the irregularity from time to time in the state of accounts reflected the following:
The Roubases experienced increased demands for working capital with the growth of their business.
From time to time essentially non-recurring expenses were incurred, for example, in relation to their visit to Greece, or the purchase of a modest motor vehicle, or hospital and medical costs.
The Roubases continued to make repayments on the fully drawn account.
Expenses were incurred which increased the value of the Mortlake property.

The description by Dovico is of an account out of order and of an increasing indebtedness of struggling borrowers. I regard the situation as reflected by the above dealings as one in which the bank was responsive to the reasonable needs of a young couple who were in the process of enlarging both their family and their business and experiencing the usual vicissitudes.

However, in view of the fact that the increased overdraft had been on a temporary basis the Roubases were informed by a letter of Ronan dated 7
January 1985 that they were required to place the account in order - at that stage the balance debit was $14,462.82. The Roubases responded by requesting an adjustment of their account to provide a personal credit line facility of $17,000 with which to clear the existing advance account indebtedness and their fully drawn loan debts. These arrangements were confirmed by letters of the bank to the Roubases of 26 April and 1 May 1985. In the preliminary application for this rearrangement of facilities the value of the Mortlake property was shown as having substantially increased and the West Ryde property was included amongst their assets at a value of $200,000. A surplus of assets over liabilities was stated to be approximately $350,000. In seeking this facility, the Roubases informed the bank that Roubas had been unable to work for several months as a result of an injury which required admission to hospital for an operation. It was further noted that although he had recommenced work, Roubas was not in the position to reduce the existing indebtedness which stood at approximately $14,166. The Roubases were informed that the "alternative accommodation would need to be considered to place them on a reduction program". The approved facility, in fact, required monthly repayments of $420.

The bank agreed to retain the overdraft limit of $5,000 "to fulfil working capital requirements".

Of this arrangement Dovico reported as follows: "In May, 1995 upon review of their account, their overdraft was once again extended from $15,000 to $17,000, even though the $15,000 was supposed to be short term and reduced down to $10,000 by December, 1994.

The basis for granting such an extension, apparently, was that there was appropriate security and it needed re-valuing. A calculation of the income was made, but there is no basis for this calculation. It appears they were mere assumptions, for had the income been as is suggested, there would have been no necessity to extend the overdraft (twice).

On the 24th April, 1985, the bank estimated the value of 56 Mortlake Street and West Ryde at $180,000 and $200,000 respectively. The mortgage on each property was $23,000 and $35,000 respectively." (Exhibit 8, p 1) 
Dovico appears to be unaware that:
Following the Roubases return from Greece, Roubas had been incapacitated for several months and, presumably, unable to attend to his business.
The programme that was put in place was one which cleared the advance account and the fully drawn loan account and put the borrowing on a reduction basis.
Whatever the true value of the real property owned by the Roubases, it had increased substantially with the West Ryde property providing income.

In those circumstance, in my opinion, the Roubases would have been entitled to have taken affront at a rejection by the bank of the proposed rearrangement of facilities in April-May 1985.

The overdraft limit of the Roubases was extended from $5,000 to $10,000 in
April 1986. By letter of 4 April 1996 the bank informed the Roubases of the state of the overdraft account and in response to that A Roubas informed the bank that the Roubases "were having difficulty obtaining (payment of) outstanding debts ... (and) that her husband had been ill and unable to work for some weeks ...". Her request to extend the limit to $10,000 on a temporary basis was approved on 9 April 1986 and confirmed in writing by letter from
Baker to the Roubases of 11 April 1986. Their attention was drawn to the fact that the working limit was on a temporary basis and that the bank would anticipate its reinstatement within six months to a limit of $5,000.

Baker has a record of a visit by the Roubases to his branch on 16 September
At that time the advance account was down to $6,649.36 and the personal credit line was reducing satisfactorily. Baker noted that their "normal outgoings and income position (had) improved dramatically over the past few months" and that there was approximately $6,000 in recoverable debts owing to the business. It appears that Roubas also earned fees from teaching karate at night in connection with which he had taken time off for a visit to Japan for specialised karate tuition. Details of their income from the sign writing business were disclosed and it was noted that repayments on the outstanding borrowing of $15,155.11, owed to Australia & New Zealand Banking Group
Limited (ANZ) was being satisfied out of rentals received from the West Ryde property. Baker noted that increased earnings were anticipated from the sign writing business in respect of which the Roubases expressed a desire to lease a "computerised sign making robot". It was said that this system would "greatly improve output ..." and would permit A Roubas to participate more gainfully in the business.

Baker noted that the Roubases were "good types (: that) they (had) a good attitude now and aim to build up the business (: that) cash flow should be sufficient to cover lease payments (: that) term is not excessive (aided by finalising of ANZ debt July 1988) and (that) they should have the resources to meet the residual value on expiry". It was anticipated that borrowings could be reduced on sale of a motor bike for $3,000.

It appears from Baker's file note of 16 September 1986 that while there had been temporary excesses on the advance account, at the time of the visit by the Roubases the account was down to $6,649.36. The main purpose of the visit appears to have been the desire to acquire a computer for the business. Two days later the Roubases advised Baker that they wished to proceed with the leasing.

In the following twelve months the bank's records reflect the fact that at different times in 1987, particularly towards the middle of that year, the advance account was overdrawn against the limit of $5,000 by amounts of approximately $2,500. There is a file note of 22 July 1987 which explained that part of this excess was the result of stocking up on materials "which were at a good price". The note also recorded information from the Roubases that their business was prosperous. At the same time the Roubases were requested to "follow up quickly outstanding debtors and to refrain from issuing cheques "unless arranged". On 21 September 1987 it was necessary for the bank to notify the Roubases that the advance account was overdrawn by approximately $3,000. They were required to bring the account within the $5,000 limit.

It was at this time that the option to purchase the West Ryde property, given by the Roubases to Pedome was due to expire. The option was exerciseable within a period ending on 29 April 1988. I think that the Roubases regarded the option fee as a windfall and were confident that within six months they would receive a further windfall in the form of a sale of the West Ryde property for $600,000. I think the Roubases had some justification for their confidence. There are not many investors prepared to walk away from a $100,000 option payment, particularly where the option fee is to be applied against purchase price. In many ways, this extreme good fortune which befell the
Roubases carried the seed of their financial downfall.

Upon receipt of this option fee Roubas, as stated earlier in these reasons, took a two weeks option over the Rooty Hill property to purchase it for $500,000. The option fee was $5,000 and was exerciseable up to 5:00 pm on 13
October 1987. The Roubases immediately called upon Baker to discuss the terms upon which the bank would be prepared to provide loan funds to enable the
Roubases to complete this purchase. Baker recorded their visit on 28 September in the following terms: "They are not interested in buying another property at 51-53 Rooty Hill Rd
North, Rooty Hill for $500000- (Vol 15074 Fol 95- one block, three shops with three flats upstairs) which has existing tenants, Pizza shop, Robbo Spares, a
Video shop grossing $62000pa and netting $55000pa. They are interested in borrowing $400000 & in finding out our rates, fees etc etc. They would require this to be a long term loan because when the remaining $500000 comes in April they would repay ANZ debt, our existing PCL and Home Loan, some $43000, and the remainder to buy another property. They would like the $400000 to be on an interest only fixed rate facility and B/E/F would suit ideally. I obtained an indicative rate B/E/F of 13.30% and with our fees of 1.75% rate would be around the 15.05% mark - interest only figures were quoted.
 ...........

Of course they are setting us up against the ANZ and the better bank will win.
I did not indicate approval. I asked them to consider our alternatives and should they agree to go ahead with us then we would like figures to 6/87,
B/Sheet, income (printing jobs in train) and expenditure and a submission to our H/O would be formulated.

They are good types. However working limit has been exceeded for some four months, they saying that they have given us plenty of security and that it is safe and that they have a lot of work on with customers having difficulty in paying. (We will leave the thoughts with them to get back to us." (p 47 under tab 29 in Exhibit C) 
I think it is particularly noteworthy that within a matter of days of receipt of the $95,000, being the balance of the option fee from Pedome, the Roubases had placed an option on the Rooty Hill property and were looking ahead to the acquisition of similar income producing property upon receipt in six months time of the balance of proceeds of the sale of the West Ryde property.

As it happened, the Roubases went ahead with the purchase of the Rooty Hill property with the assistance of loan funds from Security Pacific on first mortgage, presumably, on more attractive rates than those on offer from the bank. The contract was entered into on 16 October 1987 by Topden. In relation to the bank facility of $58,000 to Topden, it was notified that "full clearance from settlement of West Ryde property" was required.

On 28 September 1987 Baker was also informed that settlement of the Rooty Hill property was expected to take place within six weeks and that "settlement for
West Ryde Sale (was) taking place on 29/4/88". In approving the provision of the additional funds required for the purchase of the Rooty Hill property, the bank also acceded to the Roubases' request to increase their overdraft facility from $5,000 to $10,000. In his evidence in cross-examination, Baker agreed that, in the course of his dealings with the Roubases over the Rooty
Hill property, he was informed that the Roubases had given an option over the
West Ryde property. He was specifically directed to his diary note of 28
September 1987 which recorded the information received from the Roubases as stating that they had "signed contracts ... to sell the property". There was a similar reference in his diary note of 13 October 1987. However, Baker's recollection was clear that he had been informed by the Roubases that the property was subject to an option to purchase and that he must have been mistaken in recording the matter differently in his diary note.

Of this transaction Dovico reported as follows: "From this transaction it appeared that the bank was not interested at looking at serviceability nor was it paying attention to the facts for the following reasons: 
I) West Ryde was not sold, rather our clients entered into a six (6) month's option agreement with Pedonne (sic) Pty. Limited (a shelf company with no assets) for $100,000.

II) There was no certainty that the option would be exercised within that period (in fact it was not exercised).

III) Our clients were having difficulty keeping within their limits at that time and yet, this transaction required them to fund a shortfall of $5,200 p.a., at the very least (i.e. interest $60,200 less net rent of $55,000).

IV) No consideration was given to repairs and possible vacancies occurring which would place further financial pressure on the clients.

In his submission, the bank manager states "They are good types, however, working limits have been exceeded for some four (4) months. They are saying that they have given us plenty of security and that it is safe".

It seems from the above that the only way the clients could ever repay any loan was from the sale of assets and not from cash flow. It appears that total reliance was placed on the West Ryde property having been sold. In fact, it was never sold nor were any contracts for sale signed. Only options were signed.

Ultimately, the property was purchased with total borrowings of $428,000 advanced from the following: 
Security Pacific $375,000 @ 14.45% = $54,187 
Commonwealth Bank $53,000 @ 14.7% = 7,791 $61,978 
A shortfall of $6,978 (i.e. $61,978 - $55,000).

This assumes, no vacancies, rent reductions or defaults, interest increases or vacancies.

Again, the bank took security by way of first mortgage over Mortlake Street to secure the company debt, knowing that the only way the debt could be repaid was by the sale of West Ryde or other properties." (Exhibit 8, pp 2-3) 
I think the critical tones of this portion of the report and some of the calculations put in support of that criticism should be rejected.

I doubt if the position could have been much clearer than that the Roubases were confident that the West Ryde property was sold - a view apparently shared by Baker. It is clear that so far as the bank's accommodation was concerned, it required clearing of the facility through the sale of the West Ryde property. If there was a risk in the option not being exercised I consider that the Roubases, and for that matter the bank, would have been justified in regarding that risk as very low. Further to that, I think it is bordering on the fanciful to think that the Roubases would have behaved any differently had the bank lectured them on the dangers of proceeding on the assumption that the
Pedome option would be exercised. Clearly, the Roubases were committed to embark upon the acquisition of an income producing property. In this respect they secured sufficient loan funds from Security Pacific to ensure that purchase of the Rooty Hill property could proceed and it was simply a matter of acquiring the comparatively small balance needed to complete the purchase.

In my opinion, the risk taken by the Roubases, so far as it involved assuming that the sale of the West Ryde property to Pedome would proceed, was a risk which they were entitled to take, but it was entirely theirs to take and, in my view, there were no reasonable considerations justifying the transferring of that risk, for practical purposes, to the bank.

Further, I find it very difficult to accept Dovico's proposition that "the bank was not interested at looking at serviceability". I have already mentioned the stipulation that the West Ryde property was to be sold to clear the subject indebtedness. Dovico appears to have assumed that if the option fell through there would be no market for West Ryde - at least he makes no allowance for the sale of West Ryde other than to Pedome. He also appears to have overlooked the somewhat detailed content of Baker's diary note of 13
October 1997 which sets out the current and forecast rentals from the Rooty
Hill property which apparently was fully occupied by tenants.

Dovico's comment that it seemed "that the only way (the Roubases) could ever repay any loan was from the sale of assets and not from cash flow" overlooks the basis upon which the facility was provided which, in terms, contemplated that real property would have to be sold and was intended to be sold by the
Roubases. Whether that sale was to Pedome or to some other party, in my view, is beside the point.

Dovico referred to a minimum shortfall in cash flow from the Rooty Hill property of $5,200 per year, a figure which makes no allowance for the impact of maintenance costs and possible vacancies. He also referred to the fact that the Roubases were "having difficulty keeping within their limits". I have earlier referred in these reasons to the circumstances in which the overdraft accommodation was increased which do not reflect, in my opinion, any real basis for concluding that they were struggling to make ends meet, as distinct from experiencing what I would describe as the usual financial difficulties associated with a young family and a successful, growing business. Sherman's analysis of the bank's involvement with the proposed purchase of the Rooty
Hill property is set out below. It represents much of my thinking in relation to the bank's role in this matter. So far as it is relevant the Sherman report was as follows: " The original loan proposed by the Roubas' as understood by the bank is detailed in Mr Baker's diary note dated 28 September 1987 (refer Annexure "F") and is summarised below: a) The Roubas' advised that they had sold the West Ryde property for $60,000.
They had received a deposit of $100,000 and would receive the balance in six months.
 b) The Roubas' stated that they wished to buy a property at Rooty Hill for $500,000. They intended to use the $100,000 they had received on the West Ryde property in this purchase and requested the CBA to finance the balance ($400,000).
 c) During the six month "bridging" period between the purchase of the Rooty
Hill property and the sale of the West Ryde property, it is apparent that a shortfall of $2,600 ($433 per month) would exist on the interest payable on the proposed loan and the rental income from the Rooty Hill property (refer
Annexure "G"). In the absence of any information in relation to the Roubas' other sources of income at the time. I assume that the interest shortfall would have been capitalised and repaid upon settlement of the West Ryde property sale.
 d) Upon sale of the West Ryde property (approximately six months after the purchase of Rooty Hill) the Roubas' intended to pay off $43,000 of their existing CBA and ANZ debts and purchase another property with the balance of the West Ryde sale proceeds of $457,000 (ie. $500,000 less $43,000).
 e) Based on the interest rate of 15.05% referred to in Mr Baker's diary note, repayment of $43,000 of the Roubas' debt would provide them with an interest saving of approximately $6,472 per annum (ie. $43,000 x 15.05%).

On this basis and assuming all other things remained equal, the Roubas' cash flow would in fact improve by at least $1,200 pa (ie. $6,472 interest saving on debt repaid less $5,200 interest shortfall on proposed borrowings) after the sale of the West Ryde property.
 iv) Mr Dovico states that "No consideration was given to repairs and possible vacancies occurring which would place further financial pressure" on the
Roubas'. It is unclear whether these issues were specifically considered by the bank. In my opinion, it would be reasonable to allow for possible vacancies of four to six weeks pa. Based on the rental figures referred to in
Mr Baker's file note dated 13 October 1987 (refer Annexure "H") this allowance would result in possible lost revenue of between $1,005 and $2,185 (refer
Annexure "I"). In my opinion, this contingent loss would not be sufficient to alter the lending decision of a reasonably competent banker in these circumstances.
Mr Dovico's assertion that the only way the Roubas' "could ever repay any loan was from the sale of assets and not from cash flow" fails to recognise that the sale of the West Ryde property was a key component in the Roubas' investment strategy and an important consideration in the bank's evaluation of the Roubas' proposal. I do not consider that the bank was imprudent in proceeding on this basis for the following reasons: a) The Roubas' intentions in applying for this loan appear to have been to purchase a property to replace the West Ryde property (refer Annexure "F").
 b) The Roubas' had granted an option to purchase the West Ryde property initially at an option fee of $5,000 and extended for a further fee of $95,000 (although the bank believed a sale contract had been signed). As discussed above, the option and particularly the fee paid for its extension provided evidence that the property was likely to be sold and of the Roubas' commitment to its sale.
 c) Had the sale of the West Ryde property been completed when anticipated, it is apparent from my comments above that the Roubas' net cashflow would have increased (due to the decrease in interest costs).
As stated above, ultimately the bank did not provide the major funding for the purchase of the Rooty Hill property. Instead, the Roubas' borrowed $375,000 from Security Pacific and required only $53,000 from the CBA.
Mr Dovico has calculated that an annual shortfall of $6,978 existed between the interest payable on these loans and the anticipated net rent receipts from the Rooty Hill property. Again, Mr Dovico's argument is incorrect. At the time the bank provided the loan to the Roubas' it was understood by both parties that the West Ryde property was to be sold within 6 months (ie. April 1988) and as a result the shortfall identified by Mr Dovico only exists during the short-term bridging period. As discussed in paragraph above, I assume that this shortfall would have been capitalised and repaid upon receipt of the West Ryde sale proceeds.
Accordingly, the shortfall relating to the Rooty Hill property amounted to approximately $3,500 for the first six months at which time the West Ryde property was to be sold, which would facilitate the repayment of a portion of the Roubas' existing indebtedness (totalling $83,546 in October 1987) (refer
Annexure "H"). Assuming an interest rate of 14.7% (being the rate applicable to the new loan) this repayment would have provided an interest saving of $12,281 per annum. Furthermore, approximately $415,000 of the sale proceeds would remain (ie. $500,000 less $83,546) which could be used by the Roubas' to settle their loan with Security Pacific, purchase another income producing property or undertake some other investment. It is apparent that these repayments and investments would provide additional surplus cash flow rather than the shortfall calculated by Mr Dovico.
Based on the above, it is my opinion that the bank was not imprudent in providing the Roubas' with funding for the purchase of the Rooty Hill property." (Exhibit K, Annexure A pp 6-8) 
I think it can be fairly concluded that there was nothing improvident in the acquisition of the Rooty Hill property, nor any lack of under standing by the
Roubases of their position, which called for any commercial advice by the bank nor justifying any criticism of the bank in the form offered by Dovico. If the
Roubases had been content to allow their investments and those of Topden to provide them with income to supplement the earnings from the sign writing business and from Roubas' karate teaching, there is little doubt in my mind that they were entitled to look forward to a period of financial prosperity.

In 1988 the Roubases entered into an agreement to purchase the Hammondville property for $1,903,000 on a deposit of $30,000. This reduced deposit was the result of a direct approach by Roubas to the principal of the vendor company to whom Roubas explained that, while he was unable to provide a ten per cent deposit on the signing of the contract, he expected to have sufficient funds within a few months which would enable the Roubases to purchase the
Hammondville property. On this basis the reduced deposit was agreed upon, on the condition, as expressed by the Vendor's principal, as follows: "I give you only five weeks. If you don't get the money together by then, you'll lose the $30,000" 
That meeting was followed by a confirmation in writing by letter dated 14
March 1988 of the vendor's agent stating that the Roubases' offer had been accepted. The circumstances in which the deposit cheque was drawn are not entirely clear. Roubas gave evidence that prior to the drawing of that cheque he approached Bolt with the proposal to purchase the Hammondville property and for the need to provide a $30,000 deposit. The date of this visit is not established. One assumes it was sometime between 4 March and 22 March 1988 when the preliminary application for the subject advance was submitted by Bolt to the N.S.W. Northern Metropolitan Division of the Bank (administration).
Bolt created a handwritten sheet of calculations which presumably related to this meeting. It is undated. In his evidence in chief, Roubas described the conversation with Bolt concerning his dealings with the vendor over a deposit for the Hammondville property in the following terms: "... the owners says if I give him $30-000 he'll wait for me for five weeks until I find the money. I don't want you to give me the $30-000 unless you can give me the rest of the money." 
According to Roubas, Bolt was unable to give him approval at that meeting. He said that there was further meeting with Bolt "some days later following a phone call from him" in which he attributes to Bolt the following statement: "I've looked at all the figures, everything's okay and looks very good. You can go on with it and I will give you the rest of the money too, with what we've got here you can pay it off no problem." 
Roubas stated that on the strength of that assurance he then signed a cheque for the deposit in the presence of Bolt.

Bolt's recollection of these events is less than clear. However, I think there is little doubt that Bolt approved of the drawing of the deposit cheque. He stated, I think with some credibility, that he understood the payment to be " a holding deposit ... not a deposit paid on exchange of contracts". I say `with some credibility', because the nature of the conversation between Roubas and the vendor's principal as relayed to Bolt was the language of a holding deposit.

The bank first gave formal approval for the provision of the loan facility to enable the Roubases to purchase the Hammondville property on 27 April 1988.
Having regard to the amount of the loan I think it is not credible that Bolt would have assured the Roubases that the funds would be available without some formal or informal indication of approval by administration. The preliminary application for the loan was made on 22 March 1988. The approval by administration dated 27 April 1988 referred to "approval as discussed in recent phone calls (Brown/Bolt and Horne/Bolt) is generally on the basis submitted".

In his cross-examination Roubas was asked to restate his evidence in chief as to the content of his communication with Bolt concerning this application for further loan monies. That version in cross-examination confirms my view that the language Roubas used with Bolt was more the language of a holding deposit in relation to the proposed payment of $30,000. The evidence of Roubas was as follows: " Then I went to see Mr Bolt. When I go to see Mr Bolt I went with the option and I explain to him, "I need $30,000. I want to buy this property". First I told him, "But the man, he wants $250,000 deposit. Anyway, I see the owner, he agree to wait for me for five weeks if I give him $30,000 deposit". I said to him, "Look everything if it looks good. I don't want you to give me the $30,000 until you can give me the rest of the money". He say "okay", he going to make few phone calls, "Because I can't say anything on my own." He have to ring the head office and say, "I call you".

And I left it there and then he call me back again and I went to the bank and he say, "Everything looks all right". Officer say, "okay". I give you the $30,000 and after I give you the rest of the money and he ask me to make a cheque for the $30,000 in front of him.

Q. Do you say that exhausts your recollection? 
A. I signed a few papers, that is how he give me the $30,000.

Q. Is there anything else you recall Mr Bolt saying to you about your borrowing the money for the land in March or April 1988? 
A. No, he saw the figures. He say, "Looks very good. The deal looks very good". That is why the bank agreed to give me the money." (T13.21 - .47) 
I feel reasonably comfortable with the conclusion that on 21 March 1988 Bolt had obtained sufficient information concerning the financial position of the
Roubases and had ascertained the attitude of the bank to the proposed application sufficient to enable him to provide some comfort to Roubas that he could anticipate the bank funding the proposed purchase of the Hammondville property.

On 22 March 1988 the preliminary application for advance by the Roubases was submitted by Bolt to administration. The application was for a fixed rate bill endorsement of $1,600,000 which contemplated the availability of $500,000 upon sale of the West Ryde property on 28 April 1988. The availability of those sale proceeds was described in the application in the following way: "In 1985 applicants branched out on their own accord and purchased a
Commercial property at West Ryde NSW which has now been sold to developers
Pedonne Pty Ltd for $500,000. This property is unencumbered and terms of settlement are for full purchase price to be paid in full on or before 28
April 1988".

It will be observed in the passage quoted from the cross-examination of Roubas that he does not claim to have shown the option to Bolt when discussing the proposed Hammondville property purchase with Bolt. For his part, Bolt was adamant that he was not informed that the transaction affecting the West Ryde property was an option and not a contract of sale due for completion on 28
April 1988. It was not submitted on behalf of the Roubases that Bolt deliberately misstated the position in relation to the West Ryde property in the preliminary application prepared by him for submission to administration.
It is an extraordinary coincidence that Baker in his diary note of the
Roubases visit to his branch on 28 September 1987 also described the position in relation to the West Ryde property as being subject to "signed contracts for $600,000" in respect of which the Roubases had "received $100,000 deposit" with the "remaining $500,000 to be paid on 29 April 1988". But for Baker's acceptance during cross-examination that he had been told of the option given by the Roubases in respect of the West Ryde property and that the diary note record of a contract for sale must be in error, I would have been fairly comfortable in the conclusion that neither bank officer had been informed by
Roubas that an option had been entered into in respect of the West Ryde property.

Nothing of significance, in my view, turns upon this fact, notwithstanding the evidence of Bolt in cross-examination that the form of his submission to administration would have been somewhat different had he been aware that it was an option affecting the West Ryde property. I think the reality is that
Roubas entertained very little doubt, if any, that the option would be exercised given the amount of fee paid by Pedome. I am quite satisfied that the Roubases were prepared to take whatever risk there was in planning the purchase of the Hammondville property on the basis that the proceeds of the sale of West Ryde property would be available to partially satisfy the purchase of the Hammondville property. It may well be that, both to Baker and to Bolt, Roubas spoke in terms that made it appear that there was no question about the completion of the sale of the West Ryde property by 29 April 1988.

In any event, I regard the element of risk taken by the Roubases in planning the acquisition of the Hammondville property on the basis that the option would be exercised as a reasonable commercial risk. I regard the nature of that risk as one which the Roubases were entitled to take and as one which cast no obligation upon the bank to counsel them on the possible imprudence involved in that risk taking. I think the bank's position can also be gauged by the fact that Bolt, whose evidence on this aspect I accept, regarded the $30,000 payment as a holding deposit and not as one paid pursuant to a contract committing the Roubases to completion of the contract of sale of the
Hammondville property. In other words, the cost of the risk in the mind of
Bolt reasonably could be equated with the possible loss of a $30,000 holding deposit.

Dovico reviewed the 22 March application in the following terms: "In reviewing this form the following matters should be considered: 
I) The Mortlake property is reflected at a value of $400,000 on the 24th
April, 1985 (refer bank memo of same date), the bank appraises the property at $180,000, an increase of $220,000 or 122% over three (3) years? An increase in excess of 40% per annum.

II) The Rooty Hill property is owned by Topden Pty Limited. Topden Pty.
Limited is funded by: a) Equity $100,000 b) Bank Debt $428,000 
As the property has just been purchased for $500,000, it would seem that the value of the equity would be $68,000, not $100,000, and further, the property equity in Rooty Hill from the bank's point of view should be no greater than the debt owing to it, i.e. $57,000 (assuming this to be the debt owing on
Rooty Hill to the bank).

Purchase Price $500,000 
Mortgage - Security Pacific $375,000 
Mortgage - Commonwealth Bank 57,000 
Equity $68,000 $500,000 
At best, the bank's position should reflect equity of $125,000 ($68,000 + $57,000) and not $170,000 ($100,000 + $70,000).

If in fact the debt to the bank is $57,000 (nett), then the equity position further reduces to $68,000." (Exhibit 8, p 3) 
The second last line from the quotation, in referring to the equity position is a reference to the equity position from the view point of the Roubases.
However Dovico makes no reference to Bolt's inclusion of the following passage in the application for administration's consideration: "Applicants have been rapidly paying off the Housing Loan and PCL which are both ahead of arrangements. In addition a $35000 loan has been repaid to the
ANZ bank over the past 3 years. This loan was to assist purchase the West Ryde property originally and was arranged for them by a cousin of female applicant." (Exhibit C, p 81) 
As to the comments of Dovico in relation to the Mortlake property valuation there does not appear to be any indication of the valuation which would enable one to test the reliability of the substantial improvement in value from that noted in the bank's appraisal of its worth at $180,000 on 24 April 1985 (see the notation of the bank's valuation dated 26 April 1985). However, I note from the request for additional finance dated 3 May 1988, referred to later in these reasons, that the valuation of the Mortlake property is noted as "valuation (1/3/88) $400,000." I entertain little doubt that there had been a significant increase in the value of the Mortlake property in the intervening period that is, between April 1985 and March 1988. The evidence has disclosed that the property market was "overheated" in 1988 and I have little doubt that market factors would have resulted in an increased market value for the
Mortlake property.

Dovico was correct in his observation that the Roubas' equity in the Rooty
Hill property was significantly overstated by the sum of $102,000. However, this should be put into context in the report which found that there was a surplus of assets over liabilities in excess of $1,000,000, independently of the acquisition of the Hammondville property.

Perhaps of more significance was cross-examination of Bolt which demonstrated that the allowance for solicitor's fees and stamp duty of $20,000 in the preliminary application of 22 March 1988 for of the funding required for the
Hammondville property was understated by $70,000. Instead of $20,000 it should have read $90,000. The effect of that understatement was that the stated surplus, over what was required for the purchase by what was available, of $80,445, should be reduced to a little over $10,000. Again, I regard this as a matter of no great significance.

The approval of the application in terms of the memorandum by administration to Bolt of 27 April 1988, as earlier mentioned, was subject to "satisfactory ... valuation by PVD", with the qualification that the bank's property valuation division had valued the Hammondville property at $1.9 million less realisation costs of $60,000. This requirement emphasised the importance to the bank of satisfactory valuations being available to support the approved loan.

On 3 May 1988 Bolt submitted the Roubas' further application for additional finance to administration requesting bridging finance of $430,000 to "enable completion of purchase for which $323,000 was required in addition to stamp duty of $90,000". The circumstances in which this application was submitted was described in Bolt's memorandum to administration as follows: "We refer to our S227 22/3/88 and your approval memorandum under reference.

Andrew Roubas called today with his plans in disarray.

The proposed purchasers of the Commercial Property at West Ryde NSW (Pedonne
Pty Limited) pulled out of the sale on the 29th April which was the last day for settlement. Apparently they are willing to forsake the $100000 initial deposit paid to Mr & Mrs Roubas in September 1987 on the purchase. This has been confirmed with borrowers Solicitors. The Company, which was to have redeveloped the West Ryde Shopping complex have reneged on 8/10 other property owners in the area as well in similar fashion recently. It is thought they are endeavouring to lower prices by this means or are no longer interested in developing the site.

As a result applicants have to again place the West Ryde property on the market (for $600000) and require Bridging Finance ..." (Exhibit C, p 89) 
Roubas described those circumstances somewhat differently in his evidence in chief as follows: "On 29 April, 1988 Pedome Pty. Limited failed to exercise its option to purchase West Ryde and we considered that we were in serious trouble. We were committed to the purchase of Hammondville and had to do so or lose our deposit. Mr. Bolt came to our home for the purpose of having us sign some documents and one of us said to him:- "The option hasn't been exercised." 
Mr Bolt replied:- The deal still looks good and the Bank is still prepared to go ahead and lend you the money." 
I (sic) was because of this that we decided to go ahead. We regarded Mr. Bolt as our financial adviser because he dealt with money and knew what was about appropriate for us. Ever since we started to deal with Mr Bolt he has shown great interest in our dealings. At our various meetings. Mr Bolt made notes and calculations which I believed were to ascertain whether the income from
Hammondville would be sufficient to enable us to repay the Bank. Mr Bolt made his calculations from rental figures and outgoings figures which we supplied.
I then arranged, in conjunction with my accountant for Anna to prepare a document dated 29 April, 1988, a copy of which is annexed hereto and marked with the letter "K". This document was prepared following a request by Mr.
Bolt for further information." (Exhibit 2, par 53) 
During his cross-examination Roubas was asked to restate his evidence in chief. In doing so he failed to restate evidence of the alleged assurance by
Bolt of the prudence in proceeding with the purchase of Hammondville. In those circumstances I gave him the opportunity of addressing that omission as recorded in the following extract from the transcript of evidence: "Q. Between the time, that is 29 April 1988 when the option lapsed-- 
A. Yes.

Q. --and the time when you completed the purchase of Hammondville did you have any discussions with Mr Bolt? 
A. Yes, Mr Bolt.

Q. Can you tell me what conversations you had with Mr Bolt? 
A. I was scared, I thought I could not make it because I was not going to receive the $500,000. Mr Bolt told me he look everything again and he say the deal still looks good, you can go on, I believe him." (T19.34 - .46) 
However, I think the most revealing aspect of the bank's attitude to this application lay in the terms of Bolt's recommendation: "Despite the fact that is applicants first large property purchase and borrowing, both the security position and interest only repayments appear to be satisfactory.

This application is by far the largest to emanate from this branch in our history and naturally we are anxious therefore to have the borrowing approved.

Mr & Mrs Roubas apparently have already signed contracts on the purchase with a completion date in Mid May `88. They would go to an outside Mortgage
Fund is we were not to assist them and obviously we would lose whatever future opportunities may arise for these long standing clients.

Approval of F/R/B/E/ facilities strongly recommended subject to satisfactory valuation by PVD.
 also attached are:- * High/Low Balances (personal & Company) * Taxation returns 1986 & 1987" (Exhibit C, p 83) 
I consider that this attitude highly coloured the conduct of Bolt when it came to valuing certain of the properties of the Roubases after it was necessary to make a further application for additional funds following the breakdown of the option to purchase the West Ryde property.

Roubas' description in his evidence in chief of the encouragement he received from Bolt to continue with the Hammondville purchase after the collapse of the option over West Ryde is not particularly convincing if taken literally.
Bolt's evidence on this matter was not particularly helpful. He appeared to have no clear memory of events other than of an occasion after he became aware that the Roubases had actually contracted to purchase the Hammondville property. Almost as an aside in cross-examination, he referred to a telephone conversation with the Roubases' solicitor who expressed concern that if the
Roubases did not proceed with the purchase they would be exposed to loss of the $30,000 deposit and in addition to litigation under the contract for sale.
This presumably prompted the view that bridging finance to enable the purchase to proceed may well have been in the interests of the Roubases.

As to the credibility of witnesses I have no reason to disagree with the assessment of the Roubases by a series of managers of the bank with whom they came into contact and who described them as decent and honest. That was certainly my impression, consistently with an impression, in the case of
Roubas, that he was not entirely free in his evidence from the pressures upon him and his wife inherent in the unsuccessful outcome of their case. I think that amounts to no more than a need to be cautious in accepting the reliability of evidence of conversations with the bank's officers which took place some eight or nine years ago, and of which there is no contemporaneous record (cf McLelland CJ in Eq in Watson versus Foxman (unreported, 3 August )). Similar considerations apply to Roubas' evidence of his level of understanding of the subject transactions and of his dependence upon the advice of the bank. However, I think it should be emphasised that I formed a favourable impression generally of the Roubases. Accordingly, I find it extremely difficult to accept that Bolt when first informed of the collapse of the option simply responded by informing Roubas that the deal still looked good and that the bank was still prepared to go ahead with the advance. Bolt's recollection is not of much assistance in this regard but I do not regard that as requiring me to accept Roubas' recollection of events.

Bolt's evidence is that it was not until 3 May, the date of the request for additional finance by the Roubases, that he was informed of the breakdown in the arrangements of the sale of West Ryde. He stated that he was still confident of the ability of the Roubases to dispose of the West Ryde property in the short term in the buoyant property market prevailing at that time.

Putting pieces together, I would infer from the evidence of the Roubases and of Bolt that following 29 April there was consternation on the part of Roubas - he says that he was afraid of the possible consequences of the breakdown of the sale of the West Ryde property - some advice was provided by the Roubas' solicitor to Bolt as to the possible consequences of the Roubases endeavouring to get out of the Hammondville property purchase and that this played some part in Bolt's consideration of the transaction. I think it is reasonably clear that Bolt still held out hope for the provision of finance by the obtaining of additional bridging finance in the genuinely held belief that
West Ryde was readily saleable in the market conditions operating in West
Ryde.

In this he is supported by Robert Murray (Murray), the registered valuer retained by the bank in early May 1988 to value the Rooty Hill property and the West Ryde property in connection with the application for additional finance. Murray described the circumstances in the West Ryde area as one where prices were materially affected by the presence of developers looking to redevelop significant areas in that district. Although I have reason to express reservations about the valuations as so provided by Murray, I think he is to be accepted in this description of market factors affecting West Ryde property values.

To support the Roubases application for additional finance, Bolt required them to present an analysis of their requirements; of the property values offered as security; of income details and of details of outstanding indebtedness: for example, $9,154.32 was still owed to ANZ on the security of the West Ryde property. This analysis was presented by the Roubases with the assistance of their accountant. The bank placed no small reliance upon the fact that the
Roubases had retained an accountant over the years, upon the fact that they had turned to the accountant from time to time for advice and that they did so in relation to the purchase of the Hammondville property. A Roubas was cross- examined about the nature of the advice received from their accountant and the following is the substance of that evidence: "Q. In making your property investment purchases in 1987 and 1988 you and your husband obtained advice from your accountant, did you not? 
A. 1987? 
Q. 1987 and 1988 you and your husband obtained advice from your accountant? 
A. Well, am I supposed to say yes or no to that? 
Q. Yes, if you would? 
A. It is not really a yes or a no answer, it is both, because when we had some money we decided to do something about it, to purchase a property and, of course, yes we would ask our accountant and our bank manager, yes, so it is sort of both.

Q. It is true to say, is it not, that in respect of the purchase of the land at Rooty Hill in the name of Topden Pty Ltd that you and your husband obtained advice from your accountant in relation to that purchase? 
A. Yes, he told us that it would be a good idea if we did get it in the company name and, yes.

Q. You recall that he gave you some advice about tax savings or other savings, do you not? 
A. That is why we got it in the company name because it would save, I think, land tax at the time, something like that, I don't remember rightly, something like that, I think it was land tax.

Q. And apart from that, the position is that you just don't recall what else your accountant told you in giving advice to you and your husband, is that right? 
A. It was good advice because we were happy to do the purchase, so whatever it was, it was good.

Q. And you were happy to do the purchase because of the advice he had given you in part at least? 
A. Yes, all right.

Q. But you have got no specific recollection of what the contents of his advice was other than the tax matter which you referred to and the purchase in the company name which you have referred to? 
A. Yes, that is all.

Q. Is it the position that you also sought your accountant's advice and that accountant was Mr Stan Frank of Vowder Ward & Company? 
A. Yes, Stan Frank was our accountant.

Q. And he is still the accountant for you and your husband? 
A. Yes, he is.

Q. Is it the position that you also sought your accountant's advice in relation to the purchase of the Hammondville land in 1988? 
A. I don't recall that.

Q. I will ask you to look at this document, I am showing you the agreed bundle, Exhibit C open at page 87, just have a look at that document for yourself, it is on two pages? 
A. Yes.

Q. Have you seen that document before? 
A. I typed it.

Q. You typed it? 
A. Yes.

Q. And did you prepare that in conjunction with your accountant? 
A. We had all the figures, see when the rents came in I knew what the rents were going in the bank and whatever and I probably would have spoken to Stan to make sure I did not have the wrong thing because I didn't know how to do one of these things before. The bank wanted to know our figures and he told me that is why he did it. So I got his advice - not "Do you think we should purchase the property?" but "How can I prepare this document for the bank?". I probably got that type of advice and he told me and I had the figures. I mean, don't ask me to tell you about the figures eight years ago but I had the figures from the agent who was collecting the rents. So I had monthly statements and I worked all this out and that is what my accountant says, if you do that and add it all up it makes sense." (T20.53 - T22.22) 
Additionally, the Roubases had retained a solicitor who, at least, was available to give some advice. Bolt was aware of the advice provided by the
Roubases solicitor in relation to the Hammondville property contract and one infers that he was aware of the involvement of the accountant in the financial appraisal presented by the Roubases at his request to support their application for additional finance in May 1988. The extent of the involvement of the accountant in advising the Roubases is far from clear. The only record, apart from the financial appraisal to which I have just referred, consisted of a memorandum of the accountant of 1 March 1988 in which he detailed financial aspects of the Hammondville property and notes certain rates of return against what I assume to be possible interest commitments that were likely to be involved in the acquisition.

All of these matters I think bear upon the count in negligent advice. My clear impression from the dealings between the Roubases and the bank in 1987 and is not one of financial adviser to customer, either generally or in relation to any particular transaction that occurred in that period. There is nothing, at least nothing of any significance, in the record of those dealings which would suggest otherwise, in my opinion. Indeed, it is reasonably clear that, far from treating the bank as their financial adviser the Roubases approached the bank as an institution competing for business in the money lending market (see Baker's diary note of 28 September 1987). I doubt if that relationship had changed significantly over the ensuing several months. It was also the impression of Bolt in the Roubases dealings with the bank in relation to the Hammondville property that if suitable finance was not available from the bank the Roubases would go elsewhere. Further, I have considerable difficulty in accepting on face value the statements attributed to Bolt by
Roubas in his dealings with the bank in mid 1988. I am firmly of the view that the bank did not accept or undertake any responsibility at common law to provide the Roubases with financial advice as to the subject transactions entered into in 1988 nor am I satisfied that any financial advice was sought by the Roubases, nor that any actionable advice was given by the banks as to the acquisition of the Hammondville property.

It is my view that, if the bank has any liability in respect of the 1988 transaction that liability must be found under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) in the form advanced on behalf of the Roubases, in substance, as one created by the fostering of commitments, inter alia, on the security of the 1977 mortgage of the Mortlake property, upon terms which reflected an improvident transaction against which the Roubases should have been warned or strongly advised to have recourse to independent expert advice, having regard to the respective positions of the Roubases and the bank. In that respect I would not regard the bank as discharged from any such obligation by a knowledge of the fact that the Roubases had retained a solicitor or an accountant from time to time in relation to their affairs. If the transaction is shown to be improvident at the time, I think one may infer that its improvident nature was not the subject of competent advice from either of those independent sources. The terms of the approval by the bank of the additional finance required for the acquisition of the Hammondville property are set out in its letter to the
Roubases of 16 May 1988 as follows: "We are very pleased to inform you that the Bank has approved a Fixed Rate
Bill Endorsement Facility of $1,600,000 (gross) and a Bridging Bills Discount
Facility of $430,000 (gross) to assist you purchase the Shopping Centre
Complex at Hammondville, NSW.

The advance is subject to the Bank's usual terms and conditions generally and in particular to the following:- * Security is to be to the Bank's satisfaction and is to comprise: 
First mortgage over your property situated at 4 West Parade, West Ryde; 
Second mortgage over your property situated at 56 Mortlake Street,
Mortlake on the understanding that the principal amount owing under the first mortgage does not exceed $18034; 
First mortgage by yourselves over property to be purchased at 38-62 Walder
Street, and 5 Stewart Street, Hammondville; and 
Second mortgage by Topden Pty Limited over property situated at 51 Rooty
Hill Road North, Rooty Hill on the understanding that the principal amount owing under the first mortgage does not exceed $375000.
 * Adequate insurance cover must be maintained on all properties held as security during the term of the loan.
 * Reduced establishment fee of approximately $8000 (This amount is still to be confirmed by Head Office).
 * Bills will be drawn for a period of 90 days and will be discounted at the rate appropriate to bills of similar size and tenor applicable at day of draw down together with an endorsement fee of 1.75%pa for the Fixed Rate Bill Endorsement Facility and 2.5%pa for the Bills Discount Facility and deducted from the face value of the Bill. The fixed rate will be for a period of five years in accordance with the application form attached.
 * Clearance of the Bills Discount Facility ($430000) within approximately 6 months from the sale of your West Ryde property. Proceeds of this sale will clear the Bill facility and also be applied towards clearance of the overdraft and other advances in your names and Topden Pty Limited.
 * The Fixed Rate Bill Endorsement Facility is to be cleared in full after 5 years or refinanced at that time." (Exhibit C, pp 94 - 95) 
Preceding that approval Bolt had caused to be forwarded to administration, in support of the application for additional finance, the Murray valuations of the Rooty Hill property and the West Ryde property respectively in the sum of $680,000 and $600,000. The note of 12 May 1988 forwarding those valuations bears the following handwritten note of Bolt dated 13 May: "Rang Peter Nee 4:00 pm. Valuations received and forwarded onto PVD. Peter confirmed that he had already committed his OK & to go ahead with documentation approved over telephone with PVD confirmation to come." 
Nee was the District Manager of administration. It is not clear when it was between 3 May 1988 and 13 May 1988 that Nee had "already committed his OK", presumably to the additional finance. What is clear is that the bank acted with considerable haste to meet the Roubases' contractual "deadline" of 30 May ; the 16 May 1988 completion date for the Hammondville property purchase plus the "final 2 week extension" under the contract terms. The circumstances in which Bolt described the need for additional finance in the request of 3
May 1988 has been adverted to in these reasons. The application also referred to the manner in which the additional $430,000 would be applied. In that context Bolt informed administration that upon receipt of the proceeds of the
West Ryde property sale the existing advance account balance, the personal credit line, certain leasing, savings bank and other loans would be repaid - in effect leaving the principal indebtedness consisting of $1,600,0000. The request memorandum reviewed the income position of the Roubases and analysed the ability of the Roubases to meet interest and repayments "until bridging content cleared" - without taking into account the income anticipated from the
Hammondville property nor the interest payable on the bill facility of $1,600,0000 required for its acquisition, that cost worked out at a daily figure of approximately $644. Accepting that restricted analysis of the income position of the Roubases, the surplus of income over outgoings per week amounted to $85.00.

The request also noted that the bank's property valuation division was not in a position to respond expeditiously to the need for early valuations of the
Rooty Hill and West Ryde properties and it was in these circumstances that
Murray was retained as an independent valuer. In relation to those securities offered in support of the request for additional finance the request memorandum contained the following details: "SECURITY: 
EXISTING:-
U/2/M by applicants over House/Shop Mortlake NSW 
Valuation (1/3/88) $400000 less CSB H/L $18034 plus 30/70 $7728 25762 E/S/V $374238
R/M by applicants over Shopping Centre Hammondville NSW 
Valuation by PVD 4/88 $1900000 less realisation costs 60000 E/S/V $1840000 
PROPOSED:-
R/M by applicants over Commercial Property 4 West Parade West Ryde NSW 
Owners Valuation $600000 E/S/V $600000
R/2/M by Topden Pty Limited over Commercial Property 51 
Rooty Hill Rd North Rooty Hill NSW 
Owners Valuation $700000 less 1st M/- 
Security Pacific Central 
M/- $375000 plus 30/70 $160714 535714 E/S/V $64,286 
TOTAL E/S/V $2978524 
Supports on N/L/M $2084966 
Security would support facilities of * A & A Roubas $2093453 * Topden Pty Ltd $58000 $2151453 
Whilst not quite supported on margins total borrowings would represent 72.23% of total extended value. This should be accepted in view of the bridging content involved subject to satisfactory valuations and reports.

Security position over remaining facilities approved 27/4 would be enhanced following the West Ryde sale." (Exhibit C, pp 90-91) 
In relation to those details the following observations, I think, are pertinent. It is not clear why the Mortlake property was not the subject of independent valuation although I note that the description of the security refers to "valuation (1/3/88)". In that context I note that in Baker's diary note of 13 October 1987, in relation to the Roubas' request for the balance of finance required to purchase the Rooty Hill property, the bank's condition for approval of the $58,000 bill facility included a requirement as follows: "New valuation Mortlake by Concord branch (Now)" 
At the time the Mortlake property was said to have a market value of $350,000.
Perhaps one may infer from the 3 May 1988 adoption of the Mortlake property valuation that the "1/3/88" valuation was an acceptable one to administration.

A further matter to note is that the valuation of $600,000 for West Ryde and $700,000 for Rooty Hill were identified as "Owners Valuation", as distinct from the valuation details provided for the Mortlake property. However, those owner valuations for the West Ryde property and the Rooty Hill property were the subject of discussion between Bolt and Murray in a conversation concerning the retaining of Murray to value those properties in May 1988. Although Bolt had no recollection of that telephone conversation, it is clear from the evidence of Murray and from exhibit G that the owner valuations for those properties were disclosed by Bolt to Murray. Murray had a rational explanation for that disclosure, namely, as one enabling some sensible indication to be given as to the likely valuation fee that would be payable. However, given the terms of Bolt's letter to Murray of 6 May 1988 I consider that telephone conversation concerning the owner valuations of the subject properties as having additional significance. The letter was as follows: "VALUATIONS: : 4 West Parade, WEST RYDE NSW : 51 Rooty Hill Road North ROOTY HILL NSW on behalf of Andrew and Anna Roubas 
We refer to our telephone conversation today regarding the above customer and valuation of both properties.

Copy of Title search over the West Ryde property is attached. We do not hold details of the Rooty Hill premises.

Andrew is in desperate need to have the valuations returned to the Bank as soon as possible. It is mentioned that we require valuations to be approximately the equivalent of owners estimates to provide our necessary security support.

We very much appreciate your assistance in this regard and look forward to your reply by around 11/5/88." (Exhibit 9) 
Murray was called by the bank to prove that, however unfortunately worded that letter of instructions may appear to the objective reader:
The instructions were of a kind that Murray regularly received and refused to be influenced by, and
The instructions were so ignored on this occasion by Murray who provided independent market valuations for each property.

As I stated during the course of the hearing I retained considerable reservations as to the reliability of those valuations and nothing has changed since the presentation of submissions. It will be seen that the valuation of the West Ryde property was on a "comparable sales method" while that of the
Rooty Hill property was on the basis of "capitalisation of the market rental value". As was pointed out in cross-examination of Murray, this reflected an increase of $180,000 over the purchase price paid for that property by Topden approximately six months prior to valuation. That valuation by Murray was $20,000 less than the owner's valuation of $700,000, to which he had been requested by Bolt to have regard in presenting his valuation. Some further observations I think are called for in relation to that valuation. The capitalisation rate applied of 9.4 per cent was towards the higher end of the range. When questioned about that choice of rate and the available range,
Murray gave the following evidence: "A. In, say, the eastern suburbs and in the really strong areas in commercial areas and in the city they were selling for as low as 4 and 5 per cent return.
Industrial properties were around about the 10 per cent at the time, so commercial and industrial investment properties would have ranged between, say, 5 and 10 per cent at the time, I would say." (T66.20) 
I further observe that Murray did not capitalise current rental returns but capitalised what was described in his valuation as "Market Rents". These he derived from the current rents of the three flats at $5,720 per annum per flat and the three shops at $20,250 per annum per shop. This was a little less than the current rent for one of the shops and approximately $6,000 to $7,000 per annum greater than the current rent in respect of each of the other two shops.
This difference was taken by Murray to reflect a below market value being received for the rentals in those two shop premises. In his opinion they were "below the market because of the heated market at the time". I would have assumed that the terms of the lease may have been an important factor in that consideration in capitalising so called market rents. However, Murray was not aware of the details of those tenancies, in particular, whether they were long term tenancies. Murray also supported the adoption of the capitalisation method of valuation of the Rooty Hill property by the absence of comparable sales in the subject shopping centre.

In my view, the choice of capitalisation rate, the selection of "market" rents over current rents, the absence of comparable sales, the dramatic increase in value since acquisition by Topden some six months prior to valuation, require, in my opinion, considerable reservation as to the reliability of that valuation as a reasonably achievable price in the then current market.

The reservation which I have concerning the valuation of the West Ryde property is not so easily reached nor so easily demonstrated. The area of the
West Ryde property had been the subject of active developer interest which would make it difficult to be overconfident about a valuation of current market valuation. Moreover, the existence of comparable sales would seem to lend support to the West Ryde valuation. The cause for concern lies in the fact that the valuation accords with the owners valuation as requested and in the fact that an option to purchase at that price had been abandoned with a loss to the proposed developer of $100,000: from which an inference could be drawn that in the mind of that proposed or potential purchaser the property was worth less than $500,000, taking into account costs of acquisition and sale: after all, the property could have been acquired by Pedome for a net $500,000 after allowance for the option fee. It may be that Pedome was not in the financial position to complete the subject purchase of the West Ryde property. Nevertheless, the view I have formed of the valuation of the Rooty
Hill property and of the West Ryde property is that each of them are to be regarded with considerable reservation.

In this context, I note the evidence in chief of Roubas, from which he resiled somewhat in cross-examination, that: "There was no way that we were going to be able to obtain another $500,000 for
West Ryde and we were then committed to additional interest to the Bank of $248,000 in respect of the $1.6 million and $85,000 in respect of the $430,000 loan. At that stage therefore our interest shortfall in respect of all the properties was about $70,000." 
That evidence is not consistent, in my view, with the offering by the Roubases of the West Ryde property for sale after 29 April 1988 at between $650,000 and $700,000 with different agents. I think it is clear from the evidence that the
Roubases continued to maintain throughout the remainder of 1988, 1989 and into that the value of the West Ryde property was greater than $600,000.
Indeed, the conclusion I have reached is that the failure of the Roubases to sell the West Ryde property prior to September 1992 is very much a product of their persistence in this attitude as to the value of the West Ryde property.
I think it is equally clear that by 1989 this attitude was quite unrealistic and reflected a refusal on the part of the Roubases to "meet the market". I have little doubt that if the Roubases had been prepared to dispose of the
West Ryde property at market value, whatever precisely that may have been in , much, if not all, of their financial tribulations would have been avoided. As it happened, it seems to me that they preferred to roll over the bill facilities which represented the bridging loan, thereby incurring interest and costs which they could not afford, in the hope of achieving what
I think was an unrealistic price for the West Ryde property. When the market turned against them I think the Roubases held on in the hope that their fortunes would change with an improvement in the market. I return to this topic in more detail later in these reasons.

Referring back to the 3 May 1988 request for additional finance, Bolt recommended the provision of bill facilities including the bridging finance in the following terms: "RECOMMENDATION: 
As can be seen we are now being asked for 98% of purchase price plus continue existing facilities for a short term. However collapse of the West Ryde settlement was certainly unforeseen and unfortunate.

We will be back to the original approved facilities ($1610000) within 6 months from clearance of the Bridging BDF, PCL, Lease, CSB H/Loan and reduction of the A/A plus repayment of the Company debt. In view of the short term involved approval is recommended as submitted.

Your comments as to how we can overcome the valuation situation within the time constraints would be appreciated. Would you please telephone your decision as soon as possible in view of the urgency of the settlement." (Exhibit C, 92) 
Much has been made by the Roubases of the irregularity in the bank's lending policy represented by the bank's approval of facilities representing 98 per cent of the purchase price in addition to the continuation of existing facilities "for a short term" and by the fact that the total borrowings would "represent 72.23 per cent of total extended value" as contrasted with a policy limit of 70 per cent of valuation. It was pointed out on their behalf that, if one questions the comparatively undocumented valuation of the Mortlake property of $400,000 and brings into question the Murray valuations, it is quite clear that the proposal went well beyond bank requirements for security cover.

On one view of the issues raised in these proceedings that may have little relevance. The question of sufficient security cover is not the basis upon which the Roubases attack the agreement giving rise to the May 1988 FRB and the bridging loan as being unjust. Their criticism lies in what is now said to be the improvident nature of the transactions arising out of their alleged inability to service the required interest costs. That does not involve inadequacy of security to repay borrowings. I think the true relevance of the valuation issue lies in any corroborative effect it may have when examining all "the circumstances relating to the contract". In that respect, I think that the valuation evidence never reaches the point of demonstrating that the security backing for the subject loan facilities was insufficient to enable repayment of the borrowings by timely sale of those properties. As at March of I think it is quite clear, as I have earlier stated, that there was a healthy excess of assets over liabilities even allowing for major adjustments in relation to valuations for the Mortlake property, the equity in Topden and the West Ryde property valuation. It may be argued that had the true security position been disclosed to administration, in particular, the circumstances surrounding the Murray valuations, the Roubases application for additional finance would not have been approved. That possibility, I think, is really beside the point in the context of the issues in these proceedings, unless it could be argued that that circumstance, along with other circumstances relating to the May 1988 loan, evidenced the unjust nature of the loan agreement. Again, if it was the Roubases position that, had they been aware that the bank was exceeding policy limits on security cover in making the 1988 loan facilities available, they would not have proceeded with the loan application, it could be argued that their entering into that agreement, ignorant of that departure from policy limits, made the contract unjust. There is no such evidence and it would be highly surprising, I think, if that happened to be the true position.

I think it all comes down to a consideration of the alleged improvident nature of the loan agreement represented by the terms of interest costs imposed by the bank, having regard to the financial circumstances and commercial awareness of the Roubases.

Dovico analysed the consequences of the terms of the 16 May 1988 approval as follows: "On the 16th May, 1988 the manager writes to Robert Murray Valuations stating " ... Andrew is desperate" "... we require valuations to be approximately equivalent of owners' estimates". In fact on the 12th May, the valuation did come in at the owners' estimates of $600,000 for West Ryde and $680,000 for
Rooty Hill.

On the 16th May, the loan is approved for $2,030,000 made up of the following: 
Purchase Price $1,840,000 
Stamp Duty 90,000 
Interest 62,000 
Other costs 38,000 $2,030,000 
Funded as follows: $1,600,000 @ 13.3% = 1.75% = 15.05% = $240,800 $430,000 @ 13.45% = 2.5% = 15.95% = 68,585 
Total interest cost $309,385 
Once again, it seems clear that the bank has placed total reliance on the disposal of assets rather than cash flow to repay debt. In fact the bank has placed the clients in such a position that even at this point they would need to sell all of their properties to repay the debts owing. The basis for these contentions are as follows: 
I) The valuations are excessive and correspondence indicates that valuations were prepared primarily to satisfy the bank manager's requirements so as to allow him to convince head office to proceed with the loan.

At no stage could West Ryde be worth $600,000, subsequent events have proven this. In fact the property was ultimately sold for $350,000, a realist (sic) value for the said property. Rooty Hill was valued by the bank on the 12th
March, 1990 at $565,000.

II) The cash flow from the Hammondville acquisition was substantially negative, i.e.: 
Net Rental Income $227,040 
Interest Costs 309,385 
Net Shortfall $82,345 
III) Even if the West Ryde property was sold and the $500,000 repaid, there still would be a shortfall on interest paid, i.e. $430,000 @ 15.95% = $68,585 $70,000 @ 15.05% = 10,535 ,120 
Shortfall as above 82,345 
Net Shortfall $3,225 
IV) No consideration was given as to how any possible shortfall was to be funded in the event that West Ryde did not sell in the short term. In fact, it took quite a long time to sell.

The clients were certainly never in a position to fund the negative cash flow, let alone reduce the debt from other sources of income.

This fact became quite evident shortly after settlement on the 1st June, 1988.
In fact on the 15th August 1988, only ten (10) weeks after settlement, the bank manager writes to head office and advises "On roll over of the FRBEF on th August, 1988 (with discount fees totalling $58,955.02), the account ...
will overdraw to almost $38,000". On the 11th November, 1988, one shop becomes vacant with the tenant leaving abruptly and owing some $3,000 in rent.

By this stage, all of our clients' accounts are way overdrawn due to their inability to meet their commitments, consequently, the bank funds these through short term loans.

To make matters worse, on the 11th November, 1988, the bank considers and ultimately approves a loan to our clients for $160,000 to purchase a "Cruising
Cutter Boat". As mentioned above, the clients are overdrawn on all their accounts, are not able to meet their commitments and yet the bank advances a further $160,000? This surely is proof that the bank could only rely on asset security and sale to dispose of the loans." (Exhibit 8, pp 4-5) 
The last mentioned reference to the provision of finance by the bank to permit the Roubases to purchase what may be described as a luxury yacht will need to be addressed independently of the other matters raised by Dovico.

I think that the opinion expressed by Dovico that "the bank (had) placed total reliance on the disposal of assets rather than cash flow to repay debt" is insufficiently supported by the material contained in both the March preliminary application and the May request for additional finance. In each application the cash flow of the Roubases is addressed and, apart from some criticisms about the absence of sufficient recognition for vicissitudes, such as loss of anticipated rental and costs of maintenance, the bank's memoranda demonstrate, in my view, a reasonable appraisal of the ability of the Roubases to achieve their objective: namely to acquire the Hammondville property while retaining the rest of their assets other than the West Ryde property which they always intended to dispose of to enable them to acquire the Hammondville property. While the financial position of the Roubases could be described as tight pending disposal of the West Ryde property, once that property had been disposed of the cash flow would have justified some confidence in the success of the investment.

Dovico's insufficient regard to the fact that the additional finance was in the nature of a bridging facility and the effect of disposal of the West Ryde property on the financial position of the Roubases, in my opinion, weakens considerably the force of his analysis.

It also seems that Dovico has contrasted one source of income, namely the
Hammondville rental against the totality of interest costs facing the Roubases in identifying "a Nett Shortfall of $82,345". I do not regard that as a particularly useful comparison. Furthermore, the description of a "Nett
Shortfall" of $3,225 in interest costs does not address the availability of income from other sources to meet that shortfall.

The criticism that "no consideration was given as to how any possible shortfall was to be funded in the event that West Ryde did not sell in the short term" is, I think rather too simplistic. At the time of the loan agreement the property market in West Ryde was, it seems, quite active with developer interest evident. Some sales had taken place in the vicinity and, putting aside whether they were accurately described as comparable sales, they lent support to the likelihood of there being a market for the West Ryde property. As I have stated earlier, I think the Roubas' failure to dispose of the West Ryde property at market price, in hindsight, represented a very serious mistake and one which I regard as the real source of the adverse consequences that flowed from the May loan agreement. I am reasonably comfortable with the position that that failure to dispose of the West Ryde property was a reflection of the fact that the Roubases continued to place an unrealistic value upon that property. I am also reasonably satisfied that the
Roubases failed to make sufficient effort to dispose of the West Ryde property in time to prevent the cost of the bridging loan eroding their assets.

The Sherman report addressed the Dovico assessment in some detail and, in substance, I agree with the analysis offered by Sherman in that report: I note however, that he appears to misinterpret the calculation of the basis of the "surplus income of $85 per week" in the May application for additional finance.

In order to evaluate the consequences of my finding that the Murray valuations were to be treated with caution, I requested counsel to prepare schedules based on what I understand to be agreed interest costs of the Roubases, income available to the Roubases from rented properties, from their personal exertion in their sign writing business and in karate teaching and making the assumption that at the time of the roll over of the bridging loan the West
Ryde property had been disposed of at a) $350,000 or b) $400,000. These assumptions were artificial in that there was no evidence of market valuation of the West Ryde property after 29 April 1988 other than the Murray valuation.
However, it was, in my opinion, a calculation that was capable of testing the proposition that the May contract represented an improvident transaction.

Mr O'Loughlin, counsel for the Roubases, presented a detailed and clear statement which demonstrated that, had a sale taken place on those assumptions, there would be a weekly surplus of a little over $30.00 per week in the event of a sale at $350,000 and of approximately $180 per week assuming a sale at $400,000.

Mr Jackman, counsel for the bank, came up with more comfortable surpluses of $492 and $645 respectively. The difference between counsels' calculations lies in the fact that Mr O'Loughlin has brought to account the excess of interest costs over income in relation to the Hammondville property, together with interest on the Roubases overdraft account and on their outstanding borrowings on the Rooty Hill property. There are slight differences in their respective calculations of interest costs on the agreed shortfall of $30,000 and $80,000, respectively, in clearing the bridging loan.

I think that the costs brought to account by Mr O'Loughlin and omitted from the bank's calculation should be so brought to account. This results then in a financial position of the Roubases which could be described as very tight. At the same time, I think it is indicative of the fact that, if the Murray valuation was generous, there remained a significant margin between the assumed $350,000 and the Murray valuation figure of $600,000 which, if a sale had been effected within that margin would have permitted the Roubases to retain their other income producing assets. That consequence does not indicate to me the essentials of an improvident transaction, particularly, when one takes into account the fact that in 1988, at the time of the acquisition of the Hammondville property, favourable market conditions for sellers offered the opportunity to benefit from capital gains.

It follows I think from these considerations that the disastrous financial consequences that occurred in the affairs of the Roubases in the following few years should not in my opinion be attributed to any aspect of the May 1988 loan contract which could be described as unjust. I think this is borne out by the events that followed the acquisition of the Hammondville property.

They begin with an astounding decision by the bank to approve the granting of the boat loan.

Although the Dovico report and the Sherman report both address the prudence of the boat loan, the issues as presented by the bank's contentions together with the Roubases defence and cross-claim do not present that loan agreement as one in respect of which relief was sought. This was adverted to by counsel for the bank in the course of final addresses in response to Mr O'Loughlin's submission that it would be appropriate to grant relief of a limited kind under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) in relation to that agreement. Although a glaringly imprudent transaction I do not regard it as one attracting an entitlement to relief under the [Contracts
Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).
There was no suggestion that the Roubases did not have a full understanding of the transaction. The loan approval was on the basis that the West Ryde property had to be sold in addition to the house property forming part of the
Hammondville property. At the time of the application the house property was not on a separate title and was at a stage when plans had been put to council for approval of the necessary sub-division. It was stated that "this should not greatly delay the sale". One wonders about that. I note that in Bolt's letter to the Roubases following that purchase on 9 June 1988 they were addressed as "Dear Andrew & Anna". In that letter Bolt reminded the
Roubases that "the Bank looks to you to sell the West Ryde NSW property within the next six months" and then indicates the use to which such proceeds would be put. In that letter Bolt did advert to the possibility that: "If Sale of West Ryde property cannot be completed within the six months (the bank would) need to review the position at that time and no later than say the beginning of November 1988." 
On 30 November 1988 the bank caused the bridging bill to be rolled over to a maturity date of 1 March 1989. This was confirmed by letter of 2 December 1988 from Bolt to the Roubases which contained the following note: "This extension has been approved on the understanding that every effort must be made to sell the property at West Ryde NSW at that time.

Andrew and Anna, the interest content on this Bills Discount Facility obviously mounts up as time goes on and it is only economically sensible to sell the building and clear the Bill. Please let me know immediately any further developments occur on West Ryde." (Exhibit J, Annexure N) 
I note that the discount rate was 15.45 per cent, the usage fee 1.5 per cent and the facility fee 1 per cent.

In that financial climate it is hard to believe that on 13 February 1989 the bank informed the Roubases that they had been successful in their application for an increase in their personal credit line of $32,000 to purchase a fifty- five foot cruising cutler yacht. It was made clear by the bank that the provision of that money did not give rise to an inference that the balance of purchase price would be provided. I note that the rate quoted for that advance was 18 per cent per annum. On 24 April 1989 Bolt submitted an application by the Roubases for an increase in the personal credit line of $128,000 to complete the purchase. Bolt regarded that increased borrowing as "imprudent", made at a time when the only way the Roubases were funding interest payments was by further borrowings (T95.37; 96.25). Bolt stated in cross-examination that he did not expect the application to be approved and that he simply submitted it because he "was requested to do so, despite (what) his personal feelings were" (T94.47; 95.4).

Earlier in these reasons I referred to the Roubases placing the West Ryde property on the market at $650,000 and $700,000 with two agents. In fact, this application for the increased personal line of credit noted the Roubas' efforts to dispose of the West Ryde property in the following terms: "On Thursday 20/4 Mr Roubas instructed the selling Agents to immediately reduce the asking price to:- 
L J Hooker (Parramatta), $650,000 
L J Hooker (Epping) $700,000 with a concerted advertising campaign for quick sale to be implemented. Both agents were receptive to the reduced amounts and obviously all reasonable offers will be seriously considered. It is hoped to nett $550,000 from a more responsive market within the next 3 months." (Exhibit C, p 127) 
It is not clear from what the price had been reduced, but one infers that the sale price had been in excess of $700,000 in 1988. I think this demonstrates the extent to which the Roubases had lost sight of the necessity to dispose of the West Ryde property promptly, due to inflated ideas of what might be derived from sale of that property. The recommendation for the approval of the application was in the following terms: "Andrew & Anna Roubas are very honest and reliable people who are ever mindful of the total overall position and will gladly undertake and fulfill all conditions and arrangements placed on them in an endeavour to be able to secure their lifelong ambition with this Boat.

They have accepted that the West Ryde property (and also the Hammondville house) must be sold as quickly as possible to ease the spiralling debt load and have taken positive steps in the direction of sale.

Income position over next 3 months will service the existing position as demonstrated including the PCL and until the properties sales are concluded.

We therefore recommend that in view of these clarified circumstances that the increase in PCL of $128000 be approved as submitted in our original memo with an amended further review date by the end of July 1989." (Exhibit C, p 130) 
The reference to the ability of the Roubases to service the existing facilities was based on a summary of income and expenses to the end of July which demonstrated a total income of $117,295, excluding proceeds from karate teaching which were set off against living expenses. That income total was contrasted with expenses for that period totalling $111,214.

The result of the approval of this increased personal credit line brought the total indebtedness of the Roubases to the bank to $2,391,888. In his further report to administration of 22 August 1989, Bolt extensively reviewed the financial position of the Roubases. It was generally seen to be deteriorating.
It was noted in the memorandum that the responsible authority had yet to approve the sub-division to permit the sale of the Hammondville property house, and in relation to the West Ryde property noted that the Roubases had reduced the asking price to $600,000 and optimistically expressed the opinion that "interest should now pick up as a result": notwithstanding an earlier observation that "the general downturn in real estate over the last few months has not helped at all". The memorandum concluded with some comments about the
Roubases trying genuinely to sell both the West Ryde property and the
Hammondville property house, the sale of which would result in "the only remaining debt (being) portion of the PCL and the FRBE facility" - referring in the latter instance to the $1.6 million fixed rate bill endorsement facility. Bolt was of the opinion that, with rentals from the Rooty Hill property and from the Hammondville property to supplement the sign writing and karate instruction activities of the Roubases, "these remaining debts would easily be met and serviced".

One gathers from this record of the relation between the Roubases and Bolt during the latter part of 1988 and 1989 that there was a genuine acceptance by
Bolt of the efforts by the Roubases to dispose of the West Ryde property of the Hammondville house.

The letter to the Roubases of 27 December 1989 from the bank's relieving manager Mr J B Walker (Walker) struck a different note in setting out the balances of the Roubas' various accounts and noting that "these accounts have increased by $90,690 since your discussions with the permanent manager Mr Bolt on 6 November last". Not unexpectedly, the Roubases were requested to "call to discuss the position" and that pending that "discussion the bank would not like to see any further increase in the level of overdrawings". Walker's memorandum of 28 December 1989 to administration reflected a somewhat alarming financial position as follows: "The position of these accounts gives rise to concern with total debts now standing at $2,688,602 against extended security valuation of $2,961,192 with bill roll over costs of approximately $68,000 to be met over the next two months".

This seemed to have provoked the Roubases to provide authority to submit the
West Ryde property to auction on 15 March 1990. In his further report of 25
January 1990, Walker reported that he had interviewed the Roubases and that the "impression was gained that they were in no way fully aware of their parlous position". I think the following further passage recording his interview with the Roubases is instructive: "They found it hard to believe that the Bank was looking to have debt contained at present levels and that funds $68,000 were now being sought to meet bill roll overs due next month. They were of the opinion that an open ended commitment had been given to follow them until market values increased." 
They were reminded of the bridging nature of portion of the May 1988 loan facility and it was noted that "their reluctance to meet the market was of concern". In authorising sale by auction, the Roubases had refrained from providing a reserve price. This was seen by the bank as a perseverance in an attitude of unwillingness to face the reality of the prevailing market price.
This was a matter that was brought to their attention by Mr K R Murphy the relieving manager in February 1990, with his letter to the
Roubases of 5 February 1990. The Roubases responded by providing the authority to sell at a fair market price and to meet the market, as requested by Murphy.
In the light of the improved prospect of a sale by auction in March of the
West Ryde property, the bank agreed to extend facilities to provide for the
February roll overs.

On 12 March 1990 the Roubases called on the then manager of the branch,
Cummerford, who also observed that they "did not appear to fully realise the precarious position they (were) in". His diary note recorded the fact that he "fully outlined" the financial position that the Roubases appeared to be in and in particular that their income "did not seem to cover the interest content of their various loans". It appears from his diary note of 12 March that the Roubases were still anticipating proceeds of sale of the West
Ryde property and the Hammondville house as "likely to net $800,000".

In Cummerford's report of 22 March 1990 to administration he conveyed the depressing news that no offers had been received for the West Ryde property at the auction that day. It seems that the Roubases had then decided to attempt to refinance all facilities through "Citibank" who had offered a fixed rate loan of 15.95 per cent which required a refundable establishment fee of $14,000. Cummerford recommended that the Roubases be permitted to draw a cheque in that amount. There is little doubt that at that point the bank welcomed the opportunity of bringing their arrangements with the Roubases to an end. It appears that the Citibank approach was unsuccessful and on 10 May Cummerford reported to administration on the then current position which included information that the Hammondville property had been placed on the market and was scheduled to be auctioned on 14 June 1990. The report noted that a reserve of $3,000,000 had been set. Cummerford's next report of 27 June noted that the Roubases had rejected a bid of $2,650,000 at auction on 14
June 1990. In that report Cummerford recommended that legal action be commenced. In his report of 24 July 1990 Cummerford observed that the Roubases continued to look elsewhere for finance.

On 15 November 1990 the bank was advised by the Roubas' solicitor of their purchase of a sandwich shop business. Cummerford's report of that date notes the proposed purchase and also that the Roubases had submitted a proposal for the rearrangement of their facilities involving a refinancing to the extent of $1,750,000 with Citicorp. Cummerford did not recommend acceptance of that proposal. It appears from correspondence in February 1991 that sale of the
Hammondville property was affected on 22 February 1991.

With the July 1991 agreement the Roubases agreed to the consolidation of debts in the form of a fully drawn loan of $950,000 to repay the named accounts as at the 25 July 1991 balance date. The security included the bill of sale which was given on 2 August 1991. It is this agreement and the bill of sale upon which the bank further relies for the default of the Roubases in repaying monies agreed to be advanced pursuant to those arrangements. The Roubases in their amended defence and cross-claim assert that they were, in effect, forced into entering into that agreement and bill of sale and that those contracts were unjust in the circumstances relating to them. I do not think it is necessary to give detailed consideration to the issues concerning that 1991 agreement and bill of sale. It is my view that if the 1988 agreement was unjust then the appropriate relief would accommodate the effects of those 1991 transactions. Conversely, if I am right in my view that the Roubases have failed to establish an entitlement to relief under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) in relation to the 1988 transaction then there was nothing, in my view, that could be reasonably regarded as unjust in the bank consolidating accrued indebtedness of various accounts into one fully drawn loan account supported by a traders bill of sale. Roubas asserted that he was threatened by the bank with the consequences of refusing to agree to the July 1991 agreement and to provide the bill of sale. I do not accept that evidence. I have no doubt that
Roubas felt that he had no alternative other than to accede to the bank's proposals.

I think it is fair to describe the bank's sole concern in this period up to the serving of demand for payment under the Mortlake property mortgage and the bill of sale on 31 October 1995, as one of protecting its security cover.
Under the fully drawn loan facility the monthly repayments were a little in excess of $10,000. It appears the Roubases met these payments with some difficulty. In May of 1993 they sought some respite from the bank by reference to a proposal by the Advance Bank to provide a loan facility in the sum of $620,000 at interest only for three to five years at 9.5 or 9.8 per cent. The bank resisted any reduction in interest charges (see diary note of Chia 28 May ).

In July of 1993 the Roubases sought the services of financial advisers A &
B Business Connections (A & B) to assist them in the renegotiation of their funding position with the bank. The submission by A & B was detailed and reasoned. It was dealt with in the report of Chia to administration by memorandum of 22 July 1993. It is clear from that memorandum that, although the proposal advanced on behalf of the Roubases reflected a capacity to service the proposed rearrangement, the bank at that time was almost solely concerned with the security cover for its indebtedness. The key recommendation was in the following terms: "Our potential loss is not really altered if we agree to the re-arrangement and in the process we lose control of our virtual first mortgage over the
Mortlake property and do not really gain anything. We therefore recommend we decline borrowers request to re-arrangement and press to have our debt refinanced or security properties sold." 
A further approach to the bank was made on behalf of the Roubases by A & B in August 1993. This involved reducing monthly payments to $7,500. The bank estimated that, at the time of the application, the Roubases had no equity in the security properties, there being a shortfall of some $100,000. The memorandum of administration to the bank's West Pennant Hills branch of 10
September 1993 proposed the provision of a further facility of a fully drawn loan of $300,000 to assist the Roubases "in restructuring their borrowings".
It was to be for ten years with repayments at $4,175 monthly. On 30 September , the bank informed the Roubases by letter of their acceptance of a reduction in payments on their loan account to $7,500 per month. It appears that the offered facility of $300,000 was not taken up.

The remainder of 1993 seems to have been occupied by further attempts to renegotiate loans with third parties which met with guarded co-operation by the bank. These matters appear to have come to nothing with the service of demands upon the Roubases by the bank as mentioned earlier. The Dovico report has calculated that a total of $2,181,000 was borrowed to enable the completion of the purchase of the Rooty Hill property, the purchase of the
Hammondville property and the motor cruiser and that the proceeds from the sale of the West Ryde property and the Hammondville property netted $2,610,000. The present claim by the bank for practical purposes, may be treated as an interest claim over and above interest and principal repayments affected by the Roubases after May 1988.

The elements said to create an unjust contract were set out in the Roubases cross-claim as follows: "The agreement was unjust in the circumstances relating to the agreement at the time it was made.

Particulars 
The cross-claimants were required to permit the mortgage over the Mortlake property to stand as security for the Hammondville property so that any default in the agreement could expose the cross-claimants to loss of the
Mortlake property.

The cross-claimants were exposed to the risks that the option to purchase
West Ryde might not be exercised.

The cross-claimants were exposed to the risks that interest rates might increase.

The cross-claimants were exposed to the risks that the rental received from the Rooty Hill property, the West Ryde property and the Hammondville property might decrease.

The cross-claimants faced the risk that they might experience difficulties in continuing to receive income from the signwriting business.

The cross-claimants were exposed to the risks that the Bank could and would exercise its rights to sell the Mortlake property in the event that there was any default by the cross-claimants.

The bank knew, as a result of the examination it had made of the proposal to purchase the Hammondville property, that it was advancing the sum of $2,030,000 on the security of the Hammondville property which was being purchased for $1,930,000 and that the total interest payable at the rates then applicable to the various advances made by the Bank, exceeded the likely income by $70,000, assuming that West Ryde were not sold and no profit assuming that West Ryde were sold for $500,000 pursuant to the option.

The Bank, by virtue of its facilities and experience, had the opportunity to assess the commercial implications to the cross-claimants of the acquisition of the Hammondville property and the cross-claimants did not.

The fact that the Bank knew that the cross-claimants had little or no commercial experience.

The fact that the Bank knew that the cross-claimants had no professional or financial qualifications.

The Bank knew that the cross-claimants did not adequately or properly understand the possibility that the option might not be exercised." (Par 24 of the Amended Defence and Cross-Claim) 
For the reasons that I have given I do not regard the Roubases as being so deficient in general education as not to have a sufficient understanding of the matters referred to in sub-pars (a) - (f). As to par (g) the matters there particularised I think overlook a number of matters not the least of which was the nature of the loan of $430,000 as being in the form of bridging finance which assumed the sale of the West Ryde property. I have also in these reasons examined the financial consequences of the contemplated operation of the May loan agreement and in my opinion, that analysis does not reflect an improvident transaction. As to par (h) - (j), each of these matters I think had been made out by the Roubases. However, for the reasons in which I have examined the circumstances of the subject contracts in some detail, I am far from satisfied that those matters should give rise to the claimed relief under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). As to the matter the subject of par (k) I have dealt with that in the course of my reasons. I have taken the view that the Roubases did understand the possibility that the option might not be exercised but, not unreasonably, placed the risk of that happening at a low level. They had themselves engaged in the use of an option in the acquisition of the Rooty Hill property and had experienced the lapsing of the first option over the West Ryde property prior to the granting of the principal option for an option fee of an additional $95,000 above the $5,000 previously paid. As to the understanding of the
Roubases of their financial position in May 1988, I am of the opinion that their knowledge of commercial matters was somewhat rudimentary. However, as I have stated earlier in these reasons, I am reasonably satisfied that it was at a sufficiently satisfactory level of understanding to permit them to extract significant option fees from prospective developers alongside a hefty increase in the asking price for the West Ryde property; to enable them to shop around amongst financiers for a suitable rate in the financing of the Rooty Hill property purchase; to enable them to negotiate down the price for the Rooty
Hill property and to take out an option in respect of it. Although it is not necessary for my decision I am of the opinion that the bank's defence to the amended cross-claim based upon [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s6.html) of the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) has not been made out. [S (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s6.html) is in the following terms: " (2) A person may not be granted relief under this Act in relation to a contract so far as the contract was entered into in the course of or for the purpose of a trade, business or profession carried on by him or proposed to be carried on by him, other than a farming undertaking (including, but not limited to, an agricultural, pastoral, horticultural, orcharding or viticultural undertaking) carried on by him or proposed to be carried on by him wholly or principally in New South Wales." 
In Hope versus Bathurst City Council <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 1] the Court was concerned with the phrase "carrying on business" and commenced its considerations by directing attention to the meaning of the word "business" as follows: "Although it has been common ground that "business" is used in its ordinary meaning in s. 118(1), the courts below have refrained from saying what that meaning is. This is perhaps understandable because, as a glance at the
Shorter Oxford Dictionary will show, the word has many meanings. Ironically it is the last meaning given by the Shorter Oxford Dictionary, "19. A commercial enterprise as a going concern", that comes closest to the popular meaning which the courts appear to have acted on in the present case." (At p 8) 
This difficulty in providing a definitive meaning to the word "business" was reflected in the following passage in the judgment of Mahoney JA in Chief
Commissioner of Stamp Duties versus Woollahra Municipal Council [(1993) 30 NSWLR ]
at 288: "The essential question is whether what was done was "the carrying on of an activity in the nature of a business" within <case>(c) (of the [Stamp
Duties Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/)). Both parties accepted that the phrase "in the nature of" to an extent extends the meaning of the "activity" beyond that of "a business" in the strict sense.
Reference was made to Titmus versus Littlewood [[1916] 1 KB 732] at 736. But, bearing that in mind, it will be sufficient to concentrate, as counsel did, upon the term "a business" and the nature of such an activity.
 "Business" is a term which may have a number of different meanings: even the
Concise Oxford Dictionary (1964) lists ten meanings of the term. The full significance of the meaning of it depends upon the context in which it is used. Dr Lindgren QC, for the Commissioner, understandably stressed the emphasis placed in the cases upon the elements of continuity and repetitiousness and upon the significance of a system and the like in deciding whether an activity is within the term. He referred to the oft-cited observations of Jessel MR in Smith versus Anderson [(1880) 15 Ch D 247] at 258; and to Hope versus Bathurst City Council <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 1] at 8-9 and Hyde v. Sullivan [[1956] SR 113] at ; [(1955) 73 WN 25] at -30. He submitted that the facts of this case showed that what the Council had done involved, as he described them, profit making by maximisation of interest, repetitiousness, permanence, record-keeping, system and organisation, activity on a large scale, the investment of substantial capital sums and sophisticated forms of investment. These, he submitted, justified the conclusion that the activities undertaken constituted a business or something of that nature.

However, the significance of matters such as continuity, repetition, and the like must, I think, be assessed with care. There are bodies to whose activities descriptions of that kind may be applied which do not, in any relevant sense, carry on a business. Thus, terms such as continuity, repetitiousness, system and other terms used in argument may appropriately be applied to what is done by a department of State such as Treasury or to an institution such as the courts. These do not - at least in the sense here in question - carry on activities in the nature of a business. Indeed, what "a local government council" does will ordinarily involve continuity, repetition, the adoption of systematic activities and the like: thus, what such a council does in the receipt of general rates and the expenditure of them on roads and similar things is accepted, in my opinion correctly, not to be a business in any sense here relevant.

Such terms have ordinarily been used where the courts have been concerned to distinguish between a single transaction and a business or between a business and a group of heterogeneous activities having no continuity or relationship one to the other. For the purpose of categorisation of activities within [s
U(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s98u.html), matters of this kind, though relevant, are not determinative." 
In Wallis versus Downward-Pickford (North Queensland) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 388] at 400 the Court cited with approval the terms in which Young
J considered that phrase in Ellison versus Vukicevic [(1986) 7 NSWLR 104] at 111 as appears from the following passage which commences with the reference to [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s74.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth): "A similar expression to that in [s.
(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s74.html), "for the purpose of a trade, business or profession" as it appears in [s.
](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s6.html) of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) (N.S.W.), was considered in Ellison v. Vukicevic (28) where Young J. adopted the view of Lee J. In Collins v. Parker (29) that: "[t]he expression `for the purpose of' has the meaning that the contract under consideration is entered into as an ordinary incident of the carrying on of a particular trade, business or profession then being carried on or proposed to be carried on." " (per Toohey and Gaudron JJ) 
With respect, I would adopt that view as a guide to the application of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s6.html) to the facts of this case. In my opinion, the circumstances the subject of this litigation disclose not the acquisition of loan facilities for the purpose of a trade or business carried on by the Roubases or proposed to be carried on by them. At the time the Roubases were full time sign writers in carrying on their own business of sign writing from premises which they owned and in which they resided at Mortlake. Through Topden, the Rooty Hill property had been acquired which was a mixture of rental producing units consisting of three retail shops and associated dwellings. Their interest in that company in my view does not amount to the carrying on of any business by them (see Toscano v Holland Securities Pty Ltd [(1985) 1 NSWLR 145] at 149 and
Australian Bank Limited versus Stokes [(1985) 3 NSWLR 174] at 176).
The West Ryde property was also an income producing property. Even if one were to treat the Topden activities as those of the Roubases, I am far from persuaded that the subject loan was in any sense "entered into as an ordinary incident of the carrying on of (any) particular trade or business ... then being carried on or proposed to be carried on". I would distinguish that description of a contract of loan from one, as in this case, entered into to permit the Roubases to obtain an income producing investment in which any involvement of the Roubases was consistent with their continuation of the full time conduct of their sign writing business and the giving of karate teaching lessons by Roubas. Indeed, that income was a not an insignificant element in the consideration of their capability of servicing the May loan in addition to their other commitments. Accordingly I make the following orders.

Order:
There be judgment against the first defendant and the second defendant in the sum of $885,831.61.
There be judgment in favour of the plaintiff for possession of the land comprised in certificate of title, folio identifier 1/225993 and known as 56
Mortlake Street, Mortlake New South Wales,
Leave be granted to the plaintiff to issue a writ of possession in respect of the property identified in par 2 of these orders.
There be judgment for the cross-defendant on the cross-claim.
The defendants are to pay the plaintiff's costs of its summons and of the cross-claim.
 * * * 
