

Regina versus Bollen Matter No 60201/97 [1998] NSWSC 67 (25 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 April 1998 `REGINA versus MARK ANDREW BOLLEN` ` 60201/97` `25 March 1998` `Hunt CJ at CL, Hulme J, Graham AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` `

NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Temby AJ` `FILE NO/S:60201 of 1997` `HEARING DATE/S: 9 September 1997` `DELIVERED: 25 March 1998` `PARTIES: REGINA versus Mark Andrew BOLLEN` `JUDGMENT OF: HUNT CJ at CL, HULME J, GRAHAM AJ` `COUNSEL:` ` APPELLANT - P Byrne SC` ` RESPONDENT - M C Marien` `SOLICITORS:` ` APPELLANT - I S P Law` ` RESPONDENT - SE O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions` `RESULT: Appeal dismissed` `CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Manslaughter - friends and relations of victim wearing badges with a photograph of deceased - perception that attempt being made to create sympathy for the deceased and to convey pre- judgment of guilt of the accused - irrelevance to sentence of victim impact statements containing particular effects of death of deceased upon members of his family.` `No. of pages: 52` 
REGINA versus Mark Andrew BOLLEN 
Manslaughter - friends and relations of victim wearing badges with a photograph of deceased - perception that attempt being made to create sympathy for the deceased and to convey pre-judgment of guilt of the accused - irrelevance to sentence of victim impact statements containing particular effects of death of deceased upon members of his family.
 
The appellant was charged with murder. A number of people were in court wearing badges with a photograph of the deceased when the trial commenced in the absence of the jury panel. The Crown prosecutor informed the trial judge that they were doing so "as a sign of bereavement to bring home to the court and members of the jury that we are talking about a human being and not an object who is now deceased." There were also such persons in the precincts of the court on that day and a member of the jury panel, who was subsequently selected as a juror, was seen talking to them. This was not brought to the judge's attention.

The judge ruled that the photographs were not to be worn in the courtroom and said that it was greatly preferable that they were not worn outside the courtroom either. He permitted them to be worn when the jury returned from their retirement, and during the sentencing proceedings.

Held (1) Photographs of the deceased should not be worn at any time in the courtroom or within its precincts where they may be seen by potential jurors or witnesses or the jury once empanelled. What is in issue is the integrity of the process by which criminal justice is administered. It is the perception of the public which is important. Without the appearance of justice, the public will lose confidence in the administration of justice. The wearing of such photographs produce a perception that an attempt is being made to create sympathy for the deceased and to convey a pre-judgment of the guilt of the accused. Verdicts of guilty are at risk of being set aside because of that perception. If persons persist in wearing photographs, there is no alternative for the trial judge but to exclude them from the courtroom and from any areas in the vicinity of the courtroom where they could be seen by either jurors or prospective jurors or witnesses. 
Registrar, Court of Appeal versus Collins [[1982] 1 NSWLR 682] referred to 
Victims' organisations, officers of the DPP whose task is to give assistance to families and friends of deceased victims and Crown prosecutors should take every step to avoid such conduct which may taint any verdict of guilty obtained.

The meaning of such badges when the prisoner is being sentenced may also produce a perception that the judge is being placed under pressure.

The evidence relating to the juror speaking to the persons wearing photographs is unsatisfactory. In any event, at that stage he would not know what case he was called for, and he obtained only a fleeting glance of those persons. There is no evidence that he saw the photographs again. They would have had little impact at that stage. If the matter had been drawn to the judge's attention, it could have been cured by a direction. There was no miscarriage of justice.

The appellant was convicted of manslaughter. Complaint was made for the first time on the appeal in relation to the terms in which the judge had directed the jury concerning the unlawfulness of the act of the appellant which caused the death of the deceased.

Held By majority (Hulme J dissenting) There was no error in the directions given. 
Seven victim impact statements were tendered when sentencing the appellant.
The judge said that he bore in mind the material contained in them and the reactions of the respective authors of those statements to the death of the deceased.

Held The material was irrelevant to the sentence to be imposed, and error had been established. 
Regina versus Salvatore Previtera (Hunt CJ at CL, 27 May 1997, in the course of being reported) followed. --------------- 
DATE OF HEARING : 9 September 1997 
DATE OF JUDGMENT : 25 March 1998 
Appearances: 
For the appellant : P Byrne SC 
For the Crown : MC Marien 
Solicitors: 
For the appellant : ISP Law 
For the Crown : SE O'Connor, Solicitor for 
Public Prosecutions ------------- 
REGINA versus Mark Andrew BOLLEN 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: The appellant (Mark Andrew Bollen) was charged with the murder of one Matthew Phillip Groves, and he stood trial upon that charge in the Supreme Court sitting at Grafton. He pleaded not guilty. The jury found him not guilty of murder, but guilty of manslaughter. Temby AJ imposed a sentence of penal servitude of five and a half years, consisting of a minimum term of four years and three months and an additional term of one year and three months. The appellant has appealed against his conviction and he has sought leave to appeal against his sentence. 
The Crown case was that the deceased with his family were living in a house on a property at Boambee (near Coffs Harbour) which they leased. They had taken the appellant in when he needed a bed late in 1994. Their relationship, however, deteriorated following various incidents between the deceased and the appellant, and the deceased asked the appellant to leave. The appellant succeeded in obtaining a lease to a flat over the garage on the same property, contrary to the wishes of the deceased, who had hoped that friends of his would be able to lease it. This intensified the feelings of animosity between the two men. In April 1995, the appellant complained to the deceased in abusive terms in relation to his dog barking. The deceased's wife asked the appellant to watch his language, and she was in turn abused. The deceased grabbed the appellant's shirt and told him not to speak to his wife like that.
He attempted unsuccessfully to punch the appellant, and the appellant pulled the deceased's shirt over his head, disabling him from punching him further.
They fell to the ground, where the appellant kneed the deceased in the ribs.
It appears that they subsequently shook hands, but the deceased later sought treatment for his injuries.

The differences between the two men continued. The appellant reported the deceased to the police, alleging that he was cultivating marijuana. This led to a search of the deceased's premises under warrant, and the deceased was charged with a number of drug offences. The appellant asked the police to keep his identity as the informant secret, but the deceased nevertheless blamed him. The appellant complained to the police that he had been threatened and hassled by the deceased, that there had been banging on his door and that rocks had been thrown on his roof. He complained to the owner of the property about the behaviour of the deceased, and sought to persuade him to evict the deceased before the expiration of his lease. The owner was told by the deceased's wife that her husband had been set up in relation to the cultivation charge and that she believed that the appellant was responsible.
Each told the owner that, if the other remained, he would have to leave. The owner decided to evict the appellant, who became agitated when given notice to quit. This was on 13 June 1995.

On 16 June, the deceased returned to his premises with his brother to discover a roller door on a nearby shed open, a refrigerator inside overturned and a fluorescent light broken. It was assumed by the deceased that the appellant was responsible. He called out to the appellant that he was going to get the police on to him. His wife in fact telephoned the police. The deceased's brother banged on the door to the appellant's flat with his fist, and called out to him, saying "Why don't you come downstairs, you chicken shit". He added "You are a fucking arsehole, why don't you leave them alone". There was no reply, and the deceased and his brother returned to their own premises.

The appellant was heard to leave his flat. The deceased, his wife and his brother went outside, where they saw the appellant walking away from them. The deceased called out to him to stop, and that he wanted to speak to him. The appellant slowed down and the deceased almost caught up to him. The deceased put his right hand on the appellant's shoulder, and the appellant either turned or was turned around to face him. The deceased repeated that he wished to speak to him. The appellant said nothing. The deceased said: "You have pushed it too far, pushed it too far, and now you are on report. We have rung the police, and they know what you have been doing." 
The deceased was gesticulating with his hands when he was saying this, but he dropped his arms when he had finished. The appellant had his hands under his jacket, as if keeping them warm. He then took one hand out of his jacket, stepped forward and lunged forward at the deceased, towards his stomach, as if punching him. The deceased's brother saw something in the appellant's hand which was shiny. The deceased stepped back, bent over and held his stomach, saying that he had been stabbed. The appellant left the scene without speaking. The deceased was assisted back into his house, where the ambulance was called. He died shortly afterwards, in hospital.

According to the medical evidence, the knife had entered the body directly from the front, and it had passed through the aorta, the major blood vessel leaving the heart and supplying almost the entire body with blood.

The appellant gave sworn evidence. His case was that, in March 1995, the deceased had accused him of stealing his marijuana and had threatened to kill him if he found out that it was he who had stolen it. Of the incident during
April, he said that he had complained loudly to the deceased about his dog barking, and that the deceased was telling him to calm down. The deceased's wife entered the argument and he told her: "Shut up Wendy, you're full of shit." The deceased had then struck him in the cheek with his fist. He had pulled the deceased's shirt over his head in order to stop him hitting him further, but the deceased continued to struggle and they both collided with a wall and fell. He had fallen with his knees on the deceased's chest. They stood up. The appellant apologised for losing his "cool" about the dog, and they shook hands. There was another argument when the appellant had cleared some lantana, and the deceased complained that he had uncovered his marijuana plants. After the police had charged him, the deceased accused the appellant of putting him in, but he had (falsely) denied it. There was a further argument after the owner of the premises had attempted to sort out the differences between them. The deceased had threatened him with a large stone.
There was also an argument about the appellant removing a bulb from an outdoor light which the deceased used often to leave on all night.

A few days before 16 June, he had discovered that the rubbish which he had stored in plastic bags in a bin in the garage had been scattered everywhere.
The deceased complained that there were bottles under the car, and he accused the appellant of trying to damage his tyres. He denied it. When he was subsequently served with the notice to quit the premises, he was angry and amazed that that was the decision reached. He started to pack his things and to move them to a shed on the property of Ms Russell, his former defacto partner. Later, in the shopping centre, he observed the deceased approaching his (the appellant's car) but, when the deceased saw that he was watching him, he had about faced and gone away. This had made the appellant feel very intimidated and scared.

On 16 June, he had continued to remove things from the premises on the property. He denied doing anything to the refrigerator in the shed, but he conceded that he may have knocked a fluorescent tube over when moving his own things. He said that the interior as shown in the photographs was the same as when he had seen it. He had not been responsible for the state it was in. When the deceased and his brother had returned, they had started yelling at him.
The deceased had said "What the fuck did you do in the shed?", and his brother had said "Come downstairs, you chicken shit bastard". He felt too scared to go and confront them or to talk to them. There was further banging on his door.
The deceased's brother had repeated his challenge to come downstairs, and he had yelled at the top of his voice "Why don't you leave them alone?". The appellant said that he interpreted the challenge as a wish to fight him. He was terrified. There was a lull, and then the deceased, his wife and his brother were yelling out that they had reported him to the police. They continued to yell out, calling him an arsehole. He was petrified at that stage.

The appellant telephoned Ms Russell to tell her that the others would not let him out of the flat, but she persuaded him to go to her place. Before he left the flat, he put a little steak knife in his pocket. He gave as his reason: "Self-preservation. I was very worried, very scared. It just gave me a sense of security." 
He left as quietly as possible because he did not want the others to know he was leaving, as they may go into his flat if they knew he was not there, and "do whatever I thought they could do." He said that, when the other three came out of their premises, he was "shitting" himself as the deceased said: "We've got you now, it's no use running away, you're on report and we've got you, and you're going down." 
They were hostile and he was scared. They called on him to stop, but he did not do so because they would damage him. They continued to call out, in very raised and angry voices, that it was no use running away because the police knew what he had done.

The appellant felt the deceased grab him on the shoulder and "reef" him around to face him. He saw the three of them facing him, the deceased being the closest. At that stage, he was petrified. He thought that he was going to die.
He had fear in his heart. He was just too scared for words. He was petrified of them. He pulled the knife out of his pocket and held it in front of himself, just to show them that he was armed. He said "Get away, I'm armed".
He saw the deceased move in, with his fist clenched. The appellant was still holding the knife out in front of himself. The deceased pulled up halfway through his attack and said "What did you stick me with, you bastard?". The appellant felt a bit of pressure on the knife, a very mild push, and he thought that he had pricked the deceased with the knife in the side of his torso. He ran away, scared and trembling, to summons help as quickly as possible. He threw the knife away as he ran.

It was part of the Crown case that the appellant had telephoned the police from Ms Russell's premises and told them "I've just stabbed someone", but the appellant said (according to one interpretation of his evidence) that he had merely hurt the deceased. Another part of the Crown case was that, when first approached by the police, the appellant was asked: "I have been told you have stabbed a fellow in the stomach at 285 a short while ago. What can you tell me about it?" to which he answered: "That's right, I got Matt in the stomach". In evidence, the appellant said that his answer had been: "That's right, I did do that. ... What, I got Matt in the stomach?" 
He had gone on to say: "They came at me, I pulled out a knife I had on me and told them to get away, and they attacked me and Matt stepped on the knife." 
The issues left to the jury in relation to the charge of murder were: whether the stabbing was the deliberate act of the appellant or merely an accident, whether there was any intention to kill or to inflict grievous bodily harm, whether the appellant was acting under self-defence, and whether he was acting under provocation.

As neither counsel had raised the issue of provocation in his final address, and as the appellant had never suggested in his evidence that he had lost his self-control, the judge suggested to the jury that they should not be caused any difficulty by the last of these issues. Indeed, it is difficult to see any basis at all upon which it should have been left as an issue, even in accordance with Pemble versus The Queen.1 However, no complaint was or has been made, and certainly no prejudice to the appellant was occasioned.

The appellant has filed a number of grounds of appeal against his conviction.
The first is that the judge erred in refusing the appellant's application for an adjournment of the trial so that he might obtain different legal representation.

When the case was called on for hearing, and in the absence of the jury panel, counsel for the appellant (Mr Bruce) sought leave to withdraw upon the basis that his instructions and those of his solicitor had been withdrawn by the appellant five minutes earlier. He indicated that, if leave were granted, he would seek to appear as amicus curiae in order to request an adjournment for a sufficient period which would enable the appellant to raise funds for private representation. Mr Bruce is a public defender, and he was briefed by a solicitor assigned by the Legal Aid Commission. In answer to the judge's question, counsel indicated that there was no professional reason which would render it either improper or impracticable for him to continue to represent the appellant other than the fact that his instructions had been withdrawn. He said that he had been ready to proceed.

The judge explained to the appellant that, as he had counsel available and ready to represent him, he was disinclined to give him an adjournment simply because he preferred to have privately funded representation. He asked him to say why, if he did not want legally aided counsel and solicitor to appear for him, the trial should not proceed with him appearing unrepresented. The appellant said that he had had a "personality conflict" with counsel, who had advised him to take an action which he felt that he should not take. It was accepted on appeal that counsel had advised the appellant to plead guilty to manslaughter. He had rejected that advice, and counsel had advised him seriously to consider sacking him. This had occurred ten days earlier.

Counsel informed the judge that there had been some problems at the conference ten days earlier and that he had advised the appellant to consider his position. He had been available since that time except for one day, and that there had been time for a further conference. The appellant, I should point out, had been on bail since within days of his arrest. Counsel assured the judge that he had informed the appellant that his obligation was to do his best for his client in accordance with his instructions, whatever those instructions may be, and that he would continue to offer his professional services if the appellant wished to avail himself of them. The Crown prosecutor expressed the view that it was not a trial which he would wish to proceed with if the appellant was totally unrepresented, but he acknowledged that it was the appellant's own choice.

The appellant said that he felt that what he described as counsel's "overly cautious" attitude was not warranted, and he would find it "fairly uncomfortable having Mr Bruce as my representation in light of our hostilities and personality conflicts". He thought it was "cut and dry", although he conceded that he was not familiar with what he said were the "minor technicalities" of the law. He nevertheless found himself in a difficult position whereby "people are advising me that I am guilty when I feel I am not".

The judge refused the application for an adjournment upon the basis that the application had been made at the last moment and that there was a competent defence lawyer who continued to be available to represent him. He said that the appellant could proceed with or without the services of Mr Bruce, but that he would grant an adjournment until later the same day, or until the next day if Mr Bruce wished. He wanted the appellant to confer with Mr Bruce. At 2.00 pm, Mr Bruce announced that, following discussions with the appellant, he and his solicitor were again representing him. After another matter was discussed, the jury was struck, the Crown prosecutor opened his case and the hearing was adjourned for the evidence to commence the next day.

It has been submitted that, in all the circumstances, the adjournment should have been granted. Reference was made to statements made in cases in which an accused person without legal representation sought an adjournment in order to obtain such representation where no question of legal aid arose,[2] and in such cases where that question did arise and the issue of fault on the part of the accused was relevant.[3] It was argued that the inconvenience caused by the delay was not such as to make it right effectively to force the appellant to accept the services of "counsel in whom he had no confidence"; nor was it a case where the accused had had a long history of disagreement with his legal representatives.[4] 
Whether or not an adjournment should be granted is a matter which is within the discretion of the trial judge, and an appeal against a refusal to grant an adjournment is circumscribed by the usual limitations inherent in an appeal against a discretionary decision.[5] Even where an adjournment has been wrongly refused, a new trial will not be ordered unless a resulting miscarriage of justice has also been established in relation to the trial which then took place.[6] 
I see no error by the judge in the exercise of his discretion in refusing an adjournment. The appellant had received very proper advice from counsel as to his position at least ten days before the trial, including the suggestion that he may like to withdraw his instructions. He waited until five minutes before the trial was called on to accept that advice. There was no impediment to such a decision being made in sufficient time for Mr Bruce to be replaced by another public defender. Nothing has been shown to justify the reasonableness of the appellant's desire, at that late stage, to have private representation.
The situation in which he found himself of having to proceed with counsel whose advice he did not like or with no representation resulted from his own conduct.[7] Nor has any miscarriage of justice been demonstrated. I have often had Mr Bruce appear before me in criminal trials. He is a very experienced and competent counsel. I have read through the transcript of the trial, and it demonstrates that the issue which is obviously the one upon which there had been a disagreement (whether the stabbing was a deliberate one) was strongly urged by Mr Bruce on his client's behalf and in his interests.

Counsel himself saw this issue as having failed during the course of the sentencing proceedings. The judge, too, in his remarks on sentence thought that the jury may well have concluded that the appellant had deliberately stabbed the deceased merely by way of reaction and without the specific intent required for murder. As stated later when dealing with the fifth ground of appeal, however, the Crown case in relation to manslaughter (of which the appellant was convicted) did not depend upon any deliberate act of stabbing.
But, even if the jury had reasoned that way, it is hardly surprising in the light of the evidence in the Crown case and the unlikelihood of the explanation which the appellant put forward. I would reject this ground of appeal.

The second ground of appeal is that the judge erred in not discharging the jury panel because a large number of people were seen in court and in the precincts of the court, in the presence (it was alleged) of potential jurors, wearing photographs of the deceased.

The issue arose as soon as counsel for the appellant announced that he and his solicitor were again representing him. This was again in the absence of the jury panel. The judge drew attention to the presence in court of about a dozen people wearing such photographs, and said that he was troubled by this. He asked counsel whether they wanted to make any submissions. The Crown prosecutor said: "Without attempting to do injustice, I am instructed they are wearing the photographs as they are as a sign of bereavement to bring home to the court and members of the jury that we are talking about a human being and not an object who is now deceased." 
I shall return to that statement later. Counsel for the appellant said that his concern was that the jury may see those people sitting in the back of the court and interpret their actions as an attempt to curry favour or to gain sympathy for the deceased's cause and thus the Crown's cause. He submitted that they should be asked to either remove the photographs or leave the court.

The judge ruled that the photographs were not to be worn in the courtroom. He also said that it was greatly preferable that they were not worn outside the courtroom either, so that neither jurors nor potential witnesses would feel that views favouring the Crown case were being forced on them. At the very end of the trial, and after it had been announced that a verdict had been reached, the Crown prosecutor asked the judge to permit the photographs to be worn by those sitting in the back of the court. Counsel for the appellant objected, saying that the jury were still put in a difficult position when they returned with their verdict. The judge ruled that there would be no way in which the jury could be affected at that stage, and that the photographs could be worn.
Counsel for the appellant conceded that there was no room for a perception that the judge was being placed under any pressure should he have to sentence the appellants.

Evidence was led on the appeal, by way of the tender of one paragraph in an affidavit given by the appellant, that he had seen one of the jurors prior to his selection as a juror speaking to people wearing photographs in front of the courthouse. He claims that he tried to tell his counsel of this at some time, which may or may not have been during the jury selection process, but he was ignored. This evidence is unsatisfactory, and the appellant himself was not called in order to repair its deficiencies when they were pointed out.
There is no other evidence before this Court that any member of the jury panel saw the photographs before the first ruling had been made by the judge. The usual arrangements in Grafton, where the trial took place, are that (as in any other centre) members of the jury panel are required to report well before .00 am on the first day of the trial, so that their attendance can be noted, the details on their summonses checked out and the special video for jurors shown to them. They are kept in the one area, and the witnesses and the public are kept well away from them, until the members of the jury panel are taken into the courtroom in order to see the video.

Even if a juror had seen or spoken to someone in the precincts of the court wearing a photograph, the significance of that fact would in my view have had little impact upon that juror at that stage. It is not as if the photograph itself was prejudicial. The only prejudice is the pressure which wearing photographs may put on the jurors. This was no more than a fleeting glance.
That potential juror would not know at that stage what case he or she was called for. There is no suggestion that the persons wearing the photographs sought out the potential juror to speak to him, and the incident is consistent with the juror merely asking for assistance as to where he was to report. Nor is there any suggestion that he would have seen the photographs again. Once empanelled, the jurors enter the court building through a separate entrance well away from the street entrance, and they are unlikely to have seen anyone wearing a photograph in the area of that separate entrance. No photographs were worn in the courtroom during the trial. Although unfortunate, that incident could not warrant the quashing of the verdict, particularly as it was of such a fleeting duration and therefore could have been cured by a direction had one been sought.

In my view, the judge (who was unaware of that incident) dealt with the photograph issue when it first arose in court in a very sensible fashion, and that there could be no complaint made in relation to the course which he took.
I do not myself (and with respect) think that it was appropriate for the photographs to be worn when the verdict was being given, but (as the judge said) there was no prospect of prejudice to the appellant at that stage so far as the jury was concerned. At no time was there any application made for the discharge of the jury, or for any specific direction to be given to the jury directed to the wearing of photographs. The Crown prosecutor had told the jury in his opening address that, as judges of the facts, they had to be "hard- nosed", putting aside all sympathy and prejudice. This was reinforced by the judge in his summing up, when he reminded the jury that they had to perform their task dispassionately, without being swayed by emotion or sympathy or prejudice. He pointed out that he was referring to emotion because some of the witnesses had obviously been affected by it. He said that, although they may feel sympathy for the deceased's wife and brother in relation to their loss, none of that really mattered because it was upon the evidence, not upon sympathy, that they had to decide the case. He directed the jury that they must not allow the emotion in the case to affect them. I see no reason to suspect that the jury would have acted in any way other than in accordance with those directions.

I do not accept that there was any miscarriage of justice, and I would reject this ground of appeal. However, before leaving it, I believe that it is necessary to say something in relation to the increasing practice of friends and relatives of the person whose death has led to the charge or charges being tried to wear badges with a photograph of the deceased at that trial.

I accept that the Crown prosecutor, in making the statement which I earlier quoted as to the reason why the photographs were being worn, was merely repeating the reason which he had been given by the persons wearing them. It is the reason which has been given by more than one of the victims' organisations which do much to assist the friends and relatives in their grieving process, a process which almost inevitably includes attendance at the trial. I do not intend to imply that these organisations have suggested the wearing of photographs for any purpose other than one which they genuinely see as helping those friends and relatives to cope with their loss. What has to be emphasised, however, is that such a genuinely held belief that the purpose is a beneficial one does not avoid a perception by others arising which is anything but a beneficial one in the context of a criminal trial - in two areas, in particular.

The atmosphere of a criminal trial is not an easy one for jurors, who often find it very stressful. Jurors are regularly exhorted to act with complete detachment and impartiality, and to put to one side matters such as sympathy and prejudice, but (because they are not trained in any way) that is not always a very easy thing for them to do. Any case involving the death of a person necessarily raises issues which excite sympathy, so that it is all the more difficult for jurors to avoid letting sympathy or emotion sway their judgment. There are already many ways in which there will be incidents during the trial which will unavoidably excite sympathy. Witnesses are emotionally overcome in describing the matters of which they have to give evidence.
Persons in court will similarly become emotional during evidence which is horrific in nature. There is nothing which can be done in relation to those incidents.[8] Within reasonable bounds, it would not be right to exclude family and friends from the courtroom simply because such incidents may occur.
They could not reasonably be seen as an attempt deliberately to excite sympathy.

But the wearing of photographs is not unavoidable, and they inevitably excite sympathy. They are more than merely avoidable instances of exciting sympathy.
They are quite obviously deliberate. It does not require the express statement of intention conveyed through the Crown prosecutor which was made in this case to demonstrate to the jurors that the action of wearing the photographs is a deliberate one to create sympathy for the deceased, and for the friends and relatives of the deceased. The atmosphere created is one of hostility towards the accused. The relatives and friends are easily perceived as having concluded that the accused is guilty.

It is essential to the fairness of a trial according to law for the jurors to perform their difficult task as unemotionally as possible.[9] Even if the jurors are, with difficulty, able to steel themselves against such attempts to excite sympathy, the perception by others of such attempts may well be of a very much more serious nature. If it is seen by the reasonable or fair minded observer that attempts are being made to create sympathy for the deceased (and thus to convey a pre-judgment of the guilt of the accused), any verdict of guilty may well be tainted by the fear that such attempts have successfully ensured such a verdict. Yet the accused person is presumed to be innocent until the Crown has established his guilt beyond reasonable doubt. Such verdicts are therefore at risk of being set aside because of that perception.
Surely this must be the last thing that the relatives and friends of the victim would want.

There is a contempt of court if anything is said or done which has a tendency, as a matter of practical reality, to interfere with a criminal trial by influencing the minds of jurors upon the issues which they have to decide.[10]
There is a contempt whether the conduct suggests that the accused is guilty or innocent.[11] And this is so, whether or not there was an intention to influence the jurors.[12] I refer to the law relating to contempt not in order to accuse the friends and relatives of contempt,[13] but only to illustrate just how seriously the law insists upon criminal trials proceeding without any conduct which is likely to influence jurors. What is in issue is not really the rights of the accused against the rights of victims (or their families).
What is in issue is the integrity of the process itself by which criminal justice is administered. If that integrity suffers, so does the whole criminal system.

The victims' organisations should understand the importance of the issue involved, and should take every step to avoid such conduct on the part of family and friends of deceased persons whose death has led to the charges being tried which may taint any verdict of guilty obtained. Those officers of the Director of Public Prosecutions whose task is to give assistance to such persons should do likewise. Crown prosecutors should be firm in preventing such conduct. If relatives and friends of the deceased persist in wearing such photographs, there is no alternative for the trial judge but to exclude them from the courtroom and from any areas in the vicinity of the courtroom where they could be seen by either jurors or prospective jurors or witnesses.[14] 
I should add that I do not myself subscribe to the view which the judge expressed in the present case, and which counsel for the appellant conceded, that there is no room for a perception that a judge is being placed under any pressure in the sentencing proceedings by the presence of persons wearing photographs. Judges themselves are unlikely to succumb to the pressure, but that is not the point. It is the perception of the public which is important.
It is trite law that justice must not only be done but must be seen to be done. Without the appearance of justice, the public will lose confidence in the administration of justice.[15] 
The same paragraph of the appellant's affidavit tendered on the appeal complains of counsel's failure to comply with a direction to challenge a red haired man on the panel whom the appellant did not like the look of. There is no ground of appeal directed to this incident, but in any event such a disagreement between counsel and client does not amount to a miscarriage of justice.[16] 
The third ground of appeal asserts that, because the jury were not asked to consider favourable character evidence on the question of the appellant's guilt, there was a miscarriage of justice. Despite the way in which that ground is expressed, there was no evidence of good character put before the jury to provide a proper basis for the relevant direction as to the use to which that evidence could be put. What is really being asserted is that it is the absence of that evidence which led to a miscarriage.

Where such evidence of good character is given, it can be of substantial benefit to an accused person. It may demonstrate that is unlikely that, as a person of good character, he or she would have done the act charged. It may also support the credibility of the evidence of the accused denying guilt and hence the likelihood of his or her guilt.[17] Its absence may lead to a miscarriage of justice,[18] but it is for the appellant to persuade this Court that a miscarriage did occur, and to provide the evidence upon which such a conclusion could fairly be based.[19] There will have been a miscarriage only if this Court considers that, in the context of the evidence which was given at the trial, there is a significant possibility that the jury would have acquitted the appellant if the new evidence had been before them, although it has been emphasised that there should be no absolute or hard and fast rules where the fundamental question is whether a miscarriage of justice has occurred.[20] 
It has been submitted that character evidence limited (as [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s110.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) permits) to the particular issue of his lack of prior violence would have precluded the
Crown from leading evidence of the appellant's two prior convictions for dishonesty in 1978 and 1980 in reply.[21] The evidence produced on this appeal is to be found in the written exhibits tendered during the sentencing proceedings. It has not been verified on affidavit, as it should be,[22] but no objection was taken to it being considered in the appeal. Various people say that the conduct alleged against the appellant is uncharacteristic, and express disbelief that he would have acted violently or deliberately. The strongest - written by a Mr and Mrs Moody - says: "We have never known Mark to act in a violent way, or to carry a weapon of any kind. We find him to be a very kind and gentle man..." 
It is understandable why counsel would not have wished to rely upon that character reference in a case where the appellant admitted to carrying a knife. Some of the relevant references refer only to the charge of murder; they say nothing about the manslaughter of which the appellant was found guilty.

I am not satisfied that the absence of any of this material led to a miscarriage. I would reject this ground of appeal.

The fourth ground of appeal complains that the directions given by the judge in relation to the medical evidence were inadequate.

The evidence was given by Dr Duflou, the forensic pathologist who conducted the post mortem examination of the body of the deceased. He said that the cause of death was the blood loss caused by the stab wound to the abdomen. He said that the knife in evidence had a very sharp point, so that it would have penetrated the skin very very easily, and that, once the skin had been penetrated, a singularly small amount of force was required to cause all of the other injuries which had been noted. He agreed that it was possible that the track which the wound followed was consistent with the knife having been held in a stationary position and the deceased coming on to the knife with no movement from the holder of the knife. He said that he was unable to say what degree of force was actually used, but it may have been quite slight. On the other hand, there may have been a very large amount of force used in a short thrust but the knife would have had to be withdrawn as soon as it touched the spinal column because there was no penetration of that column. The knife may have entered the body up to the end of the blade, but it may well not have gone in that far. He estimated that the knife had entered the body up to about one finger breadth from the end of the blade. This, however, need not have been an indication of how much force was used. He said that there can be bruising and abrasion as a result of a hard impact between the skin and the handle at the end of the blade, but (at least as I understand his evidence) there was no such bruising or abrasion present in this case.

This evidence was relevant to the defence case that the appellant had not deliberately stabbed the deceased, and that the deceased had come on to the appellant's knife which he was holding in front of himself and upon which he felt a very mild push as the deceased moved in with his fist clenched to punch him. In his summing-up, the judge said this of Dr Duflou's evidence: "While touching upon the medical evidence, could I remind you that Dr Duflou did not say that the force with which the knife came into contact with the stomach of the deceased was slight, he said it may have been slight, but could not say that it was not forceful, involving a stabbing motion in and out. So, on the question of whether the act was a deliberate one, I suggest to you that the medical evidence is equivocal. Perhaps there was not much force, so it is not by any means impossible on the basis of the medical evidence that the deceased ran upon the knife, but the doctor could not say that the force was in fact merely slight. It might have been greater than merely slight." 
This was said in the appeal to have failed to make the point sufficiently clearly that the doctor had conceded that the injuries may have been caused by the deceased "running" on to the knife.

At the completion of the summing up, counsel for the appellant complained that there had not been a proper balance in it in relation to the facts. He made a large number of points which he said illustrated that lack of balance, but nowhere did he complain in relation to the matter now raised on appeal. The judge did give further directions in accordance with the majority of the matters raised. As nothing had been raised in relation to the point now raised, it is understandable that the judge did not say anything further about the point. The appellant accordingly requires leave to raise the point on appeal; leave will be granted if the appellant is able to establish that the error led to a miscarriage of justice.[23] 
I am not persuaded that there was an error. The judge had just shortly before made it clear to the jury that, in relation to the charge of murder, the Crown had to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the act of stabbing was a deliberate one on the part of the appellant and that it was not an accident.
In my view, the evidence of Dr Duflou was indeed equivocal as the judge suggested. Dr Duflou had said that he was unable to say what degree of force was actually used; it may have involved a very large amount of force, or it may have been quite slight. The judge made it clear that the medical evidence was consistent with the defence case ("it is not by any means impossible on the basis of the medical evidence that the deceased ran upon the knife").
There is no further support for the defence case in his evidence than that.

The Crown had to eliminate any reasonable possibility that it was an accident, not the mere possibility that it was. The other directions given - that Dr Duflou had not said that the force used was slight or merely slight - would appear to have been corrections of submissions made by counsel for the appellant during the course of his final address. That that is so is supported by the silence from counsel upon this issue at the conclusion of the summing up. If there was any error created by the suggestion made that the evidence was equivocal, it was expressly made only as a suggestion, and the judge had given a clear direction that the jury was obliged to disregard any opinion which he expressed or appeared to hold in relation to the facts of the case unless it coincided with the view which they had independently formed. There was therefore no miscarriage. I would reject this ground of appeal 
The fifth ground of appeal is that the directions on manslaughter left it open to the jury to convict the appellant of that charge on the basis that he was merely carrying the knife which caused the death of the deceased.

The Crown case in relation to manslaughter did not depend upon any deliberate act of stabbing done without the intention required for murder. When directing the jury that the Crown had to establish that it was the act of the appellant which caused the death of the deceased, the judge said: "You may think it is quite obvious here that the accused did cause the death of Matthew Groves because the knife he picked up in the flat, carried, produced and held in his hand punctured the aorta of the deceased, who bled to death." 
That made it clear that the Crown did not have to establish a deliberate stabbing in proof of manslaughter as it did in proof of murder. It also makes it clear that the appellant's production of the knife and holding it in his hand were essential ingredients of the act which the jury had to consider when they came to the next issue of whether that act was an unlawful and dangerous one.

It was in that context that the specific direction to which objection is now taken was given. The judge went on to say: "The next element of manslaughter involves proof of two things; that the act of the accused that caused death was unlawful and that it was dangerous, and both those things must be proved by the Crown beyond reasonable doubt. As to unlawfulness, much will depend upon what you decide as to self-defence. I direct you that it is an unlawful act to carry an offensive weapon, and you will no doubt see that a steak knife such as Ex J, if used in a particular way, would be an offensive weapon. And it is of course unlawful to assault anyone. But the carrying of the knife and the producing of it would not be unlawful if the accused was acting in self-defence as I have explained it to you. So the question of unlawfulness depends upon factual matters in the end; depends upon whether the Crown has disproved self-defence. If the conduct of the accused was justified according to self-defence principles, he is not guilty of manslaughter, just as he is not guilty of murder." 
When examined on the page, but out of its context, the reference to it being unlawful to carry an offensive weapon could perhaps be seen to be equivocal, in that it could mean (at least to a lawyer) that it was unlawful for the appellant to carry the weapon in his pocket or it could mean that it was unlawful to carry the weapon in his hand in front of his body. But it excited no complaint at the trial. I do not believe that a layperson would readily interpret "carry" in relation to a weapon in the sense of merely having it in the possession of the accused, as a lawyer might. Indeed, during the sentencing proceedings, counsel for the appellant submitted that the jury must have been thinking that the dangerousness was the production of the knife in the circumstances that emotions were high, and that the judge should place such an interpretation upon the evidence. He obviously saw nothing wrong with the directions after having heard them.

Such a perception by counsel is underlined by the directions which followed in relation to the act being a dangerous one, in which the judge said: "As a matter of law, an act is a dangerous one when a reasonable person in the position of a particular accused would realise that the act was one which exposed another, or others, to an appreciable risk of injury." 
The jury must inevitably have understood that such a risk of injury could have resulted only from the production of the knife, and not from merely carrying it in his pocket.

As stated earlier in this judgment (when dealing with the first ground of appeal), the judge in his remarks on sentence thought that the jury may well have concluded that the appellant had deliberately stabbed the deceased merely by way of reaction and without the specific intent required for murder. It was in that context that the judge said: "It is obvious that, had the prisoner not been armed,[24] there would not have been a death. Accordingly, he must be sentenced for having unlawfully armed himself and assaulted the deceased with a knife without a specific intention to do grievous bodily harm or worse." 
These remarks are relied upon by the appellant as strong support that the jury may have convicted him on the basis that he merely carried the knife. I disagree. The judge appears to have sentenced the appellant upon the basis that the stabbing was deliberate. That was certainly open on the evidence, but the basis for manslaughter upon which the jury were directed did not require them to be satisfied that the stabbing was deliberate. The deliberate act upon which the Crown relied, according to the longer passage from the summing up earlier quoted, was "the carrying of the knife and the producing of it". I do not think that there was any real risk that the jury interpreted the direction to which objection is now taken as permitting a finding of guilt if the only unlawfulness was carrying the knife without having produced it. I would reject this ground of appeal.

So far as concerns the contrary conclusion reached by Hulme J in his judgment, which I read in draft form, I observe only that it has very often been said by appellate courts that, where no complaint has been made at the trial, a summing-up should not be subjected to a minute and detailed textual criticism or examined word by word and sentence by sentence looking for error; the issue is whether the case has been put to the jury fairly and adequately.[25] What can be argued based upon a written version of what was said orally at the trial is often quite unreal. In my opinion, and with due respect to Hulme J, the reasons which he has given for his conclusion do not comply with the oft stated principle to which I have referred, and I regard his interpretation of what was said as trespassing upon the unreal. When competent counsel at the trial, in the context of the atmosphere which existed there, and in the contemporary awareness of the manner in which the summing-up was orally delivered, makes no complaint about an error as fundamental as that now perceived by Hulme J, it should usually be assumed by this Court that there was not apparent at the time of the trial any reasonable ground for concern regarding the adequacy and fairness of what was said by the judge. For that reason, there is a well recognised hesitation by this Court to entertain grounds of appeal challenging the form, content or balance of a summing-up when those matters have not been adverted to by counsel at the proper time during the trial.[26] 
An issue was raised during the hearing of the appeal by members of the Court as to the precise nature of the unlawfulness of the appellant's act if it did not involve a deliberate act of stabbing the deceased. In the passage to which the fifth ground of appeal was directed, the judge directed the jury that the carrying and production of the knife (as an offensive weapon) was unlawful.
The Crown has now identified for the Court <case> of the [Summary Offences
Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/soa1970189/), which prohibits a person having an offensive implement in his custody in a public place without reasonable excuse. An offensive weapon is defined by <case>(b) as including anything intended by the person having its custody to be used to injure or menace another person. The appellant gave evidence that, when he pulled the knife from his pocket, he told the deceased "Get away, I'm armed".
In my view, the knife so produced therefore fell within that definition. A public place is defined by <case> as a place open to or used by the public (including a limited class of persons), and whether or not it is ordinarily so open or used. In the present case, separate leases were granted by the owner of the land, one to the deceased and the other to the appellant, for different parts of the property. The act causing the death of the deceased appears to have occurred in an area where visitors to either tenant (invited or uninvited) would have had access, as indeed would anyone else - even trespassers. It was therefore a public place.[27] 
In his judgment, Hulme J has pointed out that this basis for the unlawfulness of the appellant's act is different from that put forward by the Crown prosecutor in his address to the jury, that the judge said nothing to the jury about reasonable excuse and that no issues of fact were left to the jury for their determination in relation to the unlawfulness of the appellant's act. It is, it seems to me (again, with due respect to Hulme J), to be necessary to state a number of fundamental propositions in relation to the faults now perceived by him. We do not have a complete transcript of everything which was said at the trial - in particular, of the discussion relating to the issues to go to the jury which should, and usually does, take place prior to the final addresses. Experience in criminal trial work soon demonstrates that counsel (including counsel appearing as Crown prosecutor) often presents his or her case to the jury as depending solely upon the resolution of some issue in relation to which the case of that party is strong, ignoring any issue upon which the case is not so strong.[28] 
The fact that the Crown prosecutor addressed in this case upon the basis that the unlawful act was an assault rather than the appellant merely holding the knife out in front of him (in relation to which act the issue of self-defence was more difficult for the Crown to establish) is easily explicable in that way. The absence of any complaint at the conclusion of the summing-up that counsel had not had the opportunity to address the jury upon the issue as the judge had put it in the summing-up underlines the reality of the view which I have expressed. The clear inference available - and the inference which I confidently draw - is that it was accepted by both parties that - as the judge put it to the jury - the only issue as to unlawfulness was as to whether the
Crown had negatived self-defence. As <case> of the [Summary Offences
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/soa1970189/) placed the onus upon the appellant to show reasonable excuse, the direction which the judge gave was too favourable to the appellant, and no complaint can now be made about that error.

I see nothing in the decision of the High Court in Taikato versus The Queen,29 to which Hulme J has referred, which would have assisted the appellant at the trial. As that Court made it clear, what constitutes reasonable excuse depends not only upon the circumstances of the individual case but also upon the purpose of the provision to which "reasonable excuse" is made an exception. In the [Summary Offences
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/soa1970189/), the purpose of <case> is to protect the public against the carrying of offensive weapons.
If the knife here was offensive only because it was being used to menace the deceased, then the only excuse which realistically could be reasonable in the circumstances of this particular case was self-defence. The absence of any separate direction in relation to reasonable excuse did not deprive the appellant of any real chance (or chance which was fairly open to him) of being acquitted.[30] 
Not only was none of these matters raised by Hulme J the subject of complaint at the trial, none has been made the subject of complaint in the appeal. The issue of unlawfulness was raised by members of the Court, not by the appellant, who has been represented in the appeal by very experienced and competent counsel. In those circumstances, in my respectful view, it would be productive of serious mischief if this Court were to interfere with a conviction because of the way the issue of unlawfulness was left to the jury.

The last ground of appeal directed to the conviction is that the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory. The ultimate question which must be answered by this Court in relation to such a ground is whether, having made its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the whole of the evidence, and notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain that verdict, it is persuaded that it was not open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty of manslaughter.[31] 
The appellant says that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to whether the Crown had established that he was not acting in self-defence. The
Crown was obliged to establish either that the appellant did not believe that it was necessary in self-defence to do what he did or that he did not have reasonable grounds for that belief.[32] The issue of belief must be directed to the ingredients of the particular crime in relation to which self-defence has been raised.[33] So far as this Court is now concerned with the issue, the belief must be directed to the ingredients of the crime of manslaughter and, as there is no ingredient of specific intent, the task of the Crown is more difficult in relation to manslaughter than it is in relation to murder.[34]
That task is made even more difficult in the present case, because the basis upon which the Crown case was put to the jury did not require the stabbing to be a deliberate act.

The appellant therefore says that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to whether the appellant believed on reasonable grounds that it was necessary in self-defence to carry and produce the knife, holding it out in front of him. He points to the long history of disharmony between himself and the deceased and his family, the angry scene which preceded his departure from his flat, the challenge by the deceased to him to stop and the deceased's act of grabbing him by the shoulder. The nature of the wound was consistent with the deceased having walked into the outstretched knife, even though it was also not inconsistent with a deliberate act of stabbing.

That was not, however, the only evidence which the jury had to consider. There was a dispute between the Crown witnesses and the appellant as to whether the deceased had moved up to the appellant with (as he claimed) a clenched fist as if to punch him, and whether (as the Crown witnesses claimed) the appellant had stepped forward and lunged forward at the deceased. There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the jury ought to have rejected the evidence of the Crown witnesses upon these matters. There was a difference between the evidence of the deceased's wife and that of his brother as to whether the deceased, when putting his hand on the appellant's shoulder, had turned him around or whether the appellant had himself turned around. But the version more favourable to the appellant (that given by the deceased's wife) makes it clear that there was a significant delay between the appellant being turned around and him lunging forward. Once the jury accepted that the appellant lunged forward - and in my view there was nothing which obliged them to reject that evidence - they were entitled to be satisfied that the appellant had not acted in self-defence by holding the knife out in front of him. The Crown case upon the issue of self-defence was immeasurably stronger once the jury accepted that the appellant had lunged forward at the deceased with the knife so held out.

There were various minor discrepancies between the evidence of the deceased's wife and brother as to various issues, but they were in my view entirely inconsequential. They did not oblige the jury to reject the Crown case.[35] I am not persuaded that it was not open to the jury (in the relevant sense of that term) to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. Acknowledging that the verdict could have gone either way, I experience for myself no reasonable doubt based upon the quality of the evidence as to the safety of the verdict of guilty which the jury gave; nor do
I see any basis upon which the jury ought to have experienced such a doubt for themselves. The matters to which our attention has been drawn do not lead me to the conclusion that there is any significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted.[36] 
I would therefore reject the last ground of appeal. I propose accordingly that the appeal against conviction be dismissed. I turn then to the application for leave to appeal against sentence.

The appellant submits that the total sentence of penal servitude for five and a half years is excessive (no point being taken as to the ratio between the minimum and additional terms), having regard to: the pressure under which the offence was committed, with little time for the appellant to consider the consequences of his actions; the short duration of his conduct which constituted the offence; and the absence of any history of violence or relevant criminal conduct which would disqualify him from leniency.

The appellant also submits that he should be given the benefit of the doubt raised by: the conflicting evidence given by the deceased's wife and brother as to the time between him being grabbed on the shoulder by the deceased and the wounding; and 
Dr Duflou's evidence that not a great deal of force was used in the infliction of the fatal wound.

Finally, the appellant submits that, by his remarks on sentence, the judge gave too much emphasis to the impact of the offence upon the family and friends of the deceased.

The judge did make a finding that "at the last moment everything happened rapidly", and that the appellant's act of stabbing the deceased, although deliberate, was by way of reaction only and without specific intent to harm him at the moment when it occurred. Although the Crown case did not require the jury to be satisfied that that act was a deliberate one, the judge's finding does not infringe the De Simone principle,[37] because that act did not make the appellant liable to a more serious maximum penalty.[38] 
The judge referred specifically to the minor nature and the age of the appellant's previous convictions, and to the fact that none involved violence.
He accepted that the appellant's conduct here was out of character and that there was no likelihood of repetition. In the light of his finding that the act of stabbing was deliberate (which was clearly open on the evidence), the judge was entitled to the view (which he expressed) that this manslaughter was a serious one. An appellant has a very difficult task in seeking to argue that insufficient regard was paid to the first three matters which he enumerated.
Certainly the length of the sentence imposed does not suggest that that was so.

As the judge acknowledged, he had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt in relation to the matters upon which the Crown relied in aggravation.[39] That does not mean that, when there are two versions of the facts available, the judge must adopt the one more favourable to the prisoner.[40] I see no basis upon which the judge should not or could not have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt in relation to the facts which he found. The effect of Dr
Duflou's evidence has in any event been misstated by the appellant. At best from the appellant's point of view, his evidence was equivocal. This was discussed earlier in this judgment in relation to the fourth ground of appeal.
He expressly said that he was unable to say what degree of force was actually used; it may have been quite slight or there may have been a very large amount of force used. The judge did not rely upon any particular amount of force used in aggravation. He was not obliged to make a finding in favour of the appellant in mitigation.

The victim impact statements were admitted pursuant to <case> of the [Criminal
Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/), which requires the sentencing judge to receive such statements and to acknowledge their receipt, but which also provides that such statements must not be considered in connection with the determination of the punishment to be imposed "unless the court considers that it is appropriate to do so". In
Regina versus Salvatore Previtera,41 I held that, where the crime involves the death of the victim, a victim impact statement by a member of the family of the deceased which deals only with the effect of the death upon the family can never be relevant to the sentence to be imposed. As that decision is in the course of being reported, it is unnecessary to rehearse here the reasons why I did so. It was hardly a ground breaking ruling. The NSW Law Reform Commission had already drawn attention to difficulties with the proposal,[42] and has since confirmed its view.[43] The Attorney General accepted my interpretation as correct. In my view, it remains the only valid interpretation of <case>.

When referring to the victim impact statements, the judge said that the consequence of the crime committed by the appellant was that the community had lost one of its number and the Groves family had lost a loving member - one who was a husband, father, son and brother. I see nothing wrong with that statement. It does no more than recognise the value which the community places upon human life. However, the judge then said that he had "borne in mind" the seven statements filed, the material which they contained about the deceased and the reaction of the respective authors of those statements to his death.
He went on to describe the statements as useful because of the involvement which they permitted the family "in the criminal justice process" and also because "they help to remind the sentencing judges that the loss of any individual has real effects upon others". He referred to the counselling and medical attention which each had received, and continued: "Naturally, the seven statements were written at a time when the authors anticipated the verdict would be murder. They will, of course, understand that the prisoner must be dealt with consistently with the jury's verdict, and also that I must proceed dispassionately no matter how strongly they feel." 
I am satisfied that, by bearing this material in mind and by having regard to the particular effects of the death of the deceased upon the members of his family, the judge has taken irrelevant material into account, and thus has fallen into error. Nevertheless, the finding by the judge that the appellant deliberately stabbed the deceased (albeit by way of reaction only), a finding which I would not disturb, means that the manslaughter remained a serious one.
The sentence which was imposed was not a heavy one, and it was within the appropriate range for a manslaughter of this type. The extent to which the error affected that sentence is difficult to determine, but the appellant is nevertheless entitled to have this Court reconsider that sentence.

As the judge remarked, the deceased would not have died if the appellant had not armed himself with a knife. If indeed he was in fact in fear of violence from the deceased and his brother - and my reading of the appellant's evidence strongly suggests to me that his evidence upon this point was greatly exaggerated in the light of his previous encounters with the deceased - his decision to leave his flat at that time rather than await the arrival of the police was an obviously foolhardy one. It became a seriously dangerous one when he decided to do so with a knife to protect himself. Nothing which had happened beforehand could possibly have suggested the need for such an extraordinary weapon in order to do so, particularly as he was told that the police were on their way.

Taking into account the findings by the judge other than those relating to the victim impact statements, I would impose a total sentence of four and a half years, consisting of a minimum term of three years and four months and an additional term of one year and two months. Such a ratio does not entirely comply with [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/); it is about fourteen days out. My reason for that non-compliance, which I must state in accordance with [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html), is simply the inutility of attempting to compute the precise number of days required where the sentence is not easily divided by four. I propose that that sentence be substituted for that imposed.

PROPOSED ORDERS
The appeal against conviction is dismissed.
Leave is granted to appeal against sentence, and the appeal is upheld.
The sentence imposed by Temby AJ is quashed and, in lieu thereof, a total sentence of penal servitude for four and a half years imposed, consisting of a minimum term of three years and four months and an additional term of one year and two months.
The minimum term commenced on 11 April 1997 and it will conclude on 10
August 2000. The appellant will become eligible for parole on 11 August 2000.

REGINA -v- Mark Andrew BOLLEN 
JUDGMENT 
HULME J: In this matter, I have had the benefit of reading the Reasons for judgment delivered by Hunt CJ at CL. With one exception - counsel who appeared for the Accused at his trial has not, so far as I recall, appeared before me and I am unable to assess his competence except on the basis of the record in the instant case - I agree with His Honour's conclusions and reasoning in respect of all the matters raised in support of the Appellant's appeal against his conviction other than those relating to the fifth ground of appeal. His Honour's Reasons also make it unnecessary for me to recite the facts. The fifth ground was that:- 
The directions on manslaughter left it open to the jury to convict the accused of that charge on the basis that he was merely carrying the knife which caused the death of the deceased.

The oral directions of the trial judge on the topic of manslaughter were in the following terms:- "If the accused is not guilty of murder, if any of the elements of the Crown case have not been proved to make out murder then you must proceed to consider the alternative verdict of manslaughter. The accused will be guilty of manslaughter if he caused the death of the deceased and did so by an act which was unlawful and also dangerous. You may think it quite obvious here that the
Accused did cause the death of Matthew Groves because the knife he picked up in the flat, carried, produced and held in his hand punctured the aorta of the deceased, who bled to death." 
The next element of manslaughter involves proof of two things; that the act of the accused that caused death was unlawful and that it was dangerous and both of these things must be proved by the Crown beyond reasonable doubt. As to unlawfulness much will depend upon what you decide as to self defence. I direct you it is an unlawful act to carry an offensive weapon, and you will no doubt see that a steak knife such as Exhibit J if used in a particular way, would be an offensive weapon. And it is of course unlawful to assault anyone.
But the carrying of the knife and the producing of it would not be unlawful if the Accused was acting in self-defence as I have explained it to you. So the question of unlawfulness depends on factual matters in the end; depends upon whether the Crown has disproved self-defence. If the conduct of the Accused was justified according to self-defence principles he is not guilty of manslaughter, just as he is not guilty of murder.

If the Crown has negated self-defence then you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, not just that the accused was acting unlawfully but also that what he did was a dangerous act. As a matter of law an act is a dangerous one when a reasonable person in the position of a particular accused would realise that the act was one which exposed another, or others, to an appreciable risk of injury. So, for the Crown to prove manslaughter, you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Matthew Groves died; that the accused committed an act that caused that death; that the act was an unlawful one and that it was also a dangerous act. If you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of each of these essential elements then you are entitled, indeed bound, to return a verdict of guilty of manslaughter. If you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of any of those ingredients then you must acquit the accused.

Everything I have said to you as to murder, manslaughter, self-defence, provocation, is by way of direction of law and is binding upon you. Everything
I have said to date about the facts of a (sic) particular case is merely for you to consider if you find it helpful. That is very much the case with what I am about to do which is to refer to some parts of the evidence." 
The foundation of the fifth ground of appeal is in the passage I have underlined. There was no objection at the trial to any part of these directions.

The jury retired to consider its verdict late in the afternoon. Its members were allowed to disperse over-night. Early the following morning His Honour received a note from them saying "Could we please have a transcript of the descriptions (law) murder, manslaughter." His Honour then drafted a document which was discussed with counsel. A re-drawn version was given to the jury, the transcript contained in the appeal books not recording any objections to its form. The document was in the following terms:- "MURDER 
Murder requires the Crown to prove, beyond reasonable doubt: * that the accused caused the death of Matthew Groves; * by a deliberate act on the part of the accused; * done with an intention to kill or to inflict really serious bodily injury; and that * the accused was not acting in self-defence; and * the act of the accused was not done under provocation. 
MANSLAUGHTER 
Manslaughter requires the Crown to prove, beyond reasonable doubt that: * Matthew Groves died; * the accused committed an act that caused that death; * the act was an unlawful act; * the act was also a dangerous act; and that * the accused was not acting in self-defence. 
Alternatively, if the Crown has failed to prove that the act of the accused was not done under provocation, but all other elements of murder have been proved, the accused is guilty of manslaughter." 
A question which arises at the outset is the meaning the jury would or might have given to the word "carry". It was submitted on behalf of the Crown that, in context, it would have been understood as referring to the carrying and producing of the knife: After all, production of the knife was admitted by the
Appellant in his evidence in chief.

However, "carry" is a normal everyday word, not usually susceptible of doubt as to its meaning. Prima facie, a jury could be expected to so understand it, particularly when it was used in the course of the formal instruction constituted by a summing up. Furthermore, in the first paragraph I have quoted, His Honour used the term "carried" in conjunction with, and by inference in contra-distinction to, "picked up", "produced", and "held". He did the same a little further on when he referred to "the carrying of the knife and the producing of it". This usage was likely to reinforce the view that His Honour was using "carry" and its derivatives to denote something different from the producing of the knife. It seems to me that the jury would have been likely to think His Honour was referring to the carrying of the knife on the person of the Appellant from his flat.

It was further submitted on behalf of the Crown that the jury could not have regarded the mere carrying of the knife as a dangerous act and thus convict upon the basis of it. However there are at least two matters which make me disinclined to argue back from a position that the jury could not have regarded the carrying of the knife as dangerous to a conclusion that, despite the words used, they could not regard the requirement of unlawfulness satisfied by the (mere) carrying of the knife.

Firstly, I see no more reason to argue this way than in the opposite direction. If the jury understood that the relevant act had to fulfil the three-fold requirement of causing death, being unlawful and being dangerous,
His Honour's identification of the act of carrying as one which was unlawful would suggest it was also one which they were entitled to find was dangerous.
Why otherwise did he mention it? Furthermore, it had been suggested that the carrying of the knife was one of a group of actions which caused death and His
Honour went on to tell the jury that the doctrine of self-defence could operate to preclude the carrying (and producing) from being unlawful. To a layman both statements may suggest that the law regarded the carrying of the knife as potentially being attended with danger.

Secondly, while in the penultimate passage of those I have quoted the jury was directed that they must be satisfied that the accused committed an act that caused death, was unlawful and was also dangerous, His Honour's previous directions did not keep the necessity for one act answering this three-fold description in mind. Thus in the first paragraph quoted above, when dealing with the cause of death His Honour referred to a conglomerate activity described by the words "the knife he picked up in the flat, carried, produced and held in his hand". However, when he came to the topic of unlawfulness, His
Honour referred to acts which were, in whole or in part, different. He first referred to one of the four actions he had previously mentioned. "I direct you that it is an unlawful act to carry an offensive weapon, ..." Then in the following sentence His Honour went on to say that another and completely different activity, an assault, is also unlawful. In the context of the trial the jury would have understood this to be a reference to one or both of the producing of the knife and a blow or lunge with it. In either event His Honour was referring to something different from both the acts he had referred to in the first paragraph quoted and from the carrying of the knife and identifying a second act which was unlawful. By inference he was telling the jury that either could form one of the foundations for their verdict.

Again when His Honour said that " the carrying of the knife and the producing of it would not be unlawful if the accused was acting in self-defence ...", he returned to part only of the conglomeration of acts mentioned in the first paragraph. He did not attempt to identify any particular acts which could have answered the description "dangerous".

I am not unconscious of the authorities to which Hunt CJ at CL has referred which warn against too ready a criticism of individual passages in a summing up. In this case however the passage relied on was, and was stated to be, a direction of law binding upon the jury. It was a bald, concise statement, not contradicted by anything else His Honour said. It was expressed in plain and clear terms. There was nothing which required the jury to understand the subject passage, and in particular the word "carry" in other than its normal meaning and to understand that when the trial judge said "carry" he did not mean "carry". In these circumstances I do not see in those authorities reason for this Court not to uphold the appeal if what His Honour said was wrong.

Of course, the failure of counsel at the trial to object is a factor which must be taken into account, both because leave is required under [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) to rely on a point not then taken and because the failure is an indication that, "in the context of the atmosphere as it existed at the trial, and in the contemporary awareness of the manner in which the summing up was spoken, there was not apparent at the time of the trial any reasonable ground for concern regarding the adequacy and fairness of the summing up." R versus Heaney (CCA 13 June , unreported). However, after making full allowance for these matters, I am unable to conclude but that the jury were likely to understand His Honour as meaning what he said.

If the view I have taken as to the proper interpretation of the word "carry" is correct, His Honour's direction that "it is an unlawful act to carry an offensive weapon, and you will no doubt see that a steak knife such as Exhibit
J if used in a particular way, would be an offensive weapon" was wrong. Indeed even if the term be regarded as referring to the production of the knife, it was inadequate.

During the hearing of the appeal the question was raised as to the identity of the statutory provision which made the carrying of an offensive weapon unlawful. The Court was directed to Section 10 of the [Summary Offences
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/soa1970189/). Relevantly that section provides:- "(1) A person shall not, without reasonable excuse (proof of which lies on the person), have in his or her custody an offensive implement in a public place.

In this section - "offensive implement" means - anything made or adapted for use for causing injury to a person; or anything intended, by the person having custody of the thing, to be used to injure or menace a person or damage property." 
Hunt CJ at CL has dealt with the requirement of a public place and I need say no more concerning that. A steak knife which is what the Appellant had does not come within sub-section 3(a). Nor does it come within subsection 3(b) until the relevant intention is formed. So much is clear from the mere terms of the sub-paragraph. The conclusion is supported also by the reasoning of the
Court of Appeal in Ohlson versus Hylton (1975) 1WLR 724. In that case the
Defendant, a carpenter had been carrying his tools of trade. In the course of an altercation he seized a hammer and assaulted his victim. The actual decision was that, having regard to the mischief at which a similar statutory provision was aimed, because the seizing of the hammer, the intention of using the hammer in the assault and the assault itself were so closely connected in time, no offence of being in possession of an offensive weapon separately from the offence of the assault was committed. At p 729 Lord Widgery CJ said "an innocent carrying of, say, a hammer can be converted in to an unlawful carrying when the defendant forms the guilty intent, provided, in my view, that the intent is formed before the actual occasion to use violence has arisen." 
The summing up under consideration directed no attention to this requirement as to the time at which the knife carried by the Appellant may first have became an offensive weapon. Nor did it direct the jury as to the factual matters which needed to be established before the steak knife could be so considered and thus the Appellant's conduct in carrying it unlawful. Indeed whether those factual matters were established was never an issue the jury were asked to consider. And although His Honour did not say so in terms, when one has regard to the fact that he did not direct the jury as the circumstances when usage would make the steak knife an offensive weapon, the jury may well have understood the trial judge as directing them that it was unlawful to carry (however that term was understood) the steak knife at any time because it was capable of being an offensive weapon.

With the possible exception of the actual decision in Ohlson versus Hylton, the matters to which I have just referred have, of course, no application so far as the presentation of the knife is concerned. At that stage the Appellant clearly had the intention of using the knife to at least menace a person.
However there still remains the issue of whether the Appellant had "reasonable excuse" for then having custody of the knife. As to what may be embraced by the expression - see Taikato versus R <case>; [(1966) 186 CLR 454] at 464, 470.

The jury's attention was never directed to this topic. "Reasonable excuse" was never mentioned. The directions concerning self-defence undoubtedly dealt with factors which would be relevant to the existence or absence of "reasonable excuse" but they were largely, albeit not exclusively, made in the context of the stabbing of the deceased rather than to the carrying of the knife at any time it fell within the definition of an "offensive implement". Thus, His
Honour said, "The question to be asked and answered is this, did the accused believe on reasonable grounds as at the time, of the act causing death that it was necessary to do what he did in defence of his person?" The carrying of, and menacing with, a knife are easier to justify than using it and it is not possible to say that the jury's rejection of the claim of self-defence necessarily meant that a claim of "reasonable excuse" prior to or during the time of presentation of the knife would not have succeeded. If it had, one of the bases upon which the jury was asked (or directed) to find a relevant act of the Appellant unlawful was untenable.

Although the issue in this case is whether His Honour's directions were correct, not why they took the form they did, it may be appropriate to observe that the possibility of the Appellant being convicted on the basis of actions other than a blow or lunge with the knife would seem not to have been raised in the trial prior to His Honour's summing up. Thus, in the Crown's opening address - unusually, the addresses were recorded - it was said:- "On the Crown case the accused pulled the knife out of his pocket, turned around, side on, and stabbed Matthew in the belly button." AB 16.5 "That in short form, ladies and gentlemen, is the nature of the allegation that you are about to hear. Not a lot, I would anticipate, is really in dispute. What the Crown sets out to prove in this trial is that there was a deliberate act of the accused done either with an intention to kill Matthew
Groves or done with an intention to inflict grievous bodily harm upon him.
..."AB17.3 "...If you are not satisfied of either of those elements, then it is open to you, subject to the directions that His Honour gives you, if you so found that the blow was a dangerous and unlawful act, then the accused is guilty of manslaughter." AB 17.6 "At the end of the day, the simple issue really is this, I suppose, and I may be subject to contradiction, what you are looking at is the accused's state of mind at the time he delivered that blow." AB 18.1 
Although in the closing addresses, there is reference to the accused putting himself in a position where he could use the knife as and when he pleased, and at one stage counsel for the accused referred to the use or presentation of the knife, these addresses show a similar approach in directing attention to the issue of whether there was a blow or lunge by the accused and not separately to the presentation (or carrying and presentation) of the knife.

There was no objection by counsel to His Honour putting the case to the jury on the alternate basis and there has been no complaint in this Court based on his having done so. I do not suggest it is a ground upon which the appeal should be allowed. I mention the matter because, if a judge is to take the course His Honour took, and instruct the jury in respect of a matter on which they heard no debate and have had no assistance from counsel, there is an added need for those instructions to be accurate.

Although it was the Court that inspired attention to the terms of the particular statutory provision which may have made dealing with the knife otherwise than in the course of an assault unlawful, the ground of appeal "that the directions on manslaughter left it open to the jury to convict the accused of that charge on the basis that he was merely carrying the knife which caused the death of the deceased" is made out. The matters to which I have referred lead to the conclusion that, whether or not His Honour's reference to "carry" is understood to encompass the presentation of the knife, the appeal should succeed unless the Court can be satisfied that there was no miscarriage of justice. I am not so satisfied.

Hunt CJ at CL has largely summarised the Appellant's evidence and there is no need for me to repeat that summary. The fact the Appellant armed himself with a knife on the night in question and was seeking to leave the property argues in favour of the view that he was actually apprehensive of the deceased although whether his actions in arming himself and then producing the knife from his pocket were reasonable is an entirely different question. This Court is not in any position to say whether the jury accepted the Appellant's evidence but in the face of the totality of it, and in particular the reference to a threat by the deceased to kill the Appellant and that the
Appellant was trying to avoid the deceased and those with him and displayed no signs of aggression until, if his evidence is accepted, the deceased caught him, grabbed him and reefed him around, I am not prepared to say that the jury could not have found "reasonable excuse" for the Appellant's possession and production of the knife. Nor, at least in the context of mere carrying and presentation of the knife, am I prepared to infer that it was (at least consciously) accepted by both parties that the only issue as to unlawfulness was whether the Crown had negatived self-defence. My impression is that no-one adverted to the topic of "reasonable excuse".

There is one other matter to which it is appropriate to refer. The decision in
Ohlson versus Hylton suggests that once the Appellant became involved in an assault on the deceased Section 10 of the [Summary Offences
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/soa1970189/) ceased to have any operation. The significance of this to the situation of the Appellant may well depend upon the timing of events and presumably the principle, if correct, would apply whether or not the assault was one to which the doctrine of self-defence applied. However, Ohlson versus Hylton was not raised during the hearing of the appeal and despite the fact it may have relevance in any re-trial if reliance is placed on the wider case His Honour adumbrated, it is not appropriate that I canvass further the issues raised by that decision.

As the point was not taken at the trial, leave under [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) is of course needed to rely on the fifth ground of appeal. However, the matter is of such significance that in my view the Appellant should have that leave. It follows from what I have said that the appeal should be allowed, the Appellant's conviction and sentence quashed and a new trial ordered.

REGINA versus Mark Andrew BOLLEN 
JUDGMENT 
GRAHAM AJ: In this matter I have had the advantage of reading both the draft reasons for judgment of the Chief Judge at Common Law, Mr. Justice David Hunt and also those of Mr. Justice Hulme. 
No exception was taken by the appellant at the trial or on the hearing of the appeal to the learned trial Judge's directions on self-defence in respect of the jury's consideration of the alternative verdict of manslaughter notwithstanding His Honour's observations as follows:- "You might like to consider this; if the words called out to the accused, by whomsoever, included any statement to the effect that the police not just had the accused on report but were on their way, then would that lead anyone to lash out with a knife in self-defence?" (the emphasis is mine) "... what was there in the fight (an earlier incident) which could have lead the accused to believe on the evening of 16 June that he was about to be attacked with such violence that a stabbing was justified." (the words in parenthesis and the emphasis are mine) 
His Honour's directions to the jury on self-defence, expressed in the context of the charge of murder were as follows:- "... the Crown must ... establish that the accused was not acting in self- defence ..." "It is both good law ... and good commonsense that a person who is attacked or who is threatened with an attack may defend himself. A person attacked or threatened has a right to defend himself to the extent reasonably necessary, and that is called self-defence. He is not entitled to take actions which he does not believe on reasonable grounds are necessary in order to defend himself." "For self-defence to be made out, there must be a belief that something in necessary and the belief must be a reasonable one." "As a matter of law you must look at the situation in which the accused reasonably believed he was at the time and you must be wary of the benefits of hindsight. It may be that a person mistakenly thinks that another person is going to launch a serious attack upon him and thus that it is necessary to defend himself appropriately, even to the point of using a knife. If the accused believed on reasonable grounds that he was under imminent threat of an attack which was potentially fatal or would result in serious injury to him, if he had that belief and it was a reasonable one, then he is not guilty of murder." "The question to be asked and answered is this, did the accused believe on reasonable grounds as at the time of the act causing death that it was necessary to do what he did in defence of his person? If he had that belief and had reasonable grounds for it or if you, the jury, are left in reasonable doubt about it, then he is entitled to be acquitted of murder. If, on the other hand, you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused did not believe that it was necessary to do what he did in self-defence, or if you accept that he may have had that belief but you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he had no reasonable grounds for holding that belief, then self-defence is not available to him." "I remind you that the onus is not on the accused to prove that the act was done in self-defence. Rather, the law requires the Crown to prove that he was not acting in self-defence." 
I should interpolate that, after concluding his summing up, the learned trial
Judge responded to the jury's request for "a transcript of the descriptions murder, manslaughter" by providing the jury with a written direction in the following terms:- "MURDER 
Murder requires the Crown to prove, beyond reasonable doubt: * that the accused caused the death of Matthew Groves; * by a deliberate act on the part of the accused; * done with an intention to kill or to inflict serious bodily injury; and that * the accused was not acting in self-defence; and * the act of the accused was not done under provocation. 
MANSLAUGHTER 
Manslaughter requires the Crown to prove, beyond reasonable doubt, that: * Matthew Groves died; * the accused committed an act that caused that death; * the act was an unlawful act; * the act was also a dangerous act; and that * the accused was not acting in self-defence. 
Alternatively, if the Crown has failed to prove that the act of the accused was not done under provocation, but all other elements of murder have been proved, the accused is guilty of manslaughter." 
Having given the above oral directions, His Honour proceeded to direct the jury on the alternative verdict of manslaughter as follows:- "The accused will be guilty of manslaughter if he caused the death of the deceased and did so by an act which was unlawful and also dangerous. You may think it is quite obvious here that the accused did cause the death of Matthew
Groves because the knife he picked up in the flat, carried, produced and held in his hand punctured the aorta of the deceased, who bled to death.

The next element of manslaughter involves proof of two things; that the act of the accused that caused death was unlawful and that it was dangerous and both those things must be proved by the Crown beyond reasonable doubt. As to unlawfulness much will depend upon what you decide as to self-defence. I direct you that it is an unlawful act to carry an offensive weapon, and you will no doubt see that a steak knife such as Exhibit J, if used in a particular way, would be an offensive weapon. And it is of course unlawful to assault anyone. But the carrying of the knife and the producing of it would not be unlawful if the accused was acting in self-defence as I have explained it to you. So the question of unlawfulness depends upon factual matters in the end; depends upon whether the Crown has disproved self-defence. If the conduct of the accused was justified according to self-defence principles he is not guilty of manslaughter, just as he is not guilty of murder.

If the Crown has negated self-defence then you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, not just that the accused was acting unlawfully but also that what he did was a dangerous act. As a matter of law an act is a dangerous one when a reasonable person in the position of a particular accused would realise that the act was one which exposed another, or others, to an appreciable risk of injury." 
In the new ground of appeal No.5, the appellant has urged that "the directions on manslaughter left it open to the jury to convict the (appellant) of that charge on the basis that he was merely carrying the knife which caused the death of the deceased".

It needs to be recognised that the appellant's own evidence was that in the interests, so he said, of self-preservation he "put a little steak knife" in the right pocket of his flying jacket before leaving his flat to go and visit his girlfriend. When confronted by Matthew, Wendy and James Groves in the yard of his property he pulled the knife out of his pocket.

The trial was plainly conducted on the basis of, to use the trial Judge's words, "whether there was a deliberate action of the accused by way of stabbing or whether there was no deliberation but the deceased simply impaled himself upon the knife." 
Earlier, His Honour said:- "I should point out to you that a very real issue in this trial is whether the accused deliberately caused the knife to enter the stomach of the deceased. If he did not deliberately cause the knife to enter Matthew Groves' stomach, if it is something that happened accidentally, if it is the case that he was standing there and the accused ran upon the knife and impaled himself, then the necessary element of deliberateness would not be made out and murder could not be proved. You will, of course, understand that the Crown and the defence urge quite different contentions upon you as to that." 
A matter of importance in the case was clearly self-defence in respect of which His Honour said:- "The next matter that the Crown must prove, of course beyond reasonable doubt, is that the accused did not act in self-defence when he killed the deceased.
This is the main matter which counsel have addressed you on, particularly defence counsel." 
As I see it, His Honour's direction on the question of whether the appellant's act was an unlawful one was to the effect that it is an unlawful act for a person to carry and produce an offensive weapon in the form of a sharp knife unless that person, when producing same, believed, on reasonable grounds, that it was necessary to do so in the defence of his person; alternatively, it is an unlawful act for a person to assault (in the sense of assault and battery) another person with a sharp knife. His Honour was contrasting impaling on the one hand and stabbing on the other.

Obviously the mere carrying of a steak knife could not be seen to be unlawful:
One may be heading back from a shop with a box of steak knives intended as a wedding present; one may be going fishing and have a steak knife in one's basket for use as a fishing knife; one may be carrying a picnic basket with steak knives in it and about to enjoy a barbecue.

What will render the carrying of a steak knife an unlawful act is the use intended for it, if that be to injure or menace.

The appellant's case was that he carried the knife to, in effect, enable him to threaten harm to any attacker. In such circumstances, his custody of the knife was relevantly an unlawful act unless he had reasonable excuse for that custody. Whilst the onus may, in respect of reasonable excuse, have been upon the appellant, it was, in my opinion, sufficient for the trial Judge to direct the jury as he did by saying:- "As to unlawfulness much will depend upon what you decide as to self-defence.
... If the conduct of the accused was justified according to self-defence principles he is not guilty of manslaughter ..." 
I agree with the orders proposed by the Chief Judge and, subject to the above additional observations, the reasons given by him for those orders.
  <case>; [(1971) 124 CLR 107] at -118.
 [2] See, for example: McInnes versus The Queen <case>; [(1979) 143 CLR 575] at 579, 581-582; Regina versus Small [(1994) 33 NSWLR ]
at 590-591.
 [3] See, for example, Dietrich versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 292] at 311, 337, 357-358, 374-375; Regina versus Small (at 580).
 [4] cf Regina versus Frawley [(1993) 69 A Crim R 208] at .
 [5] See, generally, Regina versus Alexandroaia [(1995) 81 A Crim R 286] at .
 [6] McInnes versus The Queen (at 579-580); Regina versus Alexandroaia (at 289).
 [7] As in Regina versus Frawley (at 211-212).
 [8] Regina versus Christopher Anthony Lorenzo (CCA, 22 May 1995, unreported) at .
 <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 41] at 55.
 [10] AG versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd and Bacon [(1985) 6 NSWLR 695] at 697.
 [11] DPP versus Wran [(1986) 7 NSWLR 616] at -627.
 [12] Ibid (at 629-630).
 [13] cf Registrar, Court of Appeal versus Collins [[1982] 1 NSWLR 682] at 686,
The subsequent decision in Frazer versus The Queen [[1984] 3 NSWLR ], which was concerned with procedural issues, does not detract from what was said in Registrar, Court of Appeal versus Collins.
 [14] The senior judge of the US Federal District Court in the Timothy McVeigh trial arising out of the Oklahoma City bombing case forbade the families of the victims from wearing such photographs: "The Times", 15 July 1996. So did
Abadee J in the Fernando trial last year: Regina versus Brendan Fernando & Anor (5 May 1997, transcript pp 1-4).
 [15] Webb versus The Queen (at 50).
 [16] Regina versus Birks [(1990) 19 NSWLR 677] at -685; Regina versus Desmond Jeffrey Currie (CCA, 31 October 1997, unreported) at 17.
 [17] Regina versus D [(1996) 86 A Crim R 41] at .
 [18] Regina versus Birks [(1990) 19 NSWLR 677] at -685.
 [19] Regina versus Ignjatic [(1993) 68 A Crim R 333] at .
 [20] Regina versus D (at 43).
 [21] ALRC 26, Vol 1, par 803; "Uniform Evidence Law", Odgers (2nd Edn, ), par 110.3.
 [22] See Regina versus D (at 43).
 [23] [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), r 4;
Regina versus Abusafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531] at 536.
 [24] The transcript says "harmed", but it is accepted that he must have said "armed".
 [25] See, for example, Rex versus Sorlie (1925) 25 SR 532 at 539; Jones v
Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298] at -315.
 [26] Regina versus William David John Haeney (CCA, 13 June 1978, unreported) at -2 [quoted in Regina versus Aziz [[1982] 2 NSWLR 322] at 331].
 [27] In the Appeal of Camp [[1975] 1 NSWLR 452] at 454.
 [28] See, for example, Regina versus Tarantino [(1993) 67 A Crim R 31] at , 37.
  <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 454] at 464, .
 [30] Regina versus Jones [(1995) 38 NSWLR 652] at -659.
 [31] M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at -495, 508; Regina versus McKnoulty [(1995) 77 A Crim R 333] at -339; Jones versus The Queen <case>; [(1997) 149 ALR 598] at 606-607, 620.
 <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 645] at 661.
 [33] Regina versus Dziduch [(1990) 47 A Crim R 378] at -380.
 [34] Regina versus Jones (at 661).
 [35] Regina versus Dellapatrona [(1993) 31 NSWLR 123] at -141; Regina versus RMM (CCA, 19 August 1996, unreported) per Mahoney JA (at -13), McInerney J (at 5); Regina versus ST <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383.] [38] (at 392).
 [39] Regina versus O'Neill [[1979] 2 NSWLR 582] at 588;
The Queen versus Storey [(1996) 89 A Crim R 519] at ; Regina versus Isaacs <case>; [[1961] VR 236] at 237; Regina versus Lupoi [(1984) 15 A Crim R 183] at ; Regina versus Isaacs (at 378).
 (27 May 1997, in the course of being reported) at 16-21.
 [42] LRC DP 33 "Sentencing" (1996), pars 11.51-52.
 [43] LRC 79"Sentencing" (1996), pars 2.21-25.
 * * * 
