

Margaret Sanders Bruinsma versus Grace Menczer No. 4809/94 [1996] NSWSC 8 (12
January 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
SANTOW J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 25, 26, 27 October and 9 November 1995 #DATE :11:1995 #ADD 12:1:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiff     D Wilkins 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff   Somerville Laundry
Lomax 
Counsel for the Defendant     G McVay 
Solicitors for the Defendant   Diana Perla and Associates
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
THE ESSENTIAL ISSUES
SANTOW J This case concerns the validity and enforceability of two deeds between mother and daughter.
They are referred to as the 1980 Deed and the Deed. The issues are crystallised by the Defendant daughter's cross-claim against her mother, the Plaintiff, and the particularised replies. The Deeds record various financial and residential arrangements between mother and daughter. The 1980 Deed affects the daughter's property at Bondi and records a loan from mother to daughter. The 1993
Deed affects the mother's property at
Brooklet and, inter alia, governs their continued residential arrangements together.

The issue is whether either or both deeds should, on various grounds, be set aside or otherwise treated as inefficacious or void or, conversely, enforced. The 1980 Deed is challenged by the daughter and the mother seeks to enforce it. The 1993 Deed is challenged by the mother and the daughter seeks to enforce it. The daughter puts various submissions in the alternative. Her preferred position is that both Deeds should be treated as either invalid or abrogated, such that neither have any further rights against the other.
 
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES
The daughter as Defendant/Cross-Claimant challenges the 1980 Deed entered into with her mother on April 1980. She claims that it should be set aside as unconscionable, or else as abandoned or abrogated by the 1993 Deed, or by the conduct of the parties, or both. The 1980 Deed concerns the daughter's property at 101 Ocean Street South, Bondi ("the Bondi property"), and records the terms of a loan to fund its extension by mother to daughter.
The mother as Plaintiff/Cross-Defendant contends that the 1980 Deed was not unconscionable and was not abrogated by the 1993 Deed or by the conduct of the parties. She in any event contends that the claim of unconscionability is statute barred by virtue of [s16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s16.html) of the [Limitation Act 1969](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) . The mother seeks to enforce the 1980 Deed by requiring that there be paid to her thirty per cent of the net proceeds of the forthcoming sale by the daughter of the
Bondi property the subject of the 1980 Deed.
Mother and daughter entered into the 1993
Deed on 5 February 1993. The mother seeks to set aside the 1993 Deed whilst the daughter seeks to enforce it. The daughter claims that the mother's testamentary promise in the 1993
Deed confers on the daughter an equitable interest in the mother's property the subject of that promise. This property is a house, land and farm at
Fernleigh Road, Brooklet ("the Brooklet property"). That claimed equitable interest is based upon an agreement by the mother in the 1993 Deed to leave the Brooklet property to the daughter. The daughter in consequence claims that the mother holds the Brooklet property or any substitute property as a constructive trustee for the daughter and that her interest therein should be protected by an equitable charge. She claims damages in the alternative .
The mother responds that the 1993 Deed should be set aside as unconscionable under equitable principles or as unjust under the [Contracts
Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) . In the alternative, she contends that the testamentary promise in the 1993 Deed is not enforceable by reason of various claimed breaches of the daughter's obligations under the 1993 Deed, so giving rise to a failure of consideration, or else on the basis that fulfilment of the relevant testamentary promise was conditional upon fulfilment by the daughter of those obligations. Those obligations were to maintain the Brooklet property, indemnifying the mother for any expenses.
The daughter denies she was in breach. She, in any event, contends that any obligation on her part was discharged by her mother failing to fulfil an implied reciprocal obligation of co-operation. That implied obligation was to do all that was necessary on the mother's part for the daughter to carry out her obligations or not to prevent the daughter from doing so. The mother denies that she failed to carry out any such implied obligation if it existed, or by her conduct prevented her daughter from carrying out her obligations.
 
ELABORATION OF FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Early
Background
Joint living arrangements between mother and daughter, associated with financial assistance from the mother, undoubtedly began with goodwill on both sides. They appear to have continued for many years reasonably happily. In the events that happened since they moved in 1993 to the Brooklet farm property, those arrangements have broken down, leading to the present unfortunate dispute.
The Plaintiff is an alert, intelligent woman in her eighty-first year. She emigrated before the War from Vienna, living in
Australia from 1947. She has been widowed since 1974. She gives the appearance still of considerable will power and resource. Nonetheless her advanced age and health problems means her ability to cope must be diminished.
Her daughter has also been a widow, since
She has four children.
She is on a pension. She gives the appearance of a person who has, over the years, deferred to her mother, though perhaps less in recent years (as evidenced by her no longer conceding the best bedroom in the house to her mother when they moved to Brooklet).
The rift between mother and daughter, leading to the present litigation, may well have had its origin in their changing circumstances. Thus there was the daughter's relationship with her partner, which started at Brooklet. While her mother said she welcomed it, there clearly were difficulties between the three of them. Mother and daughter, with her de facto, and the grandson were thrown together on a working farm, one that was not thriving. They thus experienced an unaccustomed degree of financial and working dependency. Yet this was at a time when mother and daughter were each in their own way, seeking to maintain their independence and autonomy. That this conflict created strains was wholly understandable, especially within a family.
All of this occurred against a background over many years where the mother had enjoyed the benefits of shared accommodation with her daughter, whilst maintaining her financial independence and the daughter in turn, benefited by the mother's financial assistance. The daughter turned to her mother for financial help, which the mother was in these circumstances willing to give. I turn now to elaborate on that earlier history, before dealing with the events of Brooklet.
Not long before the Defendant's husband died, in 1976, the Plaintiff began residing with the Defendant and the Defendant's four children at the
Bondi property. After her husband's death, the Defendant became sole proprietor. Both now widowed, mother and daughter lived together in conditions of some discomfort, as the Defendant's four children were also living in what was a four bedroom house. At that time, the Plaintiff was financially independent whereas the Defendant was recently widowed with a young family including her two sets of twins, with only the Bondi property and about $60,000 from the sale of a taxi plate.
 
The 1980 Deed
Late in 1979, the Plaintiff and Defendant attended the solicitors, Messrs
Bruce and Stewart, to make arrangements in relation to the financing of a loan for extensions to the Bondi property. The Defendant could not afford the full cost of that financing. She wanted to supplement monies made available by a finance company, with a loan which the mother was willing to make. There is some dispute as to how much was in fact lent by the Plaintiff. Certainly there is no dispute that an amount of at least $14,000 was lent, though the 1980
Deed executed on 23 April 1980, referred in clause 1 to a loan of $50,000, in the following acknowledgment. "1. The daughter hereby acknowledges having received from the mother by way of loan the sum of FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS ($50,000) on terms that the loan shall be free of interest and repayable in the manner described in clause 2 hereof. "
I quote below the remaining clauses 2 and 3 of the 1980 Deed.
"2. The mother may by notice in writing to the daughter at any time after the sale by the daughter or her legal personal representative or assigns of the property known as 101 Ocean
Street South, Bondi and comprised in Certificate of Title Volume Folio 204 (hereinafter called "the said property') make demand for repayment of the loan in which event the daughter or her legal personal representative or assigns shall pay to the mother in satisfaction of the loan an amount equal to Thirty percent (30%) of the net proceeds of sale of the said property.
The daughter shall permit the mother to reside in that part of the said property as is occupied by her this day and to have the use of the facilities of the said property including a garage space for so long as the mother shall be desirous of making the said property her principal place of residence. "
It will be seen that the Deed was prepared by Messrs Bruce and
Stewart. Mr Bruce, according to the Plaintiff, was questioned at the time both by the
Plaintiff and the Defendant about the provisions of clause 2, dealing with the payment on sale of 30% of proceeds. The Plaintiff gave evidence, which was not disputed, that "Mr Bruce at that time said in response to a statement from myself or Grace,
I forget which, to the effect that 'seems like a lot of money', he replied, 'it may seem that now but don't worry, with inflation and the rising values of the property that will be nothing'. "
The funds were in fact used for the extensions. Mother and daughter continued to live together in the Bondi property until they moved together to the Brooklet property in the circumstances which I will now describe. It is clear that the Bondi arrangements had suited both parties. The daughter received capital she needed on terms requiring no repayment or interest till, if ever, she sold the Bondi property when the thirty per cent formula applied.
Her mother, for her part, enjoyed shared residential accommodation.
 
The Brooklet Farm and 1993 Deed
In 1992, the daughter started to show an interest in properties in the
Byron Bay area. She suggested they move there. At first her mother was reluctant.
But in the end she went along with the proposal that eventuated, indeed, I infer, with some enthusiasm. In late 1992 the mother sold one of the two properties she owned, that at Blackheath, for $140,000. In November 1992 she sold her second property, at 110 Surrey
Street, Darlinghurst for $375,000.
On 5 February 1993, the mother at the enthusiastic urging of her daughter purchased the property (house, land and farming business) at Brooklet near
Lismore and Byron Bay. This was bought from a company, Syix Pty Ltd for $290,000, together with a tractor for $10,000. The property at Brooklet was seventeen acres. It grew coffee, various fruits and crops of macadamia nuts, though it is unclear whether it was ever capable of being more than a hobby farm at best.
At the time that the Brooklet property was contemplated to be purchased, it is undisputed that the daughter had no other funds apart from the value of the Bondi property and the taxi plate money. However, neither mother nor daughter at that stage wanted to sell Bondi.
The mother saw it as a place she might return to if she wanted to come back to Sydney. At that time the mother, having disposed of her two properties, did have cash funds. She had also been in continued work as a podiatrist whereas her daughter did not work at all.
Prior to acquiring Brooklet, both mother and daughter went to see a solicitor in Sydney. They saw Mr Herd of Messrs Harris,
Herd and Miller concerning Brooklet. At that time the mother was no longer in good health having suffered from cancer. She was recuperating from a major operation and a lengthy period of convalescence. She says that she "was willing at that stage to do anything to appease my daughter and keep the family together." Whether the word "appease" is correct is a matter of debate. It was not clear to me from the evidence whether the mother was really so reluctant to join her daughter. However, I do not believe much turns on that. There is no suggestion of any undue influence on the daughter's part, though it was put that the mother was at a known disadvantage vis a vis the daughter, as she needed the shared accommodation and the daughter was threatening to move anyway.
Before dealing with the discussions with Mr Herd, there is some additional background which provides a backdrop to those discussions. It was towards the end of 1992 that the Defendant first saw the Brooklet property with her son, Benjamin ("Benny") Menczer. She was attracted to the property and went back to Sydney to discuss it with her mother. The mother said words to the effect "I will give you the money to buy a property up in the Byron Bay area should you find one that you like. You can spend up to the amount I get from the sale of 110 Surrey Street, which is $375,000. If you purchase a property we can both live in it".
 (Surrey Street was the mother's property at Darlinghurst.)
The idea was that Benny would join mother and daughter and come and live with them to work on the farm. The supposition at that time was that the income from the property would cover its expenses and that the mother would not have to put her hand in her pocket for any running expenses. Similar assurance was received from the then owner. That assumption was later to prove incorrect. However, at the beginning they were evidently optimistic that they could improve the running of the business and thus its return.
Prior to seeing Mr Herd, probably in early 1993, mother and daughter agreed that the property should be purchased in the mother's name "because you're using my money". After Christmas of 1992 and probably early January ,
the mother came to her daughter with a handwritten document. This I quote below, exactly as written: "This is a mother and child agreement 
I Mrs. M. S.B. on letting my money's from the sale of my two properties and my bank-book before that, be managed by my daughter Mrs. G. M. for the Purpose of buying a Property in the B.B. district to fulfil her wish to live in said district.

The new P. shall be bought under my name. But I will respect her wishes about the management of said P. The left-over money shall still be mine as I may need to buy myselve into a
RETIREMENT-VILLAGE. I will make a new will leaving all my
Possessions to my only child Mrs G. M.

Should we sell the P. I will give her 20% of the nett in Cash.

M Bruinsma 
As I Mrs. G.M am now managing my Mothers Mrs. M.S.B's money's which come from the recent sale of her two Properties $  and her cheque book she had before, for the purpose of buying a Property around Byron Bay, I solemnly declare that the new Property shall be under my Mother's name and any money left after buying said
Property shall still belong to my mother. And that she will have full say in the Land and house we are buying or respectively building.

That she will make a will leaving all her
Possessions to me for all the work I am undertaking on her behalf, for the fulffilment of my wish to live in the new district.

Not to sell 101 Ocean St. B. against her wish as she might still want to live there instead of the new Property.

G
Menczer"
Mother and daughter then visited Mr Herd. The mother gave the manuscript quoted above to Mr Herd. The mother said words to this effect: "Is this alright?"
It was then undisputed that Mr Herd said to the mother words to this effect: "I don't really think this is fair. Can I make some suggestions based upon what you have written? "
It should be noted that Mr Herd was acting for both parties. This was both upon the purchase of the property as well as on the will which was subsequently made by the mother. Mr Herd so acting was, I am satisfied, with the concurrence of all parties.
Mr Herd then prepared the Deed which was signed on 5 February 1993.
I need to quote it (omitting formal parts) in full because of its importance: "A. The Daughter is the registered proprietor of the property at Ocean Street South Bondi, ("The Second Property").

B. The Mother and Daughter presently reside at 101 Ocean Street
South Bondi.
C. The Daughter intends to reside on land purchased at Lot 10
Fernleigh Road, Brooklet in the State of New South Wales ("The
Property").
D. The purchase monies for The Property are provided from the sale of the Mother's former property at 110 Surrey Street,
Darlinghurst.
E. The Mother is the registered proprietor of The Property and the Daughter is to remain the registered proprietor of The Second
Property.
F. The Mother has expressed the desire to secure for herself residential accommodation.

WITNESSES that the parties hereto for themselves and their respective legal personal representatives and assigns hereby mutually covenant and agree:
In consideration of the Daughter residing at The Property and doing all such things as are necessary to fully maintain that property from income from the property to arrange to pay all rates, taxes, costs, charges and running expenses as and when they are due and the balance if any is to be re-invested in the property and indemnifying the Mother against all such rates, taxes, costs, charges and running expenses the All other will allow the Daughter to reside at The Property.
The Mother agrees to provide in her Will that the Property is to pass to the daughter upon the death of the Mother free of all funeral debts and testamentary expenses which are to be borne by the residue of the Mother's estate.
In consideration of the Mother allowing the Daughter to so reside at the Property the Daughter agrees to allow the Mother to choose to also reside at either the First or Second property and to reside at either property and have the use of adequate facilities of either property for so long as she maintains residence subject at all times to the provisions of Clause 4 below.
Should the daughter wish or need to sell the Second
Property the daughter is to make alternative residential provision for the Mother as is suitable to the needs of the Mother and more particularly should the Mother wish to go into a retirement home and not at that time have sufficient funds to purchase into the retirement home then the Daughter will provide such monies as are necessary to make up the difference between the
Mother's monies and the sum required to enter the said retirement home "
The Plaintiff in her affidavit of 28 August 1995 (paragraph 18) in purporting to give her understanding of her and her daughter's intention, stated: "At that time there was never any intention that the second document prepared by Mr Herd was to replace the provisions of the first document."
I earlier ruled on whether that statement of subjective intention was admissible. I concluded that it was, for the reasons set out in the brief ex tempore judgment dated 26 October 1995. I am satisfied that neither party gave any thought to the 1980 Deed when signing the 1993 Deed (as to the Plaintiff see transcript at 101 and, as to the Defendant her affidavit of 31 August 1995 para 37).
The statement should thus be read in that light.
It will be noted from the 1993 Deed quoted above, that the words "in the bedroom of her choice" were deleted from clause 3 of that Deed. It appears that the Plaintiff wanted these words in but, presumably at the insistence of the Defendant, they were taken out. The Defendant gave evidence that she was not prepared to concede the best room in the house to her mother. She felt that this time, as compared to Bondi, she wanted to have first choice, having given that up to her mother in Bondi. I do not consider anything significant hangs on this aspect. Nor do I consider the substitution for an earlier version of recital F is significant, or in some way bespeaking her being at a disadvantage. The earlier version of recital
F with its expressed desire attributed to the mother "to remain in Sydney" was not consistent with her then intention to move to
Brooklet with her daughter and grandson. I am satisfied all it does is indicate that the 1993 Deed involved some give and take.
It is, however, worth comparing the earlier handwritten Exhibit 1, to the Deed as finalised. The earlier handwritten note (written and initiated by the mother) is in some respects more generous to the daughter than what was expressly stipulated in the Deed. This suggests that the mother's interests were taken into account and do not suggest any special disadvantage on the mother's part Thus the handwritten note clearly contemplated that the daughter would manage the mother's bank book and thus have access to it. The Deed in clause 1 can be understood in that context, as merely requiring the mother to be indemnified against various costs and running expenses of the
Brooklet property. There was no stipulation that she would control her mother's cheque accounts, though in practise her mother initially allowed her to.
More significantly, while both the 1993 Deed and the handwritten note states that the new property shall be bought under the Plaintiffs name, the handwritten note says I will respect her wishes about the management of said P ". Those words do not appear in the 1993 Deed. Again, in practice the daughter took charge of the management, assisted by her son Benny, but there was no stipulation to that effect beyond imposing the responsibility of maintaining the property on the daughter.
Then the handwritten note states "I will make a new will leaving all my
Possessions to my only child Mrs G.M.". Whereas, importantly, the 1993 Deed limits the obligation in clause 2 to the mother agreeing to provide in her will that only the Brooklet property is to pass to the daughter. In fact the mother acted on that revised proposal before she entered into the 1993 Deed.
She made a will dated 18 December 1992. In it she left the Brooklet property to her daughter (along with sixty per cent of residue). That will was later revoked on 12 July 1994, after the rift between mother and daughter.
The final significant omission is that the handwritten note contemplates that should the property be sold, that is to say the Brooklet property, "I will give her 20% of the nett in cash". That is to say, the Plaintiff would give 20% of the net proceeds of sale of Brooklet to her daughter- there is simply no counterpart to that provision in the 1993 Deed. In that respect the Deed was likewise less generous to the daughter.
However, there was one provision in the handwritten note that did not appear in 1993 Deed. This provision was rather for the benefit of the mother than the daughter. This was a clause which said "not to sell 101 Ocean Street
B (Bondi) against her wish as she might still want to live there instead of the new Property". The 1993 Deed in clause 3 did contain agreement on the
Defendant's part that the Plaintiff may "choose to also reside at either the
First or Second Property" (Brooklet or Bondi) having "the use of adequate facilities of either property". All this is subject to the daughter's right to sell Bondi in clause 4, with the daughter's obligations in that event, elaborated in clause 4.
The provisions of clauses 3 and 4 of the 1993 Deed, reflected the
Plaintiff's contingency planning, that she may wish to return to Sydney at some future time. If she did, it is clear that she contemplated that she might well wish to live in the Bondi property again. However, the 1993 Deed expressly contemplated that the daughter could sell the Bondi property (see clause 4). In that event, there was an obligation on the daughter "to make alternative residential provision for the Mother as is suitable to the needs of the mother...". It then provides that "... more particularly should the mother wish to go into a retirement home and not at that time have sufficient funds to purchase into the retirement home then the Daughter will provide such monies as are necessary to make up the difference between the Mother's monies and the sum required to enter the said retirement home".
There is no mention in the 1993 Deed of the 1980 Deed and there is no evidence to suggest that Mr Herd was even aware of the latter. I infer he was not.
I am satisfied that there was no suggestion of the Plaintiff being overborne in entering into the 1993 Deed or that the Plaintiff failed to understand its effect. I am equally clear that both parties to the Deed fully understand its effect and implications.
 
Working the Brooklet Farm
In February 1993 the Plaintiff and Defendant moved into the Brooklet property with the Defendant's son, Benny, whilst the Defendant's remaining sons occupied the Bondi property, paying some rent or, more accurately, passing on amounts derived from rent of that property.
Benny ran the farm, living there with his fiance, he doing the heavier work and his mother assisting with the lighter work. He lived on the property until around mid May 1994. (He evidently ceased to reside on the property by
May 1994 after a clash with his mother's de facto, though holidaying away from the farm around March 1994.) There is some suggestion that he was not sufficiently assiduous. It seemed at least common ground that he was not consistent in his efforts. The daughter gave evidence that she tried to bring in some outside person to take over the running of the farm and also that her son said he wanted to leave (transcript at 4-5). In her affidavit of 18
October 1995 she suggests her mother resisted the suggestion that Benny be replaced. However, I am not convinced that the mother's demur ("Leave him alone. He is doing the best he can.") really would have prevented the daughter replacing her son if the daughter were convinced she should have. Diffidence in doing so is at least as likely to have been family reluctance to be too hard on the son and grandson.
When, finally, the son and the de facto finally came to blows, there was then no impediment to his going.
There is also a suggestion that at least $11,000 of the proceeds of sales of fruit and coffee were not banked by Benny (transcript at 87) though this may well have been for his wages. Much of the farm transactions were done with some informality and in cash. There is evidence that at least some proceeds from conduct of the farm went into the Plaintiff's account. Expenses of running the farm frequently exceeded earnings from the farm and cash was short.
It is common ground that the Plaintiff contributed significant amounts towards the running of the farm from February 1993 through until mid-April
This was usually when there was not enough money in the farm account run by Syix. After a time, it appears that the business was run by-passing Syix by payment into a special farm account.
The total amount contributed by the
Plaintiff was $60,000 of which a part could be said to be attributable to capital works including some $23,000 on a swimming pool. It is common ground that the Plaintiff paid for farm maintenance expenditure within clause I of the 1993 Deed totalling not less than $11,372.17 (see exhibits 22 to 24 prepared by the farm accountant, Mr Robertson). It is clear enough (from para of the Defendant's affidavit of 12 October 1995) that farm expenditure would have also included monies generally recorded as "transfer to Syix", totalling a further $5,000. It may be inferred from paras 3 and 4 of that affidavit that this also constituted expenses of running the business and property, so as therefore to be within clause 1 of the 1993 Deed. However, I do not consider other living expense items or capital expenditure items come within clause 1 of the 1993 Deed.
Thus I find that the aggregate so paid by the Plaintiff was $16,372.17.
In so finding, I deal later (under Legal Questions) with whether the indemnity in clause I applied simply to that figure. The Defendant contends rather that clause 1 required a computation of the Plaintiff's loss which alone is to be indemnified. Then the Defendant contends that this amount only becomes payable after demand is made by the Plaintiff for that amount. That loss, on this basis, would therefore be calculated by taking into account the total income received by the Plaintiff deducting "maintenance" expenditures paid by the
Defendant on the Plaintiffs behalf out of the Plaintiff's money.
Payments were in fact effected by the daughter using her cheque signing authority on the mother's accounts. I am satisfied that the daughter was well aware of the amounts and their purpose. None of the recurrent expenditure on
Brooklet paid by the mother has been repaid.
In late 1993 the Defendant's now partner, David Gibson, commenced to reside with the Defendant at Brooklet.
Though her mother said that she welcomed her daughter finding a partner, tensions arose between David Gibson and the mother, with the daughter taking her partner's side. There were several incidents in which the Plaintiff's account and the Defendant's account differ. It is not possible on the evidence before me to determine who was at fault or whether these were simply misunderstandings.
What did emerge is that the Plaintiff and Defendant were increasingly at loggerheads. Despite attempts to resolve their differences and family counselling in July 1994, first Benny departed Brooklet after an incident with David Gibson (it appears in May 1994 though originally it was thought to have been in March 1994). Then on 26
August 1994 the Defendant purchased a property at Nimbin and moved out of
Brooklet to reside there with David Gibson. The Defendant evidently used her taxi plate money to buy the Nimbin property.
The family counselling in July 1994 was given by a social worker at
Lismore, Jan Moon. Her report (exhibit 15) contains the following summation: "I was first contacted in July last year by Grace Menczir, adult daughter of Margaret Bruimsma.
 
Margaret had recently bought a Brooklet property, and mother and daughter were sharing the home, tea making and leasing fruit trees. Grace believed she would inherit this place at her mother's death.

Grace could not live with her mother and they quarrelled regularly. Grace wanted separation and so sought alternate arrangements for Margaret as follows: (dated 20.4.94) a. Mother living in a shed, converted near the house; b. Mother live in the house, supported by Home Care and Meals on wheels, and Grace move out; c. Mother live in the house but Grace's children pay rent and support; d Later, that they exchange houses, Margaret living in Grace's house in Sydney and Grace to stay in the house at Brooklet.
However Margaret wanted financial compensation should exchange go ahead.
Finally, Grace and friend moved out into rented accommodation and Margaret moved in to the Brooklet home. " 
Events since Departure of Defendant from Brooklet
The Plaintiff has since remained at Brooklet. She has been using the services of a couple who were then on the property to manage the farm while setting about selling it. I am satisfied that the Defendant's departure from
Brooklet was the result of the breakdown in their relations at that point.
I am not satisfied that it has been established that the Plaintiff actually set about causing the Defendant, with David Gibson, to vacate. All that can be said with any confidence is that tensions between mother and daughter were such that the daughter felt that she and David Gibson could no longer continue to live together with her mother on the farm. Mother and daughter's mutual dependence in doing so would clearly have contributed to strains between them, which proved irresolvable while they continued to live together.
In October 1994 the Defendant instructed her solicitors to place the
Bondi property on the market. The Plaintiff lodged a caveat over that property and subsequently on 9 December 1994 made written demand for thirty per cent of the net sale price of that property. That caveat has since been extended until further order.
The Defendant in turn, on 17 February 1995, lodged a caveat over the
Plaintiffs property at Brooklet though this later lapsed and was replaced by a fresh caveat lodged without leave of the
Court under s740 of the Real Property
Act 1990 . Subsequently, orders were made by Windeyer J regarding the
Defendant's caveat in granting leave to the Defendant to lodge a fresh caveat which continues over the Plaintiff's property at Brooklet being Caveat
No.
.
By consent orders the Plaintiff's Caveat U675435 over the Defendant's
Bondi property lapsed and a Deed of Agreement was reached. This permits the
Defendant to sell the Bondi property but requires that $170,000 of proceeds are to be held in a joint account pending Court orders relating to the present cross-claim and the parties' rights to the monies.
The present position is that both the Bondi property and the Brooklet property are subject to exchanged contracts yet to be completed. The Brooklet property has a purchase price of $317,000 though the contract is subject to cancellation if the relevant caveat is not removed. The Bondi property is to be sold for $483,000 of which thirty per cent is $144,900.
At this point, the Plaintiff has some $120,000 in her bank accounts. If the 1980 Deed were operative and fulfilled, she would receive thirty per cent of the sale proceeds of Bondi or $144,900. Finally, the Plaintiff is to receive $317,000 from the Brooklet property, but this is subject to the
Defendant's claim that she has a constructive trust over its proceeds, or over any substitute property, reinforced by an equitable charge.
So far as her interest in Brooklet is concerned, the Defendant has acknowledged that no implied term is relied upon to prevent the sale of that property. However, the Defendant contends that the provisions of clause 2 of the 1993 Deed give rise to a constructive trust by virtue of the events that have happened conferring an interest in the Brooklet property or its proceeds capable of being protected by an equitable charge. It is further acknowledged by the Defendant that while that interest is protectable by caveat, the
Defendant would not resist the substitution of other property for the Brooklet property so long as the constructive trust continued to apply to the property to the extent attributable to the sale proceeds from the Brooklet property and subject to an equitable charge continuing to apply to it.
Alternatively, the Defendant would claim damages. She accepts that damages would be an adequate remedy in the circumstances. Such damages would, according to the Defendant, be an amount equal to the sale proceeds of the
Brooklet property discounted by the remaining life expectancy of the
Plaintiff. In sum, the Defendant would not seek to restrain a sale subject to the Defendant's claimed interest being recognised in the manner I have earlier described.
The Plaintiff contends that she is not bound to leave the Brooklet property or any substitute property to the Defendant. This is on the basis that either the 1993
Deed should be set aside as unconscionable in equity or as unjust pursuant to the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) . The Plaintiff contends in the alternative that if the 1993 Deed were valid then the
Defendant is in breach of clause 1 in failing either to indemnify the
Plaintiff against the rates, taxes, costs, charges and running expenses that the Plaintiff has paid in respect of the property, or otherwise has breached clause 1 in failing fully to maintain the property from income from the property.
It is undisputed that no recompense has been made or offered to the mother for monies she has spent on the property. It is true Counsel for the
Plaintiff in his submissions of 27 October 1995 states "There is no claim here by the Plaintiff for the reimbursement of her personal funds expended on running expenses at Brooklet". However that no claim is made, is not to be understood as a waiver of any breach of clause 1, if it occurred. Finally, the
Plaintiff contends that she is entitled to be indemnified under clause 1 of the 1993 Deed for $16,372.17 (though not claiming reimbursement) and to thirty per cent of the proceeds of sale of the Bondi property under the 1980 Deed.
The Defendant contends that the reason why clause 1 has not been fulfilled is that the Plaintiff, by her actions, prevented the Defendant from continuing to reside at the property and to manage the farm and thus is in breach of an implied obligation of co-operation.
Finally, the Defendant submits as the ultimately preferred solution, that both the 1980 and 1990 Deeds be treated as abrogated, if I do not consider them otherwise set aside. Further, that each of Plaintiff and Defendant be permitted to keep the proceeds of sale of the two properties free of any continuing obligations. Likewise that they be free of any obligations under the deeds, in circumstances where their abrogation reflected removal of the substratum for their continuance.
This was by reason of termination of their joint living arrangements and sale of the two properties.
 
LEGAL QUESTIONS
The issues between the parties require, for their resolution, that I answer the following questions. 
Was the 1980 Deed unconscionable in equity and, if so, should it be set aside notwithstanding [s16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s16.html) of the [Limitation Act 1969](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) ? 
Was the 1993 Deed unconscionable in equity or unjust in terms of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) (the "Act') such that it should be set aside as unconscionable or be the subject of relief under s7 of the Act? 
If the Deed is not so set aside or declared void under the Act, does the 1993 Deed abrogate the 1980 Deed? 
If the 1993 Deed is not so set aside or declared void under the Act, or otherwise not mutually abrogated (see question 5 below) is nonetheless that 
Deed breached in an essential term by the Defendant, such that the breach is of such a nature as to entitle the Plaintiff to terminate or rescind the Deed and claim any damages resulting from such breach in relation to clause 1? In particular was clause 1 of the 1993 Deed an essential term? And did the Defendant breach clause 1 by failing to indemnify the Plaintiff for running cost amounts paid by or on behalf of the Plaintiff, having regard to whether or not the Plaintiff breached any implied term requiring the Plaintiff for her part to co-operate in the carrying out of obligations under clause 1?
Have the Plaintiff and Defendant, by terminating the residential arrangements between them and electing to sell their respective properties at
Bondi and Brooklet, abrogated the 1993
Deed and/or the 1980 Deed (on the assumption that the 1980 Deed is not otherwise set aside), such that there are now no further obligations between them arising out of either Deed? 
In the event that the 1993 Deed is not set aside or declared void or otherwise terminated or abrogated, is the Defendant entitled to enforce clause of the 1993 Deed by requiring the Brooklet property to be left to her, or is the Defendant otherwise entitled to receive damages? If so, does the Plaintiff hold the Brooklet property, or the proceeds of sale thereof, or any substitute property, by way of constructive trust and subject to an equitable charge in favour of the Defendant?
In particular, was any such obligation on the
Plaintiff's part under clause 2 of the 1993 Deed, subject to a condition subsequent that the Defendant fulfill her obligations under clause 1 of the Deed? If so, did any failure on the Defendant's part amount to non fulfillment of that condition, having regard to whether or not the Plaintiff breached any implied term requiring the Plaintiff for her part to co-operate in the carrying out of obligations under clause 1? 
Depending on the answers to the earlier questions, has the Defendant breached clause 4 of the 1993 Deed and is the Plaintiff entitled to damages for breach by the Defendant of clause of the 1993 Deed? 
Question 1
Was the 1980 Deed unconscionable in equity and, if so, should it be set aside notwithstanding [s16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s16.html) of the [Limitation Act 1969](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) ?
I deal first with whether [s16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s16.html) of the [Limitation Act 1969](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) ("the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/)") would prevent the 1980 Deed being set aside as unconscionable in equity, were the conditions for that otherwise made out.
 .
[Section 16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s16.html) of the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) provides as follows: "Deed.
An action on a cause of actionfounded on a deed is not maintainable if brought after the expiration of a limitation period of twelve years running from the date on which the cause of action first accrues to the Plaintiff or to a person through whom he claims."
The answer to this question turns upon whether the Defendant, in seeking to set aside the 1980 Deed as unconscionable, is bringing "an action on a cause of action founded on a deed", within the meaning of [s16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s16.html) of the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/). The short answer is that such an action brought by the
Defendant is the very antithesis of a cause of action founded on a deed.
Rather, it is an action to set aside the deed. The action is founded, not on the deed as such, though it is that which the Defendant seeks to set aside.
Rather it is based on the relevant matters needing to be made out pertaining to the party claiming unconscionability and the circumstances of the Deed's entry.
In the present context, the elements which the Defendant would need to prove in order to establish unconscionability and thereby to set aside the Deed are these: 
That the Defendant suffered from a "special disadvantage" or "disabling condition or circumstance" that "seriously affected the ability of the innocent party" (the
Defendant) "to make a judgment as to (her) own best interests" in dealing with the Plaintiff in the transaction recorded in that
Deed, so that the Plaintiff, knowing of this, or being in a position where she ought to have known, unconscientiously "took advantage of' or "exploited" that special disadvantage or disabling condition, whereby the 1980 Deed may thereby be inferred from such facts, to be "the product of" that exploitation, subject to there being no countervailing evidence upon which the Plaintiff may rely to show that the exploitation was not a cause of entry into the 1980 Deed, 
See Blomley versus Ryan <case>;  <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 621] per Brennan J at 632.
It will be apparent that these elements do not in any sense characterise an action to set aside as unconscionable the 1980 Deed, as "an action on a cause of action founded on a deed". In so concluding, I do not therefore need to consider whether the cause of action based on unconscionability, to set aside the 1980 Deed, arose when the 1980 Deed was entered into, or at a subsequent date when loss was suffered as a result. Because the action is not in terms to recover any such loss, there is much to be said for the view that it is the former time, contrast action under [s82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) as in Wardley Australia Ltd and Anor versus State of West Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514.]
On the basis that the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) places no impediment, I turn now to whether the application of these earlier elements of unconscionability fit the circumstances of the daughter's entry into the 1980 Deed, so that she succeeds in setting it aside. It is clear enough that the daughter needed financial assistance. But that of itself did not place the daughter at any special disadvantage. Nor was she suffering from any disabling condition or circumstance that would have seriously affected her ability to make a judgment as to her own best interests. Clearly she derived the benefit of a soft loan whose repayment depended upon her own willingness to sell the Bondi property, something wholly within her control. Unless the 1980 Deed is set aside, the evidence cannot go beyond the Deed and challenge that the debt was for $50,000 (Burns Philp Hardware Ltd versus Howard Chia Pty Ltd [(1987) 8 NSWLR 642] at 655-6) and in any event I am not satisfied on the evidence that the debt was other than $50,000. And if she did sell, she was not obliged to pay anything by way of repayment of principal or indeed accrued interest, but simply thirty per cent of the sale proceeds.
Whether the amount was large or small would depend upon the exigencies of the property market at the time. Inflation would mean that she benefited from any resultant capital accretion, as she retained seventy per cent of the proceeds. Thus it could not be said that there was anything intrinsically unfair to the daughter in the bargain that she struck.
I am satisfied that the daughter knew what she was doing when she instigated the loan and the 1980 Deed arrangements. She indeed recognised that the thirty per cent clause was fair; see transcript at 13. There is nothing to suggest that she was badgered into this arrangement.
Accordingly, I answer question 1 in the negative.
 
Question 2
Was the 1993 Deed unconscionable in equity or unjust in terms of the [Contracts
Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) (the "Act') such that it should be set aside as unconscionable or be the subject of relief under s7 of the Act?
Unconscionability of the 1993 Deed in Equity?
I have set out under question 1 the applicable principles to establish unconscionability in equity.
I am unable to accept that the mother suffered from a "special disadvantage" or "disabling condition or circumstance" that "seriously affected the ability of the innocent party" (the mother) "to make a judgment as to (her) own best interests" in dealing with her daughter in entering into the 1993 Deed. I have already described the mother as an alert intelligent woman though in her eighty-first year. Accepting that with advanced age and her health problems, her ability to cope physically must be diminished, I did not have any doubt as to her intellectual acumen or ability to understand the implications of what she was doing. That she and her daughter both miscalculated as to the problems they would encounter operating a working farm together with her grandson, as contemplated by the 1993 Deed, is very different from suggesting that the 1993 Deed that preceded those events reflected some special disadvantage or disabling condition on the part of the mother.
It was put on behalf of the Plaintiff that after the initial meeting between
Plaintiff, Defendant and Mr Herd, the solicitor, the Defendant provided most of the instructions on the draft deeds. Accepting that, again it does not follow that this somehow placed the mother under a special disadvantage. For that to be made out, it is not enough to find individual provisions which might not be in the Plaintiff's interests which were deleted, such as the deletion of the words "in the bedroom of her choice". That deletion is no sufficient evidence of the Plaintiff's special disadvantage - or exploitation of a special disadvantage. One would need to find a deed which, in its operation taken as a whole, was sufficiently disadvantageous as to indicate, alone or with other evidence, that the Plaintiff must have been at a special disadvantage and had thereby been exploited.
The daughter gave evidence that in Bondi, she had given up the best bedroom and felt this time it was her turn. There is no suggestion that the mother's accommodation was so bad that she was in effect exploited.
When one compares the 1993 Deed to the earlier "mother and child" agreement, an agreement written solely by the mother, with no apparent pressure from the daughter, in many respects the 1993 Deed is more favourable to the mother. I have earlier set out how that is so.
The pressure said to have been applied by the daughter upon her mother "I'm prepared to go with or without you" to Brooklet, is hardly the kind of pressure that could be said to be unfair. Nor is it the kind of pressure that
I consider the Plaintiff would have been unable to resist if she truly did not wish to go to the Brooklet property under the arrangements that were made.
Finally, the Defendant relies upon the deletion of an earlier version of recital F and the substitution of the current recital F to the 1993 Deed. The earlier version stated "the
Mother has expressed the desire to remain in
Sydney and to have residential accommodation available to her within the
Sydney metropolitan area and more particular the eastern suburbs of that metropolitan area". However, the mother did not remain in Sydney, but merely preserved that as an option. The final version of recital F simply states "the
Mother has expressed the desire to secure for herself residential accommodation". This she in fact achieved under the 1993 Deed. This is borne out by the final version of clause 4 of the 1993 Deed. Clause 4 in the earlier draft simply said, "should the daughter with or need to sell the Second
Property (Bondi) the daughter is to make alternative residential provision for the Mother within the Eastern Suburbs of the City of Sydney as is suitable to the needs of the Mother". Those last words indicate a concern for the mother's welfare rather than any indication of its curtailment.
The final words of clause 4 then deal, quite naturally, with what would happen should the mother wish to go into a retirement home. She is protected by those final words which make clear that if she does not "have sufficient funds to purchase into the retirement home then the Daughter will provide such monies as are necessary to make up the difference between the Mother's monies and the sum required to enter the said retirement home". While that last may on one view be more favourable to the daughter in that funds to be provided are simply the difference needed, it should be appreciated that the earlier obligation is not satisfied. It is to provide alternative residential provision for the mother, though it need not be purchased necessarily. It would suffice if the daughter provided shared accommodation for her mother living with her, or otherwise paid the rent on accommodation for her mother.
While the earlier "mother and child" agreement contained a provision not to sell the Bondi property against the mother's wish, that was in a context where the daughter was treated more generously than eventuated under the 1993 Deed in important respects that I have earlier mentioned; see earlier under "Elaboration of Factual Background" - "The Brooklet Farm and the 1993 Deed".
Thus the one element where the mother confers a major benefit on the daughter - in agreeing to leave her the Brooklet property, her earlier "mother and child" agreement would have seen her leave her entire assets.
Accordingly I am satisfied that the 1993 Deed was not unconscionable in equity so far as the mother was concerned. Unjustness of the 1993 Deed under the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) 
It remains to consider whether the 1993 Deed should alternatively be the subject of relief under [s7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) ("the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/)"), on the basis that it is unjust in terms of [s4(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s4.html) of that [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).
[Section 4(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s4.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) provides that "unjust" includes "unconscionable, harsh, or oppressive". In determining whether a contract or a provision of a contract is unjust in the circumstances relating to the contract at the time it was made, [s9(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) lays down the matters to be considered by the
Court. The Court shall have regard to the public interest and to all the circumstances of the case. [Section 9(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), without affecting the generality of the foregoing, then lists a number of matters to which the Court shall have regard to the extent that they are relevant to the circumstances.
However, whilst the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) is beneficial legislation to be interpreted liberally, the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) regulates contracts not investments. It is the contract or its provisions which must be unjust, in the sense not only of unconscionable, harsh or oppressive but also where there is either substantive injustice, in the sense that the terms, consequences or effects of the contract are unjust, or else procedural injustice in the sense of unfairness of the methods used to make it; see West versus AGC (Advances)
Ltd and Ors [(1986) 5 NSWLR 610] at 620 to per McHugh JA.
Importantly, McHugh JA at 61 emphasises: "If a defendant has not been engaged in conduct depriving the claimant of a real or informed choice to enter into a contract and the terms of the contract are reasonable as between the parties, I do not see how that contract can be considered unjust simply because it was not in the interests of the claimant to make the contract or because she had no independent advice. "
I am satisfied that in the present circumstances there was neither substantive nor procedural injustice in the sense used earlier. I have earlier set out why I do not consider the Deed in its substantive provisions operated unfairly to the mother. She continued to enjoy free residence in return for providing the financial assistance that enabled the property to be bought - and bought in the name of the mother and not the daughter. The daughter was to be responsible for maintaining that property and to indemnify the mother against running costs; see clause 1. To this benefit for the mother is added the provisions of clause 4 to which I have already referred. The mother retained throughout under clause 3 the right to choose to reside at either the Bondi property or the Brooklet property. While the former is subject to the daughter's option to sell the Bondi property, there are then the consequential obligations on the daughter set out in clause .
Nor am I satisfied that there was any procedural injustice in the sense of unfairness in the way in which the contract was entered into. There is nothing to suggest that Mr Herd did not conscientiously do what was necessary to protect both parties to the 1993 Deed in a fair and equitable fashion. In particular I do not find the daughter engaged in conduct which deprived the mother of a real or informed choice to enter into the contract and I am satisfied that the terms of the contract are reasonable as between the parties - indeed fairer on the whole for the mother than her earlier "mother and child" agreement.
The Defendant relies upon the effect of specific provisions to which the
Court has regard under [s9(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). Thus reliance is placed on [s9(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) which requires the Court to have regard to "whether or not prior to or at the time the contract was made its provisions were the subject of negotiation". The Defendant states that after the initial instructions from the Plaintiff, negotiation was between the
Defendant the solicitor and not the
Plaintiff. However, I do not find anything in the terms of the 1993 Deed which indicates that after those initial instructions, the daughter's instructions led to a contract unfair or unreasonable in its operations so far as the mother was concerned.
Nor do I find that [s9(2)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) assists the daughter. That provision directs attention to whether the deed imposed conditions "not reasonably necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of any party to the contract".
However, I am unable to be satisfied that this contention is made out.
The fact that the deed did not specifically allow the mother to sell Brooklet if circumstances changed is not, to my mind, at all relevant in that regard, since I am satisfied that the 1993 Deed does not prevent the mother selling the Brooklet property. While it is true that clause 2 of the 1993 Deed contains an agreement that "the Property" is to pass to the daughter on the death of the mother, there is nothing which specifically requires that such
Brooklet property be retained in ownership of the mother. In dealing later with the proper construction of that clause, I assume that if the daughter were not otherwise disqualified from claiming under it, it would operate so as to confer a beneficial interest in either the Brooklet property or any substitute property. However, that consideration does not alter the basic fairness of the 1993 Deed so far as the mother is concerned.
Then it is said that under [s9(2)(e)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), the age and the health of the Plaintiff should be taken into account. However, I do not consider that the Plaintiff's age or health were such that she could not appreciate the impact of the Deed or adequately protect her interests.
Then it is said that [s9(2)(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) requires that the mother should have had the adverse implications or effect of the Deed explained to her.
However, I am not satisfied that even if that were so, then had a detailed explanation been made, she would have required any different version of the Deed than in fact was made.
Finally, under [s9(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html), the Court may examine post-contract events, though the determination must still be whether the contract is unjust in the circumstances relating to the contract at the time it was made. The events that did occur included difficulties between the mother and the Defendant's de facto, Mr Gibson. Even if they made the atmosphere intolerable, this was the product of tensions between both parties and I do not believe that blame can simply be placed upon one party or another for what occurred.
Accordingly, I am satisfied that the 1993 Deed is not unjust in terms of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) or such that it should be set aside as unconscionable or be the subject of relief under [s7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).
 
Question 3
If the 1993 Deed is not so set aside or declared void under the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), does the Deed abrogate the 1980 Deed?
I have earlier stated that I am satisfied that neither party gave any thought to the 1980 Deed when signing the 1993 Deed. I allowed as admissible on the issue whether the 1993 Deed abrogated the 1980 Deed, the
Plaintiff's understanding of both her own and her daughter's intention when she stated: "At that time there was never any intention that the second document prepared by Mr Herd was to replace the provisions of the first document."
I did so, for the reasons elaborated in my ruling at the time, based on the analogy of whether parties intended to enter into a binding contract being a factor which the law takes into account, though it is not, or not always, the determining factor. Eyre Great Lakes Pty Ltd versus KS
Easter (Holdings) Pty
Ltd [(1985) 2 NSWLR 309] at 330 and later at 331 per Mahoney JA.
However, that last statement, read with the earlier evidence that neither party gave any thought to the 1980 Deed when signing the 1993 Deed, rather indicates that there was no positive intention that the second document would replace the provisions of the first document. This still leaves open the possibility that the second document's operation left no room for the first document. That is an objective matter requiring consideration of the operation of both deeds. It is clear enough that the 1993 Deed makes no express mention of the 1980 Deed nor of the monies owing by the Defendant to the Plaintiff on the Bondi property.
The Plaintiff contends that both deeds can stand alone and at the same time. The Defendant contends that so onerous, if not impossible, would it be for the daughter to comply with both the 1980 Deed and the 1993 Deed, that they could not stand together and could not have been intended to do so; or alternatively, could not have been intended to do so if the parties had directed their minds to that matter.
However clause 2 of the 1980 Deed and clause 4 of the 1993 Deed both allow the daughter to sell the
Bondi property and indeed contemplate that she should be free to do so. Clause 2 of the 1980 Deed is the means for discharging the loan provided for in that deed by mother to daughter. It requires that if, and only if, the daughter sells Bondi she is required to provide the mother with thirty per cent of the net sale proceeds. We know that thirty per cent of the net proceeds is now the sum of $138,490.33. Clause 4 of the 1993 Deed adds a further obligation upon the daughter in that event that she sells the Bondi property. That is, the daughter is required "to make alternative residential provision for the Mother as is suitable to the needs of the Mother". That is satisfied, for example, by the daughter providing accommodation to her mother in whatever residence the daughter may then be living, until the mother wants to go into a retirement home. Or the daughter might procure it by a separate arrangement for a lease of suitable accommodation. However, if the mother should wish to go into a retirement home "and not at that time have sufficient funds to purchase into a retirement home" then, and only then, does the daughter have the obligation to provide "such monies as are necessary to make up the difference between the mother's monies and the sum required to enter the said retirement home".
The Defendant contends that the only source of funds available to her at the time of the 1993 Deed to carry out her obligations in clause 4 of that
Deed would have been the proceeds of sale of the Bondi house, or more accurately seventy per cent of the net proceeds of sale, assuming the 1980
Deed were not abrogated. However, the events that happened including the sale of Bondi for $483,000 mean that there would be sufficient funds to comply with clause 4 if indeed mother were not to live with daughter in whatever property daughter bought. The provision for a retirement home would only operate if the mother failed to have sufficient funds. It is clear enough from the funds that would be available to the mother from the sale of the Brooklet property together with the funds that she already retains in her bank accounts of $120,000, as well as thirty per cent of the sale proceeds of Bondi, that she has more than sufficient to ensure that the daughter would not need to provide any such monies in that event.
Then it is put by the Defendant that if the 1980 Deed and the 1993 Deed each remained on foot, the consequences would be most unreasonable. It must be remembered that the daughter is not here putting a case that the 1993 Deed is unjust for the purposes of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) or that it is somehow unconscionable in equity. However, there is no doctrine which treats an earlier deed as abrogated by a later one merely because the consequences might, on one view, be relatively onerous if both continue, or indeed if the result were to put one party substantially at an advantage over another.
However, if one looks at the operation of the two deeds and the alleged unreasonableness if both remain on foot, it is far from clear that the result is so unreasonable as to indicate that the Deed in its objective operation was intended to abrogate the 1980 Deed. I have already indicated that the operation of clause of the 1993 Deed is not so onerous on the daughter, assuming that the mother retains sufficient assets to purchase her own retirement home. In the meantime, it was natural enough for the parties to have contemplated continuing to live together as they had done so for many years. The fact that the unfortunate rift between mother and daughter means that they will live separately and thus bring about a situation in which clause 4 puts the added financial burden on the daughter of finding separate and alternative residential accommodation for the mother, does not mean that the deeds of themselves operate so unreasonably that the 1993 Deed should be treated as abrogating the 1980 Deed.
A logical and reasonable way of looking at the operation of the two deeds is to treat the 1980
Deed as simply providing a mechanism to deal with a loan which the mother made to the daughter. Instead of the daughter having to meet a conventional repayment obligation of principal and interest, the parties worked out a rational arrangement of living together with payment out of any future sale proceeds of a fixed thirty per cent. This continued compatibly with the 1993 Deed, but meant that if the daughter were to choose to sell the
Bondi property then, and only then, was the daughter to pay over thirty per cent of the net sale proceeds to the mother. The mother took the risk that the property might not appreciate in value although no doubt both were optimistic that it would. Indeed they were optimistic that the appreciation would thus enure for the benefit of both mother and daughter, since daughter retains the remaining seventy per cent of the proceeds and is in that sense protected by inflation.
Finally, in looking at the operation of the two deeds it should not be overlooked that the daughter retained the benefit both of living at Brooklet under clause I and then, under clause 2 of the 1993 Deed, having the benefit of her mother's obligation to leave her the property at Brooklet, or, depending on the construction of clause 2, any substitute property. That leaves for later consideration whether, in the events that happened, clause 2 still remains an obligation on the mother and the extent of that obligation if it does. But that does not alter the basic point that the two deeds together were not so onerous on the daughter, as to treat the second as abrogating the first.
Accordingly, for all these reasons, I am satisfied that the 1993 Deed does not abrogate the 1980 Deed.
 
Question 4
If the 1993 Deed is not so set aside or declared void under the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), or otherwise not mutually abrogated (see question 5 below) is nonetheless that Deed breached in an essential term by the Defendant, such that the breach is of such a nature as to entitle the Plaintiff to terminate or rescind the Deed and claim any damages resultingftom such breach in relation to clause 1? In particular was clause 1 of the 1993 Deed an essential term? And did the Defendant breach clause 1 by failing to indemnify the Plaintiff for running cost amounts paid by or on behalf of the Plaintiff, having regard to whether or not the Plaintiff breached any implied term requiring the Plaintiff for her part to co-operate in the carrying out of obligations under clause 1?
In answering these questions, it is necessary to start with the basic question, was the Defendant in breach of clause 1 by failing to indemnify the
Plaintiff for running cost amounts paid by or on behalf of the Plaintiff within clause 1 of the 1993 Deed?
The Plaintiff puts two arguments for the contention that the Defendant did not breach clause 1.
These are put, notwithstanding that it is agreed that the Plaintiff paid not less than $16,372.17 for what were "rates, taxes, costs, charges and running expenses", within the meaning of those words in clause 1 of the 1993 Deed.
The first argument put by the Defendant is that the word "indemnifying" in clause 1 necessarily means that there is no obligation on the Defendant's part to recompense the mother for this amount but only for any ultimate loss suffered by the mother at the end of the year of income. That loss can be calculated only after taking into account any income earned by the farming business carried on either by Syix Pty Limited, or by the Plaintiff in by-passing Syix. Since no evidence was given as to any such loss and how it would have been calculated, and there having been no formal demand for a net amount representing loss so quantified, there could, according to the
Defendant, be no breach of clause 1. Otherwise, says the Defendant, the
Plaintiff would obtain the unintended double benefit of keeping any profit or income earned from the farm and be reimbursed for costs and expenses.
The second argument put by the Defendant is that there is an implied obligation of co-operation in the present circumstances, where the parties in a written contract have agreed that something should be done which cannot effectually be done unless both concur in doing it. Thus such an implied obligation requires that the contract be construed so that each party agrees to do all that is necessary to be done on his or her part of the carrying out of that thing, notwithstanding that there are no express words to that effect;
Mackay versus Dick [(1881) 6 App Cas 251] at 263.
Turning to the first of these arguments, reliance was placed by the
Defendant on Wardley Australia Limited and Anor v State of Western Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514] at 524. There the High Court construed a particular indemnity which was explicitly against any "net loss", as requiring first the calculation of any net loss before the indemnity could have effect. However, the very fact that the indemnity in terms was expressly predicated upon a net loss detracts from any notion that the High Court was here implying from the word "indemnity" itself that it could only apply where there was a net loss.
Indeed the High Court expressly contrasts that kind of indemnity with an indemnity "of a kind which generates an immediate non-contingent liability to pay upon execution of the instrument. It was neither a promise to meet a liability of the promisee to make a payment nor a promise to pay a debt owing by a thirdparty to the promisee " 47 see the discussion by Barwick CJ in Wren versus Mahony <case>; [(1972) 126
CLR 212] at 225-229.
Thus the judgment is entirely consistent with the proposition that the word "indemnify" must be read in the context of the clause itself and the nature of any indemnity thereby conferred. There is no inherent limitation on the word "indemnify" or "indemnifying" such as to limit it to the case where there is a net loss. Indeed Strouds' Judicial Dictionary, 5th ed, 1986 gives as the first of the alternative meanings to "indemnify" the following definition: "(1) a contract to 'indemnify ", as regards a sum of money, means in its ordinary sense, that the contractor will pay the amount; ... "
I turn therefore to the word "indemnifying" in the context of clause 1 of the 1993 Deed in which it appears. The primary obligation lies upon the daughter.
It requires her to do "all such things as are necessary to fully maintain that property from income from the property to arrange to pay all rates, taxes, costs, charges and running expenses as and when they are due and the balance, if any, is to be reinvested in the property ..." I consider that the clause should be read, to make sense, as if a comma followed the word "property", where second appearing. Thus the obligation falls upon the daughter first to "maintain" the property from income, doing so from income from the property. The words "income from the property" though capable of meaning income at the end of the year, to my mind, probably refers to cash in the hands of the daughter from managing the farming business. However nothing turns on that.
What is significant is the express reference which follows to differentiate from ordinary maintenance "rates, taxes, charges and running expenses", I have taken the $16,372.17 to comprise these items. These items are to be arranged to be paid by the daughter and not at the end of the year or "from income" but "as and when they fall due". Clearly, in those circumstances, it would be absurd if the daughter's failure to arrange to pay these items as obliged, meant the mother, who did, only got indemnified if there were a loss on the farming business at the end of the year and then only to the extent of the loss.
Indeed it is clear from the evidence that there was considerable informality in the way in which payments were made. Thus the parties' own conduct illustrated the application of the clause as turning upon the daughter using cash to make these payments if convenient and then turning to the mother if there were no cash in hand for mother to pay.
Thus I consider that the words "indemnifying" that follow are to be understood in the sense of a simple recompense for payments which the mother has made where the daughter has not herself made the relevant payment.
There is no need for more formal demand from the mother than has already occurred.
The daughter, who controlled her mother's accounts would be well aware of what was paid.
I turn now to the second argument. This essentially turns upon a contention by the
Defendant that the Plaintiff is in breach of the implied obligation to give the degree of co-operation which would be necessary for the daughter effectually to carry out her obligation. Then, that that breach somehow prevented her from carrying on the farming business in course of which only indemnification is to occur. I will assume in favour of the Defendant for the purpose of this argument that the obligation to indemnify was postulated upon the mother's implied obligation to co-operate in the carrying on of the business on the property.
I should say that that proposition is certainly not self-evidently correct. It might be said that clause is simply premised on the primary consideration of the daughter residing at the property.
However, accepting the implied obligation, the evidence for the mother's supposed lack of co-operation appears to consist in the mother failing to concur with the daughter in the latter's conclusion that her son, Benny, was unsuitable to manage the business and should be replaced by someone else.
While there is evidence that the grandmother demurred, I am not satisfied that the grandmother's demurral was intended to be a real barrier in the way of the daughter doing what was necessary so far as the son was concerned, including his replacement if unable to properly carry out the tasks allotted to him.
Other evidence of the mother's supposed lack of co-operation really turns upon the conflict between the mother and the daughter's de facto, Mr
Gibson. On that matter I am not satisfied that this bespoke a lack of co-operation on the mother's part so much as simply the joint recognition that they could not get on together. The mother did not force the daughter off the property. There was no doubt a mutual and understandable recognition that could not live together on the property without further conflict. None of that could be said to reflect a lack of co-operation on the mother's part. In any event, the monies which the daughter failed to pay dated back to a period when the daughter was still residing on the property. Thus the mother gave the consideration which, under clause 1, is the postulated quid pro quo for the indemnity obligation.
It follows from the foregoing that I am satisfied that the Defendant is in breach of clause 1 in failing to indemnify the mother in recompensing her for the amount of $16,372.17.
The question which remains is the legal consequence of that breach; in particular, has a condition of the contract been broken. That is to say, is there a sufficient breach of an essential promise, such that the innocent party, being the Plaintiff, upon becoming aware of the breach, has the right, at her option, either to treat herself as discharged from the contract and to recover damages for loss of the contract, or else to keep the contract on foot and recover damages for the particular breach. If instead what is breached is merely a warranty, that is to say a non-essential promise, it follows that only the latter alternative is available to the innocent party, that is to say to sue for damages; Tramways Advertising Pty Ltd v
Luna Park Ltd (1938) SR 632 at 641 per Jordan CJ.
Adopting the words of Jordan CJ "The question whether a term in a contract is a condition or a warranty, i.e. an essential or non-essential promise, depends upon the intention of the parties as appearing in or from the contract. The test of essentiality is whether it appears from the general nature of the contract considered as a whole, or from some particular term or terms, that the promise is of such importance to the promisee that he would not have entered into the contract unless he had been assured of a strict or a substantial performance of the promise, as the case may be, and that this ought to have been apparent to the promisor ... if the innocent party would not have entered into the contract unless assured of the strict and literal performance of the promise, he may in general treat himself as discharged upon any breach of the promise, however slight. If he contracted in reliance upon a substantial performance of the promise, any substantial breach will ordinarily justify a discharge. In some cases it is expressly provided that a particular promise is essential to the contract, eg by a stipulation that it is the basis or of the essence of the contract:
Bettini versus Guye [1 QBD ] at 187; but in the absence of express provision then the question is one of construction for the court, when once the terms of the contract have been ascertained:... "
Treating the matter here as one of construction, there being no express stipulation as to the essentiality of clause 1, I am satisfied that clause 1 was a condition of the contract and that the mother would not have entered into the contract unless assured of at least a substantial performance of the relevant promise. It is clear that the 1993
Deed is fundamentally about the basis upon which the daughter may reside on the mother's property, as can be seen by the reference to that consideration in both clause I and clause 3.
While I do not consider that the daughter was obliged to reside at the property, so long as she did do so there was a continuing obligation on the daughter's part to indemnify the mother against these various running expenses of the property and this the daughter failed to do. The breach was a substantial one, in terms of amount.
I am thus satisfied that there has been a breach by the Defendant of an essential term of the 1993 Deed and that the Defendant has thereby failed to provide a substantial performance of the relevant promise. The Defendant has thus committed such a breach as justifies discharge of the Plaintiff's obligation under the 1993 Deed and termination of that Deed, with the mother entitled to recover such damages as flows from that breach. I should add that there is no necessity for there to have been a total failure of consideration so far as the Plaintiff's right so to terminate is concerned. However, this conclusion is subject to the answer to the next question.
Finally, I do not consider that the Plaintiff's self-denial of any claim for reimbursement alters her entitlement to that reimbursement. Nor does it alter the consequences of the Defendant's breach or denial of that entitlement being as I have earlier stated.
 
Question 5
Have the Plaintiff and Defendant, by terminating the residential arrangements between them and electing to sell their respective properties at Bondi and
Brooklet, abrogated the 1993 Deed and/or the 1980 Deed (on the assumption that the 1980
Deed is not otherwise set aside), such that there are now no further obligations between them arising out of either Deed?
The answer to the earlier question 4 is subject to the answer to the present question, because, if the 1993 Deed were mutually abrogated or abandoned, then the question of damages would not arise. The Plaintiff and
Defendant would have jointly terminated the 1993 Deed by their actions. I turn therefore to this question of mutual abrogation or abandonment.
Considering first the 1980 Deed, it is difficult to see how the termination of their residential arrangements effected a termination of the Deed. Clause 3 of the 1980 Deed simply requires that the daughter permit the mother to reside in the Bondi property. There is nothing in the evidence before me which indicates either that the daughter withdrew that permission while they were at the Brooklet property together or made it impracticable for the mother to re-commence residence at the Bondi property. The fact that it was temporarily tenanted simply reflected that mother was for the time being at Brooklet. Indeed the 1993 Deed expressly acknowledges in clause 3 thereof that the mother has the right to choose to reside at either the Brooklet property or Bondi. The fact that the mother chose to reside at the
Brooklet property is therefore in no sense abrogation of the 1980 Deed.
The fact then that the daughter has now contracted to sell the Bondi property likewise does not constitute an abrogation of the 1980 Deed.
Clause 3 of the 1980 Deed, it is true, appears to permit the mother to reside indefinitely in the Bondi property. But clause 3 has to be read with clause 2. Clause of the 1980 Deed quite clearly contemplates sale by the daughter of the Bondi property. There is nothing in clause 2 which requires the daughter to obtain the mother's consent before doing so. Reading the two clauses together in a self-consistent manner, clause in fact provides the mechanism for the mother to receive thirty per cent of the net proceeds of sale of the Bondi property in satisfaction of the loan obligations in the event that the mother makes demand for repayment of the loan in that event.
Thus I am satisfied that the 1980 Deed was not mutually abrogated or abandoned by the parties.
Was the 1993 Deed mutually abandoned or abrogated?
Again reliance is placed on the termination of the residential arrangements between mother and daughter. This occurred in circumstances where relations between mother and daughter had broken down to the point where they could no longer live together satisfactorily.
In those circumstances, the daughter left the Brooklet property and went to reside at Nimbin. The daughter subsequently contracted to sell the Bondi property whilst the mother subsequently contracted to sell the
Brooklet property.
At the time that the daughter ceased to reside on the property, there was no purported termination by the mother of the 1993 Deed. That has arisen since.
It would appear that the first time that the mother, as Plaintiff, sought to terminate the 1993 Deed and seek damages was in the
Plaintiff's reply to the Defendant's cross-claim, paragraph (E) and (G), filed 10 August
The Plaintiff had earlier, in July , negotiated to sell the Brooklet property though it had been put up for sale earlier than that.
Was it a fundamental substratum of the 1993 Deed that there be a continuing arrangement for shared residence between mother and daughter at the
Brooklet property, until such time as the daughter were to sell the Bondi property prompting a re-arrangement of their joint living arrangements or in the event that mother chose to return to Sydney? And was that fundamental substratum removed in circumstances giving rise to mutual abandonment or abrogation? Clause 4 does not refer at all to sale of the Brooklet property but only to the Bondi property.
However, that is explained by the fact that the mother, by clause 3 of the 1993 Deed, was permitted to reside at either the Brooklet or the Bondi property. Clearly the Defendant and Mr Gibson left the Brooklet property and terminated the arrangements for her continuing to reside at Brooklet in August 1994, some months before the Defendant instructed her solicitors to place the Bondi property on the market in October 1994 and indeed before the Plaintiff put the Brooklet property at the sale.
In Muschinski versus Dodds [(1986) 160 CLR 5] 83, Deane J refers at 560 to "...a case where the substratum of a joint relationship or endeavour is removed without attributable blame and where the benefit of money or other property contributed by one party on the basis and for the purposes of the relationship or endeavour would otherwise be enjoyed by the other party in circumstances in which it was not specifically intended or specially provided that that other party should so enjoy it. The content of the principle is that, in such a case, equity will not permit that other party to assert or retain the benefit of the relevant property to the extent that it would be unconscionable for him so to do; cf Atwvood versus Maude (11), and per Jessel MR, Lyon v
Twedde(12) (1968)
LR 3 Ch App, at pp374-375 [(1881) 17 ChD 529], at p531 "
While I consider that the foregoing is the applicable principle to be applied in dealing with unconscionability in the context of such an arrangement as this, it does not follow that the present circumstances also reflect mutual abrogation or abandonment of the 1993 Deed. Although this is a question of some difficulty, I am in the end satisfied that the circumstances are not such as to amount to a mutual abrogation or abandonment, such as was found to exist in D.T R. Nominees Proprietary Limited v
Mona Homes Proprietary
Limited and Another <case>; [(1977-1978) 138 CLR 423] at 434 per Stephen, Mason and
Jacobs JJ. This is not a case in which, following an unsuccessful action for damages for breach of contract by one party, or other enforcement action, the other party had not rescinded and time passed during which neither party took any steps to perform the contract (compare Summers versus The Commonwealth <case>; [(1918) CLR 144).] Nor is this a circumstance as in D.T.R. Nominees Proprietary
Limited (supra) after the passage of time when the proceedings commenced, neither party regarded the contract as being still on foot or intended that the contract be further performed. Here the very proceedings brought by the daughter in her cross-claim, as well as her earlier lodgement of a caveat against the Brooklet property, amounts to the strongest of assertions that she wishes to treat the contract as still on foot, so far as the 1993 Deed is concerned. That she now contends as her preferred alternative that the 1993
Deed was mutually abrogated and terminated, along with the 1980 Deed to which
I have earlier referred, does not alter these expressions of intention to treat the 1993 Deed as on foot. Indeed the Defendant would wish to maintain the 1993 Deed if the 1980 Deed was not mutually abrogated and terminated, as I have earlier concluded.
Accordingly,
I conclude that whilst the 1993 Deed is not mutually abrogated or abandoned, this is a circumstance in which the principle in
Muschinski v Dodds (supra) does apply. That is to say, the substratum of a joint relationship or endeavour has been removed without attributable blame, so far as their joint living arrangements were concerned. In those circumstances, an Equity Court must not permit either party to assert or retain the benefit of money or property to the extent that it would be unconscionable for that party so to do. In my judgment, it would be unconscionable for the monies paid by the Plaintiff, amounting to $16,372.17, not to be reimbursed or indemnified to the Plaintiff, quite independently of whether such a remedy would lie in damages under the 1993 Deed. I deal below with whether the Defendant is entitled to enforce clause 2 of the 1993 Deed having regard to my answers to the earlier questions.
 
Question 6
In the event that the 1993 Deed is not set aside or declared void or otherwise terminated or abrogated, is the Defendant entitled to enforce clause 2 of the Deed by requiring the Brooklet property to be left to her, or is the
Defendant otherwise entitled to receive damages? If so, does the Plaintiff hold the Brooklet property, or the proceeds of sale thereof, or any substitute property, by way of constructive trust and subject to an equitable charge in favour of the Defendant? In particular, was any such obligation on the
Plaintiff's part under clause 2 of the 1993 Deed, subject to a condition subsequent that the Defendant fulfil her obligations under clause 1 of the Deed? If so, did any failure on the Defendant's part amount to non fulfilment of that condition, having regard to whether or not the Plaintiff breached any implied term requiring the Plaintiff for her part to co-operate in the carrying out of obligations under clause 1?
I have earlier concluded that neither the 1980 Deed nor the 1993 Deed has been mutually abrogated or abandoned by the parties. I have also concluded that the circumstances are such that the substratum of the joint relationship or endeavour between the parties has been removed and thus that the principles of unconscionability should apply. This is subject however to these principles being consistent with the proper contractual entitlement of either party.
Clearly the entitlement of the Plaintiff to the sum of $16,372.17 is consistent with the proper contractual entitlement of the Plaintiff This is because I have earlier concluded that the Plaintiff is entitled to rescind the Deed, though she elects not to make claim for such damages as she has suffered, by reason of the Defendant's breach of clause 1 of that Deed.
I leave to question 7 whether the Plaintiff, in all the circumstances, is entitled to any damages for breach by the Defendant of clause 4 of the 1993
Deed, if indeed that has been breached.
I have earlier concluded that the Plaintiff is entitled to terminate the Deed. In those circumstances, the Defendant would not be entitled to enforce clause 2 of the 1993 Deed, even making all other assumptions necessary for the Defendant to succeed.
One reaches the same conclusion if the position be that clause 2 of the Deed is subject to a condition subsequent or is otherwise contingent upon substantial performance by the Defendant of its obligations under clause 1 of the 1993 Deed. In terms, clause 2 is not expressed to be conditional upon substantial performance of clause 1 by the daughter. Rather clause 1 is in terms a self-contained arrangement whereby, for the mutual consideration of mother permitting daughter to reside at the property, daughter agrees to reside at the property and to fully maintain the property from income from the property and to pay all running expenses.
Clause 2 does not refer to any consideration. It simply amounts to an agreement on the mother's part to leave the Brooklet property in her will to her daughter. There is no reference in clause 2 to this being done in consideration of performance by the daughter of her obligations under the 1993
Deed. Were one simply viewing matters in terms of whether there were a breach of the daughter's obligations under any other provisions of the Deed and in particular clause 1, it would appear appropriate and consonant with the parties' intentions as expressed in the deed for the obligation in clause 2 to depend on whether a breach has occurred of an essential term of the 1993 Deed giving rise a right to termination. Only in that event, would the mother cease to be so obliged. I have already concluded that such a breach has occurred and obligation under clause 2 ceases.
There is, however, a further basis upon which clause 2 may cease to bind the mother. On the earlier quoted principle of unconscionability as expressed in Muschinski versus Dodds, it would be unconscionable for the mother to be obliged to provide, in her will, in the manner contemplated by clause 2 of the 1993
Deed, where it is clear that the substratum of their joint endeavour has been removed, albeit without attributable blame. Again, such an outcome conforms to the contractual position that I have earlier described.
Accordingly, I answer this question by concluding that the Plaintiff does not hold the Brooklet property, or the proceeds of sale thereof, or any substitute property, by way of constructive trust or subject to an equitable charge in favour of the Defendant.
 
Question 7
Depending on the answers to the earlier questions, has the Defendant breached clause 4 of the 1993 Deed and is the Plaintiff entitled to damages for breach by the Defendant of clause 4 of the 1993 Deed?
I will assume that any damages are capable of quantification.
Interestingly enough, there would be no damage, given the mothers present financial position, were she to elect not to have ordinary residential provision but instead go into a retirement home. However she has not, so far as the evidence before me is concerned, made any such election.
This question is not without some difficulty. I have reached the conclusion both that the Defendant has not, at this time, breached clause 4 of the 1993 Deed, there being as yet no completed sale of the Bondi property, but more importantly, the daughter is not bound any longer to make alternative residential provision for the mother in terms of clause 4, including contribution to any shortfall in the mother's funds, however unlikely, should the mother wish to go into a retirement home.
A basis for this conclusion, consistent with the contractual position of the 1993 Deed. would be that the daughter's obligations in clause 4 are to be treated as premised on mother and daughter not having abandoned their joint residential arrangements prior to sale of Bondi.
It might be said that such an implied term faces the difficulty that it is insufficiently certain as to what precisely the term would have been.
Clearly, clause 4 of the 1993 Deed did not contemplate that the parties should perpetually be living together.
Indeed it is premised on the possibility that one reason for their ceasing to live together may trigger clause 4, namely the mother wishing to go into a retirement home, or indeed return to Bondi. In
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd versus State Rail Authority of New South
Wales <case>; [(1982) CLR 337] the High Court refused to imply a term into a construction contract because it was impossible to say, with any degree of certainty, what the term would have been.
Here, however, there is, in my judgment, a term of sufficient certainty, reasonable and equitable, necessary to give business efficacy to the contract, and relatively obvious; compare BP Refinery (Western Port) Pty Ltd versus Shire of
Hastings <case>; [(1977) 16 ALR 363] at 376. That is, one would read after the words "Second Property" where first appearing the implied words "save in circumstances where mother and daughter had earlier agreed to live separately".
I also consider that the principle of unconscionability, as applicable to circumstances where the substratum of a joint relationship or endeavour is removed without attributable blame, produces the same result. That is to say, just as it would be unconscionable for the daughter not to restore the monies which the mother has contributed for the benefit of the daughter totalling $16,372.17 (had the mother not declined to press that claim) so too it would be unconscionable for the daughter to have to make alternative residential provision for the Mother when the mother was no longer willing to live with the daughter, not because the mother wished to go into a retirement home, but because their relationship had irretrievably broken down, thus removing the substratum of a joint relationship without attributable blame. Such a result would conform with the 1993 Deed as a contract between the parties, though such a result would not flow unaided from the contract itself without an implied term. There is an analogy here between the co-existence of contractual and fiduciary relationships and the necessary accommodation that the latter must make to the former. This analogy applies in circumstances where the contract itself is not set aside as unconscionable.
Thus in Hospital Products
Limited versus United States Surgical Corporation and Others <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 41] at Mason J says: "That contractual and fiduciary relationships may co-exist between the same parties has never been doubted.
Indeed the existence of a basic contractual relationship has in many situations provided a foundation for the erection of a fiduciary relationship. In these situations it is the contractual foundation which is all important because it is the contract that regulates the basic rights and liabilities of the parties.
The fiduciary relationship, if it is to exist at all, must accommodate itself to the terms of the contract so that it is consistent with, and conforms to, them. The fiduciary relationship cannot be superimposed on the contract in such a way as to alter the operation which the contract was intended to have according to its true construction."
If the above passage be understood as permitting equity to avoid an unconscionable result where the method for doing so is consistent with and conforms to the contract, then it can be said that, in the present circumstances, such an outcome would do so also.
Accordingly, I answer this question by concluding that the Plaintiff is not entitled to damages for breach by the Defendant of clause 4 of the 1993
Deed. I do so, either on the basis of an implied term in clause 4 of the kind earlier described, or on the basis of the principles of unconscionability, at least to the extent that they produce a result consistent with, and conforming to the contract constituted by the 1993 Deed.
 
ORDERS
I direct the parties to submit orders conforming to this judgment within fourteen days. 
As to costs, prima facie, costs should follow the event and thus be awarded to the Plaintiff. 
However, I will permit the parties to address me on costs if this is desired.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/8.html  
