

Neil Gregory Drabsch and Others versus Switzerland General Insurance Company
Ltd No. 3008/93 Appeal - Practice and Procedure - Trade Practices [1996] NSWSC (5 August 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
SANTOW J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 26-28 June, 23-24 October and 27-30 November #DATE 28:2:1996 #ADD 5:8:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs     J J Steele QC with C E Moore 
Solicitors for the Plaintiffs
Brock Partners 
Counsel for the Defendants     C G Gee QC with J E Marshall 
Solicitors for the Defendants   Minter
Ellison
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
ESSENTIAL ISSUES
The appeal and orders sought in the Notice of Appeal
SANTOW J This is an appeal by the Plaintiff Neil Drabsch ("Mr Drabs  ch") from the following parts of a decision of Master Macready delivered on 3 March :
 that the Defence to Further Amended Cross-Claim filed by the
Plaintiff/Cross-Defendant on 22 April 1994 be removed from the
Court's file. that leave be declined to the Plaintiff to file a Defence including a claim for relief under [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth), and that the Plaintiff should pay the Defendant's costs in respect of the further hearing of the Notice of Motion on March 1995 and on 3 March 1995.
By "Defendant" I refer in this judgment to the First Defendant primarily, but also where the context admits to the four Defendants collectively.
The grounds for such appeal are set out in the Plaintiff/Cross-Defendant's
Notice of Appeal of 29 March 1995. However, not all the matters the subject of those grounds were reached in argument. It was agreed that I would deal with those grounds only so far as involved in answering a series of questions for determination, reflecting the issues argued before me. These were to be agreed between the Plaintiff and Defendant or, failing agreement, to be the subject of separate submissions of each side's version of the questions for determination. Because the latter occurred, I have, under Legal
Questions, set down what I consider the appropriate formulation of these questions.
The Plaintiff sought the following orders in that Notice of Appeal: 
That leave be granted to the Plaintiff nunc pro tunc to file the Defence to Further Amended First
Cross-Claim filed with the Court on 22 April 1994. 
In the alternative, that the time be extended for the filing of the
Defence to Further Amended First Cross-Claim to 22 April 1994. 
In the further alternative to orders 1 and 2, that the Plaintiff be granted leave to file "the Proposed Defence to the Second Further Amended
First Cross-Claim" containing a claim for relief under [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade
Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth). 
The First Defendant, Switzerland General Insurance Company Limited ("SGI") pay the Plaintiff's costs in respect of 1 and 3 March 1995 and of this
Appeal. 
That each party bear his or its own costs in respect of the appearances on 24 March 1995.
 
Summation of Background to Appeal
The essential background to this appeal can be summarised thus. Following the dismissal on July 1991 by SGI of Mr Drabsch, its Managing Director, who was employed under a written contract of employment dated 1 January , Mr
Drabsch commenced proceedings against SGI. These proceedings were for damages against SGI for wrongful dismissal and were brought by Statement of Claim filed 11 December 1991.
The Defendant filed an Amended Defence and Amended Cross-Claim on 15
March to which a Defence to the Amended Cross-Claim was filed on 25 June 1993.
But, relevantly for present purposes, a consent direction was made on 17
December 1993 that SGI serve a further Amended Defence and Cross-Claim by 7
January 1994. That Amended Defence and Cross-Claim was duly served by that date, with filing following thereafter.
In the circumstances which I later elaborate, the Plaintiff did not lodge his Defence to the Further Amended Cross-Claim until 22 April 1994. This was after the date (faxed by consent direction on 3 February 1994) which the
Plaintiff was given leave for such lodgment, namely after 18 February 1994. It was that Defence to the Further Amended Cross-Claim which, for the first time, included what are compendiously referred to as the "Trade
Practices
Allegations". I shall describe those in more detail under "Elaboration Of
Factual Background".
During that time, there was a disputed request for particulars, first made by the Plaintiff on 1 February 1994 (that is prior to 18 February 1994).
Such particulars were subsequently ordered by the Registrar on 19 March 1994.
However as at 22 April 1994, SGI had either filed a motion for review of the
Registrar's order in relation to particulars doing so on 28 March 1994 having earlier on 25 March 1994 been granted a stay to lodge such particulars pending that appeal. Earlier still, on 19 March 1994 the Plaintiff had sought an order from the Registrar seeking leave to file the Defence to Cross-Claim only after such particulars were provided but this was not dealt with by the Registrar then or again when the matter came back before him on 23 March 1994. The
Plaintiff contends that his failure to press for that dispensing order from the Registrar was inadvertent. I accept that contention.
Apart from the Plaintiff's attempted explanation for his delayed filing of the Defence, based on the absence of the requested particulars, a further explanation is given.
That relates to the fact that discovery by the Defendant was not completed until March 1994 with the consequence that the Plaintiff did not complete his inspection until 6 April 1994. The Plaintiff contends that whilst the documents so inspected did not result in any alteration to the
Trade Practices allegations, until the inspection was complete he could not know that would be so.
 .
The essential issue between the parties concerns whether, applying the appropriate principles for appeals of this sort and taking into account the foregoing matters to the extent I may properly do so, Master Macready's judgment of 3 March 1995 should be set aside.
This is insofar as Master
Macready ordered the removal of that Defence to the Further Amended
Cross-Claim from the Court's file and declined leave to the Plaintiff to file such Defence to Further Amended Cross-Claim with a claim for relief under [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth). The resolution to that question requires that I first determine whether the Master erred in law in relation to the grounds he relied upon and then how any consequential discretion may properly be exercised by this Court if there be such error.
Master
Macready on 3 March 1995 concluded that the Plaintiffs Defence to
Further Amended Cross-Claim with such Trade Practices Allegations should not be allowed to remain on the file and he declined consent to its filing, on three grounds: 
That the Plaintiff/Cross-Defendant could not plead [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade
Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) by way of defence, 
There was no allegation of loss suffered by the Plaintiff such as to found relief under [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth), and 
Expiry of the applicable limitation period prevented the amendments being made which were now sought. This was on the basis that the pleading of April 1994 (being the Defence to the Defendant's Amended Cross-Claim) had to be filed within three years of the date of the Plaintiff's dismissal, namely by 15 July 1994 and as such pleading had not been filed with the leave of the Court by then, it was therefore out of time.
The Plaintiff takes issue with each of these grounds for the Master's decision. The Plaintiff also takes issue with his further findings that the prejudice to the Defendant was sufficient to disallow the amendment to his
Defence and in holding that there was no explanation for the delay in filing the documents of 22 April 1994.
The Plaintiff contends that the explanation for the delay lay in the assumption made by the Plaintiff that until the particulars required of the Defendant had been provided and discovery completed, there was no requirement to file the Amended Defence to Cross-Claim though fear of the possible application of one arguably applicable possible limitation period finally led to it being filed on 22
April 1994. Such an assumption, though I accept it was operative at the time, is now conceded by the Plaintiff to have been mistaken in that it failed to recognise the need for dispensation, never obtained, from the earlier consent direction of 3
February 1994.
Hence the present application for leave, nunc pro tunc, to file the Defence.
Thus in the event that I were to determine that the Master was in error in any of the foregoing respects, including in exercising his discretion in the manner he did, the further questions which arise are whether any such discretion can and should be exercised afresh by this Court on appeal and, if so, how should that discretion be exercised in the circumstances of the case and in the events which have happened. An ancillary issue is whether certain additional evidentiary material, adduced before the Court on a hearing of the appeal, can be relied upon by the Plaintiff and, if so, does such material in any way alter the correctness of any of the conclusions reached by the Master.
In this context it is relevant that the Plaintiff seeks not only that the filing of the 22 April 1994 document be regularised. The Plaintiff also seeks that these proceedings be further listed to hear the Defendant's motion filed May 1995 together with the Plaintiff's application, made orally, for leave to amend the 22 April 1994 document in accordance with the proposed document set out at tab 4 of the Plaintiffs submissions folder. The Defendant's Motion of 26 May 1995 is a motion that certain paragraphs of the Defence to the
Second Further
Amended First Cross-Claim filed on 28 March 1995 be struck out.
It also seeks that the Plaintiff pay SGI's costs of and incidental to the motion on an indemnity basis. I should note, for completeness, that the proposed document set out at tab 4 of the Plaintiff's submissions folder is, in a number of respects, different both from the document of 22 April 1994 and the further version of that documents filed on 28 March 1995 being the "Defence to Second Further Amended Cross-Claim" appearing in Agreed Bundle ("AB") 18.
 
The Defendant's Concession
It is important that I should note the concession (transcript 54) by the
Defendant, but limited to this application. It is to the effect that "SGI do not submit on this application that the Trade Practices Allegations were invented, nor would it submit that there is no material available as a basis to support the substance of the allegations and will not say there is no conceivable substance to the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) allegations and is prepared to assume for the purposes of this application there is a prima facie argument to support the allegations".
This eventually led to the Plaintiff not seeking to rely before me on the material annexed to paragraph 16 of Mr Veitch's affidavit of 31 October 1994 (transcript 58). It is common ground that this material was objected to before the Master, though in dispute as to whether it was disallowed by the Master, or simply not pressed by the Plaintiff after objection. This concession thus avoided my having to determine: 
Whether to admit this material before me, and 
Whether on 1 November 1994, when the affidavit other than paragraph 16 was read before the Master, paragraph 16 with its annexures was, after objection by the Defendant, disallowed or not pressed.
 
Admission of additional material
Finally, I should note that, in an ex tempore judgment given during the hearing on 27 June 1995, I formally gave leave to the Plaintiff to admit certain additional evidentiary material not before the
Master. That material is paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the affidavit of Mr Veitch of 26 May 1995, as solicitor for the Plaintiff, seeking to explain the late filing of the
Plaintiff's defence to the then Further Amended First Cross Claim. I quote the relevant paragraphs below, as they are said to be of importance to the case for the Plaintiff in seeking a review of the Master's decision: "2.
I refer to the reasons for judgment given by Master Macready in these proceedings on 3 March 1995 at page 7.5. I say that between 18 February 1994 and 22 April 1994, I verily believed that the question of Drabsch's filing of a defence to the then
Further Amended First Cross Claim had been deferred pending the determination of the position regarding the particulars which the cross claimant ("SGF) had been ordered to provide (such order then having been stayed pending review by the Master).
The Defence to Further Amended First Cross Claim was filed on 22 April 1994 for abundant caution as regards the possible application of limitation periods, notwithstanding my then understanding concerning the necessity to file such a document as deposed to in paragraph 2 above.
SGI filed a List of Documents herein on or about 5 October
I commenced the inspection of those documents on or about 12 October 1993 and that inspection took approximately month to complete.
It was in the course of that inspection that I saw, for the first time, documents which Drabsch will allege support the allegations which were first introduced into his pleadings by the 22 April 1994 document. Document numbers referrable to SGIs discovery were included in that pleading.
I deal later with a correction made by Mr Veitch to the above quoted paragraph 4 where he makes clear the inspection process was not wholly completed in the month but extended to a third list of documents on 6 April .
 
ELABORATION OF FACTUAL BACKGROUND
In setting out the relevant background and events, I use the following abbreviations: 
AB = Agreed Bundle reference to tabs, 
SB = Submissions Bundle of Plaintiff.
The events which follow and the background to them can be taken to be generally agreed or not seriously in dispute, save where specific comment is made. It incorporates the additional evidence which I have earlier quoted.
Thus the Plaintiffs chronology is largely agreed, but where it is not, I have made specific reference and findings.
 
The Employment of Mr Drabsch, the Contract of Employment and the Termination
On 1 July 1988
Mr Drabsch took on a position as Consultant to SGI. One year later Mr Drabsch took up full time employment with SGI.
While on 6 July 1989 a letter contained part of the terms of Mr Drabsch's employment was written (AB 17, para 2) a formal written contract of employment was not entered into until 1 January 1990 (AB 17, para 2, SB 4). The contract of employment relevantly provides in clause 3 (a) "3 TERMINATION 
This agreement may be terminated by:
The company (SGI) giving the employee (Drabsch) twelve months' written notice of its intention to terminate this agreement provided always that the company may terminate this agreement forthwith by summary notice in writing to the employee if the employee: ...
is guilty of grave, willful or dishonest conduct or neglect in the performance of the services"
On 22 February 1991 Dr Dill based in Zurich with the parent company and a senior director of SGI wrote to Mr Drabsch confirming that effective 1 July Mr Drabsch would become
Chief Executive Officer of SGI, in Australia;
DX14.
On 26 April 1991 there was a written variation to the Drabsch Employment
Contract (SB 4). SGI contends that at any relevant time period for allegations under [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) runs from this date. (If the Master's decision stands, nothing turns on whether that was the relevant date for the three years' limitation to run, or the later dates noted below, namely 1 July 1991 or 15 July 1991.)
As agreed on 22 February 1991, Mr
Drabsch was to take up his position on July 1991 as Chief Executive Officer of SGI in the Asia-Pacific Region and did so.
 .
On 15 July 1991 Mr Drabsch was summarily dismissed by SGI.
 
The Proceedings, Pleadings and Correspondence leading up to the Document of 22
April 1994
On 11 December 1991 Mr Drabsch commenced these proceedings by filing a
Statement of Claim.
On 15 March SGI filed an Amended Defence and Amended Cross-Claim. On June 1993 a Defence to Amended Cross-Claim was filed on behalf of
Mr
Drabsch (AB 1).
 
Inspection
Starting on 1 November 1993 the solicitor for the Plaintiff, Mr Veitch, and the Plaintiff spent considerable time inspecting documents. Although the
Plaintiff <case> refers to that inspection of SGI's documents being completed at some stage during November 1993 and that "the documents relied upon to support the Trade Practices Allegations were documents which had been photocopied and supplied to Mr Veitch during the course of the inspection process in 1993", the Plaintiff adds a significant qualification. As PX15, being correspondence between the solicitors for the Plaintiff and Defendant bears out, as well as the transcript /3 (cross-examination of Mr Veitch on June 1995), there was still a further third tranche of documents to be made available for inspection to the Plaintiff. This was the subject of the above correspondence but only in February and March 1994 and thus was not made available before then. It was not in fact reviewed by the Plaintiff until 6
April 1994. This led to Mr Veitch correcting paragraph 4 of his affidavit of October 1994 accordingly, to make clear that the inspection process was not completed by mid November but only by 6 April 1994. This time lag is fairly explicable by delayed production of that third tranche of documents.
 .
The Plaintiff contends, and I accept that contention, that until the inspection was completed, the Plaintiff could not know whether or not any of that correspondence would have a bearing on the potential Trade Practices
Allegations. I should add, that the foregoing evidence referred to in transcript 68/3, was by way of correction to earlier evidence, made with leave.
On 29 November 1993 there was a part-heard motion by the Plaintiff to set aside certain subpoenas issued by SGI. The balance of the motion was to be heard before the Registrar on 3 February 1994; transcript 70.
On 14 December 1993, Brock Partners for Mr Drabsch wrote to
Minter
Ellison for SGI and that letter contains the following paragraph: "We request that you amend your pleadings and/or particulars so as to provide appropriate details of the work that Drabsch allegedly did in breach of his contract of employment. If we do not receive an assurance of your willingness to do so prior to December 16, 1993 we proposed to move the Court for appropriate directions on 17 December 1993. We look forward to your early reply." DX12
On 16 December 1993, Brock Partners wrote to Minter Ellison enclosing a suggested timetable for directions to be made on 17 December 1993. The suggested timetable includes a proposed order (not previously suggested) as follows: "The First Defendant/Cross Claimant (SGI) serve a Further
Amended
Defence and Cross-Claim by 7 January 1994." DX12
On 17 December 1993 a form of directions, made by consent, contained as paragraph the order suggested by Brock Partners in the above letter of 16
December 1993; see AB 2.
The date by which service of a
Further Amended Defence and Further
Amended First Cross-Claim was to be effected by SGI, pursuant to the orders of December 1993, was 7 January 1994. It was in fact served on 7 January 1994 but only filed on 11 January 1994. This was the pleading to which the
Plaintiffs response is the document of 22 April 1994 presently under contention. It contains a Cross-Claim making various claims as to conduct by the Plaintiff. It claims, inter alia, that various payments to or at the behest of the Plaintiff were unauthorised under the Plaintiff's contract of employment, and gave rise to claims, inter alia, for damages for breach of contract and in negligence, and entitling restitution for money paid under mistake of fact. It also contains claims for breach of the Plaintiffs fiduciary duty and, in consequence, an account of benefits to the Plaintiff so resulting. The Defendant claims that these breaches amounted to a repudiation of the employment contract and both entitled SGI to terminate the Plaintiff's contract of employment summarily and also entitled SGI to damages.
The Defendant contends that this order of 17 December 1993 was strictly complied with. Mr Veitch gave evidence (transcript 71) which confirms this where he agrees that there was a letter of 7 January 1994 serving the document although it had not at that stage been filed and further that the document, once filed on 11 January 1994, apart from the affidavit verifying, was identical to the document served on 7 January 1994. The Plaintiff contends that the fact that the document was subsequently filed and again served does not in any way detract from the Defendant's strict compliance with the form of the order; I accept this contention.
On 1 February 1994, Brock Partners by letter, requested on behalf of the
Plaintiff, particulars of the Further
Amended Defence and Further Amended
First Cross-Claim of January 1994. Though the request was prepared that day it was not served until a fax was sent on 3 February 1994; see Veitch transcript .
On 3 February 1994 several matters occurred of relevance.
First it was the date that the dispute in relation to subpoenas was to be completed before the Registrar (transcript 70).
Second, the reason the part-heard hearing in relation to the subpoena dispute did not proceed was because consent directions were made on 3 February adjourning that dispute to 10 March 1994 (see Veitch transcript 70).
 
The Consent Directions of 3 February 
Third, consent directions were made as set out at SB tab C. The consent directions contained an order: "Plaintiff to file Defence to Amended Cross-Claim by 18 February ."
It is common ground that, as SGI points out, that it was not an Amended
Defence to the Cross-Claim, but rather a Defence to the Amended Cross-Claim that was to be so filed.
Fourth, the consent directions stood over the subpoena dispute to 10
March 1994.
On 3 February 1994 the consent directions followed discussion between the parties' legal representatives. The substance of these discussions are the subject of the following evidence: letter dated 25 February 1994, DX3, which referred to the consent directions and stated: "We note that the purpose of these amendments are in respect of certain admissions to be made by your client in the cross-claim. " 
The above letter was written by the Defendant and it can be taken that the reference to "in the cross-claim" means "in relation to the cross-claim". 
The 1 March 1994 letter, DX6, which states: "We remind you that in return for our client's agreement not to deal with the subpoena issue on the last occasion (referring to .2.94) you agreed to provide your client's Amended Defence (to the cross-claim) by 18 February. You have failed to do this. In addition, we remind you that our Counsel was advised by your
Counsel that the Amended Defence contained certain admissions which, according to your Counsel, would obviate the need for the subpoenas. This has not occurred, even though almost two further weeks have elapsed since the date YOU agreed the document would be provided" 
The above letter was written also on behalf of the Defendant. 
The letter of 4 March 1994 (DX4) states on behalf of the Defendant: "Once again we request that your client file and serve any
Amended Defence to our client's Further
Amended Cross-Claim (for the purpose of making the admissions indicated by Counsel) as a matter of utmost urgency." (The urgency was the approaching date of 10 March 1994 to hear the balance of the subpoena dispute.)
Mr Steele QC on behalf of the Plaintiff said at transcript 28, line 27: "Our position is that something may have been, and probably was said, about looking at the question of making some admissions." 
However, it can be taken that there was no undertaking to make admissions and that it is accepted that no admissions were made in the document filed.
The Plaintiff's solicitor accepts that neither SGI nor its lawyers had any notice of the Trade Practices Allegations ultimately made in the 22 April document at any stage prior to receipt of the document on that date; transcript 80. It therefore follows that it could not have been in the contemplation of
SGI at the time of the consent directions of 3 February 1994 that allegations such as the Trade Practices Allegations would be made.
Further, there is no evidence to suggest that these allegations were contemplated by the Plaintiff at that earlier stage.

The above was submitted by the Defendant as providing the context of the consent order being made.
 February 1994 was the due date for the Defence to the Amended
Cross-Claim to be filed in accordance with the consent directions of 3
February 1994. No document was filed by that date.
Then followed the correspondence earlier referred to under 3 February , namely the letters of 25 February 1994, 1 March 1994, and 4 March 1994.
On 4 March 1994 Mr Drabsch filed a Notice of Motion which by paragraph sought the following order: "The Plaintiff be given leave to file a Defence to the Further
Amended Cross-Claim within twenty-one days of receipt of the said particulars (being particulars of item H referred to in paragraph 4). ... " .
SGI says that at this stage it was apparent that the Plaintiff did not propose to comply with the 3 February 1994 consent direction in relation to the filing of a Defence to the Cross-Claim. This was taken up in the letter of March 1994 referred to below.
 .
On 8 March 1994, Minter Ellison wrote to Brock Partners regarding the
Motion filed on 4 March 1994. Relevantly, the letter states: "In relation to paragraph 5 of the Motion (filed 4 March 1994) your client has already consented to a direction that it file a Defence to the Further Amended Cross-Claim by 18 February ... It seems to us that your client is not entitled to any further time to plead to these matters and that he is in deliberate default of a consent order."
On 10 March 1994 there was a hearing before Registrar Berecry. Several matters were dealt with. 
In accordance with paragraph 1 of the Notice of Motion of 4 March 1994 of the Plaintiff, the further hearing of the earlier motion in relation to subpoenas was stood over. 
The Plaintiff successfully obtained an order that SGI provide particulars. 
The Plaintiff through Mr Veitch sought the order claimed in paragraph of the Plaintiff's Notice of Motion, extending the time for filing the
Plaintiffs Defence to the
Amended Cross-Claim until after receipt of particulars. Putting the matter in its proper prospective, I am satisfied that what occurred was that this specific question was simply not dealt with by the
Registrar rather than the Registrar specifically declining so to extend the time; see transcript at tab H to item 1 of SB and transcript 75.
SGI contends that at this stage it was clear the
Plaintiff did not wish to and had not taken up the opportunity to file the Defence pursuant to the consent direction of 3 February
The Plaintiff's position is that it considered that it was entitled to defer filing that Defence to the Amended
Cross-Claim pending receipt of the particulars previously ordered from the
Defendant and in the context of the delayed discovery. However, as against this, the Plaintiff was implicitly acknowledging the need for doing so, when he sought an order extending the time in which to file such Defence. When the
Registrar did not deal with that matter on the two occasions below, it seems thereafter to have been simply overlooked rather than followed up.
On 11 March 1994, Registrar Berecry stood over the balance of the
Drabsch' Motion of 4 March 1994 to 23 March 1994.
On 22 March 1994 there was a further hearing before Registrar Berecry.
The Plaintiff again did not obtain order 5 of its Notice of Motion of 4 March though to this the Plaintiff makes the same comment as is made concerns the earlier attempt of 10 March 1994. That is to say, the matter was not dealt with at all by the Registrar; see copy of Transcript at tab 1 to item 1 of SB.
On 25 March 1994 Registrar Berecry made orders that any Notices of Motion for review of his orders be filed by 29 March 1994. He further ordered that the order relating to particulars be stayed pending further order. It is not disputed that the Plaintiff's solicitor, Mr Veitch, was aware of this; transcript 69.
On 28 March 1994 SGI filed a Motion for review of the Registrar's order in relation to the provision of particulars; AB 6.
On 29 March 1994 Mr Drabsch filed a Motion to review the Registrar's order in relation to the subpoena matter and raising other matters; AB 7.
 
The Document of 22 April 1994 and its Filing
On 22 April 1994 (a Friday) the Plaintiff lodged with the Registry a document entitled "Defence to Further Amended
First Cross-Claim". This is the document which first raises the Trade Practices Allegations and is the subject of the present appeal.
Those Allegations are later elaborated when I deal with
Question 2(3)(a)(i) and (ii), below.
It is accepted by the Plaintiff that SGI and its lawyers had no notice of these Trade Practices Allegations until receipt of the letter, DX7, serving the document.
The Defendant asserts, from DX9, being a letter enclosing by way of service the Defence to Further Amended First Cross- Claim from
Brock
Partners bearing date 22 April 1994, that the document was not served on the front desk of Minter Ellison for the Defendant until 3.55 pm on the Friday before Anzac Day, that is to say on 22 April 1994. I note from DX10 that there is in fact a signature with that time marked on the sheet with it.
The Defendant asserts that it appears from Exhibit DX10 that the documents did not come to anyone's attention until Tuesday 26 April 1994, being the day after the Anzac Day public holiday on Monday 25 April 1994.
Again, reliance is placed this time on a handwritten notation "rec'd 26.4.94" with the initial "G" which I infer was that of Miss
Golack of Minter Ellison, the Defendant's solicitor.
While no additional evidence was called in relation to that matter, and while I do not in fact think that anything particularly turns on whether Miss
Golack only became aware of the document on Tuesday April 1994, nonetheless
I accept on the balance of probabilities that the foregoing time sequences are correct. However, I also accept that the document of 22 April 1994 was served that day; that is to say before expiry of the earliest possible limitation period.
 
The three year time limitation
In relation to the filing of the 22 April 1994 document, Mr Veitch gave evidence (transcript /3) to the effect that he first realised during April that a relevant time requirement might expire on 26 April 1994. Thus the prompt to serve the document was the impending expiry of what he believed was a relevant time limitation requirement. This requirement was based on the possibility that, as the Drabsch employment agreement was the subject of a written variation on 26 April 1991, then although employment did not commence till 1 July 1991, nonetheless the three year time period for the Trade
Practices Allegations might have expired earlier on 26 April 1994. It is apparent that the Plaintiff took this position out of caution. The Plaintiff preferred the view that the three years did not expire until the third anniversary of either employment commencing or more likely, employment terminating by dismissal; that is, in the latter case, not until 15 July 1994, and in the former, not until 1 July 1994.
The
Plaintiff does not contend that in the events that happened the document as filed was dependent upon any answers to particulars, in the sense that the particulars, when furnished in fact proved necessary to plead the
Trade Practices Allegations. But none of this is a concession that it was or could have been appreciated by the Plaintiff before the responses to those particulars had been obtained, that at least the balance of the Plaintiff's
Defence would not be affected thereby or might not need to be further amended to take account of those particulars when received. In fact the Plaintiff contends that it was only when the particulars were obtained that it became apparent that the Plaintiff's Defence was not affected thereby. The same should apply to the material from inspection, the last of such was not in fact made available till February and March 1994 and not reviewed till 6 April 1994 by the Plaintiff.
An examination of the 22 April 1994 document discloses that: 
It pleads to certain consequential amendments in the Cross-Claim (for example paragraphs 2 and 5). 
It raises some no longer relevant matters for the first time (for example paragraph 6(d)).

It withdraws admissions previously made by paragraphs 7, 19, 20 and 
The document makes no admissions not previously made (conceded by the
Plaintiff). 
The document raises for the first time, in paragraphs 33 and following what have been called the Trade Practices Allegations. 
The issue in relation to adequacy of particulars concerning item H of the Cross-Claim, was the subject of paragraph 23 of the Defence to
Cross-Claim. The paragraph was unchanged from the earlier Defence to
Cross-Claim and the Defendant contends that it is therefore abundantly clear that the document of 22 April 1994 was not dependent in any way on particulars being provided. Reference is made to the concession to that effect said to have been made by Mr Veitch (transcript 74(3)).
 .
To this the Plaintiff responds that the concession made by Mr Veitch was that the particulars of the existing pleading were not required to formulate the Trade Practices Allegations. He does not concede that the particulars requested were not necessary properly to plead to the balance of the
Cross-Claim. In the absence of any evidence to the contrary, I accept that contention.
The
Defendant contends that in relation to Mr Veitch's understanding at the time of filing of that document, the following are relevant matters: 
He was aware of the position adopted by Minter Ellison in its letters of February, 1 March and 4 March 1994; transcript 
He knew that he had failed to secure an order extending time for filing of the Defence to the Amended Cross-Claim; transcript 
He knew that the direction that SGI provide certain particulars had been stayed on 25 March 1994; transcript 76/3. 
He assumed that Minter Ellison would not consent to a document containing the Trade Practices Allegations being filed; transcript /3. 
He knew that it would be necessary to obtain an order extending the time to file the document over opposition from Minter
Ellison; transcript 77/3. 
It did occur to him that the Trade Practices Allegations could have been made by way of an amendment to Drabsch' Statement of Claim; transcript 79/3.
Further cross-examination was in fact prevented by a claim of legal professional privilege, transcript 78/3-79/3. 
Finally, the following from transcript 80 line 32 is quoted by the
Defendant: "Q: And when you filed the document or gave the direction for the filing of the document, is it fair to say you could not have been relying upon the consent directions that had been made on February 1994?
A No." 
Subsequent events to filing of Document of 22 April 1994
On 27 April 1994 Brock Partners wrote to Minter Ellison referring to the April 1994 document. The letter encloses a fresh but unsigned and not filed, Defence to Further Amended Cross-Claim and asks: "Kindly advise if you would consent."
Minter Ellison never did advise any consent to the new document, a matter of which Mr Veitch was aware; transcript 81. It is accepted that this meant that SGI did not consent.
On 9 September 1994 Minter Ellison wrote to Brock Partners regarding the April 1994 document, opening as follows: "If this Defence was filed pursuant to orders made on 3/2/94 it is out of time and goes far beyond the consent given by our client to file this Defence for the purpose of making certain admissions which your Counsel contended would narrow the scope of discovery required by our client. No consent has ever been given to allege the matters contained in paragraphs 33-39 of this document nor to the withdrawal of the admission made by paragraph .

The letter concluded: "Accordingly, we request a complete and proper answer to this letter... by 28 September 1994.
Failure to comply with this deadline may result in our client taking steps to have this pleading set aside and/or removed from the Court file without further notice."
There was no reply to this letter.
SGI notes by way of submission the following: "It is apparent that SGI contended the document went well outside the scope of the consent directions and that SGI made this complaint in writing on 9 September 1994. The Plaintiff's
Senior Counsel has repeatedly wrongly submitted that this complaint was never made."
This letter was tendered and became Exhibit A before Master Macready on 1 and 2 November .
I accept SGI's contention that SGI did make the complaint in writing on 9
September 1994.
 
November 1994 Hearing and
Judgment of Master Macready of 3 March 1995
On 1st and 2nd November 1994 there was a hearing before Master Macready; see PX1 and AB 11 and a further hearing on 1 March 1995 (AB 16 and AB tab B).
It appears there were two related matters argued before the
Master on 1
November 1994. The first concerned whether there was adequate discovery by the
Defendant and the second concerned the subject matter of this appeal, namely the Trade Practices Allegations. It was at that hearing that the Plaintiff unsuccessfully sought to have admitted the material annexed to paragraph 16 of
Mr Veitch's affidavit of 31 October 1994 (transcript 33), going to the alleged substance of the Trade Practices Allegations. Objection was, it appears, made by the Defendant on the basis that it was inappropriate to have a trial as to the merits of those allegations in the context of an application to amend.
None of this material is before me, as it was not pressed, following the
Defendant's concession earlier referred to (transcript 54). I should add that such concession was not made before the Master.
The Judgment of 3 March 1995 records that six issues were before him (page 1). Issue three "concerns leave to file an Amended Defence to the First
Cross-Claim...". Although that issue was raised on the first day it was not dealt with until the Judgment of the second day. The Judgment from page 11 onwards makes it clear that SGI relied upon the letter of 9 September 1994 from Minter Ellison to Brock Partners, which was tendered and on the 22 April document was said to have been improperly and inappropriately filed (page , line 3). The Defendant contends that it is clear from pages 12 to 14 that significant argument was addressed to the topic which the Master described as "major problems". The Master noted that the Plaintiff had not sought to amend its Statement of Claim to include the Trade Practices Allegations. I accept both contentions and thus that the matter was argued before the Master in a manner going beyond "barely argued".
Two Judgments were given by Master Macready; AB 16 and
AB tab B. The first was dated 1 March 1995 and was only relevant to the appeal as to costs.
The second Judgment, being that which is the subject of this appeal, was delivered 3 March 1995 (AB tab B).
When Master Macready made his orders on 3 March 1995 they included: "1. That the Defence to Further Amended First Cross-Claim filed by the Defendant on 22 April 1994 be removed from the Court's file.
That leave be refused to Mr Drabsch to file an Amended
Defence seeking relief under the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).
Mr Drabsch was ordered to serve (not file) his proposed
Defence to the Second Further Amended First Cross-Claim by 24
March 1995.
 
Events post judgment of Master Macready of 3 March 1995
On 7 March 1995 SGI filed its Second Further Amended
First Cross-Claim (AB 17), pursuant to the orders made by Master Macready on 1 March 1995.
On 24 March 1995 the proceedings were re-listed before Master Macready at
Mr Drabsch's request, to seek an extension of the third order made on 3 March
The
Master ordered: 
Mr Drabsch to file and serve Defence to Second Further Amended First
Cross-Claim by 28 March 1995. 
Mr
Drabsch to pay SGI's costs on an indemnity basis.
On 28 March 1995, Mr Drabsch filed and served a Defence to Second Further
Amended First Cross-Claim (AB 18).
I should note at this point, that the Defence to Second Further Amended
First Cross-Claim so ordered to be filed by the Master was not the form of defence which the Plaintiff wished to file as naturally it was required, consistent with the Master's earlier orders, to delete the Trade Practices
Allegations. The version of the Defence which reinstates those Trade Practices
Allegations, but which the Plaintiff wishes further to amend, is to be found in SB grey tab 3.
On 29
March 1995, Mr Drabsch filed his Notice of Appeal regarding the orders made by the Master on 3rd and 24 March 1995.
 
LEGAL QUESTIONS
The overall approach in reviewing the Master's determination and findings
I have earlier noted that the questions for determination, limited to the issues so far argued, differ as between Plaintiff and Defendant. Those differences should not be overstated. They have not prevented me from formulating the questions as I think they should be dealt with. The ultimate question to be determined, namely, whether I can and should grant an effective remedial order, needs to be considered in the context of an appeal at an interlocutory stage on a matter of practice and procedure to a Judge of this
Court from a Master pursuant to [Pt 60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p60), r 10 of the Supreme Court Rules. Such an appeal must be determined in conformity with the principles applicable to such appeals;
Do Carmo versus Ford Excavations Pty Ltd [(1981) 1 NSWLR 409.] Thus, if no fresh evidence is called to warrant a departure from the Master's primary finding of fact, those findings are to be followed by the Judge unless inferences as drawn or facts found by the Master are so flawed as to attract review by an appellate court under the principles set out in Warren versus Coombes <case>; [(1979) 142 CLR 531] at 552-3. Those principles require that I must respect any advantage the trial judge had in conducting the trial. But subject to that I must decide the case, the facts as well as law, for myself and am obliged to reach my own conclusion as to inferences to be drawn from the primary facts. I should emphasise that the various complex issues were argued at much greater length before me than before the Master and in light of further evidence admitted.
I deal later with the issue of fresh evidence. To the extent that I may, in the context of an appeal on practice and procedure, admit additional material on the basis that there are special grounds for doing so, I need to consider whether in all circumstances including such fresh evidence, there is warranted any departure from the Master's findings of fact and thus from any conclusions drawn therefrom. In so determining these issues, I need to consider whether any error of law was made by the Master and, if made, whether it was such as to vitiate his conclusions.
In any such review I must give weight to two important admonitions. On the one hand there is the restraint on appellate judges enjoined by Kirby
P (as he then was) in Golosky versus Golosky (NSW Court of Appeal, 5 October 1993, unreported) at 13, approved by the High Court in Singer v Berghouse <case>; [(1994) 181
CLR 201] at 212. "Unless appellate courts show restraint in disturbing the evaluative determinations of primary decision makers they will inevitably invite appeals to a different evaluation which, objectively speaking, may be no better than the first. Second opinions in such cases would be brought at the cost of diminishing the finality of litigation in a troublesome area and, sometimes at least, with a burden of costs upon the estate which should not be encouraged."
On the other hand, in analogous territory of a successful appeal against a trial judge declining to permit late filed affidavits, Priestley JA affirmed in Byron versus Southern Star Group Ltd [(1995) 13 ACLC 301] at 3 10 (followed in
Cohen versus McWilham and Anor (Court of Appeal, 12 December 1995, unreported), that there is: "a very powerful current of authority that a claim should not pass into judgment against a party who wishes to defend it unless there has been a hearing on the merits." 
Cohen versus McWilliam (supra) emphasised that this principle is fundamental in the conduct of trials.
In upholding an appeal against a refusal to permit an amendment to a defence, the Court of Appeal placed primary emphasis on the question whether there was an arguable case to be tried on the merits, since clearly the right to be heard depends on that.
Such a right so grounded may frequently, though not inevitably, have paramount force though other factors must be weighed in exercising the trial judge's discretion. There is nothing in the recent cases obliging a court to give decisive weight to court efficiency.
Cost orders are also available to deal with fault and delay. Priesley JA stated the guiding principle thus: " The cases are illustrations of an idea thousands of years older than Evans versus Bartlam [(1937 AC 473)], and one usually regarded than more basic than the needfor court efficiency, that is, that both sides should be heard before a dispute is decided." per Priestley JA at 8.
This principle therefore must guide appeals concerning the proper exercise of the trial judge's discretion, where its exercise affects that fundamental right. Nonetheless the matter remains one of discretion.
There is an inevitable tension between the policy considerations of court efficiency including fairness to other litigants in crowded lists, and justice in the particular case, taking into account the impact of refusing an amendment, as against the nature of the neglect or other conduct which brought the situation about; per Scheller JA at 13.
The application of this principle to the present circumstances depends upon the questions to which I now turn.
 
Formulating the Legal Questions
I set out below the legal questions as I would formulate them. I start with the ultimate questions to be determined and then the anterior questions upon which they depend. 
Ultimate Questions 1(1) and (2) - Was the Master in error, can and should a remedial order be made in all the circumstances? 
Subject to (2) below, and having regard to the character of the present proceedings as an appeal to a
Judge of the Court from a Master, is there a sufficient basis for this Court to conclude that the Master's decision was in error in ordering that the document of 22 April 1994 was a nullity and should be removed from the file? 
Does the
Court have the power to make, and should it make, an order capable of validating the document of 22 April 1994 in the circumstances of this case and in the events which have happened and in particular having regard to the answers to the questions in 2 below, and the application of any limitation period, taking into account the Court's remedial powers under the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and any applicable Rules? 
The answer to these ultimate questions depends on answers to the following specific prior questions.
However, any affirmative answer in favour of the
Plaintiff may depend on answers to questions raised by further issues still to be raised and argued by the Defendant and possible responses by the Plaintiff such as estoppel and waiver, as briefly foreshadowed.
 
Anterior Questions 2(1) and (2) - additional evidentiary material and explanation for delay. 
Can the additional evidentiary material not before the
Master adduced before the Court on the hearing of this appeal be relied upon by the Plaintiff, and if so, does such material and any other material before this Court warrant a departure from the Master's findings of fact and thus alter the correctness of any of the conclusions reached by the Master? and 
Was the Master correct as a matter of fact in holding that there was no explanation for the delay in filing the document of 22 April 1994? 
The fresh evidence sought to be introduced is identified in answering this question 2. 
Anterior Questions 2(3)(a) - Pleading [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s52.html) as a defence and s87(1A) claim for relief in a defence to cross-claim. 
For the purpose of answering the ultimate questions in 1 above and in determining whether an order should be made reinstating to the Court file the document filed on 22 April or otherwise in order to consider whether the Court has and should exercise any such discretion in the present circumstances afresh on appeal, did the Master err in law in: finding that: the Plaintiff had sought to plead [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) by way of defence; the Trade Practices Allegations, including a claim for relief under [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) could not be pleaded in a defence to a cross-claim 
Anterior Question 2(3)(b) - Amenability of document of 22 April 1994 to remedial order on appeal from the Master having regard, inter alia, to whether a nullity and the application of any limitation period. (i) finding that the document of 22 April 1994 was a nullity based on the various grounds relied on by the Master or argued before me and, in that context, was the document of 22 April 1994 otherwise within the terms of the consent order made on 3 February but for the late filing; (a) taking into account the content and late filing of the document of 22 April 1994, the terms of the consent order of 3
February 1994, and first considering the application of any limitation period and any other relevant circumstances including the answers to the earlier questions, is the Court now permitted by remedial order to extend the time to file and permit the filing of the document of 22 April 1994, pursuant to <case> of the Supreme
Court Act 1979 and Pt 2, r 3 of the Supreme Court Rules (or any other applicable Rules) so as to comply with the consent order of 3 February 1994, or comply nunc pro tunc, and if there be such discretion, can such discretion be so exercised afresh by this Court on appeal from the Master having regard to the earlier answers? 
Anterior Question 2(3)(c) - Comparative
Prejudice holding that the prejudice to the Defendant flowing from the fact that a Mr Webber was no longer employed by the Defendant was sufficient to justify disallowing the amendment to the
Plaintiffs Defence with respect to the Trade
Practices
Allegations, when balanced against any prejudice to the
Plaintiff and, as contended by the Plaintiff, in the absence of any evidence that the matters in which Mr Webber was involved were disputed by the Defendant; 
Anterior Question 2(4) - possible amendment to document of 22 April 1994, if filing regularised. 
In the event that the filing of the 22 April 1994 document can be and is regularised, should the proceedings be further listed to hear the Defendant's Motion filed 26 May together with the Plaintiff's application (made orally) for leave to amend the 22 April 1994 document in accordance with the proposed document set out at tab 4 of the Plaintiffs Submissions folder?
I turn to the specific questions below, dealing with the anterior questions first.
 
Anterior Questions 2(1) and (2) - additional evidentiary material and explanation for delay
Fresh Evidence
On 19 February 1996 a schedule was produced to me which identifies evidence and material which was not before the Master but before me and thus relied upon by one or other party. It does not include paragraph 16 and its annexures to the Veitch affidavit of 31 October 1994. This was having regard to the earlier mentioned concession made by the Defendant (transcript )
which led to its inclusion not being required by the Plaintiff. Importantly it does include Mr Veitch's affidavit of 26 May 1995 (paras 1-4) referred to below.
It can be taken also that any material on the Court file prior to the
Master's judgment of March 1995, was before the Master, unless an affidavit was not read before the Master.
I have earlier noted that Mr Veitch's affidavit of 26 May 1995 (paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4) was the subject of my ex tempore judgment on 27
June 1995 admitting that additional evidence over objection from the
Defendant. That evidence essentially related to the Plaintiff's claimed reasons for late filing of his defence to the Plaintiff's amended cross- claim (essentially because of delayed particulars from the Defendant and delayed inspection), and why it nonetheless was eventually filed on 22 April 1994 notwithstanding those reasons. That evidence was amplified by the Plaintiff and corrected as I have explained in one respect; transcript 68/3. Its relevance relates to the Master at page 7 of his judgment of 3 March 1995 stating that it was "an important consideration on this procedural aspect" (whether leave to file should be given nunc pro tunc or whether the documents should be struck from the file) that "no explanation for the late filing was offered to the Court". (He added as a further consideration that the time for filing was laid down by consent directions). Accepting as I do that evidence, there was at least an explanation available to be given, though it appears, regrettably, that this explanation was never explicitly proffered but left to the Master to infer, as explained below.
I have now to consider whether to admit the remaining material in that schedule relied upon by the Plaintiff and not before the Master, on the basis of special grounds having been made out; [s75A(8)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75a.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) . I am satisfied that I should do so, in the interests of justice, for similar reasons to that which led me to admit the earlier material and that the necessary special grounds to do so have been made out. This I do not only in the interests of justice but having regard to the fact that this is an appeal from a Master principally involving matters of practice and procedure, rather than more substantive matters. Martin versus Abbott [(1981) 2 NSWLR 430] at 601-602 are authority for the proposition that a more liberal interpretation is given to this category of matter, in justifying its receipt on such "special grounds".
In so concluding, I am satisfied that this evidence was not deliberately held back so as to use the trial before the Master as a trial run.
I also admit the additional evidence, not before the Master but in turn relied upon by the Defendant; I am satisfied that the interests of justice require such reciprocity.
 
Explanation for Late Filing 
I have earlier quoted the Plaintiff's claimed explanation for the late filing of the Defence, as well as for why it was in fact filed on 22 April
It was filed on 22 April 1994, though the Defendant's Particulars were still not forthcoming, in order to comply with a possible three year time requirement for the Trade Practices Allegations. This expired (on the most conservative view) by April 1994. Mr Veitch was cross-examined on his evidence. I found him a credible witness, supported by the catalogue of events to which earlier reference has been made and by the documentation. I am prepared to accept his explanation. That is to say, I am prepared to conclude that reasons for delay were: an admittedly mistaken apprehension that without further dispensation, the
Plaintiff was free to defer filing the Defence until the Defendant had complied with the Registrar's Order to provide particulars of the cross-claim (later overturned by the Master on 1 November 1994 though only to defer that requirement until discovery was completed).
This was in case the particulars, when furnished, might affect the Defence (though as events turned out, they did not and indeed the filing on 22 April 1994 pre-dated any particulars being given because of the apprehended fear of a possible time requirement being breached), and so far as the Trade Practices Allegations were concerned, until the
Plaintiff was in a position to complete inspection, it could not finalise those Allegations, and it was not in a position to complete inspection for that purpose until after it had received certain correspondence from the
Defendant in February and March 1994.
It is desirable that I briefly recapitulate the events that occurred.
This is in order to determine the proper weight to be given to the lack of any explicit proffered explanation in the context of what was actually before the
Master on 1 and 2 November 1994. The consent order of 3 February 1994 required the amended defence to be filed by 18 February 1994. During that time there was a dispute between the solicitors about the sufficiency of particulars of the Cross-Claim. Ultimately, by Motion filed 4 March 1994, the Plaintiff sought the order for particulars, granted by the Registrar on 10 March 1994.
As of 22 April 1994 the particulars had still not been given.
I now quote the Plaintiff's version of events, taken from pages 5 to 7 of the Plaintiff's written submissions of 5 June 1995. This I substantially accept, though not the Plaintiff's comment on the Master having "been incorrect" in asserting that no explanation for the late filing was offered to the Court (see (e) quoted below, to which I will return). 
Between 18 February 1994 and 22 April 1994 there were particulars outstanding from the Defendant of the Defence and
Further Amended First Cross Claim, which on 10 March 1994 the
Registrar ordered the Defendant to provide. Although no formal stay was granted, it is apparent that at least between 10 March and 22 April 1994, particulars were outstanding relating to the document to which the Plaintiff was expected to plead.
The fact that the Plaintiff had not filed his Defence to the
Further Amended First Cross Claim was raised before Registrar
Berecry on 10 March 1994 (see Transcript of that date pages 46 and 47). The matter was raised again when the matter was before the
Registrar on 23 March 1994 (see Transcript pages 13 and 14 of that date). It would appear that the Plaintiff's representatives believed that the requirement to comply with the order as to the time for filing a Defence to the Further
Amended First Cross
Claim would be deferred pending the supply of particulars.

Motions filed by the Plaintiff on 4 March 1994 and 29 March 1994 both sought to defer the time for filing of the Defence to the
Further Amended First Cross Claim until after the supply of particulars. The issue was apparently not formally dealt with by the Registrar.
 
These were matters of record because the transcript was before the Master when he dealt with the matter on 1 November 1994 and he himself overturned the order requiring particulars to be provided, not because he thought particulars were not required, but because he thought it was appropriate to provide them at a later stage of the proceedings.
 (i) Particulars furnish a statement of the case sufficiently clear to allow the other party a fair opportunity to meet it - they define the issues for decision in the litigation Dare v
Pulham <case>; [(1982) 148 C.L. R 658] at 321D.
In this case the Registrar on 10 March 1994 found that the particulars of Schedule H were required and ordered that they be given. The Master on appeal on 1 November 1994 also found that particulars were required but felt that the requirement for them to be provided should be deferred until after discovery.
In the period before the Master overturned the Registrar's
Order, the Plaintiffs representatives reasonably acted on the basis that the pleading should not be filed until the particulars of the pleading (to which it responded) had been provided. The only relevant period, of course, is the period from 18 February till 22 April 1994.

Whilst it is apparent that there was no direct evidence of the cause of the delay, the Master appears to have been incorrect in asserting that no explanation for the late filing was offered to the Court (as he has done at page 7 of his Judgment given on March 1995), when there was before him evidence of the correspondence (see letter of /2/94 - annexure J to Affidavit of G. Veitch sworn 31/12/94) disputing the sufficiency of particulars and the order of the Registrar requiring those particulars to be given. The absence of an explanation for delay was not raised by the Master during argument but the form of the motions filed on behalf of the Plaintiff on 4 March 1994 and 29
March 1994 made it apparent that the Plaintiff's advisers were expecting particulars of the Cross Claim to be provided before pleading to it.

The orders of the Registrar made on 10/3/94 which were on appeal before the Master were a direct consequence of the motion filed on 4/3/94."
I have earlier concluded that the fact that lack of particulars in the end did not prevent the filing of the Defence and also that the Defence in the end was not affected by the particulars, are not of themselves such as to refute the
Plaintiff having that as an explanation for the late filing - along with the fact that inspection could not reasonably have been completed before early April 1994. I am satisfied that this was the genuine explanation for the delay.
But granted this was the explanation for the delay, what are its implications? Clearly the Plaintiff had, in logic, to acknowledge that his two
Motions of 4 March 1994 and 29 March 1994 seeking to defer the time for filing the Defence, presupposed the need for such dispensation. When the Registrar did not deal with that matter at all (he did not explicitly rule against these
Motions), it seems that the Plaintiff thereafter simply, and mistakenly, overlooked following up those Motions. I am satisfied that this was more likely from inadvertence than because the Plaintiff thought such Motions would not eventually be granted; indeed it appears the Plaintiff was proceeding on the assumption that the dispensation would readily be given due to the delayed particulars from the Defendant.
I should emphasise that the Master was correct in asserting that no explanation for the late filing was offered to the Court (page 7 of his
Judgment of 3 March 1995). There was some material before him which conceivably might have suggested a possible explanation, by way of inference, though absence of an explanation for the delay was evidently not raised by the
Master. But it was clearly a matter for the Plaintiff, as the applicant, to make an explicit explanation for the delay. It is not for the Master to try to work out what that explanation might have been and then raise its absence.
However, having admitted the further evidence which I have, it is open to the
Court to reach the further conclusions of fact which I have done. These are to the effect that there was a genuine explanation for the Plaintiffs delay in filing the Defence as I have described. Further, that, in the events that happened the Plaintiff overlooked that he had still to get such formal dispensation, probably assuming that its grant would be readily forthcoming in the circumstances.
 .
In so doing, I should emphasise, following Priestley JA in Cohen versus Mc
William at 4, that it is incorrect that "delay must be satisfactorily explained before discretion can be experienced in favour of the applicant".
Even "gross negligence does not necessarily prevent the exercise of discretion". But "what it does do is make the court examine more closely the question whether there really is a triable issue going to the merits" - explaining Jordan CJ in Vacuum Oil Co Limited versus Stockdale <case>; [(1942) 42 SR ] at 243-4.
Here that matter was for the purpose only of this application effectively conceded; transcript at 54. To the extent argument was addressed that any such Trade Practices Allegations were, if allowed to be pleaded, inutile, I am not persuaded that this conclusion can be reached without determining the very issues which those pleadings raise. And unless at the interlocutory threshold it is apparent that they are incapable of giving rise to a relevant issue in the proceedings, this is no ground for excluding the
Plaintiff's right to have them argued on the ground that they are inutile.
 
Was the first application for leave to file the Amended
Defence before or after expiry of the limitation period?
I turn now to the Master's statement concerning the limitation period in his judgment (at 6) given on 3 March 1995. He stated that "the first application for that leave" (to file the amended Defence now foreshadowed (meaning a Defence including the Trade Practices Allegations)) "was made in
October 1994, after the limitation period" - that is to say, after the limitation period had expired.
To this the Plaintiff puts the following as to the facts and makes the following submissions as to the consequences, in his written submissions of 5
June 1995 (pages 7-9) "4. The expiration of the limitation period
The Master has wrongly asserted in his Judgment at page 7 (in fact page 6) (given on 3 March 1995) that the first application for leave to file the Defence (meaning a Defence including counts for relief under the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/)) was made in October of 1994 after the limitation period (presumably meaning "had expired').

That was incorrect. The
Application for leave to file Defence to Further Amended Cross Claim was included in a Motion which was filed on 4 March (though not stipulating the form of the document) and was before Registrar Berecry on 10 March 1994.
That part of the
Motion before Registrar Berecry on 10 March was stood over by him on 11 March 1994 until 23 March 1994.
It appears that
Registrar Berecry never dealt with that part of the Motion, although reference to the fact that time had not been extended, was made on 10 March and 23 March 1994. At worst the Defendant became aware of the allegations when the document was filed and served on 22/4/94.

A further Motion dealing with the same matter again was filed on 29 March 1994 which was returnable for 17 May 1994.
An Amended Motion was filed on 26 October 1994 (apparently the one to which the Master referred in his Judgment) seeking similar orders but in particular seeking leave to file an Amended
Defence to the Further Amended First Cross Claim (the assumption having been made that the document filed on 22 April 1994, had been validly filed).

It is submitted to the extent that the Master apparently believed that this matter was not raised until after the limitation period had expired, then he was in error.

In fact, the filing of the document on 22 April 1994 was designed to avoid the passing of the limitation period, which arguably had commenced on 26 April 1991 when the Plaintiff signed his contract of employment and became committed to his contract of employment with the Defendant. The counts for relief under the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) were included in the document filed on /4/94. The allegations in that document are substantially the same as are now sought to be pleaded but did not include new formal allegations of reliance and consequential damage which were responses to complaints by the Defendant about deficiencies in the pleading and did not include particulars which the Master had indicated would be required.
 
The aforementioned matters are of some significance because it is apparent that the Master was considering the amendment as though leave to make the amendments had not been sought until after the limitation period had expired.

The Master appears to have considered the fact that the limitation period had expired as an argument which supported the refusal of any amendment. The practical effect of the amendment being rejected is that the Plaintiff will forever be precluded from invoking the Court's powers under [Section 87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) which it is submitted would not do justice between the parties.
 "Where the order under challenge has the practical effect of putting a party out of Court upon the issue determined by the order that will be a consideration appropriate to be taken into account by an Appellate Court to grant leave to appeal and to provide relief." - Bank of NZ versus Spedley Securities [(1992) NSWLR 91] at 715E." 
The Master failed to have due regard for:-
The prejudice flowing to the Plaintiff by disallowing the pleading.
The fact that the material justifying the pleading had only become available on discovery. "
To this the Defendant in its undated "outline submissions of Drabsch" takes issue as follows: "B4(a). The Notice of Motion of 4
March 1994 had nothing to do with the document subsequently filed 22 April 1994 as is apparent from a reading of the motion and the affidavit in support. That motion was not relied upon before the Master.

If simply cannot be right that when a cross defendant asserts it is unable to plead to one aspect of a cross claim because of an absence of particulars and files motion which seeks an order that he "be given leave to file a defence to a further amended cross claim within 21 days of receipt of the said particulars or repleaded allegation " that this motion could somehow be construed as an application for leave to file the document subsequently filed on 22 April 1994. This is especially so when the motion of 4 March 1994 had not been heard and no order in relation to the defence had been made by 22 April 1994 consequential upon such motion.

B4(b).
The motion of 29 March 1994 is in precisely the same category as the motion of 4 March 1994."
The Plaintiff, in my judgment, correctly responds (in his written outline reply of 23 October 1995 to SGI's submissions) by pointing out that the Notice of Motion of 4 March 1995 did not need to identify the form of the proposed defence and thus made no explicit reference to the Trade Practices
Allegations. Nor was it at that stage appropriate to do so, or indeed possible to identify the Defence, in any final form. This was because the Plaintiff was still awaiting particulars from the Defendant of its Cross-Claim and legitimately wanted these before formulating the Defence. While the Plaintiff felt himself compelled in the end to file the Defence without these particulars for fear of the possible application of a limitation period expiring on 26 April 1994 (though doing so for more abundant caution), that does not in my judgment detract from the proposition earlier put concerning the lack of need to identify the precise form of the Defence.
I thus quote from the Plaintiff's written outline as follows: "B 4 (a) The notice of motion of 4 March, which is document .G in the Appellant's submissions folder, sought leave to file a Defence to the Further Amended Cross Claim within 21 days after the receipt of particulars, an order for which was sought otherwise in the motion.

It could not have been possible at that time to spell out with any certainty, the form of any document which was to be filed because the particulars had not been provided. The Plaintiff's advisers believed that the Plaintiff was at liberty to plead generally to the Further
Amended Cross Claim and it was therefore not necessary (but at that stage not possible anyway) to seek leave to file the document in a particular form. It is wrong to say that that motion was not relied upon before the
Master. As we understand it, that was the motion dealt with by the Registrar whose order requiring the Defendant to provide particulars, was overturned by the Master. It is true that the prayer in the motion asking for leave to file the Defence to the Further Amended Cross
Claim, was not dealt with by either the Registrar or the Master, although it was raised before the
Registrar on both 10 March and 23 March 1994." 
I should add that the same reasoning and conclusions apply, mutatis mutandis, to the similar motion of 29 March .
It follows that I conclude that the Master's observation was not correct, that the first application for leave was made on 1 October 1994, after the limitation period had expired. In fact an application, which I consider legitimately did not identify the actual form of the defence, was filed on 10 March 1994 and again on 23 March 1994, that is, prior to the expiry of the earliest possible limitation period. It also needs to be added that it was known by the parties before such possible limitation period expired that the Defence would include the Trade Practices Allegations. That was first made clear on 22 April 1994 when the Defence was filed.
I turn now to question 2(2), dealing principally with whether any errors of law were made by the Master, referred to each sub-question by its paragraph number.
 
Anterior Questions 2(3)(a) - Pleading [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) as a defence and [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) claim for relief in a defence to cross-claim
It is necessary first to answer these questions in order to determine whether, as posed by the next question, the Plaintiff's Defence was a nullity on either of these grounds.
The Master in his judgment of 3 March 1995 posed the first issue as whether "it is appropriate to plead [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) by way of defence". (pl) He posed the second issue as "whether there is any allegation of loss suffered by the
Plaintff to found relief under [s81(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s81.html) (it was agreed he must be taken to mean [s87(1A))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/)). The Master then quoted the Trade
Practices Allegations in the form then sought to be filed in accordance with his November 1994 directions. These Allegations are taken from paras 34 and 35 of the document of 22 April 1994, and also paras 35A (reliance) and
B (loss or damage) not included in the document as filed 22 April 1994 but inserted following the Master's directions.
 
Reliance
Greater emphasis was placed in argument before me on the failure to plead loss or damage, than reliance, as the former is an explicit element of [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html), expressly relied on by the Master in his reasons. Reliance in varying degrees on the part of the claimant is the typical, though not universal way in which the necessary causal connection or nexus is made out between misleading and deceptive conduct and any consequential loss or damage; compare
Janssen-Cilag Pty Ltd versus Pfizer Pty Ltd <case>; [(1992) ATPR 41-186] where a trader was entitled to recover for loss of custom from consumers who had been misled. It is not as such an express element in the [s87](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) (or s[82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html)) claim or cause of action. However, cases such as Neilson versus Hempston Holdings Pty Ltd [(1986) 65
ALR 302] treat recovery based on [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) as founded on actual reliance by the applicant on the relevant representations though influence may suffice; Henjo
Investments Pty
Ltd versus Marrickville Pty Ltd [(1988) 70 ALR 83] at 96 (full
Federal Court). It is clearly a necessary element in the present case, in demonstrating the required causal connection between loss or damage and the alleged representations. Thus whatever is ultimately determined in relation to the present pleadings concerning loss or damage, should in logic apply equally to reliance.
The concluding para 36 before the Master was, according to the Master, proposed to be amended to delete the words "will be (meaning "at") the Hearing request the court to exercise its powers pursuant to [s87(1)(A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) (meaning -(1A)") of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) so as ..." and replace them with the words "seeks an order pursuant to [s81](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s81.html) (meaning "87") (1A) of the Act...". The order sought by the Plaintiff, quoting it in full, was "to declare void, or otherwise vary so as to delete or refuse to enforce, any terms of the Contract (implied or otherwise) which are not admitted but which may entitle the
Cross-Claimant to summary termination of the contract as the court thinks fit".
The Master, before dealing with the limitation question concluded: "As can be seen, this is a raising by way of defence of a claim under [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). The ability to do that has been dealt with in the case of the Bank of New Zealand versus Spedley which is reported at first instance at (1991) APR 143 and in the
Court of Appeal [(1991-1992) 27 NSWLR 91] at 98-100. The President dealt with the present point and concluded that [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) itself does not found or create a defence. It more in effect proscribes a norm of conduct for corporations.

That case concerned a claim seeking to obtain damages under [s82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). That section of course contains a time bar and the Court held that the use of [s82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html), s[52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) in the circumstances there was appropriate giving the expiry of the limitation period." 
Trade Practices Allegations in their form before the Master
The proposed additional pleadings before the Master thus alleged express and implied representations particularised (para 33 quoted below), made as to future matters within [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s5.html) 1A of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (1974 (Cth) (para 34), and claimed to be conduct that was "misleading or deceptive" in contravention of s52 of the Act (para 35).
Accordingly it is pleaded that the Plaintiff "in reliance upon the representations entered into the employment contract and commenced performance of his duties as chief executive (para 35A) and "by reason of his reliance on the representations ... suffered loss and damage" (para 35B).
Thus the particularised representations quoted in the Master's Judgment were as follows: "33. In further answer to the further amended first cross claim, the cross defendant says that prior to the entry by the cross defendant into the contract of employment executed on 26 April , the cross claimant represented to him that:
The Australian operation of the cross claimant would not be sold and would be continued; the cross claimant intended to continue (and not sell) its
Australian operations with the cross defendant as its chief executive officer and with viable financial support from its
Swiss parent company, Swiss Reinsurance Company ("the Swiss parent"); the cross claimant intended to keep the cross defendant's contract of employment on foot for at least a period of twelve months from 1 July 1991; the cross defendant's employment would continue for at least a period of twelve months from 1 July 1991 
Particulars 
The representations were express and implied To the extent that they were express they were constituted by the following communications:
Michael Dill orally to Drabsch alone and again in the presence of McErlane and Weber in February 1991 in Zurich; 
Michael Dill orally to Drabsch in Sydney in April 1991 prior to signing the contract of employment; by Weber orally on behalf of Dill, as Dill fell ill, when reading Dill's written speeches to industry groups and the staff of SGI in Sydney in April 1991. Those speeches are the first defendant's discovered documents LN5591, 5924, 5589 and 5923.

To the extent that the representations were implied, the cross defendant relies on the following facts and circumstances; the entry by the cross claimant into the contract of employment on 26 April 1991; the constructions of the said Contract; the communications set out in (1) to (iii) above.
Particulars as to the loss and damage claimed as quoted in the Master's
Judgment were as follows: "(i) The cross defendant commenced his performance of the contract rather than seeking to enforce his rights and remedies in relation to the cross claimant's intended failure to perform its part of the contract; the cross defendant was remunerated as the Deputy Chief
Executive Officer and Financial Controller of the cross claimant rather than as the actual Chief Executive Officer, whose duties he was performing between 26 April 1991 and 1 July 1991, whilst
Mr McErlane was on period of leave.
the cross defendant failed to investigate other potential avenues of employment or otherwise assess the commercial wisdom of entering into the employment contract on 26 April 1991 which he would otherwise have done; the cross defendant's contract of employment was terminated by the cross claimant." (The above three quotations incorporate minor typographical corrections.) 
Pleading s52 as a defence
I turn now to the two authorities relied upon by the Master in concluding that s52 must not be pleaded as a defence and that the Plaintiff was here doing so. The first was the decision of Cole J in Spedley Securities
Limited (in liquidation) versus Bank of New Zealand and Ors (1991) ATPR 4143 at ,065-6 upheld by the
Court of Appeal, sub nom. Bank of New Zealand versus Spedley
Securities Ltd (in liq) [(1992) 27 NSWLR 91.]
Cole J was considering only proceedings commenced under [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade
Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth). As he pointed out, the further question of whether reliance upon [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) was statute barred did not really arise. This was because the time bar contained in [ss82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) and [87](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) related to proceedings commenced pursuant to those sections - and in Spedley "no such proceedings have been commenced"; Spedley at ,066. However, by way of dicta, it was concluded that any such action, if brought under [ss82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) or [87](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html), would have been statute barred.
This means that Spedley did not deal by way of ratio with the precise circumstances before me. I am here, in contrast, considering a Plaintiff's "defence" to a cross-claim, yet one which did purport to embody a claim made under [s87.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) That claim is of course dependent upon the conclusion that the representations were "misleading or deceptive" (or likely to mislead or deceive) in contravention of s52 of the Act.
I return therefore to the linked questions, "May the Trade Practices
Allegations be pleaded as a defence and have they been so pleaded in the present case?" Cole J held that s52 does not create a cause of action but rather a norm of conduct. Remedies for departure from that norm of conduct are, he held, to be found elsewhere in the Act, including by way of application for relief under s87. At 53,066 he therefore concluded: "If section 52 does not create a cause of action, and if the remedies flowing from a departure from the norm of conduct required by section 52 are to be found elsewhere in the [Trade
Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), particularly in [Part 1/7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p1), which remedies are, in some instances, subject to time limitations, there is no justification for treating a departure from the norm of conduct but absent a claim for relief permitted by the statute, as an equitable defence. Any remedy or claim for relief by way of damages [(section 82)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) or application for relief pursuant to [section 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s8.html) [7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s7.html) is a substantive "action " [(section 82)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) or "application" [(section 87(1A)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) Each must be commenced within three years after the day on which "the cause of action accrued".
The legislature has not seen fit to prescribe as a remedy for departure by an opponent from the norm of conduct prescribed by [section 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), the right to raise, either within or without a limitation period, such departure as an equitable or other defence to a claim brought by that opponent. The only remedies given are those conferred by the statute and relevantly, the claims which may be so brought are, in the case of claims pursuant to [sections 82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) and [87](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html), liable to be defeated by a time bar plea.
 
I acknowledge that Rogers CJ Comm. D. has expressed a contrary view in Australian
Mutual Provident Society versus Specialist Funding
Consultants Pty Limited and Anor (1991) par ATPR 41-137, basing the decision, in part, upon the Full Federal Court's decision in
Jobbins versus Capel Court Corporation Limited and Anor (1990) ATPR par 41-005; <case>; [(1989) 91 ALR 314.] His Honour's decision was delivered after argument which concluded on 22 July 1991, five days after the Full Federal Court delivered its decision in Wardley.
Wardley declined to follow the reasoning in Jobbins. Regrettably, but understandably,
Rogers CJ Comm.D. was not referred to the decision in Wardley, nor was he referred to the decision in
Tobacco Institute.
I understand Wardley is the subject of application for leave to appeal, nonetheless I think I should follow it as a decision of a Full Court in preference to the decision of a single judge.

Here, no claim for relief against SSL has been sought by
BNZ or
Securities pursuant to [Part VI](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p6) or other provisions of the statute which create a cause of action for breach of [section 52.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) 
I am thus of the view that breach of [section 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) may not be pleaded in the defence absent a claim for relief conferred by the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). There being no such claim, S.D38 must fail."
The Court of Appeal in Bank of New Zealand versus Spedley Securities Ltd (In
Liq) upheld that decision. I have no hesitation in following it in concluding that [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) may not be pleaded as a defence and am of course bound to do so in any event. While Kirby P made no reference to [s87](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html), he said, as to remedying a breach of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) by an action under [s82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) where the reasoning is analogous: "The scheme of the legislation therefore appears to contemplate, for breach of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), an action under [s82.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) The problem for BNZ is that the words of that section are not apt to support a defence.
Furthermore, if it is in [s82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) that the sanction for breaches of [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) must be found (apart from non-legal sanctions) subs (2) imposes a time limit commencing when the cause of action accrued 
I would therefore conclude that Cole J was right to strike out the defences invoking s52 of the Act. This decision alone would sustain his Honour's first orders challenged - (at 99) "Because in the current state of authority, I would reject the attempt to utilise s52 as BNZ asserts, the attempt to circumvent s82(2) in this way must fall accordingly. In short, s52 has no application by its own force as a defence. And to the extent that it could be invoked it necessarily runs into the limitation problem presented by s82(2)." (at 100)
Wardle Australia Limited versus State of Western Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514] was decided by the High Court after Spedley (though the earlier full Federal
Court decision was available both to Cole J and the
Court of Appeal). Toohey J reaffirms (at 551) that "although it is customary to speak of a claim for damages for misleading or deceptive conduct, s52 of the Act does not of itself give rise to any liability. The consequences of a contravention of the terms of s52 are to be found in various sections of the Act". As is clear from His
Honour's references to s82 and s87 at the same page, and from Cole
J's judgment in Spedley at 53,066, it is those sections rather than s52 that deal with those consequences, along with sections 80,
A and 163A.
 
Trade Practices Allegations and s87(1A)
But was s52 pleaded as a defence or rather as a claim or application under s87(1A) and, if the latter, was it made in conformity with the requirements of s87(1A)? The Plaintiff seeks to distinguish
Spedley in two respects. First, by the fact that neither s82 or relevantly, s87 were invoked in Spedley whereas in the present case s87 is specifically invoked. And second, that had they been invoked, in Spedley any action or application would have contravened the three year time bar that each of ss82 and 87 incorporates. Whereas here, by incorporating the Allegations in a Defence filed before expiry of the limitation period the Plaintiff contends that the time bar would not be contravened, certainly if any necessary leave were now given.
The Plaintiff places particular emphasis on the concluding words earlier quoted of Cole J, namely that "... breach of s52 may not be pleaded in the defence absent a claim for relief conferred by the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/)" (my emphasis). Because, says the Plaintiff, in the present case a claim for consequential relief conferred by the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) is expressly made under s87(1A) of the Act, such a claim escapes the prohibition against s52 being pleaded as a defence, as formulated by Cole J. In particular, the
Plaintiff contends, there is no material difference between a claim for relief under s82, being damages, and the range of orders permitted by s87(1A).
Section 87(1A) commences with the general power to make: "such order ... as the
Court thinks appropriate against the person who engaged in the conduct or was involved in the contravention (including all or any of the orders mentioned in sub-clause (2))".
Such an order may be made "if the Court considers such order...
will compensate the person ... in whole or in part for the loss or damage" from the relevant breach (here of s52). Under sub-clause of s87, the further range of possible orders are set out under paras (a) to (g) inclusive.
In fact, the order sought, corresponds to the kinds of order referred to in s87(2). Thus s87(2)(a) is invoked (insofar as it deals with deleting or declaring void those provisions entitling the Cross-Claimant to terminate the employment contract), s87(2)(b) is invoked (insofar as it deals with varying such provisions) and s87(2)(ba) is invoked (insofar as it deals with not enforcing such provisions).
Under s87(1A), the pre-conditions for making any such order are that: the person (applicant) "has suffered or is likely to suffer, loss or damage by conduct of another person" (the Defendant) "in contravention of a provision of ... Part V ...", and "the Court considers that the order or orders concerned will compensate the person who made the application ... in whole or in part for the loss or damage, or will prevent or reduce the loss or damage suffered, or likely to be suffered, by such a person".
Turning to the Trade
Practices Allegations, it is true that in their form filed on 22 April 1994, there was no pleading of loss or damage. This is the first pre-condition to be fulfilled. But in the version before the Master, following his directions in November 1994 (see the Judgment of Master Macready of 3 March 1995 at 1) loss or damage is pleaded in para 35B. This is said to result from the Plaintiffs claimed reliance on the alleged representations.
Clearly loss or damage, the first element of s87(1A) was therefore not pleaded till after
November 1994. I return later to the significance of this for the purpose of the three year limitation period. I have earlier noted that reliance was similarly pleaded in para 35A.
The second pre-condition is that the Court considers the order concerned (in essence, an order here to delete, vary or not enforce the termination provisions of the contract) will compensate or prevent or reduce the relevant loss suffered. The relevant loss suffered must clearly result from alleged representations being misleading or deceptive, and relied upon by the claimant
Plaintiff. Thus any loss resulting from termination of the contract as such is not relevant (though there may be some overlap in the loss claimed from reliance on the alleged representations). The real question is whether that loss would be so compensated or reduced by some deletion of, variation to, or non enforcement of, the termination provisions of the employment contract.
Thus, for example, to vary the termination provision to prevent termination (or, more likely, require payment in lieu of some specified period of notice) would clearly give some reduction in loss. It is conceivable that a Court might make such an order, even though this were in circumstances where that may also require a determination of whether there was such misconduct of the
Plaintiff as to justify instant termination and, if so, how this might affect the appropriateness of any such order.
Thus I am satisfied that this second jurisdictional pre-condition is satisfied, though without expressing any view as to the appropriateness of any such order.
This raises the final question which contract can be the subject of such order and whether the employment contract appropriately qualifies. Section (2)(a) clearly identifies the contract. The remaining paragraphs (b) through pick up that identification. It must be a contract "made between the person who suffered, or is likely to suffer the loss or damage" and "the person who engaged in the conduct ...". Clearly the present employment contract fits that description. Further, there is, as would seem necessary, some nexus between the claimed representations (for example, paraphrasing, that the Australian operation would be continued with the Plaintiff as chief executive officer) and the Plaintiff entering into the contract. This is in order for the sort of order which the Plaintiff seeks under s87(2) being conceivable (though without expressing any view as to the appropriateness of such an order being made).
Leaving aside the significance of the s87(1A) claim being thus incorporated in what is termed a defence and putting aside limitation questions, I am satisfied that the Trade Practices Allegations have been pleaded, not as a defence, but as a cause of action. This pleading, as originally pleaded, was however irregular. There was an omission of any pleading of loss or damage (and reliance) though added later. Such an omission is in my opinion an irregularity and one which would need a remedial amendment to cure. I deal, in answering question 2(3)(b) below, with whether there is power in the court to do this having regard to whether the pleading complied with the applicable limitation period taking into account the implications of any defects in that pleading as of 22 April 1994. I am however satisfied that all the pre-conditions for such a cause of action in s87(1A) including loss or damage had, as of the time the matter came before the Master, been sufficiently pleaded. I deal below on the implications of doing so in a defence.
 
Implications of pleading the Trade Practices Allegations in a Defence
I do not consider that including this claim in a document termed "defence to cross-claim", or similar nomenclature, converts it to a defence, so as to contravene the prohibition on pleading s52 as a defence. It does not thereby lose its character as pleaded, namely, as a cause of action under s87(1A), requiring, inter alia, a breach of the norm of conduct in s52.
But to this the Defendant responds by seeking to impale the Plaintiff on the other horn of a dilemma. That is, by concluding that these Allegations as pleaded constitute a substantive cause of action (Wardley per Toohey J at ), they cease to be an appropriate response to a consent order that permits only a "Defence to the Further Amended Cross- Claim" to be filed.
This proposition may be tested thus. The effect of an order under s87(2), if granted, would be to compensate for the claimed loss or damage. I accept that any effect the order may have against the Defendant's
Cross-Claim would be purely adventitious. The order sought, if granted, would affect the termination provisions of the contract.
It may thereby affect the availability or effectiveness of the cross- claimant's (SGI's) remedy for alleged breaches of the contract by the Cross-Defendant/Plaintiff But this does not mean that the Trade Practices Allegations thereby constitute a defence to the
Defendant's Cross-Claim, relating as the latter does, to alleged breaches by the Plaintiff of the employment contract, amplified by allegations of breach of duty and negligence and the like.
But accepting that the Trade Practices Allegations are not literally a defence to the Defendant's Cross-Claim, may they be nonetheless included in the Defence without invalidating them as a right of action? It is well established in the United Kingdom that even in a modem system of pleadings, the plaintiff must not set up in the plaintiff's reply to the defendant's defence what is a new cause of action, that is to say, one which is not raised either on the writ or in the statement of claim. This is because the plaintiff must not, in reply, make any allegation of fact, or raise any new ground of claim, inconsistent with the plaintiff's statement of claim. "Inconsistent", for this purpose does not mean "mutually exclusive" but merely "new or different"; see Bullen and Leeke and Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings by I H
Jacob, Sweet and Maxwell 1975 at 107. In other words, the reply must not contradict or "depart" from the statement of claim, or it will be ground to strike out the reply in which the defect occurs. However, as Bullen and Leeke point out, for the purposes of pleading, a counter claim is assimilated to a statement of claim and the defence to counter-claim with a defence. That does not alter the earlier principle of consistency. However, it does provide a basis for permitting the Plaintiffs Cross-Claim to be incorporated in his
Defence to the
Defendant's Cross-Claim, treating the latter as assimilated to a statement of claim. But if that were permitted it would still be necessary that the cross-claim both be identified as such in the Plaintiffs Defence and rendered consistent with the Statement of
Claim, by amending the latter to incorporate such claim.
The position in New South Wales is not materially different. Thus
Pt 15 r 17(1) provides "a party shall not in any pleading make an allegation of fact, or raise any ground or plaint, inconsistent with a previous pleading of his". Thus it is clear that the general rule is again that a plaintiff who desires to make a new or alternative claim should amend his statement of claim; Warnock versus Victorian Railway Commissioners [(1885) 7 ALT 54]
The position in Australia regarding the permissibility of such cross- claims so pleaded by the Plaintiff requires further analysis. In Victoria, having regard to the wide definition of "Defendant" in s19 of the Victorian [Supreme Court Act 1958](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/sca1958183/), it appears that a plaintiff can cross-claim to a defendant's claim. This flows from the requirements of s61(7) of that Act (corresponding to [s63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s63.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) ) that it is desirable that a trial judge formally determine and make findings on all issues litigated before that Judge. It has been held that s6l(7) of the
Victorian Act thus supports a counter-claim by a plaintiff in reply to a counter-claim by the defendants, though ordinarily doing so by an amendment to the statement of claim; Aurel Forras Pty Ltd versus Graham Karp Developments Pty
Ltd <case>; [(1975) VR 202.] However, if the plaintiffs counter-claim arose, not before the issue of the writ but after, or in the alternative either before or after, then it is permissible for the counter-claim to be made without amending the plaintiff's statement of claim to include the additional claim; Aurel Forras at 219-20. To allow such an amendment to the Statement of Claim where the claim is based on events or material post-dating the writ, would not contravene the principle that a cause of action should be complete when proceedings are instituted. All of this suggests that the rules of consistency and completeness nonetheless allow some flexibility in not compelling the
Plaintiffs counter-claim to be pleaded in the statement of claim where there is sufficient reason for exception.
In the
United Kingdom, Toke versus Andrews [(1882) 8 QBD 428] held that the right in the plaintiff to counter-claim against the defendant's counter- claim was within the words and spirit of the provisions of s24(3) and (7) of the
Judicature Act 1873, equivalent to what are now s61(3) and (7) of the
Victorian [Supreme Court Act 1958](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/sca1958183/). It also held that where the material upon the Plaintiffs counter-claim arose after issue of the writ, then that justified pleading the counter-claim without amending the statement of claim.
In New South Wales, Court Forms, Precedents and Pleadings New
South
Wales Vol. 1, 1989 (Editor in chief Sir Laurence Street) at 6026 summarises the position as follows. "It is arguable a plaintiff can cross-claim to a defendant's cross-claim. The definition of "defendant" in s.19 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/sca1958183/) "includes any person served with a statement of claim or summons, or served with notice of or entitled to attend any proceedings ". Further, a "party " is defined in the same section as including "any defendant and any person against whom a claim for relief is made under section 78 ". Section (4) states that a person against whom relief is claimed under the section shall, if not a party, become a party and shall have the same rights as if he were a defendant in separate proceedings.
[Part 6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/sca1958183/index.html#p6) r 12(1) of the Supreme Court Rules permits a party against whom a claim is made in proceedings commenced by statement of claim and who claims relief under <case> to cross-claim in the proceedings. These definitions may be considered sufficiently wide to include a plaintiff upon whom a cross-claim has been served, since he is a person "served with notice of or entitled to attend any proceedings". The question is not free from doubt. ((6) It is permitted in Victoria. See Aurel Forras Pty Ltd v Graham Karp Developments Pty Ltd <case>; [(1975) VR 202], but the definition of "defendant" in the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/sca1958183/) (Vic) includes a person served with process. See also Toke versus Andrews [(1882) QBD 428] See also Ritchie's Supreme Court
Procedure NSW, Butterworths, Sydney, 1984 to date (looseleaf), guidecard "[Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/sca1958183/)" at (s 63.5) where the editors suggest that s63 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/sca1958183/) permits such a "counter claim" by a plaintiff.)
Ritchie's Supreme Court Procedure NSW Butterworths, Sydney at 2175.2 under "Additional Cross-claims" summarises the position thus: "There is nothing to prevent a plaintiff answering a defendant's cross-claim by a further cross-claim where the material on which he bases his cross-claim arose after the commencement of the proceedings: Toke versus Andrews [(1882) 8 QBD 428]
However, if the matter of the intended retaliatory counter-claim arose before the commencement of the proceedings, it is better merely to amend the statement of claim: James versus Page (1888) 85
LT Jo 15 7 and see Renton Gibbs and Co Ltd versus Neville and Co [(1900) QB 181."] 
It is significant that Ritchie puts the position as merely being "better" if the plaintiff's counter-claim be effected by amending the statement of claim, again suggesting a rule capable of flexibility.
I therefore would conclude in the present case that the Plaintiff may counter-claim or cross-claim with the Trade Practices Allegations to the
Defendant's cross-claim (subject to consideration of the possible application of the three year limitation discussed later and any other objections foreshadowed by the Defendant).
The general rule is that such counter-claim or cross-claim should have been effected by amending the Plaintiffs Statement of
Claim (there being no suggestion that the cross- claim arose after the writ).
However, I conclude here justice would be better served and consistency still achieved, by permitting (if a remedial order may and should otherwise be granted) the Plaintiff's Defence to plead the Plaintiff's Cross-Claim, identified as such but making it a condition of any remedial order and done pursuant to it that such
Cross-Claim be also added to the Statement of Claim by way of amendment in the same form. There is some logic in so assimilating the Defendant's cross-claim to a statement of claim and the Plaintiff's response, to a defence in which the cross-claim is separately identified.
I finally conclude that so pleading, a plaintiff's cross-claim in what is styled a defence to cross-claim, does not mean that s52 has thereby been pleaded as a defence. Nor does it mean that the pleading is thereby disqualified from any possibility of a remedial order to cure that irregularity. That last depends on issues still to be determined, including whether the Defence is a nullity and the implications of the three year limitation period.
 
Anterior Question 2(3)(b) - Amenability of document of 22
April 1994 to remedial order on appeal from the Master having regard, inter alia, to whether a nullity and the application of any limitation period
Grounds for considering the document of 22 April 1994 a nullity
The next issue is whether the document filed on 22 April 1994 was a nullity either for its lateness or its content and whether the Master erred in law in concluding that it was.
This is with the consequence that, if a nullity, it would be incapable of being rendered effective by an appropriate dispensing order, or by fresh leave after expiry of the three year limitation period.
The Defendant's grounds for contending it is a nullity are three-fold.
First, that the court had ordered, by consent, on 3 February 1994 that the
Plaintiff file its Defence to the Further
Amended First Cross-Claim by 18
February 1994 and the Plaintiff filed it eight weeks late, namely on 22 April
It was thus not within the terms of those consent directions and, relying on the authority of National Mutual Holdings Pty Limited versus Sentry [(1989) 22 FCR 209] at 217-218, the Master concluded that further leave was required whose absence rendered "the attempt to file it a nullity". The
Defendant contends that this means that the document itself was thus a nullity. I will deal with that ground later (under "Lateness of filing giving rise to nullity?"). Second, that it included the Trade Practices Allegations which were pleaded as a defence and thus could not be pleaded as a cross-claim, without doing so by amendment to the Statement of Claim and without identifying those allegations as a Plaintiff's cross-claim. I have already dealt with that ground. I conclude that of itself, this would not render the document of 22 April 1944 a nullity; rather it is an irregularity potentially amenable to the Court's remedial powers. Third, that in the events that happened, the claim made in the document of 22 April 1994 was not commenced within the three year time limit laid down by [s87(ICA)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) and that this cannot be cured by any remedial order. I will deal with that ground first, as it is fundamental to the consideration of the availability of the Court's remedial powers.
This is because it would preclude the Court by remedial order curing what is contended to be a nullity rather than an irregularity, by retroactively permitting the filing of that Defence, despite its lateness and content. Indeed whether or not the document of 22 April 1994 were a nullity, or merely its filing, resort to fresh leave now to file the Defence, or to amend the Statement of Claim, would involve a filing outside the limitation period applicable to the
Trade Practices Allegations. The Defendant contends that the Court would have no power to do this.
 
The limitation period - third ground for alleging nullity
I turn therefore to the time limitation ground for alleging nullity.
That is, that the Plaintiffs application under [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) is time barred by the three year requirement for bringing such an application prescribed by [s87(1CA)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) This states that: "an application under subsection (1A) may be commenced ... at any time within 3 years after the day on which the cause of action accrued "
It is necessary to determine whether the application based on the Trade
Practices
Allegations was "commenced" within that time period. The application was made on 22 April 1994. As noted above, the limitation period expired on 26
April, 1 July or 15 July 1994.
The 22 April 1994 document with the Trade Practices Allegations included in the Defence did not plead loss or damage (or likelihood of loss or damage).
Loss or damage (or the likelihood thereof) is a necessary element of the
Plaintiff's cause of action. Section 87(1A) of the Act provides that application may be made by a person "who has suffered, or is likely to suffer, loss or damage" (and then sets out the remaining elements). The Plaintiff's pleadings, in originally failing to plead such a material fact (and also by failing to plead reliance in order to establish causation), were defective:
Bruce v Odhams Press Ltd [(1936) 1 KB 697] at 712 per Scott LJ ("if any one 'material fact' is omitted, the statement of claim is bad"); Supreme Court
Rules Pt 15 r 7(1).
The Plaintiff seeks, inter alia, to cure this defect by amending the Trade Practices Allegations in the Defence to include allegations of loss and damage (or the likelihood of loss and damage) (as well as adding reference to reliance and effecting what appear to be other refinements). It is therefore necessary to determine whether the application under s87(1A) of the Act was commenced within the three year period of limitation set out in <case>(1CA)(b) of the Act, notwithstanding the failure to plead loss or damage (or reliance) as of 22 April 1994.
A series of English decisions support the view that a defective originating process is capable of commencing an action, at least for the purpose of compliance with a relevant limitation period. In Hill versus Luton
Corporation [(1951) 2 KB 387]; (1951) 1 All ER, a writ for damages issued within the prescribed limitation period (Limitation Act 1939 (UK) s21(1)) was defective for incorrect endorsement. The writ and a statement of claim were later served but outside the limitation period. The defendants conceded that the statement of claim was capable of curing the defective writ but argued that the action was time-barred as the statement of claim which remedied the defect was not served within the time limit. At the expiration of the limitation period the writ was defective; as a result it was argued, the action had not been commenced within the limitation period. Devlin J held that the writ, although defective, was not a nullity, and was "effective as an instrument for commencing the action" (at 391). "I do not think that the Act is at all concerned with good or bad endorsements: the only question to be determined under it is whether the action has been commenced within the twelve months ... unless the writ was a nullity, the action was commenced within the twelve months." 
As the defendants had conceded that the writ was curable by the statement of claim, they were precluded from arguing that the writ was a nullity.
Hill versus Luton Corporation (supra) was subsequently applied in Grounsell v
Cuthell [(1952) 2 QB 673], where a defective writ was issued within the limitation period. Following service of the writ outside the limitation period, the defendant issued a summons for an order setting aside service of the writ on the ground that the endorsement was defective (insufficient precision in stating the cause of action). Afrer the issue of this summons but prior to the hearing, the plaintiff delivered a statement of claim rectifying the defective writ. It was held that the action was brought within the limitation period. See also Pontin versus Wood [(1962) 1 All ER 295 (CA)], in which the observations of Devlin J and Ormerod J were approved (at 300 per Holroyd
Pearce LJ). Holroyd Pearce LJ added, in concluding that there was no justification for setting aside service of the defective writ, that "the defendant was at all times perfectly aware of the nature of the action which the writ was intended to initiate and the defect has caused him no difficulty whatever." (at 299)
That observation is equally applicable to the circumstances of the present case.
In Mitchell versus Harris Engineering Company
Ltd [(1967) 2 QB 703], Lord
Denning MR referred to Hill versus Luton Corporation and Pontin versus Wood (supra) in a discussion of the Limitation Act 1939 (UK) (cited by Hill J in Harris v
Western Australian Exim Corporation [(1994) 129 ALR 387] at 391 (Fed C of A): "In order to satisfy the (limitation prescribed by) statute, the plaintiff must issue his writ within three years from the date .. (on which the cause of action accrued). .. But there is nothing in the statute which says that the writ must at that time be perfect and free from defects. Even if it is defective, nevertheless the court may, as a matter of practice, permit him to amend it. Once it is amended, then the writ as amended speaks from the date on which the writ was originally issued and not from the date of the amendment. The defect is cured and the action is brought in time. It is not barred by the statute (at 718)."
I will deal below with the scope and limitations of the Court's remedial powers and their potential retroactive effect, in thus dealing with what I conclude were defects or irregularities in the pleading of the Trade
Practices
Allegations. I conclude at this point that this third ground for alleging that the document of 22 April 1994 is a nullity is not made out. Failure to plead loss or damage (or reliance) is a defect or irregularity, but not a matter giving rise to nullity in that document or the Allegations therein. It follows that unless the document of 22 April 1994 were otherwise rendered a nullity for failure to comply with the consent order, in time (see later), the application constituted by the Trade Practices Allegations was commenced within the three year limitation period. Its consequent amenability to a remedial order to cure any such defect or irregularity is considered later.
 
Delineation of the Court's remedial powers
I start by considering the Court's remedial powers. The primary power is found in s81 of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) . It must be read with the other basal sections of that Act and with the relevant Rules. I refer in particular Pt 2 r 3 and, to the extent it may be called in aid, Pt 20 r 1 and r 4. I quote these for convenience below: "(s 81) Irregularity 
Where, in beginning or purporting to begin any proceedings or at any stage in the course of or in connection with any proceedings, there is, by reason of anything done or left undone, a failure to comply with the requirements of this Act or of the rules whether in respect of time, place, manner, form or content or in any other respect - the failure shall be treated as an irregularity and shall not nullify the proceedings, or any step taken in the proceedings, or any document, judgment or order in the proceedings; and subject to subsections (2) and (3), the Court may, on terms, set aside wholly or in part the proceedings or any step taken in the proceedings or any document, judgment or order in the proceedings or exercise its powers under this Act and the rules to allow amendments and to make orders dealing with the proceedings generally."
The principally relevant Supreme Court Rules are Pt 2 r 3 and Pt 20 r 1 and r 4, each of which I quote below, so far as relevant.
I start with Pt 2 r "(2.3) Extension and abridgment (1) The Court may, on terms, by order, extend or abridge any time fixed by the rules or by any judgment or order.

The Court may extend time under subrule (1) as well after as before the time expires whether or not an application for the extension is made before the time expires.

The period within which a person is required by rules or by any order to serve, file or amend any pleading or other document may be extended by consent without an order for extension."
Part 20 r 1 and r 4 are as follows: "Part 20 - Amendment 
General 
The Court may, at any stage of any proceedings, on application by any party or of its own motion, order that any document in the proceedings be amended, or that any party have leave to amend any document in the proceedings, in either case in such manner as the
Court thinks fit.

All necessary amendments shall be made for the purpose of determining the real questions raised by or otherwise depending on the proceedings, or of correcting any defect or error in any proceedings, or of avoiding multiplicity of proceedings.

Where there has been a mistake in the name of a party, subrule applies to the person intended to be made a party as if her were a party.

An order may be made, or leave may be granted, under subrule notwithstanding that the effect of the amendment is, or would be, to add or substitute a cause of action arising after the commencement of the proceedings, but in such a case the date of commencement of the proceedings, so far as concerns the cause of action, shall be the date on which the amendment is made.

This rule does not apply to the amendment of a minute of a judgment or order."
Part 20 r 4 reads as follows: "Statutes of Limitation (1) Where an relevant period of limitation expires after the date of filing of a statement of claim and after that expiry an application is made under rule 1 for leave to amend the statement of claim by making the amendment mentioned in any of subrules , (3), (4) and (5), the Court may in the circumstances mentioned in that subrule make an order giving leave accordingly, notwithstanding that that period has expired.
 ...

This rule does not limit the powers of the Court under rule ."
All of this is underpinned by the basal jurisdiction conferred by [s23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and the Court's inherent jurisdiction to do that "which may be necessary for the administration of justice". However that jurisdiction, broad as it is, does not extend to "authorise the making of orders excusing compliance with obligations or preventing the exercise of authority deriving from statute", Reid versus Howard <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 863] at 870-1 per Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh and Gummow JJ. This jurisdiction is assisted by [s63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s63.html) of that Act. Section 63 permits the Court to grant all such remedies as a party may be entitled, so that all matters in controversy are completely and finally determined, avoiding all multiplicity of legal proceedings
Finally, Pt 1 r 12 gives the Court power to dispense with the requirements of the rules, either before or after the occasion for compliance arises. Pt 1 r 13 gives the Court power to make directions where the manner or form of procedure is not prescribed by the Act or the rules, thus enabling the
Court to deal with procedural deficiencies or inadequacies that would otherwise result.
 
Scope and limitation of Court's remedial powers
Toohey J in Wardley Australia Ltd versus Western Australia (supra) at 559 in dicta dealt with whether the power to extend conferred by the [Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/) (Cth) and Order 13, r 2(1) thereunder were capable of being exercised compatibly with the so-called rule in Weldon versus Neal [(1887) 19 QBD ] and the three year time limit applicable to [s82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth). That rule, as quoted by Toohey J from the headnote, is that "A Plaintiff will not be allowed to amend by setting up fresh claims in respect of causes of action which since the issue of the writ have become barred by the Statute of Limitations." 
Toohey J held at 562 that: "[Section 82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) (2) (of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) 19 74 (Cth) imposing a three year time limitation to an action under [s82(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) based on a contravention of, relevantly, [Part V](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p5) and in particular [s52)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) presents a statutory barrier to any new cause of action; to this barrier, reference to express, implied or incidental powers provide no answer." 
Deane J agreed with Toohey J (at 539) whilst the other judges expressly left the matter open (at 534). However, if the document of 22 April 1994, though irregular, were not a nullity but sufficed to commence an application under [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) within the three year limitation period, then that reasoning would not preclude a remedial order being made, if otherwise there were no impediment. I have earlier concluded that unless rendered a nullity (the only basis left being lateness in complying with the consent order) such application was commenced within the three year limitation period, though irregular as a pleading. I turn to that basis below.
 
Lateness of filing giving rise to nullity
The Master asserted as the basis for his conclusion that this document so filed was a nullity, that it was filed without leave. The consent order made on 3 February 1994 includes a direction that the Plaintiff file a Defence to the Further Amended First Cross Claim by 18 February 1994.
It was indubitably filed without leave, being late (though for the reason earlier admitted, namely to be in a position to file the defence in final form after the previously ordered particulars were received from the
Defendant and in part also because of the extension of the inspection process).
It also included a plaintiff's cross-claim and no express leave was given to that- but again I consider that a defect or irregularity, in all the circumstances. The delay was not inordinate - it was eight weeks. But consistent with [Pt 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p20) r 5 of the Supreme Court Rules, the duration of the leave so granted had thus expired.
The Defendant, as did the Master, relied upon the decision of Gummow J (as he then was) in the Federal Court in Sentry (supra) especially at 218.
This is as authority for the contention that leave could not, or alternatively should not, be given. There the original leave was given to file only a
Defence yet the defendant without leave added a cross- claim, filing both late. Significantly however the court did not conclude that the attempt to file in those circumstances without leave was a nullity. He described the defence rather as "irregularly filed" - the language of s81 of the [Supreme
Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and of the equivalent [s51](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/s51.html) of the [Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/) (Cth). He did conclude that, as a matter of discretion, that he should not exercise his remedial powers under the equivalent to [Pt 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/index.html#p2) r , namely Order 1 r 8 of the Federal Court Rules. I should note here that s81 of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) finds its counterpart in s5l of the [Federal Court of Australia Act 1976](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/) (Cth). [Section 51](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/s51.html) provides at the discretion of the Court for remedial orders in relation to defects or irregularities and otherwise preserves the proceedings from invalidity "unless the Court is of the opinion that substantial injustice has been caused by the defect or irregularity and that the injustice cannot be remedied by an order of the Court."
Whilst Gummow J concluded that fresh leave should be given now to properly file the cross-claim, this was to deal with what was an admitted irregularity described by him as such. There was no prejudice to the party so denied a remedial order and required to file afresh. This was because Gummow
J still gave fresh leave for the irregular defence, with those very cross-claims, to be filed in circumstances where they were not time barred.
There was thus no prejudice to the defendant being denied the ability to treat them as already filed, as they were not time barred when filed afresh. Had there been that prejudice, it may well be that the court's undoubted discretion would have been differently exercised.
This approach in Sentry is thus entirely consistent with the matter being one of discretion rather than there being any absolute bar to a remedial order. It is one in which comparative prejudice is relevant in exercising that discretion in the overall interests of doing justice between the parties.
Significantly, s81 of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) was not, as is common ground, drawn to the Master's attention by either party (transcript at ). This suggests that the Defendant may not have made application to set aside the amendments under s8l(1)(b) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) , though the Defendant does not concede that it did not make any oral submission in that regard. Unfortunately there is no transcript confirming that.
It is clear [Pt 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p2) r 3 provides a wide power in this Court to extend time and to validate the late filing of a document. [Pt 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p20) r 5 is not a barrier, as it is expressed to be subject to [Pt 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p2) r 3. [Pt 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p20) r 5 provides as follows: "5 (1) Subject to [Part 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p2) [rule 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s3.html) (which relates to the extension and abridgment of time), where the Court makes an order giving a party leave to amend a document, then, if the party does not amend the document in accordance with the order before the expiration of the period specified for that purpose in the order or, if no period is so specified, before the expiration of days after the date on which the order is made, the order shall cease to have effect.

Subject to [Part 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p2) [rule 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s3.html), where, at the request of a party, each other party gives consent to amend a document, then, if the requesting party does not amend the document in accordance with the consent or consents before the expiration of 14 days after the date on which the consent or the first of the consents is given, the consent or consents shall cease to have effect."
The Plaintiff acknowledges that the relevant consent order may otherwise cease to have effect under [Pt 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p20) r 5 by reason of his failure to file the
Amended Defence within the fourteen days allowed. This can have potentially fatal consequences if, without extension, a relevant limitation period in the meantime expires. Thus in Fernance versus Nominal Defendant [(1989) 17 NSWLR 710], the addition of a new party was fatally barred by the limitation period. The amendment in that case was however effected under [Pt 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p8) r 11(3) in its then form and thus (in contrast to amendment under [Pt 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p2) r 3 and [Pt 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p20) r 1 and r4) under a regime where the amendment takes effect from when made, rather than retroactively. However, the Plaintiff contends that if an order were now made under [Pt 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p2) r 3 to "extend any time fixed by the rules or by any ... order", reinforced by s81 of the Act, then that extension would be effective and operate retroactively, so avoiding that potentially fatal consequence.
I should add that even were the time limit as originally fixed by the consent order treated as so fixed pursuant to an agreement implied by the consent, this does not prevent the Court exercising its discretion to grant an extension. It may however be relevant to an exercise of the Court's discretion, in requiring a more exceptional case so to extend that time; see
Ritchie's Supreme Court Procedures Vol. 1 Butterworths at 2113 para .3.2. and the authorities there cited.
Fernance (supra) held that the power in s81 of the Act to cure irregularities, where there has been a "failure to comply with (the) Act or the Rules, "does not permit the Court to allow an amendment the effect of which would be to negate the operation of Pt 8, r 11.
Gleeson CJ at 723-4 gave two reasons for this, the second of which he described as more fundamental: "The first difficulty with this submission, and with any attempt to rely on s81 in the present case, is that there was no 'failure to comply with the requirements of (the) Act or of the rules - but merely a failure by the plaintiff to take advantage of an opportunity, limited in point of time, created by the consent order. That order, pursuant to statute, extended by a certain time the limitation period in relation to the plaintiff's claim against Mrs Vaneck and, in effect, gave the plaintiff leave to propound that claim within the specified time. That leave was not taken up.

There is, however, a more fundamental difficulty about seeking assistance from s81. The [Limitation Act 1969](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) by its terms operated to extinguish the cause of action against Mrs Vaneck.
That cannot, in the circumstances of the present case, be undone by an exercise of the power given by s81, especially when regard is had to the nature of those powers. I note that the President, whose reasons I have had the advantage of reading, proposes that the intended result be achieved by ordering, pursuant to s81, that the plaintiff now have leave to file an amended statement of claim against Mrs Vaneck.
Such an order would presumably be made pursuant to s81 (1)(b) which empowers the Court to "exercise its powers under this
Act and the rules to allow amendments".
The relevant power to allow amendments is, however, for the reasons earlier given that contained in Pt 8, r 11, and subr (3) provides that if and when an amended statement of claim is filed the date of commencement of the proceedings against Mrs Vaneck will be the date of such filing. That will be too late. I see nothing in s81 that empowers this Court to amend Pt 8, r 11.
Treating the Rules of Court as slaves rather than masters does not warrant their emasculation."
However, in Australian Coastal Shipping Commission versus Curtis Cruising Pty
Ltd [(1989) 17 NSWLR 734], Fernance was distinguished in this respect. The distinguishing feature lay in the circumstance that in Coastal Shipping it was before the limitation period expired that the parties obtained an order permitting the original statement of claim to be amended, to add an additional party. The Plaintiff brought an order under s81 to cure the irregularity of failing to file and serve the amended statement of claim. The Court held that this amendment was not effected under Part 8 Rule 11 (3) but rather under either Pt 8 r 2 and r 4 or under Pt 20, r 1. Significantly, Priestley JA at -5 then distinguished Fernance thus: "Given the matter was argued before the court of Appeal the plaintiff relied, inter alia, on s81. Gleeson CJ, with whom
Clarke JA agreed, said there were two difficulties with the s81 submission. The first is the one arguably relevant here. The
Chief Justice said the first difficulty was that there had been no "failure to comply with the requirements of (the) Act or of the rules - but merely a failure by the plaintiff to take the opportunity limited in point of time granted by the consent order. The Chief Justice's construction of the orders made was that they "in effect, gave the plaintiff leave to propound claim within the specified time ".
This view is based upon a construction of the orders which was open in that case, particularly in light of the first order made, but which I do not think it would be right to adopt in regard to the orders in the present case. In Fernance, when the orders in question were made there was no draft statement of claim before the court, nor as a necessary consequence, had the real defendant been in any sense served with a copy of it. As a result, I do not think it can reasonably be said that when the orders were made, the plaintiff was there and then purporting to begin proceedings.
He was being given an opportunity by the order to begin proceedings. By contrast, it seems to me in the present case, where upon the making of the master's order, nothing more needed to be done than putting some court marks upon a document already in the court file, to the knowledge of the Commission, when all concerned knew that in the ordinary course the orders were certain to be made, the second plaintiff was, at that point, possibly beginning and certainly purporting to begin proceedings against the Commission.
 
The propriety of making this distinction between Fernance and the present case seems to me to be confirmed by reference to the second reason given in Fernance by Gleeson CJ for holding against the applicability of s81. After mentioning the difficulty already referred to, he continued by saying that there was "a more fundamental difficulty about seeking assistance from s81 ". This comment indicates that it was the second rather than the first difficulty which was the real basis of his decision concerning s81.
The second difficulty is one that does not even arguably apply in the present case. It was that the application with which the Court was dealing in Fernance's case was one brought after the expiry of the limitation period The court was being asked to exercise its powers under s81 in respect of an application made after the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) had operated to extinguish the cause of action against the real defendant. In the present case, the
Commission is seeking to deny the application of s81 to events that occurred before the expiry of the limitation period. This makes what seems to me to be a decisive distinction between the two cases."
In the present case, there was an amended defence before the
Court of which the Plaintiff had notice and it was likewise filed and served, before the expiry of the limitation period. The substance of the Trade Practices
Allegations was thus pleaded within the limitation period though with the defect of omitting loss or damage and reliance. I have earlier concluded that the application was commenced within three years, as required by s87(1CA)(b), notwithstanding the failure to plead loss or damage (or reliance) within the three years. Loss or damage and reliance remained to be pleaded and were finally pleaded before the Master following his November 1994 directions. I do not consider anything hangs on the fact that the pleading is subject now also to yet further refinement, as foreshadowed by the Plaintiff. Thus while it is not simply a matter of "putting some court marks on a document already on the court file", I do not consider that fatal. The Defendant was clearly on notice within the limitation period of the substance of those Allegations, and any omission of pleading loss or damage and reliance was a defect or irregularity.
I therefore adopt, mutatis mutandis, what was said by Priestley JA as to the first distinction with
Fernance in relation to this admittedly lesser difficulty.
I likewise adopt his second distinction in relation to the more fundamental difficulty. This is based on the fact that the relevant application for leave to file was one brought before expiry of the limitation period. Here, as in Australian Coastal Shipping (supra), it was sought to deny the application of s81 "to events that occurred before the expiry of the limitation period". If indeed a fresh application were now made for a remedial order, it is no more than a renewal of the application earlier made prior to the limitation period on 4 March 1994 and renewed on 24 March 1994 but whose further prosecution was overlooked at the time. It was later renewed and pursued before the Master unsuccessfully, by motion dated 26 October 1994.
Though this last step was after the relevant limitation period expired (on any view it expired at the latest, three years after the Plaintiff's dismissal, namely 15 July 1994), nonetheless the critical events pre- date that period.
Thus the
Defendant was, prior to expiration of the limitation period, on notice both of the application to extend the time to file and serve the document, and also of the actual amended defence with its Trade Practices
Allegations (though subject to later amplification to plead loss or damage, reliance and other refinements).
 
Retroactive effect of remedial orders [Part 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/index.html#p2) r 3(2) in providing that time can be extended after the time expires and by an application made after the time expires, thereby permits a
retroactive remedial order. It thus, if granted, avoids the necessity for a fresh grant of leave to file the document as distinct from a remedial order in relating to the previous filing. It is well accepted that under the relevant
Rules of Court, whether Federal (Order 13 r 2) or in New South Wales (see in particular [Pt 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/index.html#p20) r 1 and r 4), an amendment acts retrospectively or retroactively, taking effect from the date of the original pleadings: Sneade v
Wotherton Barytes and Lead Mining Co Ltd [(1904) 1 KB 295] at 419 per Samuels JA (Moffitt P and Glass JA concurring);
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd versus Larcos [(1987) 13 NSWLR 286];
Harris versus Western Australian Exim Corporation (1994) (supra) at 395 per Hill J (Federal Court of Australia). It is in fact the practice of the Court when granting such an order, to extend time for the late filing to a particular date and not require a fresh filing.
This conforms to the evident retroactive operation of the rule and is consonant with the intent of s81 that non-compliance with time, form and content requirements give rise to irregularity, not nullity.
But it is non-compliance with time, form and content requirements of the
Rules, or the Act itself(my emphasis) which is deemed by s81 to be a mere irregularity, rather than non-compliance with a Court order as such. Does it follow that s81 may therefore not be called in aid in the present circumstances? However, it is clear enough that the relevant consent order was made pursuant to the Rules; see generally Australian Coastal Shipping at 753-4 and Harkness versus Bells Asbestos Engineering Limited [(1962) 2 QB 229.] Thus the present filing was ultimately required to be made by the Rules, because Pt 20 r 8 required that any amendment (here to the earlier filed defence to cross-claim originally filed by the Plaintiff on 25 June 1993) must be made by filing a fresh document.
It could thus fairly be said that the consent order which required that filing of the fresh document (the amended defence) by 18
February 1994 was itself ultimately a requirement of the Rules, and in particular Pt 20 r 8. Thus I am satisfied that s81 does apply here, to render the defect in question one of irregularity rather than giving rise to a nullity. But even if that were not so, Pt r 3 clearly applies to extension of time fixed by "the rules or by any judgment or order". And in any event the power of amendment in Pt 20 r 1 and r 4 is in no way limited to amendments required to conform to the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) or Rules.
Finally, there is nothing in the consent order or in the preceding correspondence between the parties which limited the scope of the amended defence which could be filed. It is clear enough that more than merely consequential amendments were anticipated, accepting that the Defendant did not anticipate the Trade Practices Allegations. That they did not anticipate those Allegations is in any event not relevant. Nor do I consider that I can safely draw any inference to the contrary from correspondence subsequent to its filing on 22 April 1994. I should also record that it was not ultimately disputed between the parties that there was no agreement between the parties to limit the scope of amendments that the Plaintiff might make to his Defence.
Clearly what the Defendant did do was vigorously protest the amendments made and at no stage accepted their legitimacy.
Furthermore, the amendments containing the Trade Practices Allegations (paras 33 et seq) sought the Court's intervention under [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade
Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) to strike down or refuse to enforce certain terms (said by the Defendant to be implied in the contract). I am satisfied this pleading was genuinely in consequence of and in response to the Defendant's own document filed on 11 January 1994. This was the Further
Amended First
Cross-Claim where, in paras 5(b) and 5(1), the Defendant seeks to have certain new terms implied into the Employment
Contract. It would have been, as I have said, better to have pleaded these Allegations by way of amendment to the
Statement of Claim.
However, for the reasons I have earlier set out, I do not consider that this nullifies the document of 22 April 1994, as distinct from rendering it irregular, consistent with s81 of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) . Indeed as I have said, there is a reasonable basis for pleading them in the Defence, though the Statement of Claim, for reasons of consistency, should still be amended in parallel fashion.
 [Part 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p20) r 1 and r 4 as an alternative or additional source of power
Finally, I should return to [Pt 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p20) r 1 and r 4. This is claimed by the
Plaintiff as a potential source of alternative or additional power. This would be to enable the
Court to permit a fresh document to be filed, had the document of 22 April 1994 been a nullity, contrary to my earlier conclusion, or in order to add an amendment to the document filed, being in either case to include a modified version of the Trade Practices
Allegations in that Defence.
The Plaintiff further claims this may be done notwithstanding expiry of the relevant period of limitation.
I should emphasise that recent Court of Appeal authority (Archbishop of
Perth versus "A " to JC" inclusive [(1995) 18 ACSR 333] at 348 and 350 per Cole JA) confirms the expansive power of (retroactive) amendment thereby conferred.
Thus it empowered the conversion of a summons which merely sought an extension to the limitation period to a statement of claim which included a claim for personal injuries though not the substitution of a different legal entity as a party where there was no mistake in the original nomination.
Cole JA at 348 referred to these sources of statutory power to make amendments as conferring an abundance of power. "The Supreme
Court of New South Wales has an abundance of power to grant all such amendments as are necessary in the interests of justice to enable the true issues in dispute between parties to litigation to be determined. The form of proceedings commenced, if other than that required by the Act or rules, is to be treated as an irregularity. The sources of the power to which I have referred are found in s81 Supreme Court Act 1970 (WA), Pt 20 rr 1 and 4 and Pt 26 r 1."
None of the amendments here contemplated should thus fall outside the potential scope of this power.
In light of my earlier conclusion that the document of 22 April 1994 is not a nullity, on any of the three grounds alleged by the Defendant, and second that the application constituted by the Trade Practices Allegations does not infringe the three year time limitation in s87(1CA)(b), I do not need to consider whether this or any other rule could still be called in aid if the document were a nullity or to overcome a time limitation. It suffices that I conclude that this rule is an alternative or additional source of power to make remedial amendments to either the Statement of Claim or the Defence, or both.
It is true Pt 20 r 4(1) relates only to amending statements of claim.
But Pt 20 r 4(7) makes clear that this rule "does not limit the powers of the
Court under r 1". That rule is therefore not limited to amendments of statements of claim. The effect of subr (7) coupled with r 1 is that even where other provisions of r 4 are not satisfied, the court retains a discretion to allow an amendment, although it has the effect of adding a new cause of action after the limitation period has expired; McGee versus Yeomans [(1977) 1 NSWLR 273] at 279-280, subsequently affirmed by the Court of Appeal.
 
Nature of Orders sought
I note that as a primary matter, the Plaintiff seeks a remedial order that the document of 22 April 1994 be restored to the file and that a declaration be made that it is not a nullity. Then the Plaintiff seeks an order to extend time for compliance with the order made on 3 February 1994, by extending the time to 22 April 1994 for the filing of the document which was filed on that date, primarily so applying under Pt 2 r 3, with any failure to comply with the original consent order or irregularity in the document of 22
April 1994 being remedied by an appropriate order, a nunc pro tunc. Finally, it can be taken that the Plaintiff will seek an order under Pt 2 r 3 (and to the extent necessary
Pt 20 r 1 and r 4) permitting the Plaintiff to amend that document not only to include loss and damage and reliance (as already pleaded before the Master) but with yet further refinements to the Trade Practices
Allegations (see the proposed document set out at tab of the Plaintiff's submissions folder for a guide to what is envisaged, though apparently not complete). That latter aspect has not been the subject of any detailed argument as yet. Finally, the Trade Practices Allegations in their ultimate form need to be added to the Statement of Claim by amendment, as well as to the Defence.
 
Conclusions
I am satisfied that, in light of my earlier conclusions, the making of such orders does not give rise to the difficulty to which the dicta in Wardley or Spedley relate concerning the limitation period of three years. I therefore conclude such limitation period is no impediment to making the orders sought, if otherwise they can and should be made, having regard to the issues still to be considered. I also conclude that on none of the bases put is the document of 22 April 1994 a nullity, so that ground appears no impediment to making a remedial order. I finally conclude that the discretion exists to grant such a remedial order and that it may be exercised afresh by this Court on appeal from the Master, based on the principles I have earlier set out (though subject to any further matters which may be put by the Defendant); see "Overall approach in reviewing the Master's determination and findings". I have already foreshadowed the kind of remedial order in contemplation. I deal later with whether such order should be made, under Ultimate Questions.
 
Question 2(3)(c) - Comparative
Prejudice
It is clear that the prejudice to the Plaintiff, if the Plaintiff's document of 22 April 1994 cannot be filed with an appropriate remedial order, is that the Plaintiff will forever be unable to raise his Cross- Claim. That is clearly a matter to which the Master failed to give sufficient weight, if indeed he took it into account (though this may be explicable by the view the
Master took that the document of 22 April 1994 was a nullity); see G.S.A.
Industries Pty Limited versus NT Gas Limited [(1990) 24 NSWLR 710] at 715 per Samuels
JA.
Against that prejudice to the Plaintiff is the prejudice which the
Master did take into account, so far as the Defendant was concerned. I quote the relevant part of the Master's judgment, at 6-8: "There is still of course a need to consider the application to file the amended defence which is now foreshadowed. The first application for that leave was made in October 1994, after the limitation period. The detail of the actual amendment appears to have been given on 2 February 1995 and in the letter to
Minter Ellison Morris Fletcher, although earlier version of this was given in December
I have already set out above the actual version and it is apparent from that that important elements in the case concerned the nature of the representations which found the breach of s52. In particular the representations which were oral were made by Dr Michael Dill and in the presence of a number of people including Mr Weber. There has been evidence as to whether any prejudice might be suffered in the filing of a defence which would include these representations particularised in the way that they are. It is clear that Dr Dill ceased to be an employee of the first defendant on 31 December 1992 and that he no longer resides in Switzerland. However, I understand the situation to be, and this is not disputed, that he is prepared to now give instructions in relation to the present claims.

More importantly is the situation in respect of Mr Weber. In an affidavit 3 February 1995, Joanne Michele Golack swore in paragraph 7 as follows: "Marco Weber ceased to be an employee of SGI on 28 February 1994.
Although Mr Weber resides in Switzerland, SGI no longer has any power or right (either under
Swiss law or on a commercial basis) to require him to assist SGI in its investigations of Drabsch's allegations. Although
Mr Weber has already sworn an affidavit which has been filed in these proceedings he has recently informed Mr Apafi that he is not prepared to assist SGI further in the investigations necessary to defend Drabsch's new allegations".

It is clear that Mr Weber would still have been available to the first defendant if the defence to amended cross-claim had been filed within the time limited by the consent directions. It would have been a matter of some importance because the structure of what was happening at that stage was simply there was to be a defence to an amended cross-claim. In the earlier defence there had been no s52 defence or quasi cross-claim. It appeared for the first time in the document which I have struck off the file. No doubt if it appeared within the time limited by the consent directions there would be an opportunity to take instructions.
Although Mr Weber features in one part of the allegations, simply reading a speech of Dr Dill, it is clear that he was a party to some of the oral representations.

Considering the matter now and considering also the time that has now expired, it seems to me that there is prejudice which would be caused by the filing of a defence which included a [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) claim. Accordingly, I decline to give leave to file a defence including that claim."
To this the Plaintiff responds as follows, in its written submission of June 1995. It is convenient that I quote the relevant part. "Prejudice 
It is clear that one matter for the court to take into account in considering whether an amendment should be allowed, is the prejudice which would accrue to the opposite party. The Master at the foot of page 7 of his Judgment of 3 March 1994, deals with the matter by saying that the detail of the actual amendment appears to have been given to the Solicitors for the Defendant as late as February 1995 but records that an earlier version was given in December of 1994. In fact, the substance of the allegations had been included in the document filed on 22 April of 1994 and the further amendments which were made in December of 1994 and ultimately in February of 1995, were designed to provide additional particulars which the Master had indicated in
November of 1994 were desirable.

It hardly seems to accurately describe the situation to suggest that the Defendants did not know the allegation which was going to be made, at least in its broad terms, until February of 1995.

Some reliance has been made on the fact that Dr Dill ceased to be an employee on 31 December 1992 and apparently some material was put before the
Master orally to correct information contained in an Affidavit of the Defendant's solicitor, Ms Joanne Golack, that Dr Dill was, in fact, unavailable to the Defendants. The
Master appears to have taken up that statement (made from the Bar table) at page 8 of his Judgment but it is important to understand that Dr Dill is the officer of the Company who swore the original
Defence and Cross Claim.
 
The substantial prejudice, however, said to run against the
Defendant is that Mr Weber, who has sworn an Affidavit and is one of the persons particularised as having taken part in the so called Trade Practices allegations count is now unavailable to the Defendant. His involvement in these matters is really minimal and is limited to two matters. One allegation is that he read a speech prepared by Dill. That can hardly be in dispute and Dill could provide those instructions in any event. The transcripts of those speeches have been discovered by the
Defendant. The second allegation is that Weber was present when
Dill made certain representations in the presence of McErlane and Weber in Zurich in February of 1991. Again Dill could provide instructions as to this matter and there was no evidence before the Master to suggest that instructions from Dill indicate that those matters are in dispute.

In these circumstances, the allegation of prejudice because of difficulties with Weber can hardly be sustained.

Importantly, the paragraph of the Affidavit on which the
Master relies, namely paragraph 7, is a paragraph of Ms Golack's
Affidavit, which was objected to and was not pressed (see
Transcript of 1 March 1995) - so that there was no evidence of the unavailability of Weber." 
Conclusions concerning comparative prejudice
I set out my conclusions as follows: 
The Plaintiff is correct in saying that the Defendants knew by 22 April the substance of the Trade Practices Allegations, though not the particularised loss or damage suffered (or reliance) which appears to have been provided by, at the latest, February 1995, nor the refinements of those allegations now foreshadowed. 
The non-availability of Dr Dill, who is no longer employed from 31
December 1992, cannot be of any weight. He after all so ceased to be available before the date for filing of the Defence permitted in the consent order. And in any event there is no evidence that Dr Dill who swore the original Defence and Cross-Claim, would not be available, or be less available than if the
Plaintiff's Defence had been filed on time. 
So far as Mr Weber is concerned, I accept the Plaintiff's contention that his involvement is really minimal, limited to the two matters mentioned.
I also accept that insofar as his evidence bore on those two matters, Dr Dill could give the necessary instructions (and in any event it appears those two matters may not be in dispute anyway). 
I accept, as put by the Defendant in its undated submissions, that the
Master did have regard to the fact of the 22 April 1994 document being available to SGI (see
B7(a) of Plaintiffs submission earlier quoted).
 
I also accept as put by the Defendant that the material put before the
Master orally was not to "correct" information in the affidavit, but to negative an inference which might otherwise have been drawn. I am prepared to assume in favour of the Defendant that the Master took this information into account in the Plaintiff's favour though declining to allow the amendment (See
B7(b) of Plaintiffs submission earlier quoted). 
Finally, I am prepared to assume in favour of the Defendant that paragraph 7 of Ms Golack's affidavit was pressed and no objection taken to it (or if taken, then maintained).
However, the Master appears to make no specific mention of any other aspects of prejudice, as may have been referred to in the affidavit of J T Golack, than that earlier mentioned concerning Mr Weber. 
But even accepting or assuming in favour of the Defendant what is said in (4) above, I do not consider that any prejudice to the Defendant outweighs the permanent prejudice to the Plaintiff if precluded from filing his Defence with the Trade Practices Allegations included.
 
Anterior Question 2(4) - possible amendment to document of 22 April 1994, if filing regularised
It is premature to answer this question till the ultimate question is finally answered. 
CONCESSION AND SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS
The Defendant's Concession 
It has been conceded for the purposes only of this application that the
Defendant does not submit that the Trade Practices Allegations were invented, nor would it submit that there is no material available as a basis to support the substance of the allegations and will not say there is no conceivable substance to the Trade Practices Allegations and is prepared to assume for the purposes of this application there is a prima facie argument to support the
Allegations. 
Summary Conclusions 
There are special grounds, within [s75A(8)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75a.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) , for admitting certain evidence not before the Master. This includes the additional evidence concerning the Plaintiff's explanation for the late filing of the Defence. This is particularly as relates to the Plaintiff's delayed inspection of the documents only made available to the Plaintiff's solicitors in February and March 1994 and as relates to the Defendant not providing particulars concerning its then Further Amended First Cross-Claim before 22
April 1994 and as to why the Plaintiff, having first delayed pending those particulars, finally filed its Defence without them; see Mr Veitch's affidavit of 26 May 1995, paras 2 to 4 and my earlier judgment of 27 June 
The Plaintiff did have a genuine explanation for the late filing of his
Defence based on the matters in (2) above. 
That explanation was not offered to the Master. There was some material before the Master which conceivably might have suggested a possible explanation, by way of inference, though it was clearly a matter for the
Plaintiff, as applicant to make an explicit explanation for the delay. 
However, lack of that explanation does not prevent a favourable exercise of discretion in favour of the applicant.
What it does do is make the Court examine more closely whether there really is a triable issue going to the merits - conceded by the Defendant for the purpose of this application; see above.
 
Although the Plaintiff by two Motions of 4 March 1994 and March 1994 sought to defer the time for filing the Defence, the Plaintiff mistakenly overlooked following up those Motions. This was more likely from inadvertence than because the Plaintiff thought such Motions would not eventually be granted. Indeed it appears the Plaintiff was proceeding on the assumption that the dispensation would readily be given due to the delayed particulars from the
Defendant. 
The Master was therefore mistaken in stating in his judgment on 3 March that the first application for leave to file the amended Defence including the Trade Practices Allegations was made in October 1994, after the limitation period had expired.
Those applications were made on 4 and 29 March (before the expiry of the earliest possible limitation period) though inadvertently not proceeded with. 
It was neither necessary nor possible for those March 1994 Notices of
Motion to identify the form of the proposed defence or identify the Trade
Practices Allegations. This was because the Plaintiff was still awaiting particulars from the Defendant of the Cross-Claim and legitimately at that time wanted these before formulating the Plaintiff's Defence. The Plaintiff felt himself compelled in the end to file the Defence without these particulars, for fear of the possible application of a limitation period expiring on 26 April 1994. 
The Defendant was aware, before that limitation period expired, of the
Defence and in particular the substance of the Trade Practices Allegations, though there was then no pleading of the loss or damage suffered or reliance and refinements to the pleading of the Defence have also been foreshadowed.
That loss or damage and reliance was particularised in the material before the
Master after his November 1994 directions. [Section 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) may not be pleaded as a defence. However, the Trade Practices Allegations were not so pleaded, though included in a Defence.

Leaving aside limitation questions, the Trade Practices Allegations were pleaded so as to incorporate an application for relief in conformity with the requirements of [s87(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of that Act, though with loss or damage to the
Plaintiff (and reliance) only pleaded and particularised following the
Master's directions in November 1994. That deficiency in pleading is an irregularity or defect but does not nullify the Defence.
 
The Trade Practices
Allegations so pleaded gave rise to a substantive cause of action which is properly characterised as a plaintiff's cross-claim.
The general rule is that such a cross-claim should have been pleaded by amending the Plaintiff's Statement of Claim (there being no suggestion that the cross-claim arose after the Writ). However, here justice would be better served and consistency still achieved, by permitting (if there is otherwise no impediment to granting a remedial order) the Plaintiff's Defence to plead the
Plaintiff's Cross-claim, identified as such, but making it a condition of any remedial order and done pursuant to it, that such Cross-Claim also be added to the Plaintiff's Statement of Claim by way of amendment in equivalent form. 
The document filed on 22 April 1994, though irregular, was not a nullity, and the Master erred in law in concluding otherwise. 
The document of 22 April 1994 is irregular because of its lateness of filing after the time laid down by the consent order and because of its content in failing then to plead loss or damage (or reliance) and in being pleaded in a Defence, without there being a corresponding amendment made (with leave) to the Plaintiff's Statement of Claim. That irregularity is amenable to being cured by an appropriate remedial order pursuant to the discretion conferred on the Court in that behalf by s81 of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and [Pt 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p2) r 3 of the Supreme Court Rules (assisted as necessary by Pt 20 r 1 and r 4); see 12 above. This is however subject to considering the further grounds of objection to this course foreshadowed by the Defendant. 
The three year time limitation by when such application "may be commenced" laid down by [s87(1CA(b))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s87.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) was complied with in the present circumstances, by the filing of the document on April 1994, despite its irregularity and despite its failure then to plead loss or damage (or reliance). Accordingly, that time limitation does not preclude such a remedial order now being made retroactively pursuant to the powers in that behalf under the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and Rules in relation to the document of 22 April 1994. Nor does it preclude any necessary amendment, in particular to plead loss or damage (and reliance). The Master erred in law in concluding otherwise. The Defendant was clearly on notice before the expiry of the three year time limitation of the substance of the Plaintiff's cross-claim as well as of the Defence generally.
 
The prejudice to the Plaintiff, if the Plaintiff's irregular document of 22 April 1994 cannot or was not remedied so far as the Trade
Practices
Allegations are concerned, by an appropriate remedial order, is that the
Plaintiff will forever be precluded from pleading these. The Master failed to give sufficient weight to that permanent prejudice to the Plaintiff, if indeed he took it into account (though this may be explicable by the view the Master took that the document of 22 April 1994 was a nullity). 
Against that prejudice to the Plaintiff, is the lesser prejudice which the Master did take into account, so far as the Defendant was concerned, regarding principally the evidence of Mr Weber (and to the extent relevant Dr
Dill). The Master erred in giving undue weight to any such prejudice to the
Defendant and in failing to conclude that the permanent prejudice to the
Plaintiff outweighed it.
 
Ultimate
Questions 1(1) and (2) - Was the Master in error, can and should a remedial order be made in all the circumstances?
In light of the concession earlier quoted and the conclusions I have earlier recorded and placing particular emphasis on the fundamentality of the principle that "a claim should not pass into judgment against a party who wishes to defend it unless there has been a hearing on the merits", my preliminary conclusion, but subject to what follows, is that both these ultimate questions should be answered in favour of the Plaintiff. A hearing on the merits necessarily encompasses a hearing not only of any defence to a claim but also of any response to a cross- claim, even if it be itself a cross-claim by the Plaintiff. This is where in each case there is "an arguable case to be tried on the merits", per Priestley JA in Cohen versus McWilliam and earlier in Byron (supra). That is conceded here. Furthermore,
I see no basis for distinguishing a defence from a cross-claim. Both ultimately determine the outcome of the claim in resolving all of the issues between the parties as provided by [s63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s63.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) . No other factor such as court efficiency or the conduct of the Plaintiff, on the material presently before me, deters me from that conclusion.
Thus if, as conceded for the purpose of this application there is a prima facie argument to support the
Trade Practices Allegations, and given the earlier conclusions that they may, with an appropriate remedial order, be validly pleaded, it follows that a trial on the merits necessarily entities the Plaintiff to plead those Allegations. This is provided there be no other impediment in so doing. My preliminary conclusion is that there is sufficient basis for this Court to conclude that the Master's decision was incorrect in ordering that the document of 22 April 1994 was a nullity and that it should be removed from the file.
In particular, I conclude that [s52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s52.html) has not been pleaded by way of defence but rather as an application under s87(1A) commenced within time. I further conclude that an allegation of loss or damage (and reliance), by an appropriate remedial order can with other refinements be pleaded by way of amendment so as to date back to the document of 22 April
I finally conclude that expiry of the three year limitation period does not prevent such amendment or cause the application to be commenced out of time.
It is also my preliminary conclusion, subject to what follows, that the
Court does have power to make, and. should make, remedial orders of the nature
I have earlier described.
Such orders are based on the statutory power to cure any irregularity under s81 of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) assisted by application of [Pt 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p2) r 3 and to the extent necessary [Pt 20](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p20) r 1 and r 4; such jurisdiction and powers are underpinned or assisted by [ss23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) and [63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s63.html) of that Act and the Court's inherent jurisdiction. Thus such orders should enable the
Court to grant any remedies so that all matters in controversy between the parties, as enjoined s63 of the Act, are completely and finally determined and otherwise to make any orders as necessary in the administration of justice. I am satisfied that such orders would not entail excusing compliance with any statutory obligation and in particular any applicable limitation period. My preliminary conclusion is that such orders would be capable of curing any irregularity in the document of 22 April 1994 in the circumstances of this case and in the events which have happened, though subject as noted below.
However, these preliminary conclusions are necessarily subject to any further issues which may properly be raised by the Defendant as foreshadowed, as well as possible responses by the Plaintiff such as estoppel and waiver.
I intend to hear from both parties on what remains to be dealt with so that an early hearing date can be allocated.
 
ORDERS .
I direct that the matter come back before me on a date to be arranged through my Associate in the next fourteen days to deal with outstanding matters then or at a date to be fixed. Costs are probably best dealt with after those outstanding matters have been concluded.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/332.html  
