

Juffermans versus Central Sydney Area Health Authority and Anor Matter No /96 [1997] NSWSC 298 (8 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Juffermans versus Central Sydney Area Health Authority & Anor /96 August 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /96 - Juffermans versus Central Sydney Area Health Authority & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 2 February 1996. The process names two defendants. The first defendant is a former employer of the plaintiff. She was employed as a psychiatric nurse at Rozelle Hospital. 
The process alleges a work incident that took place on or about 20 November
It is alleged that she suffered, inter alia, low back injury when she lifted a laundry bag. This claim is founded on negligence and breach of statutory duty.

The process further alleges numerous assaults and aggravations experienced by the plaintiff when she was obliged to provide psychiatric services to a patient (George Damouras). It is alleged that the assaults took place during a period from about February 1991 to 23 December 1992. The claim is founded on negligence.

The second defendant is the employer of Margaret Rand (a physiotherapist). The plaintiff came under her care for treatment in March 1993. It is alleged that the plaintiff suffered personal injury whilst performing exercises recommended by and/or under the supervision of Margaret Rand. The injury was said to be an aggravation of the back injury suffered in 1984. This claim is also founded on negligence.

Both defendants have filed Defences. The first defendant has pleaded the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), (the Act) as a defence.

The plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion (it was also filed on 2 February 1996).
It seeks an extension of the limitation period for the bringing of the claim arising out of the injury suffered in 1984. The application is supported by an affidavit sworn by the plaintiff and an affidavit sworn by Jan Robinson (a solicitor for the plaintiff). The plaintiff gave some supplementary oral evidence in chief. She has been cross-examined and re-examined.

It came on for hearing as a special fixture allocated for 20 May 1996. I shall mention some of the material which emerged during the hearing. This reference is not intended to be exhaustive.

The plaintiff had been a nurse since about 1969. There was evidence suggesting that she may have suffered a back injury in 1975. Prior to 1984, she had experienced a niggling back. It seems that the plaintiff was a casual employee at the time of the 1984 injury. She remembers lifting a particularly heavy bag and feeling a sharp pain in her back. In her affidavit, she deposes to the incident having taken place on or about 4 November 1984. In oral evidence, she said that her husband had found an old diary and that the date was actually 2
November 1984. She reported the injury. There is now no record of the injury as the injury report book is missing.

She sought treatment from a chiropractor. Save perhaps for missing one or two casual shifts, she did not take any time off from work. She says that she continued with her normal duties, but her back never felt right again. She did not make any claim for compensation. She did not seek any medical treatment.

She gave evidence that her low back returned to its pre 1984 incident condition. By and large, it remained at that level until 1993. Her condition had flared up in, inter alia, 1990. In August 1993, she experienced the further incident which aggravated her lower back by the performance of exercises. She has said that her condition continued to deteriorate thereafter.

The plaintiff's affidavit is silent as to what took place between November and 1991. It provides a summary of material relevant to the problems she had with the patient. She describes the experience as a supervening factor which has caused post traumatic stress reaction.

It seems that she consulted her present solicitors in or about February 1993.
She received legal advice in relation to her rights to victims' compensation and workers' compensation. She has received workers' compensation payments for various periods in respect of post traumatic stress reaction, which resulted from the assaults and aggravations by the patient.

In November 1993, she consulted Dr Michael Ryan (an orthopaedic specialist).
He provided a report (see annexure `B' to her affidavit).

In August 1994, the plaintiff sought further legal advice concerning the harassment by the patient. A conference was had with the plaintiff on 28
November 1994. The plaintiff's solicitors then became aware of the 1984 injury. In February 1995, she consulted Dr Robert Gordon Smith (an orthopaedic specialist). He provided a report (see annexure `C' to her affidavit). She read the report in late February or early March 1995. She says that it confirmed her suspicions that there was a connection between her 1984 symptoms and the 1993 aggravation. On 7 August 1995, she had a conference with Mr
Elliott of Counsel. He gave advice in respect of the 1984 incident. She says that she then became aware of the matters which are referred to in paragraph 9 of her affidavit. Further, she says that, until that conference, she had been preoccupied with, inter alia, her emotional and psychiatric symptoms and less concerned with her physical problems.

The plaintiff was medically retired from her employment. Information as to this matter was given to her solicitors on 22 November 1995. A conference was arranged with Mr Morrison SC. He gave advice in conference on 13 December
After receiving this advice, the plaintiff made the decision to commence proceedings for the purpose of prosecuting her claims. She received further advice from Mr Elliott on 15 January 1996.

During submissions, Counsel for the plaintiff made an application for leave to re-open. The application became necessary because of deficiencies in the plaintiff's evidence. The application was granted on terms and the hearing of the limitation application was stood over generally with liberty to restore.
It was listed for mention before a Registrar on 1 July 1996. No attempt was made to have the application restored for hearing until 1997.

It was listed before a Registrar in June 1997. On 26 June 1997, a further special fixture was allocated. The hearing was completed on 15 July 1997.

The plaintiff herself has now sworn a further affidavit. It was sworn on 15
July 1997 (on the day allocated for the hearing of the special fixture). The first defendant now seeks an order that the plaintiff's claim be dismissed for want of prosecution. Two further affidavits have been sworn by Jan Robinson. A solicitor for the first defendant (Mr Herron) has sworn an affidavit. The three affidavits were sworn for the purposes of the first defendant's application.

The proceedings became subject to Differential Case Management. They were placed in the Not Ready List on 2 February 1996. The proceedings remain in that List. On the application of the first defendant, its Notice of Motion has been stood over to abide the result of the plaintiff's Notice of Motion.

The plaintiff's further affidavit deals with the suggestion of a 1975 injury.
She has no independent recollection of a back injury in 1975. Prior to 1984, she experienced a "nurses niggly back".

The Court has a discretionary power to extend the limitation period. The plaintiff must first satisfy the relevant threshold requirements. When these are satisfied, the plaintiff bears the onus of satisfying the Court that an order should be made.

In exercising the discretion, the Court has regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before it. The discretion is exercised so that the interests of justice are best served between the parties.

In the circumstances of this case, it is not necessary to embark on any detailed consideration of the relevant statutory provisions. The threshold questions were argued in a largely general manner. References were made to her unawareness of the nature and extent of her injury and the connection between her injury and the breach of duty.

There has been no attack on the credibility of the plaintiff. She gave the impression of being an honest witness. The difficulties lie elsewhere. Save for paragraph 9 of her affidavit, her evidence was not directed towards the satisfying of the threshold requirements. It may be observed that I am not satisfied that, since 1984, she was unaware that she had a condition which was serious and was related to the weight of what she was lifting in November .

For present purposes, I put aside the questions of the threshold requirements.
This application can be determined without resolving those questions. The discretionary considerations provide an insurmountable obstacle. In my view, the plaintiff must fall well short of discharging the onus of satisfying the
Court of her entitlement to an order. Accordingly, the application to extend the limitation period is refused.

There has been a gross lack of diligence. The accident took place nearly 13 years ago. It appears that the first defendant's first knowledge of the claim for damages came with the service of the Statement of Claim. There has been delay both on the part of the plaintiff herself and of her legal advisers.
Delay has not been satisfactorily explained.

The plaintiff has had a second chance to shore up evidentiary deficiencies.
The opportunity has not been taken. There is a lack of explanation (or sufficient explanation) for many periods of delay.

The plaintiff has clearly undergone traumatic experiences at the hands of the patient. I have borne in mind the effect had by such trauma and the part played by it in providing explanation for delay.

There is presumptive prejudice. There is the real possibility of significant prejudice (Brisbane South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866] and BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7 March 1997)). There is some evidence of actual prejudice (inter alia, the missing injury report book).

On the evidence before me, these would appear to be proceedings which should not continue in this Court. I understand that instructions are being sought to have them remitted to the District Court.

I dismiss the plaintiff's Notice of Motion. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of that Notice of Motion. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
