

Mann versus Commonwealth of Australia and Anor Matter No 20712/94 [1998] NSWSC (25 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
MANN versus COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA & ANOR /94 June 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced in 1994. The plaintiff was then a bankrupt. He now maintains the proceedings as an assignee from his Trustee in Bankruptcy. 
Largely, the plaintiff has acted in person. In more recent times, he has had intermittent legal assistance. A number of attempts have been made to plead his claim. It is presently as pleaded in the Second Further Amended Statement of Claim. This is the first pleading that has been prepared with legal assistance.

There are two defendants. The first defendant is the Commonwealth of
Australia. It is sued as being the entity responsible for the Department of
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Department of Health and the Health
Insurance Commission. The second defendant is the State of New South Wales. It is sued as being the entity responsible for its Department of Health.

These proceedings have been before me on a number of occasions. I have dealt with at least two applications for summary relief. On 16 April 1996, I ordered, inter alia, that the First Amended Statement of Claim be struck out.
This decision was made, inter alia, because of the state of uncertainty thrown up by the form of the pleading itself. I did order that the claims for relief founded on breach of statutory duty be dismissed.

The matter came before me again on 19 February 1997. The principal question in issue at that stage turned on the capacity of the plaintiff as a bankrupt to maintain the proceedings. I delivered judgment on 21 March 1997.

There are two Notices of Motion before the Court. One is brought by the first defendant. It was filed on 6 May 1998. The other was brought by the second defendant. It was filed on 26 May 1998. Broadly speaking, both applications seek either summary dismissal of the plaintiff's claim or the striking out of the existing pleading.

In previous judgments, I have recited some of the relevant factual material. I shall supplement that material by reference to other matters that have been alleged in the plaintiff's process and/or are relevant to the present applications.

During the period between March 1976 and May 1984, the plaintiff was the
Managing Director and shareholder of Western Medical Services Pty Limited . During that period, it provided an after hours backup service for medical general practitioners and, for that purpose, contracted and relied upon the services of overseas doctors who were prepared to work in Australia.
The first defendant had responsibility for matters of migration and the issuing of work visas and matters relating to the administration and maintenance of health services.

The first and second defendants established a Committee which in the course of its business considered arrangements for the recruitment of overseas doctors by WMS.

WMS and the plaintiff had commenced proceedings in the United Kingdom (the proceedings) claiming damages against three defendants for libel arising out of an article in World Medicine concerning the activities of, inter alia, the plaintiff.

It is alleged that on or about 30 March 1983, the Committee requested the plaintiff to provide information. It is alleged that the plaintiff sought an assurance that the information provided would be treated as confidential and, inter alia, would not be disclosed to other persons because, inter alia, of the proceedings. It is further alleged that the information was disclosed in reliance upon certain representations (see paragraphs 14, 15 and 16 of the
Second Further Amended Statement of Claim). The confidential information is identified in the particulars contained in paragraph 16.

It is alleged that the first and second defendants enforced a policy (which did not permit the sponsoring of overseas doctors) and that this caused WMS to go into liquidation in May 1984.

Further, it is alleged that there were financial arrangements made between the plaintiff and the ANZ Bank (the ANZ) which required the ANZ's indebtedness to be repaid within three months of the final outcome of the proceedings.

There were contested interlocutory processes relating to matters of discovery in the proceedings. In connection with these processes, Mr Rubinstein (a solicitor for one of the defendants) came to Australia. It is alleged that in or about March 1987, both of the defendants gave him access to documents which incorporated the confidential information pleaded in paragraph 16. It is alleged that, inter alia, the disclosure of the confidential information was made without the knowledge and consent of the plaintiff (paragraph 26).

It is alleged that the confidential information disclosed to Mr Rubinstein was used by his client to, inter alia, delay the proceedings and the completion of a taxation of costs in those proceedings (a delay from early 1987 to June ). It is further alleged that the delay obliged him to borrow additional moneys and brought about an inability to discharge his indebtedness to the
ANZ. The ANZ then obtained judgment against the plaintiff, took possession of his property and he was declared bankrupt.

The Second Further Amended Statement of Claim alleges seven causes of action.
For the purposes of argument, these have been divided into three categories.
The seventh cause of action is alleged against the first defendant only.

The first category is comprised by the first cause of action. The second category is comprised by the sixth cause of action. The third category is comprised by the second, third, fourth, fifth and seventh causes of action.

It is common ground that the sixth cause of action falls within the order for dismissal made on 16 April 1996 and cannot be maintained.

All parties have placed evidence before the Court. The end result is a mound of documentation. The plaintiff has prepared his own many affidavits. There are evidentiary problems. In an exercise of expediency, the course was taken with the consent of the parties to receive the material subject to relevance and noting various objections.

I have not sought to exhaustively refer to all of the submissions made in the course of the hearing. All parties have prepared written submissions. I should say at the outset that I have read all of the submissions and have had regard to all of the material contained therein. These submissions were supplemented by oral argument. I have also taken this material into account.

The first cause of action is founded on negligence. It is alleged that there has been a breach of the duty of care pleaded in paragraph 34. Paragraph 34 is in the following terms:- "34. The First and Second Defendants, and each of them, owed a duty to the
Plaintiff to exercise reasonable care and skill in formulating and exercising decisions that might affect them directly." 
The allegations of damage are to be found in paragraph 36. The particulars contained therein allege, inter alia, loss arising from his investment in WMS.

The formulation of the duty may require some refinement. It has not been attacked on pleading grounds. There seemed to be competing views as to what was actually being alleged.

The viability of this cause of action was attacked on a number of grounds. I shall expressly mention certain of them. It was said that, if any duty of care was owed, it was owed to WMS and not the plaintiff. It was said that, in the circumstances pleaded, as a matter of law, neither of the defendants owed a duty of care to the plaintiff. It was said that the alleged loss was too remote to be awarded and was not foreseeable.

The Court was referred to a number of decided cases (including The Council of the Shire of Sutherland versus Heyman & Anor <case>; [(1984-1985) 157 CLR 424];
Northern Territory of Australia versus Deutscher Klub (Darwin) Incorporated
Aust Torts Reports 81-275; San Sebastian Pty Limited & Anor versus The
Minister <case>; <case>; [(1998) 151 ALR 147).] 
The submissions made on behalf of the defendants are not without force.
However, I must bear in mind that the Court is being asked to summarily dispose of the plaintiff's claim. The granting of such relief will deprive the plaintiff of ventilating his claim in full at a trial. The cause of action has novel features. The relevant law is in a state of flux. It is constantly on the move. It seems to me that it would be premature to dismiss this part of the claim. In my view, it is better left for determination at a trial. It may have its problems, but I am not satisfied that it is hopeless.

The second, third, fourth and fifth causes of action turn on the matter of breach of obligation of confidence. In the third cause of action, the obligation is said to arise by reason of contract. The fourth cause of action is founded on negligence. The fifth cause of action is founded on misrepresentation.

Largely, the approach taken to these causes of action was similar to that taken by the defendants in respect of the first cause of action. Further, it was said that, when the identified documentation is examined, it is clear that it cannot be regarded as containing material of a confidential nature.

I should mention that there is evidence from the plaintiff that an undertaking was given to him personally (as well as to WMS). His evidence has not been challenged by cross-examination.

As the authorities presently stand, it may be correct to say that there is no obligation at Common Law (in the absence of contract). There is authority for the proposition that monetary awards may be founded on breach of confidence deriving historically from equity (Aquaculture Corporation versus New Zealand
Green Mussel Co Ltd [(1990) 3 NZLR 299).] 
In determining the dispute concerning these causes of action, I have reached a conclusion similar to that made in respect of the first cause of action. I am not satisfied that they are hopeless.

The seventh cause of action is founded on the tort of misfeasance in public office. The plaintiff relies on the allegations made in paragraphs 24, 26 and
Paragraph 26 alleges, inter alia, that the disclosures of confidential information were made "with the intention of interfering with the Plaintiff's conduct of the Proceedings to the benefit of the Defendants". It is alleged that the first defendant acted in bad faith towards the plaintiff.

In Northern Territory of Australia & Ors versus Mengel & Ors (1996) 185
CLR 307 at pp 345-348, it was said that this tort is committed where damage is suffered as a result of an act done by a public officer with the intention of causing harm to the plaintiff or which he knows or ought to know is beyond power and which involves a foreseeable risk of harm.

Leaving aside any question of pleading deficiencies, whilst the precise limits of this tort may remain undefined, it seems to me that the cause of action alleged by the plaintiff is hopeless and bound to fail.

In respect of all causes of action, it is said that each of them must fail because of the expiry of the relevant limitation period. As I have already dealt with that matter in an earlier application, I do not propose to revisit it in these applications.

I should also mention a matter which was advanced on behalf of the plaintiff.
It was put forward as a basis for rejecting the defendants' submissions at large. It was an argument founded on what was said by McLelland CJ in Eq in
Collier versus Howard (unreported, 23 April 1996).

At pp 3-4, it was said:- "Generally speaking, the interests of justice as between the parties, fortified by the public interest in the finality of litigation and the efficient deployment of judicial resources, require that where an application for interlocutory relief has been made, heard on the merits and refused, a further application for substantially the same relief should not be entertained, unless it is founded on a material change of circumstances since the original application was heard, or the discovery of new material which could not reasonably have been put before the Court on the hearing of the original application (see the extended discussion of these principles by
Sperling J in Wentworth versus Rogers 28 April 1995, unreported). This rule of practice reflects judicial experience as to what is ordinarily appropriate to the attainment of procedural justice. I am not persuaded that there is sufficient reason for departing from the rule in the present case, and I therefore refuse the first of the orders sought by the defendant." 
These observations give expression to the discretionary power had by the Court to ensure that justice is best served in litigation that is brought before it.
Each case is going to turn on its own particular circumstances.

Neither justice nor public interest are best served if parties are enabled to engage in repetitious interlocutory applications. It is usually in the best interests of justice if litigation which is not hopeless is allowed to proceed as quickly as possible to trial. In my view, that is the position in this case.

The Court has a discretionary power to grant summary relief. The power is exercised so that the interests of justice are best served between the parties. The Court has regard to the particular circumstances of the case before it. There is abundant authority for the proposition that the relief should only be granted in what has been described as clear cases. The applicant bears the onus of satisfying the Court that relief should be granted.

In respect of the disputed categories, save as to the seventh cause of action,
I am not satisfied that the onus has been discharged. I refuse the application for summary disposition except in respect of the sixth and seventh causes of action.

I dismiss that part of the claim which is propounded in the sixth and seventh causes of action. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of that part of the claim.
Otherwise, each defendant is to pay the costs of its Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
