

Regina versus Oinonen Matter No 70031/97 [1998] NSWSC 672 (6 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
REGINA versus LAURIE LEEVI OINONEN /97 April 1998 
Dunford J and a Jury of Eleven 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
SUMMING-UP: 
HIS HONOUR: Members of the jury, the accused, Laurie Leevi Oinonen, has pleaded not guilty to the charge that on 6 November 1996 at Lightning Ridge he did murder Deakin Lea Flick. 
I shall come to the details of the charge shortly and also say something about the alternative charge of manslaughter, but let me first say something about our respective functions in this trial. As the jury, you are the judges of the facts and you are the sole judges of the facts.

Our system of justice provides that any person charged with a serious criminal offence, is to be tried not by judges or by lawyers, but by his or her fellow citizens and that is where you, as members of the jury, come into it. You are the fellow citizens who have been brought here on this very serious and responsible task to try one of your fellow citizens and, as I say, you are the judges of the facts and you are the sole, or only, judges of the facts.

My function, on the other hand, is quite different. I am in charge of the law, the evidence and the procedure. You have already seen that I conduct and supervise the running of the trial. You have seen me rule on questions of evidence as they have arisen during the course of the trial and on occasions I have had to deal with matters of law.

It is now my function to give you the directions of law appropriate to your task of judging the facts, that is, to tell you what the law is so that you can apply that law to the facts as you find them to be in coming to your verdict. You are bound by my directions of law or, to put it another way, your duty and responsibility is to follow the directions of law that I give you.
But, having done that, you are the judges of the facts and you are the sole or only judges of the facts.

In the course of this summing-up, I will, for your assistance, remind you of what appears to me to be the important parts of the evidence, but I will certainly not read all the evidence to you and you may take a different view to the view that I take as to what parts are important and what parts are not quite so important.

Well, as you are the judges of the facts, it is your responsibility to decide the case on the evidence that you have heard and particularly on those parts of the evidence that you consider relevant or more important.

The fact that I only read or summarise parts of the evidence, in no way limits you to those parts. It further follows, from what I have said, that if during the course of this summing-up I express any view or opinion as to the facts, or if you think that I have expressed a view or opinion as to the facts, it is your duty to disregard such supposed view, or opinion, of mine unless you independently come to the same conclusion.

Now, the prosecution is brought in the name of the Crown on behalf of the community. As the Crown makes the accusations and brings the charge, it is the responsibility of the Crown to prove the charge. It is not for the accused to prove his innocence. He is presumed to be innocent unless and until the Crown has proved he is guilty.

The responsibility, or onus, of proving the case is on the Crown and it remains on the Crown from the beginning to the end of the trial.

The standard to which you must be satisfied is a high one, because the Crown must prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. They are three simple English words, "beyond reasonable doubt". They mean what they say and they require no further description or explanation. So, what I say is that the
Crown makes the allegations, the Crown must prove the allegations and it must prove them beyond reasonable doubt. If it does, and if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty of the charge of murder or, alternatively, that the accused is guilty of the crime of manslaughter, then it is your duty and responsibility to find him guilty of the appropriate charge. But, if at the end of your deliberations you are not satisfied that the Crown has proved the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, then it is your duty and responsibility to return a verdict of not guilty.

When I say the Crown must prove the charge beyond reasonable doubt, I mean that the Crown must satisfy you of each of the elements of the particular charge beyond reasonable doubt. I will come to the elements of the charge shortly, but there are particular elements that the Crown must satisfy you of beyond reasonable doubt in respect of murder and in respect of manslaughter respectively.

On the other hand, it is not necessary for the Crown to satisfy you of every piece of evidence in the Crown case. There may be parts of the evidence in the
Crown case that you reject or that you are not satisfied of, but you may still be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the Crown has established the essential elements of the charge.

Now, in deciding the facts, it is for you, as the judges of the facts, to decide which witnesses you accept, which witnesses you do not accept and which witnesses you accept as to part only of their evidence because you may, if it seems proper to you, accept the evidence of a witness on a particular aspect of the case and at the same time not accept the evidence of that same witness on another aspect of the case.

Whether you accept a witness on a particular point, will depend on your assessment of whether that witness is, firstly, truthful and, secondly, reliable.

You see, there are two aspects of a witness giving evidence and of your assessment of a witness. First of all, is the witness honest? Is the witness trying to tell the truth as best he or she can recall? It is a question of honesty or truthfulness.

The second aspect is whether or not the witness is reliable, because a witness may be perfectly honest but at the same time may not be reliable because he or she may not have had an adequate opportunity to observe the event in question, the witness's memory may not be so good, he or she may have subconsciously reconstructed matters in their mind since the time of the incident of which they are giving evidence, they may have been influenced by what others have said in conversation, or their recollection may be deficient because they were affected, for example, by alcohol at the time.

So, as I say, there are two aspects to take into account; whether the witness is trying to tell the truth and, secondly, whether the witness is reliable in what he or she says.

Now, you have seen the witnesses. You have seen the manner in which they gave their evidence; whether they answered the questions that were put to them, particularly in cross examination, frankly and without evasion, whether they changed their evidence at any stage and whether their memory appears reliable.

Now, in this case the accused has given evidence on oath. He was not obliged to do that. He could have said nothing at all because, as I said earlier, it is not for the accused to prove his innocence, but for the Crown to prove his guilt beyond reasonable doubt. But, by giving evidence, the accused became a witness like all other witnesses. Exactly the same principles apply in evaluating his truthfulness and reliability as apply to the other witnesses.

I remind you that by giving evidence the accused in no way altered the fundamental principle as to where the onus of proof lies. It is not for the accused to satisfy you of his innocence, it is for the Crown to satisfy you of his guilt and to do so beyond reasonable doubt.

In this case certain persons said to be experts in particular fields have been called to give evidence. The ordinary rule is that witnesses can speak only as to facts and not express their opinions. An exception to that general rule is that persons duly qualified to express some opinion in some particular area of expertise are permitted to express their opinions upon relevant matters within that field of their expertise and you will appreciate that I am referring in this case to persons such as doctors, ballistic witnesses and such like.

The law is that you as the jury are the sole judges of the facts and so you are not bound to accept such opinion evidence. Just because a so called expert gives the evidence it does not necessarily mean that it is true or correct.
This is demonstrated in some cases where you have experts in the same field giving completely different opinions. You are the judges of the facts and the opinions of the experts are matters of fact. So you remain the sole judges of the facts and are entitled to assess and accept or reject any such opinion evidence as you see fit. It is for you to give such weight to the opinions of those experts witnesses as you think they should be given, having regard to the qualifications of the particular witnesses, the honesty, impartiality or otherwise of them and the extent, if any, to which their opinions accord with such other facts as you find proved to your satisfaction.

Expert witnesses differ from the other witnesses in some respects in that they have in some instances not seen or heard what happened but have expressed opinions based on what they have been told. It is therefore important to remember that those opinions are only as valuable as the facts on which they are based and may have limited or no value if the facts on which the opinion is based have not been proved to your satisfaction.

Just let me give you an example indicating what I refer to. You might recall that there was evidence through Dr Wong, I think it was, or Dr Moynham that on the basis of the so many cups of coffees each containing so much methylated spirits, one of the experts, I think Professor Neering, had expressed the opinion that the blood alcohol reading of the accused at the relevant time would have been .4 to .45. But that opinion as to what the blood alcohol would have been is only valid if you accept that prior to that time the accused had drunk that number of cups of coffee containing that amount of methylated spirits. If he had drunk more or less obviously the reading would have been different. So that is what I mean when I say that the opinions expressed are only as valuable as the facts on which they are based.

As ordinary citizens you are not expected or required to leave your commonsense behind but you are expected to apply your ordinary commonsense to the evidence you have heard and to your assessment of the witnesses and just as you do in your ordinary every day lives it is open and proper for you to draw inferences from the direct evidence which you find established. In other words, having heard the evidence you may take the view that if certain facts are proved well then it follows naturally and logically from the facts that have been proved that other events occurred or that other facts are established. That does not mean, of course, that you can guess or speculate.
There are some inferences which follow logically from the facts that have been proved directly, whilst there are other ideas that would be pure guesswork or speculation. As I say, you must not guess or speculate, but it is proper for you to draw inferences which logically follow from the facts that you find to be proved in any other way.

Now, in this case the accused has raised the question of character. The law is that evidence of the character of the accused is to be taken into account on the question of whether he is guilty or not. The accused has called witnesses to say that he's not a violent person or has not been a violent person and that he is an honest person. Now, whether you are satisfied that the accused is not a violent person or has not previously been a violent person and is an honest person is a matter for you. But if you are so satisfied then that is a matter that you must take into consideration. And it is submitted on behalf of the accused that a person of good character in the sense that he's not a violent person is unlikely to commit this type of criminal offence, particularly the offence of murder.

On the other hand the Crown case is that that is only true to a degree and that at times persons with previously good character do commit offences.
Nevertheless the accused's previous good character, if you are satisfied of it, is a matter which you are bound to take into account along with the other evidence.

It is also a matter that you may take into account on the question of whether you believe what the accused has said, either to the police when spoken to by them, or in his evidence here at the trial; and the evidence that you heard this morning from the pastor and also the evidence of Mrs Donna Wood was that they have always known him as an honest person.

May I also remind you that you are obliged by the oath and affirmation that you took to return your verdict according to the evidence; that is the evidence you have heard from the witnesses that you have seen, including the accused; and the exhibits which have been tendered and which will be with you in the jury room. You must put aside all considerations of sympathy or other emotion and act only upon evidence and according to reason.

Now one of the main virtues of using juries as we do is that it enables the community, in effect, to have a random selection of representatives to look after its interests and primarily, of course, its interest in ensuring that justice is done. You will possibly, or probably, find that amongst your ranks you have a fairly diverse range of backgrounds and attitudes. Hopefully that is the case. You should each participate in the discussions in the jury room because all of you are equals and each of you will be responsible for your ultimate joint decision. I refer to your joint decision because under our law your verdict, whether it be a verdict of guilty of murder or guilty of manslaughter or a verdict of not guilty, must be unanimous. We do not, in this
State, recognise majority verdicts. That is not to say that each of you must agree upon the same reasons for your verdict. You may individually rely upon different parts of the evidence. However, by whatever route you each arrive at your decision that final decision either guilty or not guilty must be the decision of you all unanimously before it can become your verdict.

I turn now to the actual charge in this case and as you know, and as I have said earlier, the charge is that on the 6 November 1996 the accused did murder
Deakin Lee Flick. And it will also be necessary to say something about the alternative verdict of manslaughter.

The crime of murder is committed where the act of the accused which caused the death of the deceased was done by him with an intention to kill or inflict grievous bodily harm, and grievous bodily harm simply means really serious bodily injury.

The essential ingredients which the Crown must establish beyond reasonable doubt to sustain the charge of murder are three. Firstly, that it was the act of the accused that caused the death of the deceased. Secondly, that the act which caused the death was a deliberate and voluntary act, and thirdly, that it was done with an intention to kill or to inflict grievous bodily harm; that is serious physical injury.

You may think that all gunshot wounds or virtually all gunshot wounds would constitute serious bodily injury or grievous bodily harm. The Crown does not suggest in this case that the shooting was done with any intention to kill but does argue that it was done with the intention to inflict grievous bodily harm.

I will deal with each of these three ingredients. Firstly that it was the act of the accused which caused the death of the deceased. Now it is a matter for you as the judges of the facts but there does not really seem to be any dispute that the deceased died as a result of the gunshot wound fired by the accused. That it was the act of accused the which caused the death of Mr
Flick.

The second element that you must be satisfied that the act which caused the death of the deceased, that is the firing of the gun in this case, was a deliberate and voluntary act. This is quite a different issue to whether the killing was deliberate and intentional. That becomes relevant under the third issue, or the third element. Here the issue is whether you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the firing of the gun was deliberate and voluntary.

It is a fundamental principle of the criminal law that no person can be convicted for doing an act which would otherwise be criminal where it was not a deliberate act on his part. The onus is on the Crown to prove beyond reasonable doubt that such physical act, in this case the firing of the rifle, was a deliberate one. An act done by accident or mistake or unintentionally is not a deliberate and voluntary act.

Here the Crown says that you should conclude that the accused's firing of the rifle was a deliberate and voluntary act because when you look at all the circumstances you will be so satisfied. In particular, when the deceased went to run around the side of the house, running away with his back to the accused, the accused had lost any opportunity to confront him and at that stage the accused raised the gun to his shoulder, pointed it in the direction of Deakin Flick and the Crown submits he would not have done that if he had not intended to fire it.

On the other hand, the accused says that he did not intend to pull the trigger. People say he is honest. He concedes most other points about what happened that morning but he does not concede that he intended to pull the trigger and says that he did not intend to pull the trigger.

Now, in relation to this second element, that is whether the firing of the gun was a deliberate and voluntary act, the issue of self-induced intoxication is irrelevant. Self-induced adduced intoxication means intoxication which is voluntary and does not result from fraud, accident, mistake, duress, or the taking of prescription drugs or such like. And it has not been suggested that any intoxication of the accused in this case was not self-induced.

As I say, in considering this second element you cannot take into account that the accused was intoxicated or might have been intoxicated. It is no excuse as regards this element of the case that because of drink which the accused had taken knowingly or willingly he had deprived himself of the ability to exercise self control, to realise the possible consequences of what he was doing or even to be conscious that he was doing it. On the second element, self-induced intoxication is totally irrelevant.

Now you must not think that the accused can be acquitted only if you accept the version or position which has been put forward on his behalf. The mere fact that a defence version or position has been put forward does not mean that the accused has accepted some onus of establishing that he is innocent.
That is not the issue at all. He bears no such onus. The onus of proving this element, as of proving all the elements, remains on the Crown from the beginning to the end of the case.

In considering it, as I say, the accused has said that he did not intend to pull the trigger. Now in considering whether this second element is established, the firing of the gun was deliberate and voluntary, the issue is not whether you believe the accused when he says he didn't intend to do it, but whether in the light of what the accused has said you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that it was a deliberate and voluntary act on his part. You may believe him, you may not believe him or you may feel that in the light of what he has said you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the Crown's position. The Crown must satisfy you that the firing of the gun by the accused was a deliberate act on his part.

The third element to the charge of murder is the act of firing the gun was done with intent to kill or inflict really serious physical injury or as it is called grievous bodily harm. As I say, the Crown does not suggest that in this case there was an intent to kill. There can be no doubt that really serious physical injury was in fact inflicted in the present case but the issue here is not whether in fact such injury was inflicted but rather whether such an injury was intended. Was there an intent to inflict really serious physical injury? Was that specific result which the accused sought to achieve by the act which in fact caused the death? And you appreciate you are only considering this point if you find that the firing of the gun was deliberate.

So (you must first be satisfied that it was the act of the accused) in relation to murder, you must firstly satisfy yourselves that it was the act of the accused that killed the deceased. There doesn't seem to be much doubt about it but it is a matter for you. The second issue is whether the act that caused the death, that is the firing of the gun, was a deliberate and voluntary act. If you are not satisfied of both of those points in relation to murder you don't have to go on and consider the third one. But if you are satisfied of both of those points then in relation to murder you have to consider the third element: whether the act of firing the gun was done with intent to inflict really serious physical injury.

Now, "intent" and "intention" are familiar words. In this legal context they carry their ordinary meaning. Intention may be inferred or deduced from the circumstances in which the death occurred and from the conduct of the accused person before, at the time of, or after he did the specific act which caused the death.

Whatever a person says about his intention may be looked at for the purpose of finding out what that intention was in fact at the relevant time. In some cases a person's acts may themselves provide the most convincing evidence of their intention.

Where a specific result is the obvious and inevitable consequence of a person's act, and where he deliberately does that act, you may readily conclude that he did that act with the intention of achieving that specific result.

Let me assist you with an illustration of that direction right away from the facts of the present case. If one person hits another on the head with a hammer, it is, you may think, obvious and inevitable, that that person will receive a really serious bodily injury as a result. If, therefore, the first person deliberately hits the second on the head with a hammer, it is a simple matter for a jury to conclude that he did so with the intention of inflicting really serious bodily injury on that other person.

You may think that there is no difficulty about coming to such a conclusion, but you must remember that you are considering the intention of the accused, not what your intention might have been if you were in that position.

The intention does not need to be present for any length of time and does not need to be planned in advance. The intention my exist for only a short period of time, but it must exist at the time of the act causing the death.

The Crown says that it is just as simple a matter in the present case and no one would fire a gun at short range in the direction of another person without intending to at least cause that person really serious bodily injury.

On the other hand, the accused says that he did not aim at the deceased, he did not intend to pull the trigger, did not intend to hit him but only intended to scare the deceased, although he admits loading the cartridge into the rifle and leaving the safety catch off and raising the rifle to his shoulder.

He also claims that he was intoxicated at the time and in relation to this third element of intention, you must consider whether the accused was intoxicated and, if so, take that factor into account in determining whether or not he had the intention to inflict really serious physical injury.

There has been a lot of evidence about the accused's consumption of alcohol and methylated spirits. If that evidence raises in your mind a doubt that the accused intended to inflict serious bodily injury, then you should reject the
Crown's argument that no one would have acted in that way, by firing the rifle, without such an intention.

Let me explain how intoxication can be relevant to the intention with which an act is done. If a normally mild mannered person, who is somewhat affected by alcohol, is involved in an argument with another person and, because of the inflammatory effect of the alcohol on him, he throws a punch which wounds that other person, it is easy to see that it was the alcohol which at least partly induced him to do something which he probably would not have done had he been sober. But, it can hardly be said that he did not intend to throw the punch and that the result which he thereby sought to achieve was not to cause injury to his opponent in the argument.

Alcohol has, no doubt, contributed to the formulation of the intention to cause that injury and perhaps explains it, but the intention has in fact nevertheless been formed.

The alcohol in that case has not caused the person to throw a punch without the formation of the intention to cause injury, and he is therefore guilty of assault with intent to cause injury. That is what is claimed by the Crown here; the accused may have been affected by alcohol, but he nevertheless set out to inflict serious physical injury on Deakin Flick.

On the other hand, you could have a situation where a person intentionally throws a punch in circumstances where, because of the effect upon him of the alcohol which he has consumed, he did not, by that punch, intend to cause injury. That may occur where, for example, the alcohol had induced that person to believe that his victim was out of reach, or something like that. It may be that because of the effect upon him of that alcohol, he did not realise how hard he was hitting the victim with his fist and so did not fully realise the probable consequences of his act. The Crown says that is light years away in the situation that you have here. It is a matter for you.

There is no onus on the accused to prove that he was intoxicated to any particular extent. The onus of proof remains on the Crown at all times to remove any doubts raised in your mind of alcohol by the deceased and to satisfy you beyond reasonable doubt that he shot the deceased with an intent to cause really serious bodily injury.

Bear in mind that the issue is not whether the accused, having consumed that amount of alcohol and methylated spirits, was capable of forming the intent to inflict serious physical injury, but whether he did in fact form the intent to inflict grievous bodily injury. But, the question of intention and intoxication are not two separate issues. They are the one issue. The Crown must satisfy you that he had the intent alleged, but in considering whether he had the intent alleged, you must take into account the evidence you have heard about the amount of alcohol and methylated spirits he had drunk and the probable, or possible, effect on him and on his mental processes of that alcohol and methylated spirits.

On this issue, the Crown submits that the evidence is that he was capable, notwithstanding the intoxication, to form the necessary intent and the Crown submits that he certainly formed the intention to do everything else except pull the trigger. According to him, he formed the intention to load the gun, drive into town, asked Mr Nagy to ask the deceased to come outside, to confront him with the gun, and the Crown submits that he was discerning enough to know that firing the gun in these circumstances would cause serious physical injury, and that he intended to do so.

On the other hand, the defence submits that you would take into account that people knew him as a non-violent person. He has denied that he intended to injure the deceased and those people have said that he is an honest person.

Mr Dalton, on his behalf, submits that clearly he was intoxicated. The evidence is that he possibly may not have formed the intention because of that intoxication and that, therefore, you would not be satisfied that he did, at the time, form the intention which the Crown must prove.

Once again, it is not a question of whether you believe the accused, but whether, in the light of all the evidence, including what the accused has said, you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the Crown has proved that he had that intention.

Now, if you find these three elements proved beyond reasonable doubt, then you find the accused guilty of murder. If you are not satisfied of those three elements, you find him not guilty of murder and turn to consider the alternative verdict of manslaughter.

Where an accused is charged with murder and the Crown has failed to establish his act was done to the required degree to amount to the crime of murder, there is this alternative verdict of guilty of manslaughter. The accused is guilty of the crime of manslaughter if the Crown has established beyond reasonable doubt that the act of the accused which caused the death of the deceased was an unlawful and dangerous act.

An act is dangerous if it is such as a reasonable person would realise to be one which exposed another to an appreciable risk of serious injury. That act is also unlawful if it causes such injury without the consent of the person injured, because to threaten someone - to threaten violence to someone - is technically an assault and that is an unlawful act.

So, merely to threaten someone with a gun is an offer of violence without their consent. If that unlawful act leads to causing injury without the person's consent, it is an unlawful act.

You should notice that the Crown does not have to establish that the act of the accused was done with any particular intention to injure. The act itself which caused the death of the deceased must, of course, have been a deliberate one on the part of the accused and it is not sufficient if it was accidental, in the sense that the accused did not intend to do the act itself; but in considering this element in relation to manslaughter, you can take into account a lot more than you could take into account in respect of murder.
Whereas I said that in relation to murder you had to be satisfied that he deliberately pulled the trigger for it to be a deliberate and voluntary act, here you can have regard to the whole of the circumstances. It must be a deliberate and voluntary act, but in this context it does not have to be a deliberate pulling of the trigger.

You can look at the whole of the circumstances which were voluntary acts of the accused and they include going to the premises where Deakin Flick was sleeping, taking the rifle with him, loading the rifle, cocking the rifle, leaving the safety catch off, holding the rifle outside that house with his finger under the trigger guard and raising it to shoulder height and looking along the barrel to point the rifle in the direction of the deceased as he ran around the corner, pointing it in the direction of the deceased.

They are all voluntary acts of the accused which you can take into account as part of all the circumstances and it is a matter for you whether you think all those circumstances, taken together, would constitute a dangerous act and a voluntary act and an unlawful act.

The Crown submits, of course, that if you go round pointing a rifle in the general direction of someone with a cartridge in the breech and the safety catch off and the rifle cocked and your finger under the trigger guard, that is certainly an unlawful and dangerous act, and the crime of manslaughter is complete even if no injury was intended and if the accused had not realised that what he was doing was dangerous in the sense that I have described.

The test is not whether the accused recognised that his act was dangerous. The test is, rather, quite objective. It is whether a reasonable person would recognise that the act was dangerous in the sense described above.

Now, in considering this alternative verdict of manslaughter, you cannot and must not take into account or have regard to the fact that at the time of the shooting, the accused was, or may have been, intoxicated. Intoxication, or self induced intoxication - and that is the only intoxication involved here - is totally irrelevant to considering the question of manslaughter.

So, to summarise all that again, for the crime of murder you must be satisfied that his act caused the death of the deceased; that it was the act of the accused. Secondly, that the firing of the gun was a deliberate and voluntary act and, thirdly, that in firing the gun the accused intended to cause really serious physical injury to the deceased.

If you are not satisfied of each of those three elements beyond reasonable doubt, you find the accused not guilty of murder and you then turn to consider the alternative verdict of manslaughter. If you are satisfied that it was the act of the accused that caused the death of the deceased and that that was a dangerous and unlawful act, then you find him guilty of manslaughter.

It is only if you are not satisfied of those matters that you will find him not guilty.

As I said, I will summarise parts of the evidence for you but I will not go through it all. I remind you of what I said, that you have regard to all the evidence you have heard and you may take a different view and may quite properly take a different view as to the view I take as to which are the most relevant and the important parts.

The first witness was Colin Nagy. He lived at 7 Potch Street, Lightning Ridge, and on 6 November 1996 Deakin Flick stayed there with Colin Nagy's sister,
Jenny.

On the morning of 6 November the accused turned up at about half past six and
Mr Nagy knew he was standing at his door. He asked where Deakin Flick was. "I said, 'He's asleep in the room with my sister'. He asked me to go and wake him up and I went and woke him up". They went outside. "I just told him that
Laurie wanted to see him outside".

So, Deakin Flick went out the front door and Mr Nagy went to the toilet and whilst he was there he heard a gunshot out the front of the house.

He hopped off the toilet and run out the front lounge room and saw the accused put something in the back of the station wagon. He jumped in and took off pretty quick. Mr Nagy looked for Deakin and could not see him. He went to see his sister and walked out to the kitchen, looked through the back window and saw Deakin lying on the lawn about 10 metres from the house. He then ran out to him and he was still breathing. They tried to give him mouth to mouth resuscitation for five to ten minutes but after awhile he just died in his arms. They then rolled him over and saw a hole in his back.

He had known the accused for a couple of years. He knew he was an alcoholic.
He said after a few drinks he could just handle it. When he had a lot to drink he was the same as anyone else. He had seen him drive a car when drunk or after he had quite a bit to drink.

Jenny Nagy was the next witness. She didn't add anything new or further.

And then Donna Wood said Deakin had come to their house in Lightning Ridge on the previous day, on the Tuesday. She said he thought that Pop, meaning the accused, might be looking for him "and I said to him", this is Donna Wood speaking, "I said to him, well Deakin, you said you went and pinched that opal" and he said, "Yeah, we did." I said, "You stole that opal didn't you Deakin?" He said, "Yes, that's why I thought that Pop was looking for me." 
He said the relationship between Deakin and the accused was fairly close. They spent a lot of time together. Then on the Wednesday morning she remembers
Laurie coming to their place fairly early in the morning. He had been there the day before drinking metho and she knew that he had been drinking it for about six weeks before; drinking metho every day and night.

When he arrived on the Wednesday morning he appeared to be very upset. The first thing she can remember him saying was, "I fired a shot at Deakin. Can you go up and check him out to see what happened." She said, "We jumped into the car, myself, my husband, and we drove up there to where it happened." They went in the accused's car. They saw a gun lying on the back seat. They left the accused on their back verandah.

When they realised Deakin was dead she went and got the ambulance and she drove to Gary Morgan's place and he dropped her off at her place and took the car back to Potch Street. That is the accused's car.

When she got back to her house at Nettleton Drive the accused was there and sitting on the back verandah. He asked her what happened. I said, "You killed
Deakin. He is dead." The accused started to cry and then Stephen, one of the family, got him a bottle of beer out of the fridge and just after that the police came along.

The accused also said, "Oh, I'm sorry. I didn't mean to do it. It wasn't supposed to happen. I'm very sorry. 'That is what he just kept on saying'.
'Deakin was like me own grandson', and that was it." 
She knew that the accused had a serious drinking problem. Had been drinking methylated spirits on a binge like basis for at least a couple of weeks before this incident. He was drinking methylated spirits almost constantly and other alcohol as well.

She was used to seeing him in a drunken state. She saw him on the Tuesday night at Evon's place, that is her sister. He was drinking metho and beer. She left about 11 o'clock to go home but he was still there. Whilst there she said she heard a conversation between Lisa and Laurie, that is Lisa Bolton, her niece. She heard Lisa tell Laurie about hearing Deakin had stolen the opal.

She said when she saw Laurie on the Wednesday morning, the 6 November, he was very upset. It appeared like he was drunk still from the night before. He was no different. She saw him later at the police station. He then appeared much the same as he was in the morning: " Q. He still appeared drunk to you? A. He appeared drunk to me. Q. And distraught? A. Yes even more so, all the time." 
She said in the time she has known him she has never known him to be a violent man and that he is a very honest person.

Her husband, Reginald Wood, also gave evidence and a lot of his evidence about the accused that morning is the same as Donna's evidence but he did say that when he came he appeared to be affected by alcohol. Mr Wood was also having a hangover. The accused had a history of drinking methylated spirits. He especially appeared drunk when he came on the morning of 6 November. He didn't regard him as a violent sort of person. He had known him for 10 to 15 years and "He seemed fairly honest to me since I had known him." 
That might be a suitable time to adjourn for the afternoon. We will continue tomorrow morning. Would it be convenient for you all to start at 9.30 instead of 10 o'clock. Does that create any problems for anyone? 
All right we will start tomorrow morning at 9.30. I remind you once again not to discuss the case with anyone as you will appreciate it is even more important now than it was earlier. So retire now, return about 20 past 9 and we will start at 9.30.

IN THE ABSENCE OF THE JURY 
DALTON: I'm not sure I don't think that I heard your Honour give the presumption of innocence.

HIS HONOUR: Yes, right at the very beginning. What I said was, reading from ....

DALTON: I heard the Crown's onus referred to the last-- 
HIS HONOUR: I said it is not for the accused to prove his innocence. He is presumed to be innocent unless and until the Crown has proved he is guilty.

DALTON: In relation to character will your Honour note that there is no evidence from the Crown to the contrary. You can certainly say that with respect to honesty.

HIS HONOUR: What do you say Mr Crown.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: I object. I could have made an application to re-open to tender evidence of the allegation of the conviction or non-conviction in relation to assault. I didn't wish to do that. First of all it is probably prejudicial value as to probative value to whether or not the accused had a tendency to be violent in certain circumstances. I don't wish to be involved in that. However, in my submission, it goes a bit far for the defence to say since the Crown didn't do it there is no evidence that the jury should in fact find that it's not the fact.

In my submission he has told the jury what the witnesses have said and that accords with the evidence. In my submission it would be - I am just trying to think of the appropriate word.

HIS HONOUR: It would give undue emphasis to the point to mention it now in isolation.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: In my submission it would be misleading because there is evidence it just hasn't been led.

HIS HONOUR: There is no evidence.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: There is no evidence before the jury.

HIS HONOUR: And that is all we are concerned about.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: Except, in my submission, it's misleading in that case to say there is no evidence of it when it is clear to the defence that there is evidence which is available; and whilst the Crown didn't lead it in my submission it's unfair of the accused to try and take advantage of that aspect. Especially when Mr Dalton said if there was evidence the Crown would have led it.

HIS HONOUR: It would have been obvious I would have thought to the jury that there is no evidence to the contrary 
DALTON: I said my position in relation to that. I don't really think the matter to which the Crown is referring comes anywhere near a suggestion of violence but in any event that hasn't been litigated.

HIS HONOUR: Prima facie I would have thought a finding of, that a finding of an assault charge was proved would be a bit risky to put up against an allegation of no evidence of violence.

DALTON: It's a slap on the bottom after his de facto wife had been involved in a rather nasty altercation. The only reason I know that at this point in time that your Honour will want to hear about that at some point presumably.

As I said my fall back position is there is no evidence in the contrary in respect to honesty.

HIS HONOUR: Mr Crown, I don't want to have anything to put in relation to honesty.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: Your Honour puts something to the jury - 
HIS HONOUR: You have heard evidence about non-violence and his honesty. There is no evidence to the contrary. One line is about as far as it will go.

DALTON: Thank you your Honour I appreciate that.

HIS HONOUR: I think Mr Crown there is no evidence of it. I have been asked for a direction and I think it's appropriate.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: The difficulty in this particular case, it's the crown case that the act which led to the offence was really something of a momentary manner. The actually firing of the gun wasn't a necessary long deliberated and planned matter.

HIS HONOUR: I said that the Crown submits that it is only true to a degree and that at times persons with previously good character do commit offences. I didn't go any further because you have not gone any further. I did not want to put too many words in your mouth.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: My submission is your Honour has dealt with it appropriately and doesn't call for any further -- 
HIS HONOUR: I don't think it is going to make the slightest bit of difference one way or the other but I will think about it overnight.

DALTON: The only other thing is your Honour said there is no real dispute with the act of the accused causing the fatal injury. I suppose the only thing I can say in relation to that is accident.

HIS HONOUR: No, it was in the context of the first element. It was the act of the accused that caused the death of the deceased. It was the firing of the accused's gun that caused the death of the deceased.

DALTON: Certainly the discharge of the firearm the accused was holding has caused the death of the deceased.

HIS HONOUR: I think accident goes to deliberate and involuntary act; surely? 
DALTON: Only to pulling the trigger.

HIS HONOUR: Yes, I have told them that.

DALTON: My point being if it could have been a knock on the pressure of the take down screw, but I don't think so. That is my point.

HIS HONOUR: No, the first element goes to the identity of the offender. In other words it was his gun, it was the gun he was holding not the gun that someone else was holding. That is what is the first element goes to, the identity of the offender; and I don't think there is any real dispute as to whether we have got the right person.

DALTON: I agree with your Honour that even if it was accidental and it's a pulling of the trigger then it is still the act of the accused. I'm just concerned whether it was the actual pressure on the take down screw and not the pulling of the trigger caused the discharge of the rifle.

HIS HONOUR: Your point is made, but I don't.

DALTON: Thank you your Honour, they were the only points.

ADJOURNED TO 7 APRIL 1998 AT 9.30 AM 
DUBBO: TUESDAY 7 APRIL 1998 
SUMMING-UP CONTINUED: 
HIS HONOUR: Members of the jury, just one matter that I omitted yesterday, but it would have been obvious to you. There was evidence, you recall, and I referred to it, of Mr and Mrs Wood and the minister who said that they found the accused an honest person and had not known him to be violent. There was no evidence to the contrary in relation to those matters.

Yesterday I had dealt with the evidence of the persons who were on the scene, as it were, very soon after the shooting.

Let me now turn to the police evidence. The first one in point of time was
Constable Slatford, but he went with Constable Thomas, so I will refer to
Constable Thomas' evidence. He said that at 6.47 am on 6 November he received a phone call at home from a female who identified herself as Jenny Nagy. She told him something. He contacted the ambulance co-ordinator and then he phoned
Constable Kerr and then he picked up Constable Kerr and they went to 7 Potch
Street, Lightning Ridge. The ambulance was parked around the front. There were various people there, including the ambulance officer, Peter Lang, who was treating Deakin Flick.

The ambulance officer said he was deceased. He spoke to various people who were in there, including Yvonne and Colin Nagy and at 7.31 a white Holden station wagon drove up to the front of the house driven by Gary Morgan. He spoke with him and he saw a rifle lying on the back seat and there was a didgeridoo on the floor.

After that he and Senior Constable Kerr went to 32 Nettleton Drive, Lightning
Ridge. They knocked on the door and were admitted. On the back verandah there were three male persons. "We walked up to one of them and said, 'Are you
Laurie Oinonen?' He said, 'Yes'". This would have been about quarter to eight in the morning. He said, "You are under arrest for shooting Deakin Flick". He cautioned him that he was not obliged to say anything and anything he did say would be recorded and may later be used in evidence.

He said when he first saw him he did not appear to be intoxicated. He appeared upset. His eyes were watery and he had a slight shakiness to him, but he was, when he stood up, able to walk down five or six steps off the verandah quite easily and he spoke quite clearly and he was able to walk up the side driveway quite easily. After he searched him he was able to step up into the back of the landcrusier, which is quite a high step, without any assistance at all. He did not appear to have any difficulty understanding what was said to him. He saw no signs of alcohol as far as he was concerned.

Constable Kerr was with him and I will not go through all his evidence which is largely a repetition of that of Constable Thomas. He said that after they returned to the Lightning Ridge police station, the accused was seated in the dock area. Kerr said to him, "Do you understand why you have been arrested?"
He said, "Yes, I know why I am here". He said, "You have been arrested as we have reasonable cause to believe that you fatally shot Deakin Flick in Potch
Street this morning. Again I want you to understand you are not obliged to said anything", and so on. The accused said, "Yes, I am relieved. I was waiting long time for you to come. I come to station and push button. It must be out of order". He then said, "Sir, I do not feel well. I have problems with my blood pressure". Kerr said, "Are you on medication for this?" And he said, "Yes, but I did not take them this morning and now what has happened, my blood pressure is bad". He said, "I will get an ambulance officer to look at you", and a short time later an ambulance officer attended the station.

He said that the phone device out the front of the police station was out of order at the time. He said, "I formed the opinion that when I first saw him there was no sign of intoxication whatsoever, but later on at the station, he appeared to be withdrawing from some of the effects of intoxication, in that sometimes he would have the shakes. He was very lethargic in the dock. He appeared to me to be having the DTs".

Well, then Peter Lang was the ambulance officer. His first involvement was to go to 7 Potch Street where he saw Deakin Flick lying in the backyard and by that stage he was dead and there was a bullet wound to the right side of his back.

Then he saw him four times during the day and he gave evidence about each of these four times, but you have Exhibit E which records what happened on each of the four times. The first time, of course, was when he told Constable Kerr that he was not feeling well and that was about 8.50 - 10 to 9 in the morning.
Then he was called back to the police station at 10.52 because the accused had vomited and the police asked the ambulance to come.

He was then taken to the hospital and seen on that occasion by Dr Pratap and given Maxalon and liquids for the dehydration.

Then he was, at 17.29, or half past five, called again. He was called again because he had been vomiting and again at 6.29, or half past six, he was taken to the hospital again and finally from there he was taken to Walgett Hospital.

Now, I do not think I need go through the various stages. You have got the description of what Mr Lang observed on each occasion and various findings.
You will note that on the Glasgow Coma Scale he scored 15 on each occasion, which is the maximum, meaning that he was not in any sort of coma or a state of unconsciousness.

Let me turn now to the evidence of Mr Bowra, who was at the time a senior constable of police. He said that about 7.50 am he left Walgett with Constable
Elkins and Detective Millington and travelled to 7 Potch Street, Lightning
Ridge. Out the front he saw the white Holden with the rifle lying on the back seat. He went to the rear of the premises where he saw the deceased laying on his back on a foam mattress.

He then went to the police station and he saw the accused seated in the dock area. He did not have a conversation with him at that time. About 10.30 am he had a conversation with Constable Elkins. He went to the sergeant's office and then to the dock area of the station where he told the accused that he proposed to ask him questions in relation to the matter.

The accused said, "Yes, sir". He said that at that time the accused appeared normal. He was seated in the dock. "At one stage I saw him rolling a cigarette with tobacco and tobacco paper. He appeared all right". He said he smelt of intoxicating liquor but he did not appear to be intoxicated, like the signs of the morning after the night before, "may be hung over, a little tired, may be".

When he was rolling the cigarette his hands were not shaking at that stage.

He told him that the interview would be electronically recorded and asked him whether he agreed to being electronically interviewed and the accused said, "Yeah".

So, they went to the sergeant's office where Constable Elkins had set up the recording machine. The accused sat down in a chair, "and Constable Elkins and
I had walked out of the office and had a conversation. While we were speaking,
Mrs Wandmaker, solicitor, attended the police station and requested to speak to the accused. She was shown into the office and spoke briefly with the accused. A short time later she came out and we spoke briefly with her and she left the police station and Constable Elkins and I went to the sergeant's office and placed the audio tapes into the electronic recording machine", and they asked the accused a number of questions.

In relation to these various interviews, you have not only the tapes, you will have the machine to play the tapes. You will also have the transcripts. As I said at the time, the evidence is what is on the tape. The transcript is only for your assistance. If there is any discrepancy, you go by what is on the tapes. You can listen to them as often as you like and by listening to them you will hear not only the answers to the questions, but also the way in which the questions were answered - the tone of voice, inflections and matters of that nature.

Now, you will see from the transcripts that you have, and when you listen to the tapes, that that interview started at 10.36. It commenced with a warning that he was not obliged to answer any questions. Ultimately, it was at question 34, he was asked about what happened then and he said, "I would rather not talk about that because I'm still half cut", or, "half drunk" - it is not clear what he said. He was asked about drinking methylated spirits and you will see that from question and answer 34 down to question and answer 64 and then at 10.48 the interview was suspended.

Shortly after that, the accused was seated in the dock and began to vomit. The ambulance was called and he was treated by an ambulance officer and taken to the Accident and Emergency Centre at Lightning Ridge.

Constable Bowra, as he then was, or Constable Elkins was with him the whole of the time that he was in the Accident and Emergency Centre.

Then he was taken back to the police station and the interview was resumed at .55 and you will see that at that time it was confirmed that he had been to the hospital and whilst he was there he had spoken to the police officers and at questions and answers 77 and 78 he agreed that whilst at the hospital he did not want to really speak to them about what happened that morning. Then he was asked about going to visit the camp site and showing them around and he agreed to that, although he was told that he did not have to agree. That interview was suspended for the second time at 1 pm.

Then shortly after that, Mr Browne, the solicitor, came and had a conversation with Constable Elkins, Constable Bowra and the accused. Mr Browne then left the station and the accused was given a meal and allowed to rest in the dock area. A short time later they set out for the camp site. That was about 2.40 pm.

Upon arrival at the accused's camp site Constable Bowra said, "I commenced recording all conversations had with the accused. The accused produced a plastic container which contained two .22 calibre bullets in it. I took possession of this exhibit. He gave me this exhibit from the top of the fridge in the back area of the house. He showed Constable Elkins and I an area next to the fridge where the accused's rifle had been stored. Whilst searching the house the accused sat in a chair and while Senior Constable Elkins and I asked the accused a number of questions, those questions together with his answers were electronically recorded as the interview took place". That interview is the other tape and the transcript is Exhibit D.

You can listen to it and you can read the transcript. At questions 26 to 31 he is asked about where he kept the rifle and the bullets. At question 35 he was asked how come he took the gun with him that morning and he said it was a hard question to answer. He was asked about the opal. At question 55 he was asked why did he go to see Deakin that morning and he said he preferred not to answer that question. Then at question 61 to question 69 he was asked some more questions which I will not read and you can read his answers yourself. I will not go through those. Again, from questions 81 to 95 he was asked a lot of questions which he answered about what happened at 7 Potch Street.

You have also got the photos and they are part of the exhibit showing the camp site.

One of the things they saw was a bottle which appeared to be three quarters full of methylated spirits. In one of the garbage containers there was an empty methylated spirits bottle.

They then returned to the police station. The accused was placed in the dock area of the station. Mr Browne attended the station, "and Constable Elkins and
I had a conversation with him and played the conversation between Constable
Elkins and I and the accused to him". That is the tape of what was being said at the camp site. Mr Browne then spoke to the accused. The accused was then escorted to the sergeant's office and the interview resumed and this took place in the presence of Mr Browne.

That started at 4.34 and it is on the tape that is Ex C, and it starts at question 96. First of all you will note that he adopted, as it were, what had been said at the camp site and said that was quite true, what he said there was correct and he had no complaint about that.

Then he was asked about how he felt, question 129, about his drinking and how he felt that morning and his state of intoxication or otherwise, and that goes down to about question 150.

Question 154 on he was asked about getting up in the morning, driving to Potch
St, what he is intending to do. I draw your attention particularly to questions and answers 163 to 165. Again, from 193 to 209. I am not suggesting that you should ignore the rest of it but you may find that those questions and answers are more directly concerned with what actually happened in Potch
St.

After the conclusion of the interview Sergeant Worboys came into the room and asked in the presence of Mr Brown it would seem but without Bowra or Elkins being there and asked him whether he had any complaints about the way the interview had been conducted and he said "no".

Mr Bowra said that he would imagine that the consumption of methylated spirits and alcohol was one of the causes of the accused's ill health on this day and his lack of access to it during the day. In other words what is commonly called withdrawal symptoms and he was hung-over, and that he was very upset about the events that had happened that morning. But when not being actually ill he was polite and co-operative. He smelt as a though he had been drinking and smelt what was the smell like one of stale alcohol.

His hands were shaking at various times during the day. His body was shaking at various times. This, of course, is after he arrived at the police station.
There isn't any evidence about whether his hands were shaking at 6 - 7 o'clock in the morning.

Then Constable Elkins gave evidence, and his evidence was pretty much the same as Constable Bowra's because they were together virtually all day. But he was asked some questions about the appearance of the accused and he said that when in the course of speaking to the accused and particularly the first time he spoke to him he was obviously suffering from what he would regard as a hangover and was slightly intoxicated. "The accused was shaking with the vomiting that took place in the dock and just general observations along those lines made me of the opinion that he was suffering from a hangover more so than intoxicated." 
Then there was Dr Moynham and he is a medical practitioner specialising in the study of alcohol; the police medical officer. He has made a special study in the pharmacology of alcohol in relation to re-evaluating the physiological performance of his subjects at various grades of alcohol concentrations, examining the absorption and elimination rate of alcohol and evaluating breath and analysing instruments and such like.

He read the transcripts of the record of interviews with the accused but had not met or spoken with the accused.

He said that having regard to what the accused had said of his use of alcohol he concluded that he was a heavy user of alcohol and had been a heavy user of alcohol for sometime and indeed he would be a heavier user of alcohol than what might be your average heavy drinker - if there is such a person - because he was a person who was consuming not just alcohol products as one would buy in a bottle shop but was actually consuming what we call methylated spirits which is about 80 per cent alcohol.

He said the effect of that on a person's body would be that the person would be addicted to alcohol, to need to use it like that. In the long-term if you have been using alcohol and reaching high blood alcohol concentrations there is usually a fair amount of damage done to the nervous system, that is the brain and some of the peripheral nerves and some damage done to the liver. He didn't really consider what his blood alcohol content would have been in terms of trying to put a figure on it but obviously it would have been very high.

He said for the ordinary person to drink that much alcohol they would be hardly able to move. That is a social drinker or a non-drinker. "But a person who was used to drinking high levels of alcohol would tolerate that type of drinking without too much trouble and given the drinking history of this gentleman, although his blood alcohol concentration I feel to be quite high, he would be able to tolerate it; he would be intoxicated, but would be able to tolerate it." That was making an assumption that he would probably appear to the outside observer to be intoxicated but functioning like someone who's had a bit too much to drink but still seems able to look after himself in terms of getting about and knowing what he is doing and having a sense of direction and that type of thing.

He would be like someone who looks a bit merry who has had a bit too much to drink but not incapacitated. That would be the presentation you would expect from such a person.

He could be unco-ordinated in his actions but not necessarily. And he would be able to drive a motor vehicle, something in the order of 4 to 6 kms although he shouldn't be doing it. But it would not be surprising for such a person to be able to, with a key, to open the door, sit in the car, start the car up and drive and operate the gears if it was a manual car.

He was asked about the effect of alcohol on a person's inhibitions or decisions. He said "Well, alcohol has the ability to take away people's inhibitions. I suppose a simple answer of that is we may tell someone what we think of them when we have had a few drinks whereas normally we might not do that. Even though we might feel like doing it we wouldn't. It tends to take off the brakes - that is the alcohol tends to take off the brakes - the inhibitions. So, a person would do what he or she would not normally do. The brakes would come off and they would say or do something that they wouldn't do if there wasn't alcohol in the system." 
He said such a person would know what they were doing. "For example, if you tell someone off which you normally wouldn't do perhaps the alcohol gives you what might be false courage to do things, or Dutch courage. But it takes those inhibitions off. So you know what you were doing but it's just that you are no longer restrained because the alcohol takes the brakes off." 
Asked whether or not the accused would have been able to form the intention to actually do the shooting, he said "Well, I suppose in a situation like this a person could, I suppose for want of a better description, have an intention to do something and then the alcohol - normally you might not do it - but the alcohol could take away that inhibition or take away what might be called - give you the courage to do it, or take away your better judgment and you do it; not make you do it but takes the brakes off so that you would do it." In other words, doesn't seem to be very clearly expressed but, as I understand it, he is saying that a person with this drinking history would be able to form the intention to do it and if he formed the intention to do it whereas he might not normally do it the alcohol would remove the inhibitions and he might go ahead and do it.

Then he was asked about if you are dependent on alcohol and you don't have any for awhile you start to go through withdrawal symptoms and can be quite unwell when you are going through withdrawal symptoms.

The history that the accused had given of drinking the night before, drinking the two cups of coffee and the cup of lemon juice with the methylated spirits in it in the morning before 6 clock was put to him and then not having any more alcohol or methylated spirits later in the day, that position was put to him and he said that could cause a person to appear to have deteriorating health because he would again be starting to go through the withdrawal symptoms.

In cross-examination he was asked about whether he was aware that Professor
Neering had done calculations of the blood alcohol content of the accused as a result of that drinking and said he didn't disagree with those calculations which he understood as being at 6.30 am of between .4 and .45 which is an extremely high range which he described as normally the "embalming" level; meaning you would be dead. But he said you have to practice drinking a lot of alcohol often to be able to get to that range and still tolerate it. He said such a person might learn what to do, what could be called practised activities. The things that you do most often. As you get to tolerate more and more alcohol those things, the things you do most often are the things you still do. But unfamiliar activities are the ones that become difficult to carry out and unexpected events can cause problems; and they have a problem responding to unexpected events.

He said the reasons why such persons may suffer a lack of inhibition is that their perceptions can be impaired so that the events going on are being distorted on the way in and they can be processed inside - the brain that is - not completely accurately. They are susceptible to losing the appreciation of the consequences of their actions. "That is possible", "Or the link between cause and effect." 
He agreed that that level of intoxication that he had been talking about might lead a person to the inhibitions being stripped so as to give that person false courage to make the person do something that he would not normally do.
"So the dangerous action of brandishing a weapon at say someone with no intention of shooting that person but discharging it without the intention of doing so", he said he agreed with that and agreed that was a reasonable possibility.

He gave these answers to these questions: 
Q. Now, looking back on the circumstances of this matter, is it your evidence that the accused in the circumstances could have intended the consequences of his act when the firearm was discharged? 
A. Yes.

Q. But also given his level of intoxication it is a reasonable possibility that at the time of the actual shooting it was a reflex action or an inappropriate reaction, the consequences of which he did not specifically intend? 
A. Yes.

Q. That is a reasonable possibility? 
A. Yes." 
Then Dr Pratap was the general practitioner from Lightning Ridge. He, on 6
November, saw the accused firstly around about 11 o'clock. He said obviously the patient was somewhat distraught. He had a tremor of his hands but his general mental state was otherwise not too bad. He was orientated in time and space - and that may have been, perhaps that should have been time and place -
I'm not sure, and his memory was intact. He was coherent. He was rational and his cognitive faculties - that is thinking and reasoning - were intact. He was mildly dehydrated. "I thought he may have been suffering from some effect of alcohol or similar substance but not to an extent that he was highly intoxicated." 
He hadn't seen him vomiting but he had a history of vomiting and that is consistent with withdrawal symptoms. Vomiting can also be a reflex action from emotional trauma or an acute anxious state. He thought he was capable of making valid decisions or judgments. He passed out in his care shortly after o'clock and he didn't see him again until 7 o'clock.

He said he didn't have any history of how much methylated spirits the accused had been drinking that morning or the day before, but Mr Oinonen had been a patient of his for some years and he knew his life style and knew that he used to drink a lot. He knew that he was drinking alcohol and methylated spirits.

When he saw him at 7 o'clock in the evening he made a diagnosis of alcohol withdrawal treatment. He hadn't actually treated him on any occasion when he had been suffering from intoxication but there are many other medical conditions that he presented which were related to alcohol use and abuse. He had been treating him for about two or three years.

Then Dr Cala's report was read to you and it won't be any surprise to you to learn that Dr Cala came to the conclusion - he conducted the post-mortem examination - he came to the conclusion that the accused died from a gunshot wound in the back of the chest. He said he believed that the deceased was probably at least two or three metres away from the muzzle of the gun when it discharged. He was not able to say the maximum distance the deceased may have been away from the gun.

He was unable to say definitely how far the deceased may have been able to travel following the injury, but it is possible, even with fatal wounds such as these, that they theoretically may have been able to travel 100 to 200 metres.

Mr Grima was the ballistics expert. He studied the bullet and his only relevant conclusion was that the bullet had travelled directly from the rifle to the deceased and had not struck anything else along the way.

Then Constable Charleston was also a ballistics expert. She had examined the rifle in some detail. She did the standard safety test; holding the weapon cocked and she hit it with a rubber hammer at certain parts of the muzzle and then she also carried out a test to see what pressure needed to be applied to the trigger to activate the firing of the rifle.

She explained how the rifle was loaded and she said that if you do not pull the cocking mechanism back, it cannot fire. Similarly, if you put the safety catch on, it cannot fire. The rifle was manufactured between 1931 and 1936 and was in poor condition. The force required to activate the trigger mechanism was 3 pound, 10 ounces or 3.6 pounds. The safety mechanism was efficient and if it was on, there was no possibility for the weapon to discharge.

In March this year she carried out additional safety tests, including dropping the one pound rubber mallet, letting it fall on to the muzzle with a primed cartridge in the breech. On one occasion when it fell underneath the muzzle, underneath part of the muzzle, it decocked, but it did not discharge the primary case inside and, therefore, would not have fired. She dropped it on a number of occasions and it did not discharge, but on at least one occasion it did discharge when dropped from a distance of 45 centimetres.

She also tried another test where she belted the muzzle with the hammer and on one occasion it when off. She saw a Mr Barber, another ballistics expert, brought into the case on behalf of the accused, carry out similar tests, except he used a raw hide hammer instead of a rubber hammer. On the knock test it discharged, "The same as mine did, but his did with the first blow. Also, where mine was decocked near where the screw his discharged. I think it went off when it was dropped as well". I think that was at 30 centimetres". She also did some testing in relation to the trigger mechanism itself, that is whether it would activate, fire, if the trigger was wriggled backwards and forwards and she said, "You mean lateral trigger movement and forward trigger movement?" She said it did not discharge with lateral trigger movement and forward trigger movement and she described what they were. In moving the trigger from side to side with the same pressure she would wriggle the trigger backwards and forwards and it did not discharge in those circumstances.

She also saw Mr Barber cock the weapon and slam it into his shoulder four times and the weapon did not discharge on any of those occasions.

Then there was the evidence of Dr Wong who is a consultant psychiatrist. He had not seen or spoken to or treated the accused and his evidence was based on the various statements and recorded interviews. He said that from what he had read and been told, he formed the view that the actions of the accused were purposeful acts and appeared to be carried out in a logical sequence and this indicated that he was thinking logically and he knew what he was doing.

He came to the conclusion that the accused was capable of forming the intention to fire the rifle at the deceased. There was nothing in the actions of which he was aware which indicated that the accused did not know what he was doing. He was aware that the accused had a considerable amount of methylated spirits to drink the evening before as well as on the morning of the shooting. He said that it was difficult to determine just how much he had drunk, how much methylated spirits he had drunk, because there had been different versions given as to how much and how many cups he had had and he took the view, from what he had read, that the accused was not severely intoxicated.

He said, "When one is trying to assess the degree of intoxication, you can either rely on observations of his behaviour or rely on the amount and estimated blood content. In most cases the two coincide but where there is a discrepancy, then I think more reliance should be placed on his behaviour and this is particularly true because very often it is difficult to be sure how much the individual had consumed and even more importantly, the fact of some tolerance having developed".

He agreed that a person who is severely intoxicated will have difficulty in accurately analysing information and formulating plans and in particular may be susceptible to lose the appreciation of the consequences of his actions.

He considered it significant that he had given two accounts of what happened to the police and those accounts were essentially consistent. He said that indicated that he was thinking logically and could remember things.

He was not aware that in evidence, when he formed the opinions, that Mr and
Mrs Wood had both expressed the view that when they saw the accused on 6
November at about 7 o'clock, he appeared to them to be drunk.

He said that the fact that he was vomiting at 10.30 is irrelevant. That was an indication of withdrawal symptoms and that is not relevant to his earlier state of intoxication. He thought the fact that some of the answers were given after a long pause, indicated that the accused was being discriminating and able to think about his answers.

He was of the opinion that he was capable of forming the necessary intention, but whether or not he did form the intention, he did not express an opinion.

He was asked whether he would concede there was a reasonable possibility that he did not form such an intention because of his level of intoxication and he said, "I would not say there was a reasonable possibility. I would say the possibility is there".

That was a summary of the evidence on behalf of the Crown.

I turn now to the case for the accused. The accused said that he did not mean to shoot Deakin Flick and did not mean to cause Deakin Flick any physical harm at all. He was asked, "Do you know what actually happened when the rifle discharged?" He said, "No, that is unclear to me". He said he still feels very upset about the death of Deakin Flick. He had known Deakin Flick for five or six years. They were goods friends. He, the accused, had a drinking problem which had started before he was 19 and continued, although he had had periods off alcohol. He started drinking methylated spirits a couple of years back, but first to use it like a hang over cure in the mornings. He did not drink it then to get drunk, but only in, say, the year 1996 he started to get drunk, "on metho". Sometimes he would drink it every day for a couple of weeks, "Not only metho, but I used, when I was in town, I used to drink beer or some whisky sometimes and some brandy, but I did not bring any alcohol to my home and later in the evening I would drink metho". He started drinking methylated spirits constantly about two weeks before 6 November 1996 and he was also drinking beer and other alcohol.

On Monday 4 November, Deakin Flick came to his camp in the morning with Colin
Nagy. They played chess the whole evening and,"... drank metho and Colin was mainly watching videos in the bedroom while me and Deakin was playing chess.
On the Tuesday morning we had a bit more metho before we went back to town".
Then he took Deakin Flick and Colin Nagy back to town in the car.

On the Tuesday he first went to Ada Morgan's place. He there had some drink during the day and, "Then I must have been getting fairly drunk at Ada's because, like, after that I can't remember at all". Later on, on the Tuesday evening, he went to a little party at Yvonne Morgan's place. He was first drinking beer, but then the beer ran out and he started drinking methylated spirits. Whilst he was there, Lisa Bolton told him, "Deakin must have pinched opal from you". He replied, "No, he wouldn't do that". She said, "Yes, I think so, because he had plenty money," and she said she had seen him with $1,600.
He stayed at the party to around midnight. What he did then is a bit unclear, but he assumes he took Eddie Morgan home, "Because before I went home myself, there was didgeridoo in the car. I think that must belong to him." He got home. He checked if there was anything missing from the parcel of opals that he had in the Strepsil tin and there was quite a large stone missing. He said, "Then I realised that it must be true what Lisa Bolton has told me and I find it hard to believe first, but I have to believe it. Then I started thinking; how the heck, what I say to Lenny Russell?" 
Then he was drinking methylated spirits and thinking about those things, "But
I don't remember exactly what time I went to sleep". He woke up the next morning about 5 o'clock. He remembers it was 5 o'clock because he looked at his wrist watch when he woke up. He went to the toilet and made a "metho drink". He filled a cup of boiling water with coffee and put in about two spoons of sugar and then put some "metho" in and continued drinking and added more "metho".

When he first put some "metho" in the cup, it would have been a quarter full.
He made another cup of coffee and put some more "metho" in it the same way.
After that he did not have any more coffee, but then he had one with lemon concentrate and a lot of sugar. He was thinking about Deakin Flick and the opal that morning. "I knew I can't go to Lenny. I got to go to Deakin first".

He decided to go to Deakin and confront him about stealing the opal. "I thought if I take rifle with me and then ask, then he will take me seriously.
I didn't want to hurt him but I wanted him to confess that he took the opal".
It did not cross his mind that he might hurt him: "Q. And when did you think about taking the rifle? 
A. Just before I went there.

Q. After you had started drinking? 
A. Yes.

Q. Why did you load the gun? 
A. Well, what is good to take empty gun? I would have taken walking stick instead. If I took walking stick with me would have been as effective as empty gun".

It never occurred to him not to load it.

He was asked: "Didn't you think that taking the gun there loaded and cocked that Deakin might get hurt?" He said "To me it's safe unless you pull the trigger. What, I can't see what can happen unless somebody pulls the trigger." "Did you put the safety on?" " No I didn't." "Did you think about putting the safety on?" " Didn't think about it." 
He was asked how he felt physically when he left that morning. He said "I was feeling much better than I was feeling when I woke up." 
He put the gun on the back seat of the car. He described how he did it: "The barrel pointing away from me and the butt towards me and then I closed the door." And the didgeridoo wasn't on the back seat it was one end on the floor and the other end leaning against the door frame.

He was asked what happened when he arrived at the Nagy household. And he said he parked the car, "Went to the door. Only the screen door was closed, the wooden door was open. And I knocked on the screen door and said 'anyone home'.
I did that twice. And then there was no answer. I walked in the lounge room and from there I seen end of the corridor bedroom door was open and go in and
Nagy was sleeping on the bed and I went to the door to his bedroom door and said 'Colin' a couple of times. Then he turned around and I said 'where is
Deakin'? He said 'Deakin's sleeping next room there'. I said to him, 'can you wake him up and tell him I want to see him outside'? Then he got up and I walked out.

He saw Deakin come out because Deakin didn't take very long when he came out.
He came out the front gate close to the car. "I opened the back door and took the rifle and went to the front close to him and I pointed the rifle from my hip to him and said, 'you done dirty trick to me. You stole opal from me.' He said 'no I never'. I was pretty angry. I did not think about harming him." 
He, that is Flick, moved to the other side of the car between the car and the fence "so the car was between us" and they were both moving backwards and forwards on either side of the car. "Then he stooped down and I couldn't see him for a while and I was looking this way and that way, I didn't know which way he was going, and then I seen over at the car, no, I was actually level with the bonnet part of the car when I saw him running, disappearing behind the corner." "When I saw him next I just hit - lifted the rifle and put it on my shoulder and pointed to him, to his direction" and the rifle went off.
 "Q. Do you know how it went off? 
A. No, but I was kind of surprised when it went off.

Q. You told the police that you pulled the trigger, 
A. I must have pulled the trigger because otherwise it wouldn't go off." 
He said that was what he was thinking when he spoke to police about that.
 "Q. Did you actually know when you spoke to the police that you pulled the trigger? 
A. No, but I knew my finger was inside the trigger guard all the time.

Q. Do you know now whether you pulled the trigger? 
A. No, I still don't know." 
He was asked how his hands were and he said "oh, I was shaking because I got pretty upset when he said 'no, I didn't do it'." 
He was barefooted. Deakin disappeared around the corner. "Then I chucked the rifle on the back seat and took off. I went to police station. I was too scared to go around the back because Colin and Deakin would have been in the house and I didn't think they would have taken it very lightly that I fired a shot." 
Went to the police station. The door was closed and locked. He saw the emergency button, pressed it but it didn't work and then he saw a sign out of order. "Then I went to Ada Morgan's place and I said 'I have shot Deakin but I don't know if I hit him or not. Can you go and check if he's all right'." 
Reggie said don't tell lies or something to that effect and the accused said, "This is not bullshit, it really happened, go and check him." So they left; that is Reg and Donna Wood.

Then ultimately Donna came back and said "Deakin is dead. You killed him" and that was a terrible shock to him.
 "Q. Have you any idea how the rifle actually discharged? 
A. In my opinion I must have pulled the trigger otherwise it wouldn't
Discharge.

Q. You don't remember doing that? 
A. No.

Q. Did you ever mean to pull the trigger? 
A. No.

Q. Had your rifle ever accidentally gone off before this time? 
A. No." 
He was asked about how he was feeling when he went to the police station. He said, "very bad, terrified. I was still drunk in my own opinion but that shock had kind of a sobering effect, I think." And the Woods gave him a beer. Whilst he was in the police station he started to get sick.

When he went to the camp site in the afternoon he was still sick and very upset and confused. He started to tell the police what had happened. He told them the truth. He said "Not everything was explained there and then, but I believe what I told them was true." 
When they got back to town he saw Mr Brown and then continued the interview with the police and continued to tell them the truth.

He was asked about his state of intoxication at the time of the actual shooting and he said, "I was definitely drunk". He said he knows that he is responsible for the death of Deakin Flick.

In cross-examination he agreed that apart from the actual pulling of the trigger he remembered almost every single detail of what happened on the morning of the shooting and that apart from the actual pulling of the trigger everything he did he knew what he was doing, and again apart from actual pulling of the trigger the fact that he was intoxicated did not affect his ability to know what he was doing.

He said that the feeling ill after the police came to see him was a combination of the fact that he had caused Deakin's death and the alcohol going out of his system.

He said he made the decision to take the rifle after he had the third cup of coffee, the one with the lemon concentrate with the methylated spirits in it.

He said that when he first spoke to Deakin he was holding the gun at waist level pointing parallel to the ground his left hand under the front of the stock and finger of his right hand on the trigger. His index finger was on the inside of the trigger guard on the trigger. The safety was off and the bolt was forward. The gun was in position to fire at that stage and at that stage it was pointed at Deakin in the manner that he indicated. He kept it pointing at Deakin at that stage.

He didn't tell him "Don't run or I will shoot" or anything like that. The whole time he had the gun at the ready.

He marked where Deakin was on the plan when Deakin went to run around the side of the house. And then he lifted the rifle. Deakin was in the area of the red dot on the plan, facing away from him. He was running very fast, appeared to be running as fast as he could in the direction of the back of the house. He lifted the rifle up, looked along the top of the barrel and it was facing in the direction of Deakin and he could actually see his back with the barrel pointing in the direction of his back, and it was his intention to have the gun pointing at Deakin.

He knew that at that time his ability to frighten Deakin was fading fast because he was running away. It was put to him that he shot at him because he wanted to stop him from running. He said that was not true. He said that the lifting the rifle from high hip to the shoulder was like a reflection. It all happened in a second.

In re-examination he said "I knew most of the things what I was doing but I was drunk and if I had been sober I wouldn't go to see Deakin with the rifle and probably not at all. I would probably see Len Russell first before I went there." 
Then Mr Browne was the solicitor. He said he attended the Lightning Ridge
Police Station shortly after 1 pm and spoke to the accused. He was very upset, his hands were shaking. He was not very coherent and his breath smelt very strongly of methylated spirits. "I felt he was quite intoxicated." He said to the police "I did not think he was in any condition to undergo an interview at that stage." 
Then there was the Reverend Poklea, a pastor of the Finnish Lutheran Church and he had known Mr Oinonen for some years. He had met him in Mt Isa in the late 60's. He met him because he turned to the pastor in the first place having difficulty with the drink like many single persons in that place; that is Mt Isa. "During the years he came to us and in Mt Isa we were very close and he was like a son of my family and very very active also in the church and
I never knew that he had trouble with the things since then." 
He said they stayed in contact when he moved to Lightning Ridge. And he visited Lightning Ridge about three our four times. Apart from one trip he always stayed with the accused.

He said the accused is very honest otherwise people would not have had him look after their home for three months at the various places. "We would not have done that but we knew he is very honest." He was asked about whether he was a violent man, he said, "No, I have never seen him angry. I have never seen him show any - he was always helpful." 
So that, as I say, is a brief summary of the evidence. You have regard to all of the evidence, not only the parts that I have referred you to.

So to sum up, the Crown says that you would be satisfied that the accused deliberately loaded and cocked the rifle leaving the safety catch off, deliberately raised it to his shoulder and deliberately pointed it at Flick's back and then deliberately pulled the trigger intending to strike Flick with the bullet and knowing that that would cause serious bodily injury to Flick and that that is murder.

The Crown further submits that if you are not satisfied that the trigger was pulled intentionally or not satisfied that the accused intended to hit Flick causing him serious bodily injury then you would still be satisfied that brandishing a loaded and cocked rifle without the safety catch on with your finger, with one's finger on the trigger and pointing it at Flick was an unlawful and dangerous act and you would therefore find him guilty of manslaughter. And the Crown submits there is no room for any verdict of not guilty of either of these offences.

The Crown submits that intoxication can be virtually disregarded. It is not relevant at all to manslaughter and as far as murder is concerned its only relevance is in considering whether the accused had formed the intention to cause serious bodily injury.

The Crown points out that the rifle did not go off accidentally when tested and certainly it was not - well it did actually but in totally different circumstances. Because on the morning of the 6 November 1996 the rifle was not hit with a hammer, rubber or rawhide and was not dropped and the accused said himself that it had never gone off accidentally.

Mr Dalton on the other hand submits that you would accept the accused when he says that he did not deliberately pull the trigger and did not intend to cause serious physical injury. Or even if you don't accept him in the light of all the evidence particularly the evidence of the accused you would have a reasonable doubt.

As for pulling the trigger, he submits that the accused says he did not intend to do it although by way of reconstruction some months afterwards, or even later that day, he said that he must have, and that is what he meant when he told the police that he shot the accused.

He points out that it is a faulty weapon and therefore may have gone off accidentally.

He submits you would be satisfied that the accused was intoxicated and that in the light of that bearing in mind particularly the evidence of Dr Moynham, the accused's previous reputation for non-violence and his honesty in association with his statement that he did not intend to do it, you would not be satisfied that he intended to cause serious physical injury to the accused and the only offence that you could find him guilty of is manslaughter.

Now, when you return your foreman will be asked firstly, whether you have agreed on your verdict and then whether you find the accused guilty or not guilty of murder. If the response is guilty of murder that will be the end of it. If the response is not guilty the foreman will then be asked whether you find the accused guilty or not guilty of manslaughter.

If you have any questions as to the directions of law that I have given you or any other matters that you wish to have explained, please send a note through the Sheriff's officer and, similarly, if there are any parts of the evidence that you want checked or you want me to re-read to you, or whether they are passages that I have already summarised or not, likewise, send me a note and the court will reassemble and I will read them to you. The exhibits will be sent out to you.

Are there any matters of fact, Mr Crown? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: No, your Honour.

DALTON: In relation to Mr Bowra's observations in respect of drinking, the history of drinking, he said he had no reason to disbelieve the accused.

HIS HONOUR: Yes, I think he said that.

DALTON: And he agreed that in hindsight a blood test would have been good.

HIS HONOUR: Yes, we know that. There was no blood test and no one is criticising anyone for that.

DALTON: Your Honour noted Dr Pratap's history of no drinking, but he also did not take a history of the events that day and he saw him for about five minutes in the morning and about five or 10 minutes in the evening.

HIS HONOUR: Yes.

DALTON: There is one matter I would like to take up very quickly and it relates to Mr Crown's address.

HIS HONOUR: Members of the jury, will you just retire for a few minutes.

IN THE ABSENCE OF THE JURY 
DALTON: Your Honour said in relation to the Crown's address that the accused deliberately raised and cocked the rifle knowing that it would cause serious bodily harm. The Crown did not suggest that at the time it was loaded and cocked that he had an intention to cause grievous bodily harm. The Crown went to the jury on the basis that only on the instant that he actually raised the rifle from his hip.

HIS HONOUR: What is your point? 
DALTON: That he did not deliberately load and cock it back at his home with the intention to go through to cause grievous bodily harm.

HIS HONOUR: I do not think I said he did.

DALTON: I thought it was not appropriate to canvass that in the present of the jury.

HIS HONOUR: Yes, that was appropriate. Your point, Mr Crown, is that it was when he deliberately raised it to his shoulder that he intended to strike? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: Yes, knowing that it was cocked. I think your Honour correctly summarised what I said. Your Honour has just enumerated various things that the accused did, but did not indicate when he did certain things.
I do not think there is a problem.

HIS HONOUR: It might be better to clarify it. Are there any other matters? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: No.

DALTON: No.

IN THE PRESENCE OF THE JURY 
HIS HONOUR: Just one thing, members of the jury, that may possibly have been open to a misunderstanding. When I summarised the Crown's submissions, I said that you would be satisfied that the accused deliberately did a number of things, including loading, cocking the rifle and so on, and then deliberately raising it to his shoulder pointing it at the deceased's back and pulled the trigger and intending to strike him and knowing that it would cause serious bodily injury. The Crown only meant, and I only meant, when I summarised it, that the intention to strike Flick with the bullet, and knowing it would cause serious bodily injury, only related to the last events of deliberately raising the rifle to his shoulder, pointing it at Flick and pulling the trigger and not to the earlier events. I thought that was clear, but I thought I should clear it up. Does that cover it? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: Yes, your. Honour 
DALTON: Yes, your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: Members of the jury, would you retire now and consider your verdict.
 (The jury retired to consider its verdict at 11.10 am).
 (The jury returned at 11.43 am with a verdict of not guilty of murder, but guilty of manslaughter).
 (His Honour discharged the jury).
 (For proceedings after conviction see separate transcript).
 * * * 
