

Basil versus Tunshow Pty Limited t/as Merimbula's Magic Mountain Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 725 (18 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
LYNNE BASIL versus TUNSHOW PTY LIMITED t/as MERIMBULA'S MAGIC MOUNTAIN /97 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter, application is made under s.76E of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) for payment out to the plaintiff of part of the damages sought to be recovered in the proceedings. The court by s.76E(3) may make such an order if the defendant has admitted liability and in this case the defendant has. There appears no matter under s.76E(4) which would deprive the court of the power to make such an order. The court gains the power to make such an order to the extent that the payment of such amounts as it thinks just must not exceed a reasonable proportion of the damages which in the opinion of the court are likely to be recovered by a verdict. 
By [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p16)
Rule 8 of the Supreme Court Rules, the plaintiff making application for such a payment must serve a statement of particulars and the statement under Part 33 has now been provided.

When the matter came on for hearing I was advised by Mr. Simpson of counsel appearing for the plaintiff, that the plaintiff's advisers who had recently taken over the matter were not aware of what the position would be in relation to that payment of any possible claim by the Department of Social Security or the Health Commission but, that notwithstanding, the payment was still sought.

In support of the application the affidavit of the plaintiff sworn 1 May 1998 was relied on.

It shows that the plaintiff was a registered nurse who at the time of the accident was deriving income whilst working in her husband's business as a secretary. She has two children. The accident involved a severe injury to her back in consequence of a heavy man landing upon her whilst she was taking a child on the waterslide at Merimbula's Magic Mountain. That collision has caused her some 12 operative procedures in private hospitals including two spinal fusions. In addition her marriage has broken up, she has gone bankrupt, she has lost her home, she is seeking to maintain the children at their school and she is continuing to defray her and their personal expenses together with the costs of her treatment.

I will not attempt to list the medical procedures and advice in respect of this lady's problem except to say that the particulars indicate that not only has she had the spinal fusions referred to above, but in consequence of those operations, there have had to be further operations for removal of loose screws, rods and screws, rhizolysis to dissect masses of fibrous scar tissue, urethral dilation to relieve incontinence, insertion of a synchronised intrathecal pump which had to be re-positioned a few days later and then later removed as it had caused meningitis, followed by a further operation as the pump sleeve had accidentally been left in place following the removal.

The various consequential ailments that it is alleged were caused include back pain; radiated leg pain; vulval pain; restriction of movement of the lumbar spine; groin pain; stress disorder and severe unremitting depression; animal posture; anxiety; breakdown of the family and the marriage; dysmenorrhoea and severe amenorrhoea; hysterectomy; a necessity to take morphine and methadone; repeated urinary tract infections; inability to bear children; inability to stand, sit or otherwise deal with unremitting pain; a complete loss of libido, self-esteem and the opportunity to indulge in sexual intercourse; inability to bend, lift, shop; difficulty in performing household tasks including driving the children to and from school, and this last is particularly important since in this case there is evidence that as a result of the lack of monies occasioned by the accident, the plaintiff has had to move and is, as a result, put to some two and a half hours a day driving to get the children to and from school; inability to participate in the various sporting activities the plaintiff used to enjoy prior to the accident; and, most importantly, an inability to work.

The particulars of claim in respect of economic loss and out of pocket expenses herein show the claim to be a most substantial one. It is very clear that the particulars enable one to draw the conclusion that if the medical reports substantiate the claim then the general damages will be such that the amount presently sought of some $50,000 would be well below a reasonable proportion of those monies that might be expected to be recovered by a verdict.

I have read, though not in detail, the voluminous and detailed medical reports which have been annexed to the affidavit of the plaintiff and the affidavit of the plaintiff's solicitor, Gail Margaret Chalmers sworn 18 May 1998. For the purposes of this application it is not necessary that the detail of that evidence be recorded. In general terms that material appears to support the claims made in the particulars.

No challenge is made by the solicitor for the defendant appearing today to that material or to the proposition that generally it supports the allegations as made in the particulars. Indeed the defendant's position, as expressed by its representative, is that, having admitted liability, it accepts responsibility for the future, at least on an interim basis, for the costs to the application for payment of the plaintiff's further medical procedures but that for any amount by way of interim payment over and above that it does not assent but does not oppose. There being no opposition and there being before me the clearest evidence of already incurred liabilities together with clear liabilities to enable the plaintiff to maintain her family unit such as school and related expenses for the children, health insurance premiums and living expenses, I am of the view that it is entirely proper to make the interim payment which is sought in the motion.

In the circumstances I make orders in accordance with the short minutes of order which have been handed up by counsel for the plaintiff and I note the matters contained therein under Order 2 and under the heading "Noted". I will initial those short minutes and place them with the papers.
 * * * 
