

Regina versus Green Matter No 60069/97 [1997] NSWSC 440 (29 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Regina versus John Hilton Green /97 September 1997 
Grove J, Newman J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus JOHN HILTON GREEN 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against severity of sentence imposed by Twigg DCJ in the Goulburn District Court on 6 February 1997. On that occasion the applicant appeared for sentence on a count of robbery contrary to [s 94](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s94.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). He was sentenced to a total term of six years penal servitude divided into a minimum term of three years commencing on 16 September 1996 and expiring on 15 September 1999 together with an additional term of three years. The reason for the delay in the commencement of this sentence was that the applicant was in fact serving a fixed term of four months imprisonment imposed at the Goulburn Local Court on 4 September 1996, which was due to expire on the date upon which his Honour commenced the sentence to which I have referred. The applicant had pleaded guilty before a magistrate and adhered to that plea when he appeared in the District Court. 
The facts were that the applicant was in the township of Bowral at about .20pm on the afternoon of Wednesday, 15 May 1996. He was in company with other persons. Police investigations did not reveal that these persons were involved in the offence committed by the applicant; indeed, he insisted they were ignorant of what he was about and that position was ultimately accepted.
It appears that the applicant must have told his companions that he was going to a bank to obtain some money - literally this is what he did - but he arrived with a hood over his head, a beanie, sunglasses and gloves, and passed a note to a young lady teller stating: "This is a hold up, give me the 100, $50 and $20 notes." He received $2,900 in various denominations. His photograph was taken by a security camera. The motor car in which he was riding was identified and I do not need to detail the prompt action by police which led to the detection of the applicant and his prompt arrest. As I have said, he pleaded guilty when taken before a magistrate and adhered to that plea.

As is implicit in my reference to the term imposed at Goulburn Local Court, the applicant was not without prior conviction. He had other convictions but it is to be said that his record was not as bad as is sometimes seen by persons engaged in serious crime such as that with which the Court now has to deal.

The solicitor representing the Director of Public Prosecutions in the District
Court made a written submission concerning sentence and we have been able to read a copy of the document. Included in it was what appears to have been a considered submission in the following terms: "The Crown respectfully submits the matter is one demanding a term of full time custody ranging between: a minimum term of 18 months and an additional term of six months; and a minimum term of three years and an additional term of one year (subject of course to your Honour adjusting the ratio)." 
The written submission also contained reference to other material matters which the Crown submitted should be taken into account on the question of sentence.

The sentence imposed is markedly higher than the upper limit of the range of sentences submitted by the Crown. It is acknowledged by counsel appearing for the applicant in this Court that it was open to his Honour to reject the
Crown's submission and I would confirm that he certainly was not bound to accept it or to act upon it. Nevertheless, having regard to the circumstances which I have recounted, it is surprising that his Honour made no reference whatever in his remarks on sentence to the reasons which had led him to impose a total sentence some 50 percent higher than the upper extremity of the range submitted by the Crown.

We have also been informed that the learned sentencing Judge was supplied with certain information extracted from the records kept on sentencing statistics by the Judicial Commission of New South Wales. It is contended that nothing in those statistics as handed to his Honour was inconsistent with the submission made on behalf of the Crown. Before this Court the Crown Prosecutor, who did not appear at first instance, has sought to assist the Court by extracting from the Judicial Commission statistics more up to date and complete figures.
Without entirely canvassing all the information therein, it can be observed that a minimum term of the order imposed in this case at first instance for one count contrary to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s94.html) upon offenders aged 21 to 30 years after a plea of guilty in circumstances where they had prior convictions occurred in a tiny percentage of cases.

Combining the understandable grievance that might be felt in the absence of any explanation for exceeding the upper limit of the Crown's submission and the statistic that I have just mentioned, leads me to conclude that this is a case where the observations of the then Chief Justice in R versus Holder [(1983) 3 NSWLR 254] applicably operate to provoke intervention by this Court. I am of a view that the sentence imposed below should be quashed and that this
Court should proceed to resentence.

Provisionally upon the Court reaching that view, certain material was placed before us in the affidavit of James Charles Allen, the solicitor for the applicant. Exhibited to his affidavit are some reports by a consultant psychiatrist working on the staff of the corporation overseeing the Junee
Correctional Centre.

It is unnecessary to recount what can be read in those reports. It can be observed that the condition of the applicant must be different from the time when he appeared for original sentence in the sense that there has been now diagnosed his affection by a significant mental illness. The most recent report, dated 20 August 1997, holds out some promise and a prognosis that the mood and psychosis of the applicant will continue to improve over the next four weeks. It is significant, however, that the applicant has been having auditory hallucinations and the prognosis is not that these will vanish altogether.

It seems to me then that this is a case in which upon release it is important that the applicant be under a regime of supervision. The learned sentencing
Judge found that there were special circumstances. I agree with that finding and on resentence would make a similar finding myself, that conclusion being enhanced, of course, by the material to which I have just made reference.

In my view, particularly having regard to the statistics now presented to the
Court and the observation that can be made that the cases referred to by the
Crown which involved total terms similar to that received by the applicant involved offenders being on parole when they committed the offences, an appropriate total sentence in this case is four years penal servitude. I would divide this into minimum and additional terms in a similar fashion to that adopted at first instance.

Accordingly, I propose the following orders: the application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted and the appeal allowed; the sentence imposed in the District Court quashed. In lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced to a total term of four years penal servitude consisting of a minimum term of two years commencing on 16 September 1996 and expiring on 15
September 1998 together with an additional term of two years commencing on 16
September 1998. The applicant should be eligible for parole on 15 September and while on parole should be subject to the supervision of the Probation and Parole Service.

NEWMAN J: I agree with both the reasons and the orders proposed by the presiding Judge. 
GROVE J: The orders of the Court, therefore, will be as I have proposed. * * * 
