

Regina versus Guthrie Matter No 60785/96 [1997] NSWSC 632 (10 December 1997) ` 
Regina versus Barry Guthrie` /96 December 1997 
Grove J, James J, Simpson J 
The Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Moore DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60785/96 
DELIVERED: Wednesday 10 December 1997 
HEARING DATE: Wednesday 10 December 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA V BARRY GUTHRIE 
JUDGMENT OF: GROVE J, JAMES J, SIMPSON J 
COUNSEL: * APPELLANT: In person * RESPONDENT: P G Berman 
SOLICITORS: * APPELLANT: - * RESPONDENT: S E O'Connor 
RESULT: APPEAL DISMISSED 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - SEXUAL OFFENCES AGAINST STEPDAUGHTER - CONVICTION AND SENTENCE - NO SPECIAL POINT OF PRINCIPLE 
NO OF PAGES: 11 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: The appellant stood trial before his Honour Judge Moore and a jury at Coffs Harbour District Court where he was convicted on a number of counts charging indecent assault and sexual intercourse without consent. The jury were unable to agree in respect of some other similar counts. The complainant in respect of each charge was Kelly (B) who was a stepdaughter of the appellant. The offences occurred between approximately 1978 and 1988. Concurrent sentences were imposed amounting to an effective minimum term of four years penal servitude with an additional term of three years. 
The appellant was represented by solicitor and counsel at trial. He has appeared for himself in this appeal. A written outline of argument in support of his appeal is contained in the typescript of a 30 page letter, apparently originally addressed to an officer of the Legal Aid Commission. The applicant has not filed formal grounds of appeal but within the letter is a page entitled "Why I am appealing my conviction and sentence" under which the following assertions are reproduced as they appear: "ON CONVICTION
I am appealing because I am not guilty, and I believe my barrister and solicitor, both had failed to ensure me a fair trial through their incompetence, unprofessional and fraudulent manner and actions while they were preparing and defending my case.
The Judge had a failed in his duty to remain impartial. He failed by showing inconsistency in advising the jury of obligation required by them to access the evidence, this also made him prejudice and lent to perverting the course of justice. His actions had lent credibility to the crown witnesses, including Patrick Guthrie and his evidence.
Judge Moore by his actions during court or lack of action, had allow himself to continue his impartial view when handing on my sentence after I failed to except the Public Prosecutor,s' deals.
The Public Prosecutor had deliberately taken actions in my case that put his office and staff in the position of perverting the course of justice.
Patrick Guthrie had and was found to have lied in my case, with the help of the Public Prosecutor.
All of my cases should of been heard together, by all my accusors, so that the jury would of been allowed all the would have been allowed all the evidence available in my cases to be heard. This would allow a fair trial as no evidence could be tampered with because of outstanding trials.

ON SENTENCING
I was found GUILTY in court, because I was not presented in court correctly. This was also presented with the Public Prosecutor making offers or deals. The sentence I received was far in excess of any logical understanding with the offers made by the Public Prosecutors office".

I will refer to these as grounds of appeal and adopt the paragraph enumeration.

There is also a following section within the letter referring to purported "new evidence".

The applicant and his wife - who was called by him to give evidence at the trial - had each been previously married. Their household included three children of his earlier marriage, the complainant (a child of his wife's previous marriage) and, later, a son born of their marriage. The earliest criminal act against the complaint was said to have occurred when she was about nine years of age. She was aged 27 at the time of giving evidence and was married.

There was evidence that she brought the matters which became the subject of the charges to the attention of her husband when she felt a need to do so just prior to the birth of their first child. She had spoken of the matters to a friend, Miss Claydon in about 1988 or 1989.

There is no present need to detail the activities said to constitute the offences. They represent actions of sexual gratification by an older man upon a young female child and later through her teenage years.

The content of what has been treated as the appellant's written submission is not entirely coherent and the bulk of the material consists of voluminous assertions about witnesses, Crown and other authorities and circumstantial matters which do not appear to be connected with issues upon which the charges were focussed.

I shall deal first with the above assumed grounds and make some observations about other matters agitated by the appellant.

The first ground complains about the appellant's legal representatives. The appellant's solicitor retained counsel to conduct the trial. There is no basis for this Court to conclude that counsel was other than appropriately experienced to conduct the matter and a reading of the transcript shows that the trial was regularly conducted with the interests of the then accused being appropriately seen to by his representatives. There was a complaint about counsel that he compromised his position by allowing himself to work for the "Public Prosecutor" while defending the appellant. The profession of a barrister requires him to be available for fee to accept work offered to him in any area in which he practises from any litigant including the Crown. There is in fact nothing in the papers to demonstrate that counsel at the time had any retainer in any matter from the Director of Public Prosecutions and it would not be a matter of significance if he did.

A particular complaint is that counsel did not explain to the jury that the appellant suffered from dyslexia. There is no material upon which this Court can gauge the accuracy of that assertion but it can be observed that the appellant gave evidence at the trial and was cross-examined and if he was feeling that his claimed condition was inhibiting his ability to express himself it was open to him to mention the matter. There is no suggestion that he ever instructed his legal advisers about this condition.

The second ground essentially amounts to railings against the utterances of the presiding judge. A reading of the transcript and in particular his
Honour's charge to the jury does not support the complaints. A particular complaint is that the presiding judge addressed the jury with words to the effect of inviting them to ask themselves why these (the prosecution) witnesses would be making these claims. No such invitation in any terms appears in the transcript of the proceedings before the jury.

The third ground really continues the matters raised under the second and adverts to a claim by the appellant that at some stage it emerged from the prosecutor that he could have a lesser sentence if he pleaded guilty to charges. As will later appear, there are outstanding charges relating to allegations of sexual misconduct by the appellant against other of his children. This Court on the material before it can only conclude that the events described in the appellant's letter are inventions or figments of imagination. Even if pleas of guilty had been offered, the matter of sentence was for the presiding judge, who was, even on the appellant's assertion, not a direct party to any offer. I hasten to add that I find it hard to attach credibility to the suggestion that the Crown Prosecutor made an offer of a "deal" which was outside his ability to complete. It would appear that after the jury returned its verdicts of guilty, an enquiry of counsel was made as to whether the appellant was interested of disposing of outstanding matters by way of plea or schedule but upon a negative response being given to the Crown
Prosecutor the matter was not taken any further.

The fourth ground is a compendious allegation of misconduct on the part of prosecuting authority and is unsupported by any factual material.

Leaving aside the expression concerning the "help" of the Public Prosecutor, fifth ground would seem to be directed to the credibility of Patrick Guthrie.
He was called by the Crown and gave evidence that he had seen his father and the complainant naked in bed together. The appellant states that at the time of giving evidence this witness was scheduled to be dealt with on charges of "armed holdups". Accepting for present purposes the accuracy of the timing, the decision whether to attack the Crown witness on this basis must have been a tactical one to be made by counsel for the purpose of trial. I can readily imagine that a decision would be taken not to follow that path which would involve an attack by a father upon a son which may well have had a less than favourable effect in the jury's assessment from the point of view of the appellant. There was no perceptible miscarriage.

The sixth ground refers to the outstanding accusations against the appellant by two of his sons and his daughter. The conduct of separate trials where there are multiple accusers is frequently undertaken in order to avoid the risk that jury might find that a conclusion of guilt is reinforced by the mere multiplicity of complainants rather than by the assessment of evidence. The appellant includes in his typescript an assertion that the trial judge "had taken time to collectively have the jury assess the fact that Patrick, Ian and
Rebecca Guthrie were in Court to support Kelly (B) and required them to ask why they would be doing this". There is no such material to be found in the record of trial.

The reference to new evidence is obscure. The appellant claims that there is a witness who would have shown that the offences said to have occurred at
Sextonville did not happen. The name of the witness is not given, nor is it indicated how this witness would negative the prosecution case. The appellant makes reference then to further evidence obtained in gaol and nominates a man
Carroll, apparently a co-offender with Patrick Guthrie on some matter or matters. It is not clear whether Carroll is the person who was unidentified as a potential witness. The appellant says that this man has confirmed that he and the appellant's children and his ex-wife "had input" into his case. It is impossible to draw from that bald statement a conclusion that there is new or fresh evidence which might relevantly be taken into account in this appeal.

The appellant continues with the often repeated refrain throughout his submissions that he perceives some conspiracy against him. To this he adds that his counsel told him that he, counsel, could not perceive a conspiracy and the criticisms of the appellant are really based upon an undemonstrated assumption of the existence of some conspiracy. There is nothing to indicate that the view attributed to counsel was incorrect.

It would be quite impractical to deal with all the unverified assertions in the documents presented by the appellant. I can discern nothing of apparent substance. A sample of the style can be chosen. The appellant wrote: "Judge Moore took the time to confirm the Public Prosecutor's demand of the jury to return a guilty verdict on all charges, relating to the accuser being under the age of 16 years, as she was under the age of consent. However, he failed to instructed the jury at any time that there was no evidence to support the charges other than hearsay, excluding the evidence he allowed to prejudice my case in the eyes of the jury that Patrick Guthrie had been allowed to place before the Court".

What his Honour in fact told the jury was that in relation to the first four counts in the indictment as the complainant was aged between nine and eleven years, the Crown did not have to prove that there was any lack of consent on the part of the complainant. That direction accorded with the law. It was simply incorrect to incant as the appellant does are that there was only hearsay evidence against him. The complainant gave direct evidence of his interferences with her. I can find nothing in the material which leads me to a conclusion that the trial miscarried.

At the hearing this morning the appellant has supplemented his earlier written submissions by reading to the Court other material. Matters which appear to be significant within that address to the Court are as follows. He repeated the assertion that he is not guilty. Next, a number of complaints were mounted about the lack of legal aid. It has already been indicated to the appellant that this Court has no power to direct or otherwise effect the grant or withholding of legal aid. The appellant once again raised the question of the so called "deals" which were offered through his barrister. It is to be observed that in his oral submissions this morning, he confirmed that the only person he asserts he ever spoke to was his own counsel although from that he jumps to a factual conclusion that there was a participation by the Crown and the Judge in these offers.

I have already made some reference to the sentencing "deal" which the appellant asserts. An affidavit from the Crown Prosecutor has been received into evidence. The applicant did not desire to cross-examine him. Part of that affidavit contains the following: "At no time were there any deals done between Mr Gelbert and myself.
Specifically I did not suggest to Mr Guthrie or his legal representatives that he would receive a two year sentence if he pleaded guilty or that he would receive a four to six year sentence if he pleaded guilty to two of each of his accuser's charges. After the verdicts of guilty were returned, I did approach
Mr Gelbert to ascertain if the outstanding charges involving other complainants might be resolved by way of plea or by being taken into account on a schedule. That approach was rejected." 
The credibility of Mr Harrison's deposition is somewhat supported by a letter tendered by the applicant to the Court this morning. In his submission he referred to having given written instructions to his counsel. The letter which he has tendered is dated 3 December 1996 and is addressed to the appellant in gaol from his then solicitor, Mr Bigelow. Leaving aside some observations about the merits of any proposed appeal, Mr Bigelow's letter contains the following statement: "I have a copy of your signed instruction that you did not want to schedule any of the charges brought by other complainants prior to your sentencing on the convictions; also that it is your intention to defend such charges if they are brought against you".

In the light of the absence of any attack by way of cross-examination upon Mr
Harrison and the contents of that letter, it is impossible in my view to attribute any weight to the prolix assertions about "a deal" made by the appellant either in his written material or today.

The appellant also addressed the Court about difficulties which he claimed he is encountering with the classification committee at gaol. He asserted that as he did not admit his guilt, he would be unavailable to do courses required of sex offenders and that in turn, that would mean that he would not achieve parole upon his eligibility date. Matters of prison discipline and prison administration are outside the jurisdiction of this Court.

All the assertions made by the appellant are self evidently irrelevant to any matter in this appeal. By the same token the observations of the appellant concerning his segregation in prison are similarly irrelevant. I should add that there was also received into evidence an affidavit by Jennifer Regan who was the solicitor instructing the Crown Prosecutor on behalf of the Department of Public Prosecutions at the trial in Lismore. Her affidavit was provoked by an assertion contained in the earlier written submissions of the appellant.
She has not been required to attend for cross-examination. As in the case of
Mr Harrison, the appellant has chosen in oral submissions to assert that the material in the affidavits should be rejected. For my part I see nothing inherently incredible about what is contained in either of the affidavits and there is nothing about the material there which should affect the outcome of this appeal in the sense of favouring the appellant.

As with the written material, I regret that it must be observed that the vast bulk of what the appellant had to say this morning, consisted of no more than lengthy extravagant and entirely unsubstantiated assertions.

The appellant complains of the sentence. Amongst other things he asserts that the judge sentenced him "on his belief" that the appellant was a repeat offender not only in this complainant's case but in relation to all accusers.
There is a transcript of the judge's remarks on sentence and it is plain that he went to considerable lengths to exclude from his consideration, not only matters relating to complaint by other people, but in relation to those parts of the evidence in the current trial which touched upon the counts which were unresolved by the jury verdict. The appellant had no prior convictions and his
Honour detailed subjective matters which he took into account in his favour.
The counts upon which the appellant was convicted showed a pattern of sexual depredation upon a vulnerable girl over an extended period of time.

In my view the sentence imposed was well within the range of the sound exercise of discretion. I propose the appeal be dismissed. The appellant should have leave to appeal against sentence but that appeal should also be dismissed.

JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of the presiding judge and the orders proposed by his Honour. 
SIMPSON J: I also agree. 
GROVE J: The orders will be as I have proposed. * * * 
