

M S Pederson versus J A Barclay and D L Barclay; Hillside Homes P/L versus N J Ure
Holdings P/L [1996] NSWSC 235 (27 June 1996) 
M S PEDERSON versus J W BARCLAY & D L BARCLAY HILLSIDE HOMES P/L & N J
URE HOLDINGS P/L /86 
THURSDAY 27 JUNE 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff claims damages for personal injuries allegedly suffered by him when he fell through the ceiling of a picture theatre at Carrington near Newcastle on 27 November 1976, when he was eight years old.

The plaintiff has no memory of the accident or of his life up to that time, but the evidence establishes that the theatre had ceased to be used as such and was in the course of being converted to a confectionery warehouse in circumstances I shall later refer to. At the time the seats had been removed, the asbestos ceiling plaster sheets replaced, and the side doors replaced by roller doors.

The theatre had apparently become an attraction for some of the local children, including the plaintiff and his friends, who used to go looking for, and finding pigeons and their nests in the ceiling and the plaintiff's sister and others who used to go roller skating on the concrete floor where the stalls had formerly been.

None of these children ever had any trouble gaining access to the building, either through the front door until a padlock was placed on it about a week or so before the plaintiff's fall, or through the back door which could be locked by a button on the inside of the lock but which was left either ajar or, if closed, unlocked; and it was through the back door that the plaintiff and his friends gained access on the day of the accident. None of the children could remember seeing workmen on the property, but although they occasionally wagged school they usually went after school hours or at weekends, and as the work that was done appears to have been spasmodic and intermittent, it is not surprising they did not see workmen present or work being done. Indeed, if they had gone to the theatre and seen workmen there, they probably would not have gone in. The plaintiff's accident occurred on a Saturday.

To get to the pigeons' nests the plaintiff and his young friends were in the habit of going into what had been the projection room, standing on a chair, climbing through a manhole in the ceiling and walking along the beams and also the asbestos sheets which constituted the ceiling to the nests which were at the sides of the rafters and gutters.

About a day or two before the plaintiff's accident, one of his friends,
Timothy Crooks, was engaged in this activity when the asbestos sheet on which he was walking gave way. He was able to grab hold of the beam, pull himself up on to it and get down safely, but he was apparently rather chastened by the experience because on the day in question he went to the theatre with the plaintiff and another friend, Gregory Hall, and they gained entry through the back door which was open, but when the others proceeded to the projection room and into the roof he tried to talk them out of it, and told them that if they did not get down he would call the police. He did go to the police who told him they would be there shortly. He returned to the theatre by which time the other two were out of sight, but he called out to them that the police were coming and the next he knew he heard a voice and a piece of asbestos ceiling fell about 25 feet to the ground with the plaintiff landing on the concrete floor. This was at the end of the building furthest from the projection box and I am satisfied that the plaintiff fell when an asbestos ceiling sheet gave way whilst he was walking upon it. There were no signs about the building prohibiting entry, but whether any signs would have deterred a group of eight year old boys is in my view highly unlikely.

The first defendants, Mr and Mrs Barclay, were at the time the owners of the premises. On the morning of the plaintiff's fall Mr Barclay was out fishing when the police notified Mrs Barclay of the accident, and after notifying Mr
Ure (whose position I will refer to shortly) she went to the premises and found the back door open and the roller door up (it had presumably been opened in the meantime to give the ambulance access to the plaintiff). She closed them and secured the building. There were no workmen there that day and she observed no workmen's tools.

The second defendant, Hillside Homes Pty Limited, was formerly known as N J
Ure Builders Pty Limited (the Building Company) and the third defendant, N J
Ure Holdings Pty Limited was formerly known as N J Ure Pty Limited and conducted a real estate agency (the Agency company). Neville John Ure was a director and major shareholder in both companies, the principal executive officer of the former and held the only governor's shares in the latter. He was also a director of Julie Enterprises Pty Limited (Julie).

By contract of sale dated 5 March 1976 the first defendants agreed to purchase the former picture theatre from Julie. The contract was negotiated through the agency company and completed about mid 1976. It was subject to approval being obtained from Newcastle City Council for the use of the premises as a confectionery warehouse and there was some form of partly oral agreement that
Mr Ure would cause to be carried out for $3,000 work detailed in written specifications signed by Mr Barclay and on behalf of Julie (part of Exhibit
B).

The evidence does not make it clear on whose behalf Mr Ure was purporting to act in these transactions. The receipts for payment in respect of the work are all from the Agency Company as is all correspondence, although there is occasional reference in the correspondence to the Building Company, including a reference in February 1977 to a signed contract with the Building Company (but no copy of such contract was produced and there was no evidence whether it related to the original work or to additional work carried out later). A
Notice of Intention to Commence Work prepared on behalf of the first defendants, but apparently not lodged, named the Agency Company as the builder. Mr Barclay said he always understood it was Mr Ure's company or companies that were doing the work for him. As Mr Ure apparently drew no distinction between the Agency Company and the Building Company, and as neither company has appeared at the trial, I consider it unnecessary for me to draw any such distinction.

Although the contract of sale provided for vacant possession on completion, the evidence of Mr and Mrs Barclay was that they did not receive the keys to the premises until the building alterations were completed and paid for, and this is confirmed by a letter from the Agency Company dated 30 May 1977 when the latter forwarded a form of indemnity for signature noting that when it was returned the keys would be made available (part of Exhibit 6). They said that they only had access to the building in the meantime when workmen were present.

Mr Barclay did not have any express agreement with Mr Ure on behalf of the companies about keeping the site locked up, but assumed that it was the builder's responsibility as he did not have a key; and after being notified of the plaintiff's accident Mrs Barclay contacted Mr Ure and asked him why the site was open, but she received no explanation. She claimed that every time she went to the premises prior to the accident when workmen were not present the doors, including the back door, were locked; but even if this is so, I am satisfied that on a number of occasions the back door was not locked or secure and that on a number of occasions groups of children gained access to the premises.

I therefore conclude that at no time prior to the plaintiff's accident did the first defendants take actual physical possession of the property, although the contract of sale clearly gave them that right on completion.

For the purposes of the law of negligence, the occupier of premises is any person with such control over the premises that he can prevent injury to visitors: Trindade & Cain: Law of Torts in Australia at 441 citing
Wheat versus E Lacon Co Ltd <case>; [[1966] AC .] A person can be an occupier if he has an immediate right to exercise control, even though he has not entered into actual physical possession: Harris v
Birkenhead Corporation <case>; [[1976] 1 WLR 279] at 287, and an occupier is liable for the default of his contractors if such default involves no technical knowledge and experience (as is the case with locking the doors of premises): Vial versus Housing Commission of
New South Wales [[1976] 1 NSWLR 388] at 396.

In some cases of building operations both the building owner and the contractor have been regarded as occupiers, eg Canberra Formwork Pty Ltd v
Civil & Civic Ltd [(1982) 41 ACTR 1] at 7, AMF
International Ltd versus Magnet Bowling Ltd [[1968] 1 WLR 1028] at 1052; and, in so far as it is relevant, I find all defendants, ie Mr and Mrs
Barclay, the Building Company and the Agency Company, to be joint occupiers in the present case.

However in Australian Safeway Stores Pty Ltd versus Zaluzna (1987) 162 at 479 the
High Court held that it was no longer necessary to consider the liability of occupiers for negligence apart from a general duty to take reasonable care, and at 488 adopted with approval the statement of Deane J in Hacksaw versus Shaw <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 614] at 662-3 as follows: "All that is necessary is to determine whether, in all the relevant circumstances including the fact of the defendant's occupation of premises and the manner of the plaintiff's entry upon them, the defendant owed a duty of care under the ordinary principles of negligence to the plaintiff. A prerequisite of any such duty is that there be the necessary degree of proximity of relationship. The touchstone of its existence is that there be reasonable foreseeability of a real risk of injury to the visitor or to the class of person of which the visitor is a member. The measure of the discharge of the duty is what a reasonable man would, in the circumstances, do by way of response to the foreseeable risk." 
Even whilst the different categories of occupiers' liability applied, the courts recognised a special category of child trespasser who went onto premises because of an "allurement": Thompson versus Municipality of Bankstown <case>; [(1952) 87 CLR 619] at 633 and 642 (boy climbing electricity pole to reach a bird nest); Munnings versus Hydro Electricity Commission <case>; [(1971) 125 CLR 1] at 35-36; Commissioner for Railways versus Cardy [(1960) 104 CLR ]
at 326-7; Southern Portland Cement Ltd versus Cooper [[1974] AC 623] at 640-641, 644.
In my opinion these cases remain relevant in considering issues of foreseeability and proximity in relation to the general duty to take care made applicable by Australian Safeway Stores Pty Ltd versus Zaluzna, supra, including in the case of trespassers such as the plaintiff.

In all the circumstances of this case, including the obvious attraction or allurement that a disused picture theatre with pigeons nesting in the ceiling and a concrete floor suitable for roller skating would be expected to have for young children, particularly as there was a primary school close by, the knowledge, or at least expectation, that children would attempt to enter the premises, the possibility of physical injury to children playing or climbing in the premises, the ownership and right to vacant possession of the premises by the first defendants, the building activities on the premises of the second defendant apparently under the direction, control, management and supervision of the third defendant, I am satisfied that a relationship of proximity existed between the plaintiff and each of the defendants such that the latter owed to the former a duty to take reasonable care for his safety, and the most obvious measure to take was to lock and secure the premises so as to deny access to unauthorised persons. In failing to take such steps each of the defendants was negligent and accordingly liable to the plaintiff.

The terms of the agreement between the first defendants on the one hand and the second and/or third defendants on the other are so vague and uncertain that I cannot infer an implied term that the latter would indemnify the former in respect of any injuries to persons whilst the building renovations were being carried out, but I have held each of the defendants liable in tort as concurrent tortfeasors. I consider that the responsibility for the plaintiff's injuries was primarily that of those engaged in the building operations and their organisation, namely the second and third defendants, but it was not sufficient for the first defendants merely to "assume" that the others would take care of the situation and they must accordingly bear some of the responsibility. In my view the first defendants are entitled to contribution from the second and third defendants pursuant to the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/) [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s5.html) to the extent of 80%.

The first defendants' Defence raises the issue of contributory negligence. The plaintiff at the time was eight years and five months and there is no evidence that he was not an average normal child for his age. The test to be applied for contributory negligence in the case of young children is whether the child has failed to exercise that degree of care for its own safety reasonably to be expected of a child of such tender years: McHale versus Watson [(1966) 115 CLR ];
Mye versus Peters [(1967) 68 SR 298] at 304.

In my view a young boy aged not quite 81/2 years old would generally not be expected to foresee or anticipate situations of danger except the most obvious ones. But in this case he had been present a day or so earlier when a ceiling panel had broken and given way under his friend who had been able to recover his grip without falling, and on the day in question that same friend had told him not to do it because of the danger and threatened to go and, in fact, had gone to the police to stop the plaintiff doing what he did. In those circumstances, notwithstanding his age, I am satisfied that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence, but the responsibility of the various defendants was great in failing to take the simple and obvious step of excluding children from the site of the allurement by locking the doors and that was the negligence of mature adults. In these circumstances, I assess the plaintiff's responsibility for his injuries at 10 per cent, and the damages will be apportioned accordingly.

Following the accident the plaintiff was taken to Royal Newcastle Hospital where he was found to be suffering from a fracture of the base of the skull and pneumocephalus. He was unconscious but within a month was responding reasonably well although he had very little speech, was able to walk with assistance and was continent of urine at times. When his speech did return it was full of colourful language, but he subsequently returned to a reasonable mental situation and became more mobile, the spasticity in his lower limbs settled and he was able to walk unaided although with some inco-ordination of his lower limbs. He remained in hospital until 4 February 1977 and at the time was alert and orientated, but was diagnosed as also suffering a left sixth nerve palsy. He developed epileptic fits and on 19 August 1979 was readmitted to the hospital following an episode of fitting. He was diagnosed as suffering a left otitis media with fitting and also viral encephalitis, and was discharged on 25 August 1979.

He was readmitted on 11 November 1980 and remained in hospital for eleven days, on that occasion being diagnosed with pneumococcal meningitis with septicaemia and left otitis media. Following discharge he was reviewed in the neurosurgical clinic and on 10 August 1981 was readmitted for tests which disclosed defect in the floor of the right anterior cranial fossa, and a craniotomy was performed to repair the same.

All these admissions and conditions were regarded as due to the initial brain injury following his fall.

He has continued to have grande mal fits controlled to a degree by Tegretol.
He returned to school but learnt little and is to all intents and purposes illiterate. He left school at the age of fifteen and has been in receipt of an invalid pension ever since. He also suffers a lot of headaches and because of the sixth nerve palsy tires in his legs. He also has left-sided hearing deficit and impaired vision in his left eye associated with Horner's syndrome.
He has been assessed by Nancy Wallace, clinical psychologist, who concluded that he is in the functionally intellectually mentally deficient range and there is no prospect of his achieving any further recovery.

As at 24 September 1993 she noted that the plaintiff was then fighting a great deal with his sister who is the victim of a birth accident and described as mildly intellectually delayed. Dr John Voss queried the mother's intellectual level and the father is deceased. The plaintiff attends to his own personal hygiene without prompting and is independent in self care but cannot prepare a meal. He can travel alone to visit a friend at Waratah, a nearby suburb, operates a bank account apparently with the assistance of his elder sister and goes fishing at times, but has hardly any friends outside the family and is shy of other people. He still has no memory of anything before the accident and his memory for recent events is very poor. He gave evidence before me and spoke quite clearly and coherently with no apparent speech deficit. He gave the impression in that limited situation of having basic personality skills without being very bright. He does not have any regular activities outside the home at the present time, spending most of his time watching television, in the swimming pool and sometimes mowing the lawn. He continues to have headaches and epileptic fits.

His elder sister, who manages the house, is able to send him for simple messages to buy milk, bread, etc and he looks after the backyard. However, he cannot do major shopping because he cannot drive a car and one doubts that he would be able to remember an extensive shopping list. He has saved money from his pension to the amount of $4,500 to have an addition made to the back of the house. He is incapable of living without some general form of supervision.
He is permanently incapacitated for open employment but probably capable of work in a sheltered workshop. However, he has declined the opportunity of such employment, or rather he has expressed no interest. Dr Woolard strongly recommended that contact be made with a rehabilitation service but this has not been pursued. The plaintiff's mother although apparently still alive was not called as a witness and no reference was made to her current health.

I assess the plaintiff's general damages at $180,000 of which I apportion $90,000 to the past and I allow interest on this latter amount at 2 per cent per annum from the date of the accident to the present time, namely 191/2 years, ie $35,100. There is no claim for medical, hospital or other treatment expenses all of which have been paid by Medicare, and no claim has been made for past or future care, although the reason for no such claim was not explained.

As to loss of earning capacity, in the case of plaintiffs who are young children at the time of their injuries, it is necessary that some attempt be made to assess what type of employment they may have engaged in, and this is commonly done by reference to the type of employment engaged in by other members of the family; Settree versus Roberts (unreported on this issue, Court of
Appeal, 5 June 1981) per Hope and Hutley JJA. In the present case the plaintiff's father was a seaman employed by Broken Hill Proprietary Company
Limited, and the plaintiff's evidence was that he liked the ships and liked the idea of following a career such as his father's. He is now totally unfit for such work or any other form of open employment. Whether he would, if not injured, have wished to be a seaman and, if so, whether he would have been able to obtain employment in that field remains highly problematical. It is also not irrelevant to bear in mind that his brother, who is not a seaman, has had lengthy periods out of work, his younger sister is on an invalid pension, and his elder sister who has had a number of jobs such as factory hand, motel receptionist and housemaid, has also had periods of unemployment and at the time of trial was unemployed, but caring for two young children, one of them only four months old.

From this limited information I reach the conclusion that if he had not been injured the plaintiff may have sought to follow a career as a seaman, and may have been able to obtain employment in that field, but if not, he would probably have followed some unskilled occupation such as that of a labourer or factory worker, with significant periods of unemployment like his brother.

The only evidence of wage rates tendered at the trial was that based on the
Maritime Industry Seagoing Award and calculations were made accordingly. It is necessary to bring these calculations up to date, and besides allowing the usual 15 per cent discount for the vicissitudes of life in respect of the future, I consider a significant further allowance needs to be made for the possibility that the plaintiff would not become a seaman but would have been employed in an unskilled labouring occupation at a lower rate of pay with significant periods of unemployment. To allow for these considerations, I allow a further discount of 15 per cent making a discount of 15 per cent in respect of wage loss to date and 30 per cent in respect of loss of future earning capacity. Loss of earnings to date are therefore calculated as follows (based on the calculations prepared by counsel): .01.85 to 14.11.85 $287.32 $12,642.08 .11.85 to 13.06.86 $360.60 $10,457.40 .06.86 to 05.12.86 $361.12 $9,028.00 .12.86 to 08.01.88 $367.48 $20,946.36 .01.88 to 07.03.88 $377.24 $3,017.92 .03.88 to 18.03.88 $388.79 $583.18 .03.88 to 24.11.88 $394.47 $14,200.92 .11.88 to 19.02.90 $413.40 $26,457.60 .02.90 to 08.10.90 $423.13 $13,540.16 .10.90 to 21.04.92 $443.27 $10,638.48 .04.92 to 24.06.96 $452.93 $98,285.81 
Total Loss of Earnings to Date $219,797.91 
Less 15% $186,828.00 
I allow interest on this amount at 8% per annum from 1 January 1985 to date (11 1/2 years), $171,881.

As regards the future, the plaintiff is now aged almost 28 and I can assume that the award wage for seamen has increased since April 1992, but there is no evidence by how much. I therefore allow $460 per week capitalised at 3% per annum for 37 years ($540,040) less 30% for vicissitudes, namely $378,028.

The plaintiff's damages can therefore be summarised as follows: 
General damages $180,000 
Interest on general damages to date $35,100 
Loss of earnings to date $186,828 
Interest on loss of earnings to date $171,881 
Loss of future earning capacity $378,028 
Total: $951,837 
Having regard to my earlier findings on contributory negligence and apportionment there will therefore be judgment for the plaintiff against all defendants in the sum of $856,653 and on the cross-claim judgment for the first defendants against the second and third defendants in the sum of $685,323.
 
Having regard to the evidence of the plaintiff's mental capacity, I am satisfied that he is not capable of managing the proceeds of this judgment. It will accordingly be necessary for an order to be made under the [Protected
Estates Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pea1983200/) for the management of his affairs and this may justify a claim for management fees to be included in the judgment.
 * * * 
