

Hooker versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales Matter No 600252/90 [1998] NSWSC 330 (31 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
JUDITH AMELIA HOOKER versus STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES /90 July 1998 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff was employed by the defendant as a stewardess and at relevant times routinely worked on the Brisbane Limited Express on that part of its journey between Brisbane and Casino. She commenced that employment in 1980. On 10 January 1985 she was serving takeaway food to passengers in what was designated an RDH bar car whilst the express was traversing that leg of its journey southbound. 
Photographs which accompanied the report of Mr Simpson (Exhibit A) portray the workplace. Of significance was the location of the pie oven beneath the counter. This oven was fitted with sliding trays at levels descending to just above the base of the oven which was almost at the floor. To fulfil an order from a customer the plaintiff sought to remove a pie from either the lowest shelf or the one above it. She adopted a position somewhat like but beyond a genuflection with her posterior resting upon the upturned heel on that leg of which the knee was in contact with the floor. The door to the oven was open and the plaintiff was using one hand to retrieve a pie and held a paper bag in the other hand to receive it. Whilst she was in this position the train lurched. The plaintiff acknowledged that this was not an unexpected occurrence. There was nothing unusual about the lurch: cf Franklin v
Victorian Railway Commissioners <case>; [1959 101 CLR 197.] The plaintiff said that, whilst she was in this awkward posture, she was as a result of the movement of the carriage "thrown backwards and then forwards". She felt "two pops go" in her back and she immediately felt pain symptoms in her lower back and "down into the left leg".

The liability of the defendant to pay damages at common law was hotly disputed. Two experts, Mr Simpson and Dr Adams gave evidence at the hearing in
Grafton. The plaintiff's case was that there were foreseeable and avoidable risks in a system which necessitated an employee crouching to ever increasing greater extents as access to lower shelves was required, in a moving train.
Much exploration was undertaken of the availability of convenient handholds to grasp or other methods of bracing against a lurch of the train. I accept the evidence of the witness Mrs Bannister as a reliable description of the general circumstances encountered by employees. I do not accept the evidence of the plaintiff that she could not reach the wall of cupboards opposite the pie oven by stretching her arm to brace herself but I find that the capacity to do that is of no consequence because the particular operation upon which she was engaged on the occasion involved the use of both hands.

I accept the evidence that the surrounds of the oven became hot and that the trays within the oven (as was undisputed) were not fitted with stoppers or other devices to prevent them sliding forwards through the open door and fully exiting the oven. Those factors were relevant to the awkwardness of the whole operation of what should have been a simple task of serving a heated pastry to a customer. I find that a reasonable person in the position of the defendant would have foreseen that the combined circumstances of a need to lower the body for access, to use both hands, to avoid contact with heated parts and to prevent a tray from sliding out onto the floor were productive of a risk that an employee performing that task might suffer personal injury of some sort, such injury might follow complete loss of balance or, as in the present case,
I find the plaintiff sustained untoward stresses upon her vulnerably postured body.

I find that the risk to which the plaintiff was exposed was unnecessary.
Alternatives were available. In the series of photographs attached to Mr
Simpson's report there is depicted a structure of trays located below the counter which are individual and open out in the fashion of drawers. An item could be retrieved from the top without the necessity of horizontal access.
These drawers have appropriate stoppers apparently or at least I could perceive no difficulty in such being fitted. The evidence does not precisely identify the source of these photographs but they were treated at hearing as representing a differently fitted out carriage used for similar purposes as the RDH bar car in which the plaintiff had been working. No one at the hearing was able to inform me of the significance of the title of the car. I suspect that R and D might stand for refreshments and drinks. There are other photographs displaying an oven located in an above counter situation. There was no evidence that the defendant was inhibited for any reason from fitting out a car in either of these manners. In either case the employee would not be required to adopt a crouched posture such as that in which the plaintiff was when the train lurched. The defendant tendered testimony through Dr Adams that having regard to the possibility of the train lurching he would prefer placing as much storage as possible at lower levels. My surprise at that proposition may have been apparent at the time the evidence was given. I am unable to accept Dr Adams' view. Given his concession elsewhere that a person jolting backwards and forwards whilst crouched or severely bent may suffer stress to the spine sufficient to cause injury of some sort, I am unable to perceive how it would not be preferable to avoid that risk by using equipment from a standing or uncrouched position even if it was necessary to bend to some extent.

There was an issue about the position of the plaintiff and her claimed injury.
In broad terms Dr Adams, from an ergonomic point of view opined that the stress forces upon the plaintiff (assuming her description of events) might cause soft tissue injury but not the more serious effect contended for on behalf of the plaintiff. It was submitted that cross examination of Mr Simpson had shown that his thesis, insofar as it was to the contrary of Dr Adams, was based upon an assumption that the plaintiff's body was not only crouched but in an angulated or twisted position vis-a-vis the open door of the pie oven.
The plaintiff was invited to examine demonstrations of athleticism by counsel in order to affirm the precise juxtaposition of her body with the oven. She gave affirmation to a diorama presented by the legal representatives in which a genuflected body was in a plane oblique to the pie repository but not twisted or screwed.

Whilst I am conscious of the limitations of oral testimony even aided by mime, it is 13 years since the event and I am sceptical of the value, let alone the confidence which can be attributed to such minutiae. I should mention that there is nothing to suggest that the defendant is responsible for the considerable delay in the matter coming to trial. The plaintiff did not commence her action until 1990 and her present solicitors took over the conduct of the case on her behalf in August 1997. Thereafter the new solicitors acted promptly setting the matter down for the 1998 sittings. The diligence of the new solicitors would not attract criticism but I can only infer the long delay has been principally the responsibility of the plaintiff and her previous advisers. I return however to the issue. There was no challenge to the plaintiff's evidence about her prompt reporting that she had sustained an injury. She saw a relieving manager at Casino when she disembarked at about 9.20 pm on the date of the accident and in accordance with the direction of that relieving manager reported it again to the regular supervisor who came on duty the following morning.

I am satisfied that the plaintiff suffered an injury to her back in the circumstances which she described and that the injury was foreseeable and avoidable and therefore unnecessary in which case it was caused by the breach of the duty of the defendant to take reasonable care for the plaintiff.

In his succinct submissions senior counsel for the defendant contended that the forces on the body bending or crouching to retrieve a pie would have been minimal in the extreme and he asked rhetorically whether it would condemn an employer for negligence to require an employee, for example, to pick up a spilled coffee cup from the floor of a train, or of an aeroplane? He claimed that the same forces would have been operative upon the employee's body. There is a distinction in my view in that the low pie oven itself necessitated the bending or crouching whereas the coffee cup example is a hypothetical response by an employee to a particular situation. As earlier indicated, I refrain from judgment which is dependent upon minute detail of bending, twisting or posture. I find that the plaintiff was necessarily in an awkward situation and that the forces on her body in that situation ought to have been foreseen to have created a vulnerability to injury from stresses caused by the lurching movement of the train.

It was conceded in address that the alternatives of pie drawers and above counter oven were clearly (despite Dr Adams' view) better systems but it was contended that the fact of the existence of such options was removed from any causal nexus with the accident. I agree that there was no causal nexus between that absence and the actual incident but the significance of that evidence was that it demonstrated that the accident could and should have been avoided by the use of such available alternatives. I find the evidence demonstrates that safer equipment was available. I reject the defendant's submissions in this regard.

Contributory negligence was pleaded but no specific submission was advanced in support of that pleading. In the light of the evidence it could not be successfully argued. I find that the plaintiff was performing the particular task in accordance with the requirements and expectations of the defendant and that she did not in the circumstances materially contribute to the damage sustained by failure to take reasonable care for her own safety.

The defendant contested the causation of injury and its contribution (assuming negligence was found to be established) to the condition claimed by the plaintiff. There are various facets to these issues. The plaintiff had seen a general practitioner Dr Boyd (now deceased) in 1983 and there is a record of complaint then by the plaintiff to him of low back pain. That and other complaints led to queries of facet joint or disc involvement. In that same year the plaintiff was seen for gynaecological review and was eventually diagnosed to have an irritable bowel syndrome. Thereafter until 1985 she was evidently fit for her work as part of the train catering crew. An x-ray report (Dr Herbert) of 5 December 1983 showed no significant abnormality whereas a CT scan (Dr Newman, 7 February 1985, that is a month after the accident) was reported, inter alia, to show posterior disc bulge at L4-L5 and central disc protrusions at L5-S1.

Without objection, the plaintiff was cross examined about her post January health, her participation in sport and her marriage and the birth of her daughter. The plaintiff had been married at the time of the accident but that marriage broke down soon thereafter. She later remarried and that marriage is current and subsisting. The result of cross examination was to raise doubts about the reliability of the plaintiff's testimony concerning the extent of her pain and disability. I will return to the extent of the plaintiff's disability in connection with the assessment of the ingredients of damage.

Significant to such findings is the circumstance that the disability of the plaintiff has been the focus of previous litigation between the parties in the
Compensation Court. No estoppel was pleaded but there were placed in evidence by consent the Application for Determination, the Answer, the Award and the
Reasons for Judgment of the presiding judge in the Compensation Court. Both parties have made submissions concerning estoppel arising out of the judgment of the Compensation Court and, despite the lapse in pleading, I take it that there is an implied invitation to deal with the evidence in accordance with the content of those submissions. The originating process in the Compensation
Court made claims in respect of injuries occurring on 10 January 1985 (the incident the subject of this litigation) and 5 November 1985. The Compensation
Court judge found that the pain which she experienced after 5 November 1985 was the same as the pain that she had been experiencing since 10 January 1985 and in his judgment he held that the later injury had little moment in the case. He made no finding in respect of incapacity following the later injury specifically. Judgment was delivered on 24 October 1985and any estoppels will terminate as at that date or, probably more accurately, will cease to give rise to a consequence binding between the parties. The formal award of the
Compensation Court is consistent with this passage which I extract from the
Reasons for Judgment of Neilson CCJ: "Accordingly I find, that on 10 January 1985 the applicant sustained injury to her low back arising out of and in the course of her employment with the respondent, namely disc protrusions at the L4-5 and L5-S1 levels. As a result thereof the applicant was incapacitated and paid compensation or wages at all material times until 14 March 1989. Between 15 March 1989 and 26 May 1989 the applicant was totally incapacitated. Between 27 May 1989 and 19 December 1989 the applicant was partially incapacitated and paid wages or compensation.
Between 20 October 1989 and 6 January 1995 the applicant was totally incapacitated. Since 7 January 1995 the applicant has been partially incapacitated." 
I would for myself similarly find that the plaintiff sustained injury to her low back in the incident on 10 January 1985 being disc protrusions at the stated levels and I find that, in any event, the defendant is by reason of the earlier judgment on the issue between the parties estopped from disputing the plaintiff's claim to have been so injured. I further find that there is an estoppel between the parties on the issue of whether the plaintiff is totally or partially incapacitated for her employment coordinate with the periods specified in the extract from the judgment which I have recited, subject to the estoppel between the parties ceasing on such issues on 24 October 1995.
The translation of the findings as to incapacity into various weekly sums for the purposes of the workers compensation legislation does not inevitably give rise to an estoppel as to the amounts involved. That part of the issues between the parties is not identical in litigation at common law and litigation before the Compensation Court. It suffices to note that the measure of damage for loss of or interference with the exercise of earning capacity is not governed or inhibited by the several prescriptions of amounts and ceilings under the legislation.

It will be necessary to compute losses to be reflected in damages for this element of interference with earning capacity to reflect losses whether total or partial between 10 January 1985 and 14 March 1989. During part of that period the plaintiff had in fact continued in employment. There appears to have been some payment by way of wages or compensation made to the plaintiff between 27 May 1989 and 19 December 1989 during which period the Compensation
Court held that she was partially incapacitated. It is also found that she was in fact totally incapacitated between 20 October 1989 and 6 January 1995.

It is convenient to adopt some of the congenial language of the Compensation
Court jurisdiction and in accordance with the resolution of issue there I would hold that the plaintiff was totally incapacitated between 15 March and May 1989; partially incapacitated between 27 May 1989 and 19 October 1989; totally incapacitated between 20 October 1989 and 6 January 1995 and partially incapacitated from 7 January 1995 to 24 October 1995.

It is convenient now to note that beyond that date, upon the evidence which I accept the plaintiff has had and is likely to have in the future some residual earning capacity which she may exercise if she chooses.

The plaintiff was born on 6 August 1961. She was educated to Year 12 level at
Casino High School. She had worked casually in a supermarket while she was a schoolgirl and continued there until she started to work with the defendant.
Employment with the defendant was the only significant career path upon which she has ever embarked. She and her present husband were married in 1988. He is employed as a passenger service supervisor on XPT services. They have a daughter born in November 1990.

It has not been easy to form a view about the real level of the plaintiff's pain and disability. In the month after the accident she was admitted to
Casino Hospital for bed rest and traction. She resumed work in July that year.
In April 1987 she was again in hospital at Casino although in the interim the plaintiff resumed activities with apparently little restriction and these activities included participation in vigorous sports. After the 1987 admission the plaintiff appears to have been fairly constantly seeking medical attention. A move to the Central Coast took place. Many consultations were had with a Dr Lim and analgesics were administered. The plaintiff also visited the pain clinic at Royal North Shore Hospital. Hydrotherapy was undertaken. Later responses by therapists to her complaints led to depo-medrol injection, acupuncture, the supply of a brace and of a TENS machine. In 1993 a discogram was performed.

In July 1994 spinal fusion was performed at the Scottish Hospital at L4-L5 and
L5-S1 levels. During the next six to nine months the plaintiff was variously reported upon as being in good shape and pain free. This did not last. In
February 1995 physiotherapy to the cervical and upper thoracic spine had been commenced. The relationship of these symptoms to the events on 10 January 1985 remains obscure. I am unable to draw any firm conclusion from cross examination of the plaintiff or elsewhere concerning her estimates as to whether she would be disabled by symptoms in those regions to the exclusion of lower back pain.

Complaints of pain and disability in and apparently related to the lower back became frequent and, I infer, of rising intensity. A chronology prepared on her behalf recorded that she was admitted to Grafton Base Hospital with low back pain from 21 March to 4 April 1996; from 16 April to 20 May and from 17 to 20 June. From 27 June to 11 July 1996 she was treated at St Luke's Hospital where Dr Blum, in a two stage procedure, inserted a spinal cord stimulator.
This was less than successful in putting an end to the complaints of pain. In
September of that year the plaintiff saw a psychiatrist Dr Delaforce for depression which was claimed to be secondary to pain symptoms. From 17
December 1996 until 10 January 1997 she was re-admitted to Grafton Base
Hospital complaining of low back pain. In March there was also a brief admission to Port Macquarie Hospital during a holiday which she was taking at that town.

In the following month the plaintiff was re-admitted to St Luke's Hospital.
The stimulator was removed and a narcotic infusion pump was surgically implanted. The external appearance resultant upon this procedure can be seen in the photographs Exhibit B. Originally the drug infused was morphine but this has lately been replaced by a substitute called Fentanyl. I am persuaded that this apparently extreme step of implantation and narcotic distribution into the body was advised and undertaken by the plaintiff's medical advisers in response to the gravity of the plaintiff's complaints of symptoms.

I am further satisfied that the plaintiff exaggerated her symptoms in the descriptions in her testimony and it is reasonable to conclude, as I do, that she probably also did so when she was seeking ministrations from medical and allied professionals. I am not suggesting that the plaintiff has been without any relevant symptom and I recognize that she has undergone major spinal surgery. The evidence is that the fusion itself is stable. I find that the probability is that the plaintiff has some residual pain and that her perception is magnified by a low pain threshold and psychological factors on the one hand but on the other hand that the volume and intensity of her complaints are also reflections of conscious exaggeration.

My basis for the lastmentioned finding is a short recent film of the plaintiff taken when she was unaware of being observed. The plaintiff as depicted on the film demonstrates little, if any, perceptible restriction of movement and the final frames show her sitting in the front seat of a car and flexing her body to tend to something in the passenger's seat in a manner quite contradictory of significant restriction whether sourced in pain or anything else. It is not the mere content of the film which has provoked my reservation about the plaintiff's candour. It has been provoked by the stark contrast between the plaintiff as viewable on the film and the painfully slow moving invalid which she presented herself to be in court. Whilst I accept that an injured person may have "good" and "bad" days, the contrast was so great as to defy explanation on that basis. Nevertheless the plaintiff has satisfied me on the probabilities that she sustained injury in the accident which was causative of disability and in any event as I have earlier mentioned the defendant is in essence estopped from disputing that much. I am satisfied that the plaintiff has significant continuing effects of injury; what I reject is the magnitude of her disability and claimed ongoing symptoms.

I note that Dr Hopcroft was of opinion that the implanted pump would fail and for that reason would not require replacement. I consider the more likely reason is that the plaintiff will realise that she has reaped the result of the extravagance of her complaints to medical consultants and will abandon this extreme form of treatment.

It is trite law that the plaintiff is only to be compensated for the consequences of the tort and in a case such as this and in the light of my findings, exact lines of demarcation are difficult to draw. I will turn to deal with individual ingredients of damage. Owing to the limited time available during the circuit hearing, submissions on damage have been wholly made in writing and I record my appreciation to counsel for their assistance in producing them. The submissions will remain with the papers. Their presentation will enable me to express my findings on occasions without extensive elaboration as the content of contest is discernible in the respective documentation.

The out of pocket expenses to date are agreed at $133,502. No interest is claimed. I presume the expenses have been the subject of payment pursuant to compensation rights of the plaintiff either acknowledged by the defendant or pursuant to the award of the Compensation Court.

The plaintiff claims economic loss based upon wages which she could and would have earned in the employ of the defendant since her termination in October
The parties are agreed upon a computation of $97,588 for loss up to 24
October 1995 the date upon which judgment was delivered in the Compensation
Court. Although I have reservations about the binding force of the awarded amounts during periods of partial incapacity, the periods involved are relatively minor, some damages would be needed to reflect them and I am content to implement the agreement of the parties.

The next period to be addressed is from 24 October 1995 to date. Attached to the plaintiff's submissions are some figures supplied by the defendant relating to "comparable employees". The nett average figure for 1996-7 is less than that for the preceding year and less for the incomplete figures for the succeeding year. $713.69 per week (1996-7) will be adopted as a fair guide.
The defendant's submissions are based upon the findings made at the
Compensation Court and the ultimate submission of a projection of $300 per week in effect postulated a residual capacity in the plaintiff valued at $313.69 per week. I am satisfied that the plaintiff has been unable in any practical sense to earn income to date and I will include in the damages $99,203 for the period until 1 July 1998 based upon the whole weekly comparable figure. I am conscious that about a month has passed since these figures were computed but adjustments including the defence of payment for this short period render it reasonable to calculate in accordance with the figures in the submissions. The award for economic loss since the accident to date will be a total of $196,791.

The difference between that ingredient of award and weekly payments which the plaintiff has already received pursuant to worker's compensation benefit is in round figures $110,000. That gap has accrued in 8.67 years since October 1989.
Applicable interest rates have fluctuated over that period. The plaintiff's suggested use of 7% represents a finding that 14% would be an appropriate figure to reflect average rates over the span of time. Having regard to the very diminished rates over the past several years I consider that that assumption is too high and I would select 11% as a more appropriate representative figure which should be halved when applied to allow for gradual accrual of loss over the stated period. $110,000 at 5.5% for 8.67 years amounts to $52,454 and that amount will be included for interest.

The plaintiff's claim for future economic loss is simply based upon a projection of a weekly loss of $713.69 for the balance of the plaintiff's notional working life, less a discount of 15% as an allowance for adverse vicissitudes during the period. That claim is premised on the plaintiff being totally and permanently incapacitated for any income productive work. I do not find that that is the plaintiff's likely future. In this regard the evidence of Ms Johnston was helpful. I did not get the impression that Ms Johnston was particularly sympathetic to the plaintiff but I do not think that she treated her unfairly either. Her observations of the plaintiff's stooped and shuffling gait on presentation and later her slow paced but normal gait when being observed describe a contrast not dissimilar from my own perceptions of the plaintiff in court and on the film.

Uninjured it is reasonable to evaluate the plaintiff's working capacity at $713.69 per week nett as extracted from the comparable employee wage records.
The defendant invited use of $300 per week for the same reasons which were submitted to be applicable for the period between October 1995 to date. I consider that the plaintiff has some residual capacity of value if she chooses to exercise it. Her present situation, partly tort induced and partly consciously adopted, would not lead to immediate exercise of residual capacity but it would be unrealistic to perform arithmetical exercises upon guessed deferred dates. Assuming the plaintiff's totally lost capacity to be represented by $713.69 per week I would postulate the tort induced loss at three-fifths of that total. The money factor in any calculation would therefore be $428 per week. Allowing for vicissitudes of 15% on the basis submitted by the plaintiff, I reach an award by computing $428 x 993.8 (the agreed 3% multiplier) x 85% and award $361,544.

The defendant made an enveloping submission that all ingredients of damage for economic loss be reduced by 50% to allow for what was described as the plaintiff's vulnerability. I did not understand the submission to challenge the established law that a defendant must take a plaintiff as it finds her but as a contention that the plaintiff would have been likely to have been ultimately afflicted by underlying condition in any event. However, the plaintiff's incapacity and symptoms have initially been precipitated by the tort and the defendant has not shown that the effects have ceased. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff would have come into a situation comparable to the consequences of the tort if it had not occurred and I reject the approach of applying a further "discount" as contended by the defendant.

The parties are agreed that $13,134 is to be included in the damages to avoid the detriment identified by the High Court in Fox versus Wood.

The plaintiff claims for the loss of employer's subsidy to superannuation. It has been mandatory for such contribution to be made since 1 July 1992. The prescribed rates are tabulated within the plaintiff's submissions and I will not pause to recite them. On the basis that the plaintiff uninjured would probably have remained in the employ of the defendant to date the calculated loss is $10,352.

The value of future contributions has been calculated at $63,029. In the light of my finding that the equivalent of two-fifths of capacity is retained (as against a total loss estimated as $713.69 per week), there should also be a proportion against that calculation. For this element of loss I will include therefore $37,817. The defendant made no submission in relation to the claim for superannuation loss.

The parties have agreed upon the future cost of medications in a sum of $9,439. I turn to some individually costed items. A considerable claim is mounted for the replacement of the infusion pump on nine occasions throughout the plaintiff's lifetime. To support this claim it was said that Dr Hopcroft was a minority of one in seeing the abandonment of the implant because it will not continue to provide relief. I note that he forecast in any event the gloomiest of futures for the plaintiff. Reference was made also to Dr McKillop who predicted replacement of the implant; Professor Oakeshott who designated it as a permanent requirement and Dr Barry who described it as a long term need. I regard these various opinions as contaminated by their acceptance of the plaintiff's exaggerated complaints of pain level. I have not overlooked the possible hypothesis that the plaintiff's pain level could have been affected by the benefit of the narcotic infusion but I reject it. The plaintiff feigned constant invalidity despite the pump and she did not suggest that there had been beneficial operation from it so as to increase her life quality. She was markedly unforthcoming that on occasions she could move with the agility depicted on the film. I find she has not discharged her onus on this issue. The pump is implanted and must at some stage be removed. The defendant's submission was that there should be an allowance of $9,214 premised upon the evidence of Dr Hopcroft and allowing for maintenance during its current operational expectancy. The submission implies that the contribution of the tort has been adequately causative of the treatment. I do not of course overlook the defendant's primary submission which is that there ought be judgment for the defendant and no damages in any event. I propose to allow $20,000 to cover the cost of maintenance of the implant until the plaintiff acting reasonably decides to abandon this medical aid and undergo the necessary surgery to remove it.

The plaintiff seeks that the defendant provide a swimming pool. Again I do not find that it will lead to a just disposition of the contest between the parties to extract opinions from medical consultants which have been contaminated by the plaintiff's exaggeration of her symptoms and the acceptance of her descriptions by those consultants. An alternative basis to the claim for provision of a swimming pool was to project the $30 cost of attendance at a local heated pool three times per week for the plaintiff's lifetime. At the agreed 3% factor applicable to the plaintiff's life expectancy (1298.5) this would produce a hypothetical cost of $116,865. The cost of an installed and maintained pool is claimed at $144,780.

My conclusion is that the plaintiff's need for hydrotherapy is not sufficient to justify requiring the defendant to supply and maintain a pool for her. Her need for hydrotherapy appears to be based upon performing gentle exercise. The evidence demonstrates that it would seem to be pleasurable rather than curative. As the plaintiff's years advance and as she adopts a more realistic approach to the true extent of her pain and disability it is likely that she will engage in swimming to a lesser extent. Obviously I cannot quantify pain but I can conclude that whatever it is, it is considerably less than the extent of the plaintiff's complaints would indicate. I conclude that this item of damage can be reasonably dealt with by assuming that she visits for hydrotherapy once per week for her lifetime. As an appropriate guide this capitalizes by 1298.5 x $30 = $38,955.

The next separately claimed item is for massage. This is indicated when the plaintiff manifests muscle spasm. Again one is dependent upon her credibility about how often this is actually needed although I accept that on a treatment occasion the therapist should be able to detect the presence of any spasm. The plaintiff claims the capital cost of treatment once per fortnight for her lifetime. The defendant contended that a capitalization rated at once per month would allow damages of $11,986. The latter in my view more reasonably reflects the likely consequences of the tort and I will include that sum.

As chronicled above, the plaintiff has been in recent years a frequent seeker of hospital admission complaining of severe back pain. It is observable that this was not a phenomenon in the years more proximate to the accident. She was in hospital for 11 days in the month after the accident and it was two years later that she sought her next admission which was for four days. Although she was seeking treatment in the meantime, the next apparent hospital admission was for discogram at the Scottish Hospital in December 1993 followed by the fusion operation in July 1994.

The plaintiff's submissions seek damages based upon an annual admission for one week during the plaintiff's lifetime. I have the impression that there is an element of attention seeking in the constancy of the plaintiff's application for hospital admission and the evidence does not show that her medical advisers have always been the inspiration for these admissions. It will give the plaintiff liberal damages for any needed hospital admission if I include an amount of $24,324 in the damages which is a capitalized equivalent of admission for one week for ten years hence.

Claim is made for a variety of services said to be needed to be provided for the plaintiff. There is evidence that the plaintiff has received the assistance of a cleaner for three hours at $30 per week and the agreed sum to compensate this expenditure to date is $12,390. I find that it is a service satisfying the plaintiff's tort induced need which is likely to be required indefinitely. I include a further $38,955 for this element ($30 x 1298.5, the factor for the plaintiff's life expectancy).

There is an additional claim. The plaintiff's husband estimated that he voluntarily spent 15 hours per week tending to his wife's needs. An occupational therapist, Ms Berger produced an estimate of 17 hours per week.
Both of these estimates were premised upon an uncritical acceptance of the level of the plaintiff's invalidity. I find that it has been somewhat exaggerated. In addition, I conclude that Ms Berger's exercise was rather focussed upon all the things that she could contemplate that might be done for the plaintiff and I am unpersuaded that all of those things should be categorized as tort induced nor, insofar as some of them were tort induced, that it would be reasonable to fulfil all those needs at cost. One could debate almost interminably the pros and cons of all the major and minor tasks which have been offered for examination and which segregating the activities of life might suggest. The plaintiff's submission candidly observed that it was unsurprising that there were differences in opinions and estimates within the evidence. A claim was advanced calculated to the reference to the supply of services for 15 hours per week in addition to the cleaner. The defendant submitted that the three hours per week of cleaning service sufficed to fulfil all needs.

Dr Hopcroft who I earlier indicated assessed the plaintiff as at least as handicapped as she herself claimed said that, in the absence of her husband, the supply of help for one to two hours per day for five days per week would be the minimum requirement. I propose to utilize that opinion as a basis to give me a guide for award and I will include in the damages the commercial cost of supplying services for 7½ hours per week. I use the Dial-an-Angel rates which can be extracted from the material tabulated at page 10 of the plaintiff's written submissions. Evaluation of services on those commercial rates to date, allowing for 7½ hours per week, can be computed as $41,670.

I find that those factors are also suitable guides for future award. I am conscious that the plaintiff's need is likely to fluctuate over the years but it is to be remembered that this calculation, like all the foregoing is used only as a guide to the award of damages and not as an exercise in mathematical determination of a precise pattern of expenditure or loss.

The current cost is $15 per hour. At 7½ hours per week for the plaintiff's lifetime a capital sum of $146,081 is derived from the tables.

Interest is sought upon the past elements of the foregoing ingredients.
Surprising as it may seem to award interest upon non expenditure reflecting gratuitous care I am constrained by authority so to do.

The house cleaning commenced in January 1991. For coordinate reasons with my selection of 5½% in relation to past economic loss, I include $5,098 interest calculated as $12,360 x 5.5% x7.5 years.

The supply of gratuitous services can be dated from March 1989. I include a further $21,200 for interest on the element of past gratuitous services derived from the calculation $41,670 x 5.5% x 9.25 years.

Finally in relation to the plaintiff's claims I come to general damages and interest thereon. Counsel have helpfully made submissions in precise figures, $200,000 on behalf of the plaintiff and $125,000 on behalf of the defendant.
My own evaluation tends towards the lower of those figures. Despite my reservations about the plaintiff's candour and my finding as to exaggeration,
I do not overlook that she was comparatively seriously injured, has not insignificant residual handicap and was a very young woman at the time of the tort which findings would be apparent from the inclusion of the many abovementioned ingredients of damage. I assess her general damages at $140,000. Both submissions accept that I should apply interest at 2% for 13.5 years on half of any award for general damages. I accept that as appropriate and will add $18,900 for interest.

For ease of reference I will tabulate the ingredients of damage.

Out of pocket expenses $133,502 
Economic loss to 1989 $97,588 
Economic loss from 1989 to date $99,203 
Interest on the above subject to allowance for compensation payments received $52,454 
Future economic loss $361,544 
Fox versus Wood $13,134 
Future medication $9,439 
Loss of superannuation subsidy to date $10,352 
Loss of future superannuation subsidy $37,817 
Medical and hospital attention in connection with pump implantation $20,000 
Hydrotherapy $38,955 
Massage $11,986 
Hospital admissions other than in connection with the infuser pump $24,324 
Household cleaning assistance to date $12,390 
Future household cleaning assistance $38,955 
Additional services provided gratuitously to date $41,670 
The like services in future $146,081 
Interest on house cleaning payments $5,098 
Interest on compensation for gratuitous services to date $21,200 
General damages $140,000 
Interest on general damages $18,900 
Total $1,334,592 
I assess the plaintiff's damages accordingly. It is agreed that the plaintiff has had the benefit of $219,758 payment of out of pocket expenses and compensation to date. That payment is pleaded by way of defence and the defence is sustained to that extent.

After allowing deduction for that defence, my assessment is reduced to $1,114,834. There will be judgment for the plaintiff for that sum. Subject to application, liberty to apply for which is granted, the defendant will be ordered to pay the plaintiff's costs.

Liberty to both parties to apply generally within 21 days from this date.
 * * * 
