

Fexuto Pty Ltd versus Bosnjak Holdings Pty Ltd and Ors (No. 3) Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 616 (26 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 December 1998 `FEXUTO PTY LTD versus BOSNJAK HOLDINGS PTY LTD & ORS (No. 3)` `3799/97` `26 November 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These reasons deal with the very awkward question of costs. The main judgment in this case is reported as Fexuto Pty Ltd versus Bosnjak Holdings Pty Ltd <case>; [(1998) 28 ACSR 688], and for convenience I will refer to the page numbers in that report. 
I subsequently made orders on 4 November 1998 and the plaintiff has filed a bulky notice of appeal, but I am told the notice of appeal comes on for mention, and perhaps expedition hearing, before the Court of Appeal on 11
March 1999.

The [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), <case> makes costs in the discretion of the court, but the court as a collegiate court exercises that discretion in accordance with principles that have been established over the years.

Those principles are very easily stated, but are often very hard to apply.
Principally the guidelines are that costs follow the event so that the successful party gets its costs and the unsuccessful party pays those costs.
Where there are multiple issues, it is appropriate for the court to assess the costs on each issue or make a reduction in the costs which the successful party obtains because of that party's losses on separate issues.

The cases, however, show that it is unwise to be too technical about what is meant by "event" or "issue" in this context. The judgment of Thomas J in
Colburt versus Beard [[1992] 2 Qd R 67] gives abundant examples which establish this point. In particular one does not look at issues as if they were pleaders' issues, but approaches the matter with a broad brush.

One of the leading judgments in this area of law is that of Toohey J in
Hughes versus Western Australian Cricket Association (Inc) (1986) 8 ATPR 40-748, where at page 48,136 his Honour sets out in a summary way the effect of the decisions, which, omitting reference to authorities, is as follows: "1. Ordinarily, costs follow the event and a successful litigant receives costs in the absence of special circumstances justifying some other order.
Where a litigant has succeeded only upon a portion of his claim, the circumstances may make it reasonable that he bear the expense of litigating that portion upon which he has failed.
A successful party who has failed on certain issues may not only be deprived of the costs of those issues but may be ordered as well to pay the other party's costs of them. In this sense, "issue" does not mean a precise issue in the technical pleading sense but any disputed question of fact or of law.

There is no difficulty in stating the principles; their application to the facts of a particular case is not always easy." 
One of the problems in this case is whether the plaintiff was substantially successful. Mr Ellicott QC and Mr Drummond for the plaintiff in their submissions put that the plaintiff was clearly successful in the proceedings.
The proceedings were for an order under <case> of the Corporations Law. The plaintiff had to establish that there was oppression and that it was entitled to be relieved against that oppression and this it did.

They acknowledged that the plaintiff did not get everything it wanted, but they say that when one looks at the result the plaintiff succeeded in the proceedings. As the plaintiff is successful it should receive the general costs of the proceedings.

They say that this is not a multiple issues case, but rather where one matter had to be established, namely oppression, and to do that a series of sub- issues had to be considered, and it is quite artificial to look at the number of sub-issues and work out on which the plaintiff succeeded and which it did not. The only real test is whether it was successful in the only matter before the court, that is whether or not there was oppression.

Mr Pembroke SC for the second to eighth defendants put that this was a very bitter and personal action in which the relief the plaintiff wanted it did not get; it did not want what it in fact got, as a result of which it filed that bulky notice of appeal. It is quite wrong to say that the plaintiff was substantially successful, it was not. All the plaintiff succeeded in doing was to have the second to eighth defendants account to the first defendant company ("the Company") for very minor sums. It is not yet known how unsuccessful the plaintiff was because the accounts that have been ordered to have been taken have not yet been taken, and it may well be that when the accounts are taken the monetary result for the plaintiff will be close to zero. How then can it be said that the plaintiff was successful? 
Mr Pembroke SC further says that the plaintiff substantially failed because contrary to its legal objectives there was no order that it purchase the shares of the majority and no constructive trust was declared over the shares in NBC. It failed to achieve the commercial objectives that it set out to achieve, because the shareholding of Holdings is the same after the litigation as before, the plaintiff not having exercised its election to be bought out.
Again, if one looks at the proceedings technically and mathematically seventeen grounds of oppression were alleged (see page 696 of the judgment), nine pursued in the closing addresses and of these nine only three were grounds on which the plaintiff succeeded.

In response to that Mr Ellicott QC and Mr Drummond say that a fair reading of the judgment shows that the plaintiff was far more successful than that, and the legal result, that is to show that the directors were guilty of oppression, was achieved. In particular, when one looks at p 741 of the judgment, one can see that the facts that were listed under the various heads in the judgment, which Mr Pembroke SC claims were successes for the defendants, were in fact added to other facts from other categories, including the three admittedly successful categories, to make the situation where the conduct as a whole stepped over the oppression line.

Mr Ellicott QC and Mr Drummond also say that it has to be remembered that although towards the end of the preparation of the case, and when the evidence started, the defendants went fairly quietly on some issues, up until the case began every matter was fiercely put in issue and, indeed, the plaintiff's solicitors had to extract painstakingly the facts that they needed to succeed from the reluctant directors.

Mr Ellicott QC and Mr Drummond say that the legal objectives and the commercial objectives are really, in the final analysis, irrelevant. This was a case to stop oppression. There was a great deal of material in a whole series of compartments, which had to be painstakingly put together to make out the whole case.

The case is not one that one can easily deal with by applying some rule of thumb or even have the comfort of going to some decided case and applying it by analogy. This is not a case where there are separate counts. This is not a case where there are distinct issues. This is a case where one matter had to be established, yet it is also a case where the real problem was in the detail in the matters which had to be collected so that the court could deduce the ultimate fact, and the question as to which of the smorgasbord of remedies could be awarded.

I will not overburden these reasons with references to decided cases, but there are four or five which do throw some light on the problem. I have already referred to what Toohey J said in Hughes' case. In Thiess v
TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd (No 5) [1994] 1 Qd 156, at 206 and following, the
Queensland Full Court had to consider the costs order in a defamation case which went for many days and involved imputations of bribery and cheating of high officials of the Queensland government, in which the plaintiff recovered $55,000. It was quite clear that many of the imputations alleged failed, though thirteen of the twenty-one were found to be true, but not to carry the amount of damages which the plaintiff said they should carry. The trial Judge ordered the defendant to pay two-thirds of the plaintiff's costs. The Full
Court set that aside and substituted one-third.

The Ritz Hotel Ltd versus Charles of the Ritz Ltd [(1989) AIPC 90-567] 
There has been some discussion before me as to how far one can or should deprive a successful party of his or her costs. To a great degree this depends on making the leap in faith that a party has in fact been successful. Often that cedes the question. There is fairly high authority that courts must not, or alternatively should not, make a successful defendant pay the costs of an unsuccessful plaintiff: Hally versus Dennis <case>; [(1955) 95 CLR 661.] Subject to that, the court may, though it is a matter of discretion, conclude that in all the circumstances a successful party should pay the costs in respect of an issue on which that party has failed or when one looks at the matter globally the successful party should pay some of the costs or alternatively have that party's costs reduced because although the party has been successful overall, it would be unfair to allow that person to get the whole of his or her costs: see Rosniak versus GIO [(1997) 41 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281997%29%2041%20NSWLR%20608 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 615.

There were some submissions put before me that it was necessary to look at the reasonableness of each party's conduct. This is only relevant sub limine. The most reasonable of litigants can still lose a case and have to pay costs.
There are situations when a person's reasonable conduct in litigation is relevant, such as a situation where a person prepares a whole lot of material thinking that a particular matter is going to be raised and at the trial the other side does not raise it, and reasonable in that sense does affect the result. The principle of reasonableness goes a little further than this as cases such as Forster versus Farquhar [[1893] 1 QB 564] at 570 show.

However, these matters only go to the ultimate question, and, as noted by
Bowen LJ at that page, a judge has got to look at the matter globally and in the circumstances of each case and make an order for costs that is fair and reasonable after taking into account the general guidelines.

Having said all that and made it clear, I hope, that I have understood the principles involved in the submissions made to me, it is still up to me to make a fair assessment of the costs.

First, I am quite sure that the proper order is that there must be some order for costs in favour of the plaintiff. Mr Ellicott QC and Mr Drummond were quite correct in their submissions that although it would appear by looking at the mathematics of the judgment, as Mr Pembroke SC's submissions tend to do, there were matters of fact which were put under different heads throughout the judgment, which when added to the findings in the NBC, the Transcard and the use of the Company's lawyers matters, that amounted to general oppression.
Again I favour the submissions that the plaintiff, although it did not achieve what it wanted, and there is some truth in the submissions of Mr Pembroke SC that it got what it did not want, that it was still substantially successful within the broad meaning of that term. However it is also clear that quite a considerable amount of the time of the case and the exploring of various blind alleys took place because of Mr Bob Bosnjak's attitude to the defendants generally and what might be called his bull terrier approach to this litigation. In view of the "issues" in which he and his company were unsuccessful and in view of the net result which was very much less than that at which they were aiming, it seems to me that the appropriate order is that the second to eighth defendants pay fifty percent of the plaintiff's costs.

I should add before leaving this part of the reasons that in my reasons in the first judgment I said at page 747 that perhaps costs up to a certain limit should come out of the Company and the balance should be borne equally.
Neither counsel supported the proposition that the costs should come out of the Company and Mr Pembroke SC convinced me from a reference to Lindley &
Banks on Partnership 17th ed (Sweet & Maxwell London 1995) para -117, p 652 and to a decision of McLelland J, Meekin Enterprises Pty Ltd v
Gersbach, 6 August 1997, unreported, that in a case such as the present where the real debate is partner against partner the principle of some of the costs of dissolution coming out of the company is inapplicable.

So far as the Company is concerned, Mr Coleman, who appeared for it, indicated that he made no submissions as to costs. He was criticised, or rather those behind him were criticised for saying this, as Mr Ellicott QC said the Company should be submitting that the second to eighth defendants should pay the
Company's costs. However, I will just do as the Company's counsel says, and make no order as to the Company's costs.

The other matter raised by Mr Ellicott QC and Mr Drummond, based on well-known words of members of the Court of Appeal in Wallersteiner versus Moir (No 2) [[1975] 1 QB 373] at 391-2 (Denning MR) and 403-4 (Buckley LJ) was that this was a case of an innocent minority shareholder bringing an action for the benefit of the company and the general principle was that he should not be left out of pocket. Accordingly, any costs which were not ordered to be paid but may remain unpaid by the wrongdoers, should be ordered to be paid by the company.

With respect, I do not consider that that is the position in this case at all.
Although it is true that because of the way in which <case> of the Corporations
Law operates in Australia it is possible to make in such an action an order that could have been made in a derivative action, that does not convert these proceedings into a derivative action. These proceedings were a very bitter fight between two brothers over the way in which they considered the family company should be run. That is not the sort of situation in which the principle in Wallersteiner versus Moir (supra) should apply; see Re Sherborne
Park Residents Co Ltd <case>; [[1986] 2
BCC 99](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1986%5d%202%20BCC%2099 "View LawCiteRecord" ),528, also reported as Re a company [[1987] BCLC 82.] I do not consider that that is a principle I should apply in this case. Thus I decline to make any order for indemnity costs, or an order for what might be called the gap in costs against the Company.

Accordingly, the final order I make in the case is that the second to eighth defendants pay fifty percent of the plaintiff's costs to date. Further costs are reserved. I say this because I consider that the costs of the inquiries and accounts that are to be taken should be dealt with in due course.
 * * * 
