

Regina versus Church Matter No Cca 60528/97 [1997] NSWSC 628 (9 December 1997) 
Regina versus Sharon Marie Church /97 December 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Dunford J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Sharon Marie CHURCH 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask Barr J to give the first judgment. 
BARR J: On 3 September 1996 the applicant, Sharon Marie Church, was sentenced by Judge Ford QC to penal servitude for a term of three years and six months for the part she played in an armed robbery. The sentence comprised a minimum term of one year and six months, beginning on 3 September 1996 and ending on 2 March 1998, and an additional term of two years. In fixing the sentence his Honour took into account a period of seventeen days during which the applicant had been denied bail. The applicant applies for leave to appeal against the sentence and for an extension of time within which to bring her application.

At the time of the events concerned, the applicant and her boyfriend, Steven
Bourke, were heroin addicts. Mr Bourke was apparently already committing crime to raise money to buy drugs but the applicant had not previously offended. On the evening of 25 August 1995 Mr Bourke was in possession of a shotgun which, since it fitted into a bag, had probably been shortened. The two made a plan to commit an armed hold-up. On the following morning they went by train from
Caringbah, where they lived, to Yagoona. They had with them the shotgun, in a bag, and a roll of strong tape to bind the person they intended to rob. They entered the Yagoona Loan Office and Mr Bourke took out the shotgun and pointed it at Mr Sinclair, who was in charge of the business. He made him go into the back room. The applicant locked the front door while that was happening and then went to where Mr Bourke and Mr Sinclair were. She put something into Mr
Sinclair's mouth to stop him making a noise, taped his mouth, and bound his hands behind his back with the tape. She took the shotgun from Mr Bourke and held it whilst he stole jewellery and other items from the business. They put these things into the applicant's bag. They took the books of the business as well. They stole the keys of Mr Sinclair's car and used it to drive to a railway station. They threw away the books of the business, presumably to make it difficult to trace the goods they had stolen. They took a train to
Cabramatta and exchanged the shotgun for money and drugs. Later on they returned to Caringbah and disposed of the goods at various pawnbrokers and secondhand businesses. The goods were worth more than $20,000. There was no evidence that the gun was loaded. Mr Sinclair was apparently not seriously injured, though he must have been put in great fear.

The applicant made the following written submissions in support of her contention that the sentence imposed by his Honour was too severe.

First, the applicant has a son, now four years old, by a relationship that preceded her relationship with Mr Bourke. The applicant and her son are suffering hardship because of the applicant's imprisonment.

Secondly, this was the applicant's first offence and she had no record of offending as a juvenile.

Thirdly, the applicant cooperated with the police. The Crown would not have had enough evidence to convict her without the admissions she voluntarily made to the police.

Fourthly, Mr Bourke threatened the applicant that if she did not take part in the robbery he would beat her and take her son away from her. The applicant had no choice but to comply, given that she was afraid of Mr Bourke, had a two-year old son to support without family help, had no money, and nowhere to live.

In further written submissions put before the Court upon the hearing of this matter the applicant submitted that during the hold-up she was in a daze and carried out certain actions, for example tying up Mr Sinclair and holding the gun, under the directions of Mr Bourke.

It is convenient to deal first with the last of these submissions. The applicant was first spoken to by the police on 7 September 1995. She answered questions but made no admissions, and no charges were laid. On 18 January 1996 the police, having the day before charged Mr Bourke in relation to the hold- up, spoke again to the applicant. She participated in a recorded interview and made full and frank admissions about the planning of the offence and its commission and about the exact part she played in it, as well as about the disposal of the gun and of the proceeds of the robbery. During the interview the applicant told the police that she and Mr Bourke had planned the robbery on the previous evening and that her desire for drugs was at least part of the reason for carrying it out. She was asked whose idea it was to commit the robbery with the gun and she said this: "I dunno, see we just started joking about it, you know, and I dunno I think
Steven cracked a joke and then I sort of said, `Yeah,' sort of thing." 
Towards the conclusion of the interview she was asked whether she would like to say anything else about the matter and she said that she did not.

The applicant gave evidence before his Honour. She appears once again to have admitted her part in the offence in a full and frank manner. She said, among other things, that she had told the police the truth. She was asked why she and Mr Bourke had carried out the robbery. She said that one part of the reason was her desire to obtain heroin and that the other part was to obtain money to pay for accommodation.

Although she told his Honour that she had a two-year old son to support, lacked financial and other help, and was having difficulties finding somewhere to live, she said nothing about any threat made by Mr Bourke or any fear she may have had of him. This application is the first occasion on which those assertions have been made.

The asserted threats of Mr Bourke were of a kind that the applicant was unlikely to have forgotten by the time she gave evidence before his Honour. No explanation has been offered why the applicant gave no evidence about those threats. No suggestion has been made, nor I think could it have been, that the applicant did not realise when giving evidence what the significance of the threats might be in the sentencing process.

In my opinion, this Court should not act on the applicant's assertions. There is no evidence to ground the applicant's submissions, and even if she had offered evidence in this application this Court would have been justified in refusing to receive it. The proper place for adducing evidence of that kind was before the sentencing judge. I do not accept the applicant's first submission.

The remaining submissions can be dealt with together.

The offence to which the applicant pleaded guilty was a very serious one and attracted a maximum penalty of twenty-five years penal servitude. The penalty imposed by his Honour, comprising as it did a minimum term of only eighteen months, was, as a matter of first impression, a lenient one. However, an examination of the evidence before his Honour shows that there were substantial matters in favour of the applicant which his Honour took into account in determining the length of sentence. The applicant told his Honour something of her unfortunate upbringing by a cruel mother and a sick father and her becoming a State ward. She gave evidence that she was using marijuana by the age of fifteen years, amphetamines by the time she was seventeen years old, and heroin a year later. She was eighteen or nineteen years old when she gave birth to her son. Unfortunately, her relationship with the father of her son broke down not long after his birth. At the time of the offence the applicant was living with Mr Bourke and her son in premises rented, apparently, by the applicant's brother. According to the evidence of the applicant, he was trying to obtain more money from her and Mr Bourke and had thrown them out a number of times, seeking the assistance of the police on at least one occasion. After she was arrested on 18 January 1996 the applicant was denied bail and her son went to live with his father. That continued to be the position to the date of sentencing, even though the applicant had been granted bail in the meantime.

His Honour was aware that this was the first offence the applicant had committed and of her cooperation with the investigating police officers.

His Honour was aware of the importance to the prosecution of the admissions made by the applicant and of the fact that she stood by them. There was no statement before his Honour of the evidence Mr Sinclair might have been prepared to give. The statement of Snr Const Dipple, which was before his
Honour, showed that Mr Sinclair went to the Local Court at Sutherland on 18
January 1996, when the applicant was there. He had a conversation with Snr
Const Dipple, as a result of which that officer spoke to the applicant a second time. That conversation resulted in the applicant's admissions in the recorded interview. It seems at least possible that Mr Sinclair could have identified the applicant as one of his attackers. However, it is not necessary to resolve that issue and I will assume in favour of the applicant that the police evidence of the applicant's admissions constituted the only or substantially the only evidence in the Crown case.

His Honour could not have failed to be struck by the importance of the matters raised by the applicant, and referred to some of them in his remarks on sentence. His Honour was well aware that the imposition of a period in custody would deny the applicant close contact with her son. Courts are frequently called upon to impose sentences which will result in a restriction or denial of access between a parent and a child. However, the resultant hardship in such cases has to be of an exceptional kind before it can justify the reduction of what would otherwise be a proper sentence.

In my opinion, there was nothing exceptional about the applicant's case. The child's father, not the applicant, was the person having the daily control of the child. No doubt the period of time in custody made it difficult for the applicant to obtain access to the child, but in my opinion that did not amount to hardship which would have justified any further reduction in the sentence imposed by his Honour.

It is not submitted that his Honour made any error of principle in imposing sentence, merely that the sentence was too long. I do not think that the sentence was too long. On the contrary, its apparent leniency could only be justified by his Honour's having given full weight to all the subjective features of the case, including those pointed to in this application.

Because of the seriousness of the offence, I would grant the applicant an extension of time within which to bring this application and I would grant leave to appeal, but I would dismiss the appeal.
 
GLEESON CJ: I agree.
 
DUNFORD J: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Barr J.
 * * * 
