

Nonferral Pty Ltd versus Taufia Matter No Ca 40737/95 [1998] NSWSC 49 (27
March 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 April 1998 
NONFERRAL PTY LIMITED versus SILIVENUSI TAUFIA 
CA 40737/95; CC 11218/94 March 1998 
Cole JA, Stein JA, Sheppard AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: COMPENSATION COURT - Burke CCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40737/95; CC 11218/94 
DELIVERED: 27 March 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 4 March 1998 
PARTIES: NONFERRAL PTY LIMITED versus Silivenusi TAUFIA 
JUDGMENT OF: COLE JA, STEIN JA, SHEPPARD AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: J L Sharpe 
Respondent: D E Grieve QC 
Intervenor: J W Shaw QC, Attorney-General/C J Birch 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Messrs Vandervord 
Respondent: Messrs P K Simpson 
CATCHWORDS: 
WORKERS COMPENSATION - contract of service - whether rendered illegal and void by [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s83.html) of the [Migration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/) (Cwth) - application of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s24.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/)  - whether exercise of discretion miscarried 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 44 
NONFERRAL PTY LIMITED versus Silivenusi TAUFIA 
The respondent, an illegal entrant, sustained an injury while working for the appellant and was awarded worker's compensation.

On appeal it was contended by the appellant: that as an illegal entrant, the respondent's contract of service was illegal and void and he was not entitled to worker's compensation; that the discretion contained in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s24.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/)  (WC Act) did not apply given that the worker was an illegal entrant; that there was a direct inconsistency within [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s109.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) between s 24 of the WC Act 1958 and [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s83.html) of the [Migration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/) (Cwth); in any event, the discretion under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s24.html) miscarried; that the probable weekly earnings of the worker were not $380, or any amount, after his deportation from Australia.

Held: 
There was no implied statutory prohibition in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s83.html) of the [Migration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/) which prohibited illegal entrants from working in Australia per se. The object of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s83.html) is to prohibit illegal entrants working in 
Australia without the permission in writing of the Secretary, per Cole JA and 
Stein JA. Contra Sheppard AJA, the contract of service was rendered illegal by [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s83.html) of the [Migration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/) .

Yango Pastoral Co Pty Ltd versus First Chicago Australia Ltd <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 653], St John Shipping Corporation versus Joseph Rank Ltd [[1957] 1
QB 267] applied 
The Workcover Corporation (San Remo Macaroni Co Pty Ltd) versus Da Ping, 
Unreported, Full Court of South Australia, 30 March 1994, not followed 
There are no public policy reasons for the court to decline to enforce the contract.

Holman versus Johnson <case>; [(1775) Cowp 341], <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 538], applied 
There is no inconsistency between [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s83.html) of the [Migration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/) and <case> of the WC Act.

If the contract was illegal, then <case> of the WC Act 1987 applied.

The exercise of the discretion miscarried by the trial judge's failure to give any or any sufficient weight to the breach of the statute. Nonetheless, it should be re-exercised in favour of the respondent.

The trial judge's exercise of discretion in relation to the probable weekly earnings, if uninjured, did not miscarry.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs 
NONFERRAL PTY LTD versus Silivenusi TAUFIA 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: I have read in draft the judgments to be delivered by Stein JA and Sheppard AJA. 
The only significant point at which those judgments diverge is whether the effect of s.83(2) [Migration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/) is to render the contract of employment between the appellant and the respondent illegal. Stein JA is of the view that it does not, whilst Sheppard AJA is of the contrary opinion.

In one sense it matters not because, if the contract be illegal, [s.24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s24.html)
Workers Compensation Act confers upon the Compensation Court a discretion to treat an illegal contract as legal, and Burke CCJ indicated that had it been necessary to do so, he would have treated the contract, if found illegal, as a legal contract. However, I agree with the remarks made by
Sheppard AJA which are critical of the comments made by the trial judge in indicating the basis upon which, had it been necessary for him to do so, he would have exercised his discretion in favour of the worker. In particular
Burke CCJ's statement: "As I expressed in Viliami I find it difficult to see anything particularly blameworthy in a citizen of a country less fortunate than ours doing the best he can to support himself, his wife and five children, even in the face of a statutory prohibition. Perhaps a need to do so could be seen as a positive reason to exercise the discretion - it is all a matter of perspective." seriously misapprehends the basis upon which a discretion ought to be exercised. The discretion must be exercised against the background that the [Migration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/) expresses a clear legislative intention that an illegal entrant should not engage in work, unless he has the appropriate permission. I agree with Sheppard AJA that it should be found that the prospective exercise of discretion is to be treated as having miscarried, and this Court should itself exercise the discretion conferred by [s.24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s24.html) for the reasons given by Sheppard AJA that discretion should be exercised favourably to the worker.

Nonetheless, in light of submissions put to the Court, I should express my views concerning whether [s.83(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s83.html) [Migration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/) renders the contract of employment illegal.

I have, at times, had doubts regarding this issue. There is clear authority of a court of the equal standing with this Court that it does.[1] Fernando v
Commissioner of Police[2] makes plain that unless I am of the view that that decision is plainly wrong, I should follow it. Further, Sheppard AJA is of the view that it does.

San Remo was decided after Yango Pastoral Co Pty Ltd versus First Chicago
Australia Ltd,3 but before the more recent decisions of the High Court in which the proper approach to the question of illegality was discussed.[4]
Nelson and Fitzgerald to my mind express principles which make it plain that San Remo was wrongly decided.

Yango and Fitzgerald were each cases involving asserted illegality of contract. That is the issue presently being addressed. However, whether the question of illegality arises in relation to contract, or enforceability of a trust, as in Nelson, or in tort, it seems to have been accepted since
Yango that it is important to determine the nature of the statutory prohibition said to ground the illegality.[5] McHugh J in Nelson said: "First, the statute may directly prohibit the contract or trust. Second, while the statute may not prohibit making the contract or trust, it may prohibit the doing of some particular act that is essential for carrying it out. Third, the statute may not expressly prohibit the contract or trust but the contract or trust may be associated with or made in furtherance of a purpose of frustrating the operation of the statute. Further, the statute may make unlawful the manner in which an otherwise lawful contract or trust is carried out. It would be surprising if sound legal policy required each of these forms of illegality to be treated in the same way." 
Here the statute did not prohibit an illegal entrant from performing work.
Accordingly it did not prohibit that person from receiving compensation for injuries at work. What was prohibited was performing work without the permission in writing of the Secretary of the Department of Immigration. The prohibition is indistinguishable from that referred to in Fitzgerald by
Dawson and Toohey JJ, addressing the question of illegality of a drilling contract where a permit to drill was required: "The drilling contract was not one which the statute expressly or impliedly prohibited. A permit was required if the drilling was not to constitute an offence on the part of the owner, but a contract for the drilling of bores was plainly envisaged by the Act."[6] 
Similarly, the performance of work by an illegal entrant was contemplated by s.83 and thus a contract to perform that work was also contemplated. However in order that the performance of that work not constitute an offence, a written permission was required.

Having defined the nature of the statutory prohibition, namely, performing work without a written permission, it is necessary to consider whether, as a matter of public policy, the courts should permit reliance upon a contract made in breach of the statute because of absence of the written permission.
The proper approach to consideration of that issue was also enunciated by
McHugh J in Nelson where his Honour said: "Accordingly, in my opinion, even if a case does not come within one of the four exceptions to the Holman dictum to which I have referred, courts should not refuse to enforce legal or equitable rights simply because they arose out of or were associated with an unlawful purpose unless (a) the statute discloses an intention that those rights should be unenforceable in all circumstances; or (b)(i) the sanction of refusing to enforce those rights is not disproportionate to the seriousness of the unlawful conduct; (ii) the imposition of the sanction is necessary, having regard to the terms of the statute, to protect its objects or policies; and (iii) the statute does not disclose an intention that the sanctions and remedies contained in the statute are to be the only legal consequences of a breach of the statute or the frustration of its policies."[7] 
This passage was adopted by McHugh and Gummow JJ[8] and by Kirby J[9] in
Fitzgerald.

In my view the statute does not disclose an intention that rights dependent upon a contract of employment entered into in breach of the statutory prohibition against the performance of work without the necessary permission should be unenforceable because of illegality. The sanction of refusing to enforce those rights would be disproportionate to the seriousness of the unlawful conduct. It is not necessary to impose such a sanction to protect the objects of the Migration Act 1987 because that Act imposes sanctions in the form of a penalty. This is an instance, in my view, of the applicability of the statement by Mason J, with whom Aitken J agreed in Yango, and which
Toohey J quoted in Nelson:[10] "There is much to be said for the view that once a statutory penalty has been provided for an offence the rule (sic) of the common law in determining the legal consequences of commission of the offence is thereby diminished." 
For these reasons I do not think that public policy requires the courts to regard the contract of employment as unenforceable.

I agree with the judgment of Stein JA in all other respects. Accordingly the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

NONFERRAL PTY LIMITED versus Silivenusi TAUFI 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: (1) The respondent, Silivenusi Taufia, was injured on 7 May 1993 when working as a labourer at an aluminium foundry conducted by the appellant, Nonferral Pty Limited. He made application for compensation under the Workers Compensation Act  [the WC Act 1958 ]. On 27 October 1995 Burke CCJ made an award in his favour in the Compensation Court.[11] 
The appellant contends that the award should be set aside because of the status of the respondent as an illegal entrant. It is maintained that the respondent's contract of employment with the appellant was illegal and void by reason of <case> of the Migration Act (Cwlth). Further, it is argued that s 24 of the WC Act 1958 (which includes a discretion regarding illegal contracts of employment) has no application. Alternatively, if it did apply, then <case> is inconsistent with <case> of the Migration Act and, to the extent of the inconsistency, is invalid under <case> of the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).
Again in the alternative, it is submitted that the exercise of discretion under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s24.html) miscarried. Finally, it is contended that the judge erred in finding that the probable weekly earnings of the respondent, if uninjured, were $380 (or any amount).

FACTS 
The respondent arrived in Australia from Tonga in March 1992. He had a visitor's visa. In October or November 1992 he obtained employment with the appellant at its foundry. The respondent was so engaged when he suffered an accident at work on 7 May 1993. He injured his left lower leg. The trial judge found that as a result of the injuries sustained the respondent was partially incapacitated for work. While convalescing from the injury the respondent was arrested on 1 August 1993 as an illegal entrant and deported to Tonga on or about 8 August 1993.

IS THE CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT ILLEGAL UNDER [s 83(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s83.html) MIGRATION ACT? 
As at the time of the respondent's work accident, <case> of the
Migration Act provided: 
Where a person who is an illegal entrant performs any work in Australia without the permission, in writing, of the Secretary, [of the Department of
Immigration] the person commits an offence against this sub-section.[12] 
The penalty for such an offence is a fine not exceeding $5000.[13] 
It is common ground that the respondent did not have the written permission of the Secretary of the Department to work for the appellant. It is not disputed that at the relevant times of the entry into the contract of employment and the injury, the respondent was or had become an `illegal entrant' under the Migration Act 1992 .

Section 3 of the WC Act defines `worker' relevantly as follows: worker means any person who has entered into or works under a contract of service or apprenticeship with an employer, whether by way of manual labour, clerical work or otherwise, and whether the contract is expressed or implied, or is oral or in writing ... 
It is the submission of Mr J L Sharpe on behalf of the appellant that the reference to a `contract of service' in the definition relates only to lawful and valid contracts of service. Since the respondent's employment with the appellant was contrary to <case> of the Migration Act, his contract of employment was illegal. While the appellant concedes that there is no express prohibition rendering illegal a contract of employment of an illegal entrant, nevertheless it is submitted that the performance of it was impliedly prohibited and the prohibition results in the contract being void.
Accordingly, it is submitted that the respondent could not obtain the benefits of the WC Act. Reliance is placed on The Workcover Corporation (San Remo
Macaroni Co Pty Ltd) versus Da Ping[14] to which I shall return.

The initial task of the court is to consider whether the contract of employment between the parties was rendered illegal because of the breach of s (2) of the Migration Act by the respondent in his not obtaining the written permission of the Secretary. The approach is one of discerning the legislative intention, see Mason J (as he then was) in Yango Pastoral Co Pty
Ltd versus First Chicago Australia Ltd.[15] 
In Hurst versus Vestcorp Ltd [16] Kirby P (as he then was) gathered the principles from Yango as follows:
The fact that a transaction is made which results from or involves a breach of the requirement of statute may result in a conclusion that the transaction itself is illegal such that, to give effect to the statute, a court will decline to enforce the transaction or will treat it as void;
Such a result will not, however, always follow. Because statutes rarely provide, in terms, for the effect of the breach of their provisions upon such transactions, it is for the court, in applying the potentially crude instrument of the doctrine of illegality, to determine the imputed legislative intention. It must do so from the language, history and apparent policy of the statute: the court necessarily filling the gaps left by the legislature;
In reaching its conclusion, the court will consider the extent to which the statute itself already provides adequately for securing the attainment of its apparent objects and for punishing breaches of and non-compliance with its terms. It will also have regard to the possible consequences upon innocent third parties of a rigorous application of the principles as to illegality, and
Because of the sometimes drastic consequences of the application of the doctrine of illegality upon transactions, the proscription may not be extended beyond those transactions which are clearly in breach of the statute, lest, by casting the net more widely, serious injustice may be done to third parties beyond that necessary to give effect to the presumed legislative intention.

The President also stressed that the courts must take care to avoid the undiscriminating operation of the law of illegality.[17] He said: 
Regard must be had to the consequence of applying the law of illegality to the particular case: the absurdities thereby produced; the far reaching results and particularly any illogical or inconvenient results which would follow.[18] 
In Yango the High Court held that the breach of the statute, which prohibited a company from carrying out any banking business without authority, did not invalidate a mortgage given to the company carrying on an unauthorised banking business.

A more recent High Court authority on illegality of contract arising out of a statutory prohibition is Fitzgerald versus F J Leonhardt Pty Ltd.[19] In examining whether a provision in the Water Act (NT) prohibited contracts entered into when one party had not obtained the required authorisation,
Dawson and Toohey JJ said: ... [but] even if the performance of the contract by the driller were seen as involving a breach of the Act, that would not necessarily mean that the contract was illegal. It has sometimes been said that a contract is illegal if its performance involves breach of a statute passed for the protection of the public but, stated in that way, the proposition is too broad. The purpose of the statute may be served by the imposition of a penalty, notwithstanding that it is for the protection of the public.[20] 
In their judgment, McHugh and Gummow JJ noted that the statute, as here, contained no express prohibition against the making of the contract. Their
Honours continued: 
The contract as framed did not call for the commission of any illegality. Nor did the statute prohibit some particular act that was essential for carrying out the contract. Performance of the work would have answered the requirements of the contract if the owner had obtained licences under <case>.[21] 
Their Honours were also of the opinion that the contract should be seen as one where each party agreed to do all that was necessary on its part to enable the other party to have the benefit of its performance. Accordingly, there was an implied undertaking by the owner to obtain the permits required by the statute. If applied to the facts of this case, it would mean that the respondent was bound by an implied term in the service contract to take all reasonable steps to obtain the permission of the Secretary in order to ensure his performance of the work under the contract was lawful.

In examining the question of whether a prohibition (in the sense of rendering it illegal) of a contract of employment entered into without the
Secretary's approval is to be implied, it is necessary to examine the objects of the statute. Is the prohibition consistent with the objects of the statute or is it not necessary in order to further the objects of the statute? If it is the latter, the courts will be reluctant to find that the contract is illegal.[22] Pearce LJ has explained the reasons why the courts should not be too ready to imply that a contract is prohibited by statute. To do so would deprive the court of its own general power (based on public policy) to determine whether contracts which are ex facie unlawful, are to be enforceable.[23] 
When focusing on the statutory object, it is important to discern whether there is an intention to protect the public or merely to exact a penalty as a revenue raising device, Yango at 414, 431. In the instant case it cannot be said that a fine to the maximum of $5000 is a mere device for raising revenue.
Nonetheless, the fact that the statutory intention is to protect the public is one factor only to be considered and is not necessarily conclusive, Yango at
Many statutes have as their object the protection of the public eg.
planning and building requirements. It does not necessarily follow that contracts entered into will be illegal if the statutory requirement is not fulfilled.[24] 
While the imposition of a penalty has been said to raise a rebuttable presumption of prohibition, this may be displaced. An example of this is
Dalgety and New Zealand Loan Ltd versus Imeson Pty Ltd[25] where it was displaced, in part, by a consideration of the policy of the statute. The nature and form of the penalty may also be relevant, see Yango at 415. In
Yango the main factor which led the court to conclude that there was no implied prohibition in the statute was that the penalty provided was quite independent of the number of banking transactions entered into on any one day.
Thus, the penalty was directed to the carrying out of banking business and not imposed in respect of each banking transaction.

Another theme in cases on statutory illegality is to consider the consequences. That is, that the court should not find an implied prohibition in a statute if it would lead to an unjust, unreasonable, inconvenient or absurd result, see for example St John Shipping Corp versus Joseph Rank Ltd.26 In
Yango (at 414-415) Gibbs ACJ pointed out that a finding of statutory illegality on the facts would be very inconvenient and unreasonable and lead to unjust results.

In Fitzgerald, McHugh and Gummow JJ after referring to the existence of a penalty for the offence said: 
Here, the imposition of an additional sanction, namely inability of the driller to recover moneys otherwise owing by the owner, would be an inappropriate adjunct to the scheme for which the Act provides.[27] 
McHugh J had previously stated in Nelson versus Nelson:28 ... [courts] should not refuse to enforce legal or equitable rights simply because they arose out of or were associated with an unlawful purpose unless: the statute discloses an intention that those rights should be unenforceable in all circumstances; or (b)(i) the sanction of refusing to enforce those rights is not disproportionate to the seriousness of the unlawful conduct; (ii) the imposition of the sanction is necessary, having regard to the terms of the statute, to protect its objects or policies; and the statute does not disclose an intention that the sanctions and remedies contained in the statute are to be the only legal consequences of a breach of the statute or the frustration of its policies.[29] 
This brief analysis of implied statutory prohibitions leaves to one side the separate question of public policy stated by Lord Mansfield in Holman v
Johnson.30 I will return to this later.

In applying the applicable principles to the question of an implied statutory prohibition, it is well to note that the courts have held that there is no one test. Regard must be had to all relevant considerations and no single consideration is necessarily conclusive.[31] 
What are the objects of the Migration Act 1992 and <case> in particular?
The preamble to the statute refers to it as `relating to the entry into, and presence in, Australia of aliens and the departure or deportation from
Australia of aliens, and certain other persons'. The Migration Reform Act includes extensive objects in a new <case> but this did not commence until 1
November 1993. Part 2 of the Act deals with the entry, presence and deportation of non-citizens. Division 1 (and <case> in particular) concerns illegal entrants. Other divisions of Part 2 are concerned with visas, entry permits and deportation. Division 7 deals with offences relating to entry into and remaining in Australia. It is within this division that <case> is to be found.

When examining the offence in <case> it may be seen that an integral part of the offence is the performance of any work in Australia without the permission in writing of the Secretary. An `illegal entrant' may perform work in Australia if he or she has the Secretary's written permission. The object of <case> is to prohibit an `illegal entrant' from working in Australia only in the absence of the Secretary's written permission. The object is not to prohibit illegal entrants from working in Australia per se. In my opinion, it is not necessary, in order to further the object of the statute, to imply that the performance of all contracts of service entered into without the
Secretary's written permission are prohibited and unlawful.

There is no doubt that the section is intended to protect the Australian public and not merely to extract a penalty. However, the protection of the public can be achieved without implying into the section a statutory prohibition of the nature contended for by the appellant. The imposition of a criminal penalty for the offence, and the possibility of deportation, may be seen as a sufficient sanction to protect the public and serve the purpose of the statute.

As I have said, the proper characterisation of the prohibition in <case> is that it is a prohibition against the performance of work by an illegal entrant who does not have the permission of the Secretary. In this case, there is no suggestion that the parties to the contract of employment expressly contracted for the respondent to do the work as an illegal entrant. Indeed, if one adopts McHugh and Gummow JJ in Fitzgerald,32 then the respondent was bound to take all reasonable steps to obtain the Secretary's permission to ensure his performance of work is lawful.

Is there a need for an additional sanction to fulfill the objects of the statute? The answer to this question involves an assessment of the consequences which may follow if there is a finding of implied prohibition rendering the contract of employment wholly void and unenforceable. A moment's reflection will reveal that the consequences can be drastic. For example, the contract could be rendered unenforceable even if the employer, as one may here assume, had no knowledge of the respondent's status as an illegal entrant. The employer would be unable to enforce the employee's duties under the contract, eg. the duty of confidentiality. Such a situation would be unreasonable,
Yango at 415. On the other hand, an unscrupulous employer could deliberately recruit illegal immigrants in order to pay them less than award wages. An implied prohibition would mean that a worker could not sue for unpaid wages.
One could well envisage consequences which would result in an unjust, unreasonable or absurd result.

Applying each of the relevant considerations discussed above, I am not persuaded that there is an implied statutory prohibition in <case> which renders the contract of service illegal and void.

PUBLIC POLICY CONSIDERATIONS 
It is, of course, necessary to turn from the statutory construction issue to the separate public policy question raised by the Holman dictum.
Notwithstanding that the statute does not, in my view, expressly or impliedly forbid the performance of work in Australia by an illegal entrant (without the
Secretary's permission) should the courts decline to enforce the contract on grounds of public policy given the breach of the statute? 
To test this it will suffice to apply the propositions proposed by McHugh
J in Nelson[33] and quoted earlier. When applying these questions, for the reasons given earlier, the following answers emerge:
The statute does not disclose an intention that any rights to compensation of the respondent under the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wca1958255/) should be unenforceable in all the circumstances.
The sanction of refusing to enforce those rights would be disproportionate to the seriousness of the unlawful conduct.
The imposition of the sanction is not necessary to protect the objects of the Migration Act.
The Migration Act discloses an intention that the penalty for breach should be a fine and possibly deportation. In other words, the Act is silent as to any other consequences of breach.

WHAT OF SAN REMO? 
It is necessary, then, to consider the South Australian Full Court decision of San Remo referred to earlier. Fernando versus Commissioner of
Police[34] held that as a matter of comity the courts in New South Wales will follow the appellate courts in other States on like statutory provisions `unless convinced that the law and justice of the case require a different decision' (Priestley JA at 575). Unless it can be said that San Remo is clearly wrong, this court should follow it, even if of a different opinion.

The first matter which may be observed about San Remo is that the South
Australian [Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wraca400/) did not include a provision equivalent to <case> of the NSW WC Act which entitles the
Compensation Court, in its discretion, to put to one side an illegality in the contract of service. King CJ mentioned this distinction. Nonetheless, the Full
Court was dealing with precisely the same section of the Migration Act (s (2)) with which we are here concerned, albeit in a different factual context.

On behalf of the respondent, Mr Grieve QC submits that the Full Court was in error on the facts and in the application of legal principle. The Attorney-
General for NSW, who has intervened to seek to uphold the validity of <case> of the WC Act, also submits that San Remo was wrongly decided.

King CJ (with whom Bollen and Mullighan JJ agreed) found that the performance of the contract of employment by an illegal entrant was illegal and void because there was an implied prohibition in the statute. His Honour said `that the act to be performed under the contract, namely the performance of work, is the very act forbidden by the statute is a very strong consideration in favour of the implication of a prohibition rendering the contract void'.[35] To my mind, this does not accurately state the position.
What is prohibited by <case> is the performance of work by an illegal entrant without the permission in writing of the Secretary. That is the act which is forbidden, not the entering into the contract of service or the performance of work under it.

The Chief Justice then referred to the fine not being merely intended to secure the revenue. This is unquestionably true, but, with respect, his Honour did not proceed to consider the nature of the penalty and whether the objects of the statute could be achieved by the penalty (and the possibility of deportation) without the need for further sanctions which would be consequent on a finding of an implied statutory prohibition rendering the contract of service illegal. His Honour also referred to the object of the statute being the protection of the public. Again, this is undoubtedly correct. But his
Honour did not explore the results which would follow and whether the consequences might be seen as unreasonable or inconvenient (Yango at -415).

It should, of course, be observed that the Full Court decided San Remo prior to Fitzgerald and therefore did not have the benefit of the detailed exposition by the Justices of the High Court of the principles to be applied.
King CJ found that the worker was not obliged to perform the contract because performance would be an illegal act. Likewise, he found that the employer could not insist on performance. To my thinking, this is a somewhat startling finding given that it does not appear from the facts that the employer was aware of the breach by the worker in not having the required visa to allow him to work in excess of 20 hours per week. If his Honour is correct then, as the
Attorney-General submits, the employer could not enforce any express or implied duties on the employee arising out of the contract, such as the duty of confidentiality.

When examining the judgment of King CJ it seems that, with respect to his
Honour, he did not explore and assess all of the necessary considerations when testing for an implied statutory prohibition. In my opinion, and notwithstanding my admiration for Chief Justice King as a highly respected judge, I cannot but conclude that the decision is clearly wrong. As I say, I come to this conclusion with regret. The comity rule is an important one and should be respected. I find myself, like Priestley JA in Fernando, in a position that I think that the reasons for adopting the view I have arrived at are strong enough to justify an exception to the rule.

It follows that it is my opinion that the trial judge's conclusion that the contract of employment was not illegal and void was correct. Nor should the court decline to enforce it on grounds of public policy. In this situation, the argument about resort to the discretion in <case> of the WC Act becomes unnecessary to address, along with the collateral attack on its validity by reason of <case> of the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).
Nevertheless, in deference to the careful submissions of the parties, I propose to briefly advert to these matters.

WHAT IF THE CONTRACT OF SERVICE IS ILLEGAL? 
For the purposes of this appeal and without deciding, I am prepared to accept that reference to a contract of service in the definition of `worker' in <case> of the WC Act refers to a lawful and valid contract of service. The inclusion in the statute of <case> may be persuasive of this conclusion. Section provides: 
If, in any proceedings for the recovery of compensation under this Act, it appears that the contract of service or apprenticeship under which the injured person was engaged at the time when the injury happened was illegal, the matter may be dealt with as if the injured person had at that time been a worker under a valid contract of service or apprenticeship.

It is plain that, but for the argument about the invalidity of <case>, it would apply to the contract of service and allow the discretion to be exercised by the trial judge notwithstanding the illegality. I agree with the submission that <case> applies to contracts which are both illegal by virtue of public policy as well as by reason of an express or implied statutory prohibition.[36] 
Section 24 itself does not abrogate the contractual voidness or its unenforceability. The application of <case> to an illegal contract still leaves it in its status of void and unenforceable. What <case> does, assuming the discretion is exercised in favour of an applicant, is to extend those entitled to compensation to include, as the Attorney submits `those who do work which would but for supervening illegality be pursuant to a contract of service'. It deems the worker, for the purpose of the proceedings for compensation, to have been employed under a valid contract. I reject the submission made on behalf of the appellant that the section is only directed to `minor' illegalities, such as boys selling newspapers. I find no warrant in the section to construe it so narrowly.

Turning to the question of inconsistency, it is the appellant's submission that simultaneous obedience to both of the laws (s 83(2) Migration
Act and <case> WC Act) is impossible. Mr Sharpe submits that there is a direct inconsistency because the State law takes away the full force and effect of the Commonwealth law and trespasses into the field where the
Commonwealth has intended to exhaustively regulate. While Mr Sharpe concedes that the Migration Act does not purport to lay down an exclusive code on the rights of illegal immigrants, he submits that it does cover the field of employment in Australia by the very terms of <case>. For completeness, it may be mentioned that the Commonwealth Attorney-General did not seek to intervene in this appeal in order to make submissions.

To test for inconsistency, one needs to firstly know the ground of the illegality. Here it is either an implied statutory prohibition or as a consequence of the rule of public policy. If it is the latter, then there can be no inconsistency because the contract is rendered illegal as a consequence of a rule of public policy. This is a rule of common law governing contracts and not a law of the Commonwealth.[37] 
Assuming an implied statutory prohibition, is there any inconsistency between <case> of the Migration Act and <case> of the WC Act? As I mentioned above, the appellant contends that there is a direct inconsistency.
In my opinion, there is no direct inconsistency. As expressed earlier in these reasons, <case> does not affect or alter the status of the contract. It is directed to the proceedings in the Compensation Court. It directs the parties and the court as to the way in which they are to treat the application for compensation. It is therefore a provision which is aimed at determining the persons who are to be entitled to receive compensation. By contrast, <case> of the Migration Act is concerned with prohibiting illegal entrants from certain conduct - from engaging in the prohibited activity of working in
Australia without the permission of the Secretary. I accept the submission of the Attorney that simultaneous obedience to both laws is not impeded.

Turning to the covering the field test. What is the field of the
Commonwealth law? Applying the test set out by Mason J in NSW versus Commonwealth (the Hospital Benefits case)[38] it is apparent that the scope and object of the Migration Act is to provide an exclusive code for the entry into, and remaining within, Australia of aliens and immigrants. As conceded by the appellant, it does not attempt to lay down an exclusive code for their rights once within Australia. This is plainly so. The Migration Act does not exhaustively or exclusively seek to cover the field of the rights and obligations of persons coming into Australia. The Act says nothing to the circumstances in which an immigrant, legal or illegal, may be compensated for injury, including the circumstances where people are injured at work. It does not exclusively regulate the rights of illegal entrants who work in breach of s 83(2) of the Act.

The submission of the Attorney that it would not be anticipated that the
Migration Act would interfere with, for example, the operation of the
State's industrial occupational health and safety law, even where employees are illegal entrants in breach of the Commonwealth law, is accepted. It is plain that there is nothing in the Commonwealth statute which reveals an intent by the Legislature of the Commonwealth to regulate (via <case>) the entitlement of a worker to compensation if he be an illegal entrant at the time of injury. It follows that there is no inconsistency.

THE EXERCISE OF THE <case> DISCRETION 
The notice of appeal contains a ground claiming that the trial judge erred in the exercise of the discretion under <case>. It is fair comment to say that the submission in support of the ground was only lightly put.

The trial judge dealt with the discretion thus: ... [illegality] as such would not, per se, be a reason for declining to exercise the discretion. Usually where discretions are granted to exculpate a person from some consequences of his acts one looks to positive reason as why he should be so excused. In this particular situation it is difficult to envisage any matter that positively suggests a reason for the exercise of the discretion. In general, the illegality ignored, the applicant was in no different situation to any other worker in the community. He had suffered injury, consequent incapacity and loss. Prima facie he should get such as the law provides. It seems to me that one approaches the matter almost in the reverse way to that usually adopted and, in effect, says, the illegality ignored, why should this man not have the benefits provided.

It would seem that the refusal to exercise the discretion would be indicated if the court thought it desirable to show disapprobation of the conduct of the applicant. The court could feel that the applicant's conduct was morally reprehensible or displayed some turpitude. As I expressed in Viliami I find it difficult to see anything particularly blameworthy in a citizen of a country less fortunate than ours doing the best he can to support himself, his wife and his five children even in the face of a statutory prohibition.
Perhaps a need to do so could be seen as a positive reason to exercise the discretion - it is all a matter of perspective.[39] 
I share the same view as Cole JA and Sheppard AJA in relation to the last two sentences above. They indicate that the discretion miscarried. No or insufficient weight was given to the breach of the statute. However, the discretion may be re-exercised by this court. I agree with Sheppard AJA that it should be exercised favourably to the respondent.

THE WEEKLY PAYMENTS 
Having found that the respondent was partially incapacitated as a result of his injury, the trial judge proceeded to quantify weekly payments of compensation pursuant to <case> of the WC Act. This involved a finding of a `top figure' of probable earnings, if uninjured, under <case>(a). His Honour said: 
The accepted probable earnings uninjured appear to be $379 or $380 per week.[40] 
This finding is challenged. It is submitted that because of the respondent's status as an illegal immigrant, he cannot be employed in
Australia and, as a result, the figure should be `nil'. Alternatively, there was no evidence to justify his Honour's finding. Mr Sharpe has submitted that the trial judge breached the guidelines contained in the judgment of McHugh JA in Australian Wire Industries Pty Ltd versus Nicholson.41 I do not apprehend this to be so. I cannot appreciate how it can be said that his Honour misunderstood the process under <case> or misapplied the discretion in s 40(1) contrary to Australian Wire Industries.

It is instructive to note that Burke J referred to the `accepted' probable earnings. This is because he was led to believe that the wages schedule of the appellant was agreed. The transcript bears this out.[42] The relevant schedule contains the following information: "Ability to earn at least $379.45"[43] 
The appellant submits that this was a reference to <case>(b) and not s (2)(a) and notes that the schedule referred to `comparable earnings' as `none'. Be that as it may, it seems to me that the trial judge was given to understand that there was no dispute to a figure of between $379 and $380 per week for probable earnings if uninjured. The court should not disturb this situation. That the answer to the s 40(2)(a) inquiry should be `nil' because of the respondent's status as an illegal entrant is rejected for the reasons already given in this judgment. I should add that if I be wrong in relation to his Honour's finding of $380 per week, then the judge would have been entitled to adopt the agreed award rate of $358.10 per week. This would have been unlikely to have led to any different result.

There is no challenge to the remaining exercise under <case> carried out by his Honour. For the record, the judge concluded that the <case>(b) figure was approximately $300 per week and the difference, therefore, $80 per week. In exercising the discretion in <case> his Honour discounted the $80 per week down to $25 per week for the reasons he gave. If I may say so, this seems to be a perfectly sensible and just result.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs.

NONFERRAL PTY LIMITED versus Silivenusi TAUFI 
JUDGMENT 
SHEPPARD AJA: In this matter I have had the advantage of reading the judgment to be delivered by Stein JA. The appeal involves questions of construction of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) and the Migration Act (Cwlth). The relevant provisions of the Compensation Act are to be found in ss.4 and 24 of that Act. Section 3 defines "worker" as any person who has entered into or works under a contract of service or apprenticeship with an employer. It is immaterial whether the contract is expressed or implied or is oral or in writing. There are a number of exclusions from the definition but none of these is relevant for present purposes. Section 24 of the Compensation Act provides that if, in any proceedings for the recovery of compensation under the Act, it appears that the contract of service or apprenticeship under which the injured person was engaged at the time when the injury happened was illegal, the matter may be dealt with as if the injured person had at that time been a worker under a valid contract of service or apprenticeship. 
At the time relevant to the facts of this case, the Migration Act 1914 provided in s.83(2) that, where a person who is an illegal entrant performs any work in Australia without the permission, in writing, of the Secretary to the Department of Immigration, the person commits an offence against the subsection. The section created other offences. By s.83(5) the penalty for an offence was a fine not exceeding $5,000.

Section 83 was headed "Offences in relation to work". It was found in Division of Part 2 of the Act. That Part was entitled "Entry, Presence and
Deportation of Non-Citizens". Division 7 of that Part was entitled "Offences in relation to entry into, and remaining in Australia". The Division provided for offences in relation to the carriage of persons to Australia without documentation, offences in relation to entry into or remaining in Australia, penalties to be imposed on the master, owner, agent and charterer of vessels, stowaways, persons concerned in bringing non-citizens secretly into Australia or harbouring illegal entrants, false papers, the power of the Minister to require illegal entrants to leave Australia, and in s.83, offences in relation to work in which, of course, subs.(2), as the Act then was, appeared. In passing it may be noted that the current Migration Act contains similar, although not identical, provisions. These are to be found in Sub-Division A of
Division 12 of Part 2 of the Act which is entitled "Control of arrival and presence of non-citizens". Sub-Division A of Division 12 is entitled "Offences in relation to entry into and remaining in Australia". Section 235 deals with offences in relation to work. Subsection (3) of that section provides that an unlawful non-citizen who performs work in Australia, whether for reward or otherwise, commits an offence against the subsection. The expressions "lawful non-citizen" and "unlawful non-citizen" are respectively defined in ss.13 and of the current Act. A non-citizen in the migration zone, effectively
Australia, who holds a visa that is in effect is a lawful non-citizen. Section provides that a non-citizen in the migration zone who is not a lawful non- citizen is an unlawful non-citizen. For practical purposes, the expression "unlawful non-citizen" may be compared with "illegal entrant" in the former
Act; cf s.14 of that Act.

Section 83 of the Act, as it was at the time of the events relevant to this matter, and s.235 of the current Act considered in the context of the provisions of the respective Acts in which they are to be found, together with the scope and purpose of those Acts, evince a clear legislative policy that an illegal entrant or an unlawful non-citizen is not permitted to work in this country and that, if any such person does do work, he or she will commit an offence. The provisions need to be read in the context of the Crimes Act which makes general provisions in relation to aiders and abettors (s.5), accessories after the fact (s.6), attempts (s.7), and conspiracy to commit an offence against a law of the Commonwealth (s.86).

One apparent difference between the provisions of the Act as it was at the relevant time and the current Act is the provision in s.83(2) which provides for the Secretary's consent. If that were obtained, no offence would be committed. Nevertheless, the essence of the provision was its bar on an illegal entrant working. That taken in the context of the other provisions of the Act to which I have referred reflected a clear intention to make it unlawful for an illegal entrant to work in this country. The provision about consent was plainly an exception or qualification to this general provision.
There is no occasion to embark on a consideration of the question whether, in a prosecution, it would be for the prosecutor to show that there was no consent or for the accused to establish that there was. All I say is that the fact that consent may overcome the problem in a particular case does not undermine the importance of the prohibition against illegal entrants working.

As the judgment of Stein JA shows, it is common ground in the present matter that the respondent was, at all material times, an illegal entrant, with the consequence that the performance of work by him was unlawful by reason of the provisions of s.83(2) of the Migration Act 1959 which was then in force.
There is no suggestion in the material before us that the respondent had permission to work from the Secretary to the Department.

For the respondent to succeed in an application for workers' compensation under the Compensation Act he must be a "worker". I have earlier referred to the definition of "worker". Importantly, for present purposes, he must be a person who has entered into or works under a contract of service. In the context of this case, the question is raised whether "contract of service" in the definition of "worker" may be a contract of service which is illegal. The answer to this question must, I think, be a negative one because of the provisions of s.24 of the Compensation Act which deals specifically with what is to happen in relation to illegal contracts. The section confers a discretion upon the Compensation Court to deal with the matter as if the injured person had been a worker under a valid contract of service. That provision would have been unnecessary if the Act had been intended to apply to unlawful, as well as lawful, contracts of service.

It is to be observed that a distinction may be drawn between the terminology used in s.24 of the Compensation Act and s.83(2) of the Migration Act. The definition of "worker" in s.4 and the provisions of s.24 of the Compensation
Act are dealing with contracts of service. Section 83(2) of the Migration
Act dealt with the performance of work by an illegal entrant. There was no express reference to a contract of service but it must follow that, where as would almost always be the case, an illegal entrant was employed under a contract of service, the performance of a contract by him would be an unlawful act. The contract could thus have no lawful purpose and must, in my opinion, itself be unlawful.

The first question to be determined is whether s.83(2) of the Migration Act evinces an intention to make illegal contracts entered into for the doing of work by illegal entrants, or whether the Act evinces no intention to make such an activity illegal but does no more than impose a penalty for it.

Problems of this kind have been discussed in numerous authorities. Each case must depend upon the terms of the relevant statute and its own facts and circumstances. The ultimate task is to ascertain the intention of Parliament in a situation where there is rarely any express indication of what that intention is.

This case does not call for an extensive review of the authorities on the question. The problem has been considered recently in two decisions of the
High Court both decided on statutes and facts quite different from those of this case. The two decisions are Nelson versus Nelson <case>; <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 653.] The significance of these authorities and others decided before them emerges, not from a comparison of the statutory or factual situations in those cases with those of the instant case, but in the statements of general principle which are to be found in them.

In St John Shipping Corporation versus Joseph Rank Ltd [[1957] 1 QB 267] Devlin J (as he then was) said (at 288): "A court should not hold that any contract or class of contracts is prohibited by statute unless there is a clear implication, or "necessary inference", as
Parke B put it <case>; [(1836) M&W 149] at 159], that the statute so intended. If a contract has as its whole object the doing of the very act which the statute prohibits, it can be argued that you can hardly make sense of a statute which forbids an act and yet permits to be made a contract to do it; that is a clear implication. But unless you get a clear implication of that sort, I think that a court ought to be very slow to hold that a statute intends to interfere with the rights and remedies given by the ordinary law of contract. Caution in this respect is, I think, especially necessary in these times when so much of commercial life is governed by regulations of one sort or another, which may easily be broken without wicked intent. Persons who deliberately set out to break the law cannot expect to be aided in a court of justice, but it is a different matter when the law is unwittingly broken." 
In Yango Pastoral Company Pty Ltd versus First Chicago Australia Ltd <case>; [(1978) 139 CLR 410], Gibbs ACJ said (at 416) that there had been many cases in which a statute which imposed a penalty on an unlicensed or unqualified person for acting in a particular capacity had been held to prohibit by implication all contracts, express or implied, made by such a person to act in that capacity. In those cases the unsuccessful plaintiff did the very thing which the statute forbad him to do unless he was authorised. Gibbs ACJ then gave a number of examples to which it is unnecessary to refer. Mason J, after referring to a number of authorities, said (at 425) that the cases to which he had referred did no more than demonstrate that the question whether a statute prohibits contracts was always a question of construction turning on the particular provisions, the scope and the purpose of the statute. He also said (at 425-6) that it was one thing to imply a prohibition against particular contracts which were distinctive of a business from a prohibition against the carrying on of that business. It was quite another thing to imply a prohibition against contracts of various kinds, none of which was distinctive of the business which was the subject of the statutory prohibition.

In Yango the statute in question imposed a penalty for contravention of an express prohibition against carrying on the business of banking without a licence or an authority. Both Gibbs ACJ and Mason J referred to the manifest inconvenience that would be caused by invalidating the contracts in question which were entered into by a company carrying on banking business in the course of that business. The inconvenience would have affected, not only the bank itself, but many people innocent of any illegality. In this regard, Mason
J said (at 427-8): "However, it is suggested that this conclusion does not dispose of the issues in the present case. Here the party seeking to enforce the contract is not the innocent party but the party in breach of a statutory prohibition, the contract being made in the course of the carrying on of a business which in the circumstances was prohibited, though the contract was not itself prohibited. The question therefore remains whether the court will allow the plaintiff to enforce the contract. The suggestion is that the court will not do so and that its refusal so to do is dictated by the principle ex turpi causa non oritur actio or by the more specific rule that the court will not enforce the contract at the suit of a party who has entered into a contract with the object of committing an illegal act.

The effect of the principle ex turpi causa non oritur actio was expressed by Fry LJ in Cleaver versus Mutual Reserve Fund Life Association [[1892] 1 QB 147 at 156]: '... no system of jurisprudence can with reason include amongst the rights which it enforces rights directly resulting to the person asserting them from the crime of that person. If no action can arise from fraud, it seems impossible to suppose that it can arise from felony or misdemeanour.'" 
Mason J referred to further authorities and said (at 428) that in the case in question the effect of relieving the defendants from their contractual obligation to repay money to the plaintiff would not be confined to the substantial detriment resulting to the plaintiff. The ability of the plaintiff to meet its obligations to its investors and other creditors depended, in part if not entirely, on its ability to enforce the terms of repayment of its contracts of loan with persons such as the defendants. To hold the contract unenforceable at the suit of the plaintiff would be to provide a windfall gain to the defendants and other borrowers in a similar position and, although indirectly, to impose substantial hardship on those who originally made funds available to the plaintiff. His Honour concluded (at 429) that Parliament had provided a penalty which was a measure of the deterrent intended to operate in respect of non-compliance with the legislation in question. It was not for the
Court to hold that further consequences should flow, consequences which in financial terms could well far exceed the prescribed penalty and could even conceivably lead the plaintiff to insolvency with resultant loss to innocent lenders or investors.

Jacobs J said (at 434) that the contract would only be unenforceable if the
Court declined to enforce it because it was associated with the illegal purpose or activity of carrying on the banking business. This meant that it became necessary to consider public policy. His Honour said that he could not see that any legislative purpose would be served by preventing a corporation in breach of its provisions from recovering moneys lent on mortgage. A primary purpose of the Banking Act (Cwlth) was to protect against loss depositors of money with a corporation which, by accepting that money and safeguarding it and lending it out again, thereby carried on the business of banking. The purpose was defeated if the depositors' money lent out by the corporation was thereby irrevocably lost to the corporation and consequently to the depositors. The avoidance of the contract would cause grave injury to depositors, particularly those who had deposited their money without the knowledge that the corporation had no authority to carry on the banking business. His Honour found this a sufficient reason of public policy to decline to apply any rule of public policy that a contract made in association with an illegal purpose could not be sued upon. Murphy J reached a similar conclusion (at 436), as did Aicken J (at 436).

It is apparent from a reading of the decisions in St John Shipping and
Yango that public inconvenience or inconvenience suffered by innocent parties played a substantial part in the Court's conclusion that the illegality should not lead to the invalidity of the contracts in question in those cases. I shall deal with inconvenience in a moment. Before I do so, I emphasise that this case differs in outcome in my opinion both from St John
Shipping and Yango because of the very clear breach of the law which the respondent's employment involved. As mentioned, the relevant provision of the
Migration Act 1992 forbad, not the contract, although that was a consequence, but the performance of work. The respondent did carry out work contrary to the provisions of s.83(2) of the Migration Act and thus acted illegally. To pick up the words of Devlin J in St John Shipping, the contract had the object of doing the very act which the statute prohibited. In the language of Gibbs ACJ in Yango this is a case where the statute imposed a penalty upon an unqualified person (an illegal entrant) from acting in a particular capacity, namely engaging in work in Australia. Thus the respondent seeks to benefit from a clear breach of the law. That, in my opinion, is a major factor to be taken into account.

The more recent decision of the High Court in Fitzgerald concerned the construction and operation of the Water Act (NT). Section 56(1) of that Act prohibited a person unless authorised by the Act from causing, suffering or permitting a bore to be drilled, constructed or dealt with in other specified ways. Penalties were imposed in the event of default. Section 57 empowered the controller to grant a permit to carry out an operation referred to in s.56.
The appellant owned land in the Northern Territory which he proposed to develop in subdivision. A supply of bore water at a nominated flow was a prerequisite to subdivision approval. The appellant sought no permit under s.57 but contracted with the respondent, which held a drilling licence under the Act. The respondent caused seven bores to be drilled on the appellant's land, three of which produced water. A dispute as to the amount payable under the contract was determined by the Local Court at Darwin. A defence of illegality was raised and it was held that the contract was an illegal one.
There was a successful appeal to the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory and the appeal to the High Court from that decision was dismissed. In the course of their joint judgment, Dawson and Toohey JJ said, after referring to
St John Shipping, (at 655): "In this case, the performance of the drilling contract resulted in the commission of an offence by the owner, but the manner of performance by the driller did not turn it into a contract which was forbidden by the 
Act. As we have seen, the Act contemplated drilling by a licensed driller. In other words, s.56 of the Act was intended to penalise conduct - in this case the conduct of the owner in failing to obtain a permit - and not to prohibit contracts." 
Here the statute contemplates that workers, in order to be entitled to the benefits provided for by the Act, will be employed under lawful contracts. If the contracts are not lawful, the worker has no remedy unless he can successfully invoke the exercise of the discretion provided for in s.24 of the
Compensation Act.

In the course of their joint judgment in Fitzgerald, McHugh and Gummow JJ said (at 659): "The question then becomes whether, as a matter of public policy, the court should decline to enforce the contract because of its association with the illegal activity of the owner in, if not causing, then at least suffering or permitting the construction and drilling of bores, within the meaning of s.56(1), without the grant to the owner of permits pursuant to s.57. The refusal of the courts in such a case to regard the contract as enforceable stems not from express or implied legislative prohibition but from the policy of the law, commonly called public policy. Regard is to be had primarily to the scope and purpose of the statute to consider whether the legislative purpose will be fulfilled without regarding the contract as void and unenforceable." 
They made reference both to Yango and Nelson. Because of the importance attached to the matter of inconvenience in Yango, I should deal with it next.

It is difficult to conclude that the holding of the contract in this case to be invalid by reason of the contravention of the Act would work the sort of inconvenience, public or private, which is referred to either in St John
Shipping or in Yango. I have endeavoured to think of circumstances in which that sort of inconvenience might occur. In undertaking that exercise, I have assumed - there is no evidence on the point - that the employer was innocent of the breach of the Act which was involved. If it were not, questions of criminal responsibility pursuant to s.5 or s.86 of the Crimes Act 1984 might arise.

It needs to be remembered that the conduct engaged in by the respondent rendered him immediately liable to deportation. He was in fact deported soon after it was discovered he was working contrary to the provisions of s.83(2).
So any consideration based upon inconvenience to the employer as a consequence of losing the services of the employee cannot really have any weight because the operation of the Act in relation to deportation will, in any event, prevent the employee from continuing in his employment. That would be so whether the employee, as in this case, were employed in a comparatively menial task or in a more responsible one. I have also thought of cases where the employee's wrongful act might render the employer vicariously liable for damages to a third party, whether another employee or a stranger. But I cannot think that that situation would be affected by the invalidation of the contract. The respondent would still be the agent of the employer for this purpose.

Whatever the importance of inconvenience may be - and it may be very important in some cases - the central matter to be considered is public policy. In
Nelson Deane and Gummow JJ, after referring to Vita Food Products Inc v
Unus Shipping Co Ltd [[1939] AC 277] at 293, and to
Yango, said (at 552) that those authorities suggested the drawing of a distinction between three categories of case. The third of these categories was contracts and trusts not directly contrary to the provisions of the statute by reason of any express or implied prohibition in the statute but which are "associated with or in furtherance of illegal purposes". The phrase, as the Judges acknowledge, was that of Jacobs J in Yango (at 432). Deane and
Gummow JJ continued (at 552): "Examples in the third category include cases where the mode of performance adopted by the party carrying out the contract contravenes statute, although the contract was capable for performance without such contravention.

In this last class of case, the courts act not in response to a direct legislative prohibition but, as it is said, from "the policy of the law". The finding of such policy involves consideration of the scope and purpose of the particular statute. The formulation of the appropriate public policy in this class of case may more readily accommodate equitable doctrines and remedies and restitutionary money claims than is possible where the making of the contract offends an express or implied statutory prohibition." 
Their Honours referred to a number of authorities in relation to what they said. I have not referred to these in the quotation.

The Migration Act, dealing as it does with the circumstances in which persons who are not Australian citizens may enter and remain in Australia and, if they remain, the conditions (if any) upon which they may do so is of substantial public importance. The operation of the Act is of national importance because it involves the protection and overall wellbeing of the
Australian community. In Salemi versus MacKellar <case>; [(1977) 137 CLR 396] Barwick CJ said (at 402), "The Parliament, by its legislation [the Migration Act], has determined who shall fill that description [referring to prohibited immigrants]. The Parliament in this legislation is dealing with a national interest of paramount importance, namely, the composition of the nation, determining who shall enter and who shall stay".
And, I would add, if those who enter stay, the conditions upon which they may remain. Salemi itself may have been overtaken by developments in the general law, amendments to the legislation and treaties into which Australia has since entered. But the critical public importance of migration legislation emphasised by Barwick CJ remains as true now as it was when he wrote what he did. The Act evinces a clear intention forbidding illegal entrants to work. A penalty is provided for as is deportation. But in order to give effect to its policy and purpose it is my opinion that the Court is required to hold invalid any contract pursuant to which work is unlawfully done by an illegal entrant.

The view which I have formed is similar to that formed by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia in The WorkCover Corporation (San Remo
Macaroni Co Pty Ltd) versus Liang Da Ping (unreported, Supreme Court of South
Australia, 11 February 1994). The principal judgment was delivered by King CJ.
The case is not distinguishable from the present except in relation to s.24 of the Compensation Act which had no counterpart in the South Australian legislation. In the course of his judgment, King CJ said (at 4-5): "The purported contract of service between the respondent and San Remo could not be lawfully performed by the respondent. He was not obliged to perform it, because performance would have been an illegal act, and San Remo could not insist on performance for the same reason. The statute discloses an intention of the legislature to prohibit such performance in the public interest. That being so the implication that the contract itself is prohibited and void, seems plain.

If that be so, the respondent, as an illegal migrant who was not working under a valid contract of service, was not a worker to whom the entitlements under the [Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/wraca400/) apply and his relationship with San Remo was not "employment" under the Act for the purpose of attracting entitlement to compensation. In New South Wales, the entitlement of a person working under an illegal contract, has been dealt with in s.24 of the Workers Compensation Act 1987. Counsel referred us to s.30(7) of the
South Australian Act. The subsection, however, is concerned with the issue whether an injury occurs in the course of the employment and has no bearing on whether a purported contract of service is void for illegality. I can find nothing in the Act to suggest that an illegal migrant who is not entitled to work in this country but who works under a purported contract which is void for illegality, is entitled to the benefits of workers compensation in respect of an injury sustained while he is engaged in his unlawful activity." 
I respectfully agree with what the Chief Justice has said.

My conclusion is that the provisions of s.83(2) of the Migration Act rendered the contract of service invalid. If it were not for the presence of s.24 in the Compensation Act, that would be the end of the matter. But s.24 needs now to be considered. The section was considered by the primary Judge.
The first question to be considered is whether or not the section is invalid because of the operation of [s.109](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s109.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).
This is a matter which has been dealt with by Stein JA. I agree with what he has said about it and I have no need to add to the reasons given by him for his conclusion in that regard. In my opinion, there is no reason for concluding that [s.24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s24.html) in some way which I do not understand could be inconsistent with s.83(2) of the
Migration Act.

The primary Judge concluded that s.83(2) did not render the contract of service invalid. It was unnecessary, therefore, for him to come to the exercise of discretion under s.24. Nevertheless, he indicated the way he would have dealt with the matter if he had taken a different view on the question of illegality and invalidity. He said: "In general, the illegality ignored, the applicant was in no different situation to any other worker in the community. He had suffered injury, consequent incapacity and loss. Prima facie he should get such as the law provides. It seems to me that one approaches the matter almost in the reverse way to that usually adopted and, in effect, says, the illegality ignored, why should this man not have the benefits provided.

It would seem that the refusal to exercise the discretion would be indicated if the court thought it desirable to show disapprobation of the conduct of the applicant. The court could feel that the applicant's conduct was morally reprehensible or displayed some turpitude. As I expressed in Viliami I find it difficult to see anything particularly blameworthy in a citizen of a country less fortunate than ours doing the best he can to support himself, his wife and his five children even in the face of a statutory prohibition.
Perhaps a need to do so could be seen as a positive reason to exercise the discretion - it is all a matter of perspective.

The discretion vested by the section has been the subject of discussion in the judgments of Geraghty and Egan JJ referred to above and I adopt that discussion which seems quite consonant with my own views.

If the contract was tainted by illegality such that this applicant was not a worker under a valid contract of service I would exercise the discretion under section 24 to deal with the matter as thought it were otherwise." 
The judgment in Viliami is a reference to the judgment in Viliami Mau v
Henderson's Federal Springworks Pty Ltd (1993) 9 CCNSWR 453. The references to the decisions of Geraghty J and Egan J are respectively references to
Fakhraddine Belhad Jammar versus Bullion Engineering Pty Ltd and Paul Spencer v
Ultra Clean Services Pty Ltd, both unreported decisions of the Compensation
Court in which judgments were delivered on 10 February 1994 and 22 December respectively.

There are sometimes problems about an appellate court treating as an actual exercise of the discretion conferred on a primary judge a purported exercise of it in a case where the exercise has not been the basis upon which the matter has been decided. Reference may be made to Wade versus Burns <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 537] and to the decision of Jeffrey J in Bradley versus Fitzmaurice [1974] NSWLR 286. Both cases were concerned with mandamus or relief in the nature of mandamus. No submission based on the principles underlying these authorities was made to us. It may be that they are applicable only in cases where prerogative relief is sought. I express no opinion on the matter because, in the view I take of it, the purported exercise of discretion by the learned primary Judge in any event miscarried.

The reason I think that his Honour's purported exercise of discretion miscarried arises from one of the paragraphs quoted from his Honour's judgment. The passage in question is the second paragraph of the passage. He there said that it would seem that the refusal to exercise the discretion would be indicated if the Court thought it desirable to show disapprobation of the conduct of the applicant. The Court could feel that the applicant's conduct was morally reprehensible or displayed some turpitude. His Honour said that he found it difficult to see anything particularly blameworthy in a citizen of a country less fortunate than ours doing the best he could to support himself, his wife and his five children, even in the face of a statutory prohibition. He continued by saying that perhaps a need to do so could be seen as a positive reason to exercise the discretion. It was all a matter of perspective.

In what I am about to say I do not wish to be thought to be unsympathetic to the respondent's problems. His problems are not uncommon in this community or, indeed, in other countries whose economies are stronger than those of the
Pacific Islands. But one has to have regard to the statute which is in question. It reflects a legislative policy prohibiting illegal entrants or unlawful non-citizens from working without consent of the appropriate authority. The penalty imposed for a breach is not a nominal one; a penalty of $5,000 is not insubstantial. Sympathy for an applicant for compensation who has a predicament such as that in which the respondent here found himself is one thing. But the obligation of the Court is to give effect to legislative intention. It is not to undermine the policy reflected in a statute designed to protect the Australian community and to provide for an ordered system of immigration into this country. I would agree that there may be other cases which would reflect substantial moral turpitude. Such cases might involve an employer deliberately seeking out illegal entrants for employment and employing them, not only in breach of the Migration Act, but also in breach of acts and regulations designed for the protection of employees by paying them under award wages and by failing to provide them with safe means of carrying out their work. There have been such cases and they have resulted in prosecutions for conspiracy leading to very severe penalties. This is not a case of that kind. As mentioned, there is no evidence to suggest that the employer here was aware of the fact that the respondent was not entitled to work in this country.

It would have been possible for his Honour to take the course which he did without so clearly understating the seriousness of the breach of the
Migration Act which had occurred and its importance in the protection of
Australian citizens. But that was not his approach and I think what he said reflects an error of principle. The matter may be put in a number of ways. My preferred approach is to say that his Honour gave, either no weight at all, or quite inadequate weight, to a relevant factor, namely that there had been a breach of a significant statutory provision which had led him to approach the exercise of discretion in an erroneous way. The discretion having miscarried, it will have to be exercised again.

The next question is whether this Court may itself exercise the discretion or whether the matter must go back to the Compensation Court. The application for compensation was filed in the Compensation Court on 3 August 1994. The hearing commenced on 10 July 1995 and concluded after an adjournment on 24 October
His Honour's reasons for judgment were delivered on 27 October 1995 and the Court's award bears that date.

The matter is governed by s.32 of the Compensation Court Act which, at the relevant time, provided that on an appeal to this Court, the Court was empowered to remit the matter to the Compensation Court in accordance with the decision of the Court of Appeal "and may make such other order in relation to the appeal as the Court of Appeal sees fit". Section 32 was amended by s.5 and
Schedule 3 of the WorkCover Legislation Amendment Act 1995 . The amendment restricted appeals to points of law and to questions as to the admission or rejection of evidence. The amending Act was assented to on 20 December 1995.
The notice of appeal to this Court had been filed on 21 November 1995. The relevant provisions of Schedule 3 were proclaimed to take effect on 1 February
In the circumstances, this appeal is governed by the provisions of s.32 of the Compensation Act in the form in which it was prior to the coming into force of the 1995 amending Act. It follows that this Court may, in the circumstances of this case, exercise the discretion conferred by s.24 of the
Compensation Act.

A number of factors need to be considered. Those I have taken into account are as follows: The presence of s.24 in the Compensation Act is an indication that the legislature foresaw that there might be cases where it would be appropriate to overlook an illegality.
 For reasons given, the breach of the Act was serious involving as it did the contravention of an important provision designed for sound policy reasons to restrict and control employment of illegal entrants.
 On his Honour's findings the respondent was endeavouring to improve his ability to maintain his family in circumstances where he came from a country where wages were low and employment scarce. There are of course two sides to this coin.
Working in such circumstances is the very matter which the Migration Act restricts.
 It seems clear that the respondent's breach of the Act was not intended by him to disadvantage anyone else. He procured the employment and he engaged in it.
 He was injured in the course of that employment and has suffered consequential loss.
 The enterprise in which he was employed was not itself unlawful. Carrying out the work which he did was illegal, but his employer was engaged in a lawful business.
 So far as the evidence discloses, the employer was not aware of the respondent's breach of the Migration Act. This is not a case of aiding and abetting let alone conspiracy.
 The respondent having been deported, the amount of compensation, if he is entitled to recover it, will be substantially less than would have been the case had he remained here.

No other factors occur to me. No others except that to be found in his
Honour's offending statement were mentioned by him nor by counsel in argument.
Having considered the matter, I have reached the conclusion that this is a case in which it has been established that the discretion should be exercised favourably to the respondent.

I would add, however, that it ought not to be thought that the matters I have specified provide a list of guidelines for future cases. Each case will depend on its own facts and circumstances and on the view of those facts and circumstances considered in the context of the instant case which is taken by the Judge exercising the discretion.

One other matter which was the subject of argument and which has been dealt with by Stein JA concerned the amount of his Honour's award. I am in agreement with what Stein JA has said about this and do not wish to add anything to his reasons for the views which he has expressed.

In the result, but for reasons different from those of the other members of the Court, I agree that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 [1] The Workcover Corporation (San Remo Macaroni Co. Pty Ltd) versus Da Ping , Full Court of South Australia, 30 March 1994.
 <case>; [(1978) 139 CLR 410.] [4] Nelson & Anor versus Nelson & Ors <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 538]; Fitzgerald versus F J Leonhardt Pty Ltd <case>; [(1978) 139 CLR 410] at 413; Fitzgerald versus F J Leonhardt Pty Ltd [(1997) 71 AJR ]
per Dawson and Toohey, at 658 per McHugh and Gummow JJ, at 668-9 per Kirby J.
 [6](1997) 71 ALJR at 654-5.
 <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 538] at 613.
 [8] (1997) 71 ALJR at 673.
 [9] (9197) 71 ALJR at 661.
 [10] (1995) 185 CLR at 590.
 [11] The award is set forth at AB 80 [12] The section was amended by the Migration Reform Act, 1992 but this did not commence until 1 November 1993 [13] <case> Migration Act, 1958 [14] Unreported, Full Court of South Australia, 30 March 1994 <case>; <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 653] [20] at 655 [21] at 658 [22] PT Ltd versus Maradona Pty Ltd [(1992) 25 NSWLR 643] but cf
Hurst versus Vestcorp Ltd infra [23] Archbolds (Freightage) Ltd versus S Spanglett Ltd [[1961] 1 QB 374] at 387 [24] For example, Hayes versus Cable (1962) 62 SR 1 <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 538] at 613 [29] See also Kirby J in Fitzgerald at 669 and Mason P in Sinanian versus EKS
Carpentry Pty Ltd & Anor (Unreported, NSW Court of Appeal, 5 September at 8-12)  <case>; <case> ER 1120 at ]
 [31] See Yango at 414, St John Shipping at 287 and Shaw versus Groom <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 302] at 324 [39] See AB 76 P-X [40] AB 71 S Unreported, Court of Appeal, 4 February 1985 [42] AB 19-20 [43] AB 67 * * * 
