

Telado P/L versus Vincent and Anor [1996] NSWSC 286 (19 July 1996) 
Telado Pty. Limited v. Vincent & Anor /91; CD50632/90 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Priestley JA, Sheller JA, Powell JA 
CATCHWORDS: Landlord and Tenant - Lease - Instrument requiring registration - Guarantee of lessee's obligations "under this lease" - Clause deeming instrument "an agreement under seal for granting such lease" and deeming parties bound "as if this document were registered" - Tenant enters into possession - Payment of rent - Instrument not registered - Default in payment of rent - Instrument lodged for registration - Tenant abandons premises - Landlord re-enters - Landlord relets premises - Instrument registered - Landlord sues guarantors for damages in respect of shortfall in rent on reletting - Whether guarantors liable.

Ex Tempore/Reserved: Reserved 
Allowed/Dismissed: Allowed 
PRIESTLEY JA: The facts and issues in this appeal are set out in the reasons of Powell JA which I have had the benefit of reading in draft. I agree with Powell JA that the appellant should succeed on the basis of Powell JA's construction of clauses 10 and 11 of the Memorandum of Lease. On that construction the present case is distinguishable from Chan versus Cresdon Pty Limited <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 242], and the respondents clearly were bound to meet the obligations of Penrado Pty Limited which they had agreed to guarantee.

I also note what Powell JA says about the procedural state in which the appeal reached this court, and the remedial orders he proposes.

I agree with both the procedural and substantive orders proposed by Powell JA.
 
SHELLER JA: I agree with Powell JA.
 
POWELL JA: The question which arises for consideration on the present appeal from a Judgment delivered by Cole J (as his Honour then was) on 1 May 1991 in proceedings which had been brought by the Appellant seeking to recover from the Respondents as Guarantors damages for the failure by a company known as Penrado Pty. Limited ("Penrado") to comply with the terms of a form of Memorandum of Lease into which it had entered on 29 June 1990, is whether, by reason of the provisions of clause 10 of the Memorandum of Lease, which clause I will set out in extenso below, the Respondents were liable to the Appellant under the Guarantee notwithstanding that at the time of Penrado's vacating the premises the subject of the Memorandum of Lease and of the Appellant's re-entry into those premises, the form of Memorandum of Lease which was for a term of 5 years had not been registered pursuant to the provisions of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/).

The facts which give rise to that question fall within a short compass. They are as I set out below.

At all material times, the Appellant was registered as the proprietor of the lands comprised within Certificates of Title Registered Volume 8040 Folio 6,
Volume 9808 Folio 65 and Volume 15464 Folio 106, upon which lands appears to have been erected a commercial building known as 396-404 Victoria Ave.,
Chatswood. That building appears to have had within it a number of retail shops of which, for present purposes, one need note only that known as Shop 4 ("the subject premises").

Although it is not clear that this was so, the probability is that, in about
December 1989, Penrado entered into occupation of the subject premises pursuant to an oral agreement for a lease of the subject premises for a term of 5 years commencing in December 1989. Whether that be so or not, it is the fact that the Appellant, Penrado, and the Respondents did execute the form of
Memorandum of Lease to which I have earlier referred, which Memorandum of
Lease bears date 29 June 1990, and by which Memorandum of Lease the Appellant leased the subject premises to Penrado for a term of 5 years commencing 10
December 1989 and terminating on 9 December 1994. The form of Memorandum of
Lease provided for Penrado to pay an annual rental of $143,412.00, payable calendar monthly in advance by monthly instalments of $11,951.00 (clause 23), subject to variation in the second and subsequent years (clause 5), together with a proportion of the outgoings (as defined in clause 21). The form of
Memorandum of Lease also provided for re-entry on the part of the Appellant in the event of default on the part of Penrado, default including non payment of rent for 14 days after the due date and the taking of any steps for the winding-up of Penrado.

The form of Memorandum of Lease also contained the following two clauses: - "DEEMED AGREEMENT UNDER SEAL That this document shall be deemed an agreement under seal for the granting of such a lease as is hereby purported to be granted and the covenants and conditions herein contained shall be deemed to bind the parties in the same manner as if THIS DOCUMENT WERE REGISTERED NOTWITHSTANDING THAT IT MAY BE held that no estate passed hereunder PROVIDED that should the Lessee require registration the Lessor will procure the same but any necessary survey and the registration of such lease and the obtaining of all necessary consents thereto shall be at the cost or expense of the Lessee.
 
GUARANTEE.
 . The Lessor agrees to grant this lease at the request (testified by his/their execution hereof of TERRENCE PATRICK O'NEILL AND CLIFTON GEORGE VINCENT (hereinafter called the Guarantor). In consideration of the Lessor at the request of the Guarantor entering into this lease the said Guarantor does hereby guarantee to the Lessor the due and punctual performance by the Lessee of its several obligations and duties on its part to be observed and fulfilled and performed pursuant to the terms of this lease and in particular but without limiting the generality of the guarantee hereby given IT IS AGREED that: 
In the event of default by the Lessee in payment of any moneys due and payable by it pursuant to this lease then as regards such moneys the Guarantor shall be deemed to become a principal debtor to the Lessor and the Guarantor shall forthwith upon the occurrence of such default pay such moneys to the Lessor.
 
The guarantee hereby granted shall be deemed to extend to all costs, fees, expenses and other moneys which the Lessor may incur in enforcing or attempting to enforce against the Lessee the terms of this lease and the observance and performance by the Lessee of its several obligations and duties or any of them to be observed fulfilled or performed pursuant to this lease or in the recovery or attempted recovery from the Lessee of any monies which may be payable by the Lessee pursuant to this lease.
 
The guarantee hereby granted shall be deemed to extend to and cover the payment to the Lessor of all moneys by way of damages or compensation inter alia for any breach or non-observance (should such breach or non-observance occur) by the Lessee of the terms of this lease.
 
Any payment made to the Lessor and later avoided by any statutory provision shall be deemed not to have discharged the Guarantor's liability hereunder and in the event of any such payment being so avoided the parties hereto are to be restored to the right which each respectively would have had if the payments so avoided had not been made.
 
Where there is more than one guarantor bound by the provisions hereof then such Guarantors shall be liable hereunder both jointly and severally.
 
It is expressly agreed and declared that it is the intention of the parties that this shall be a continuing guarantee and it shall not be affected or abrogated by the granting of any time credit or any other indulgence whatever by the Lessor to the Lessee or to the Guarantor or to any one Guarantor when there is more than one, it also being the intention of the parties and it is hereby so agreed that this guarantee shall be binding and absolute in all and any circumstances." 
For whatever relevance it might have, one observes that, although each of the Respondents executed the Form of Memorandum of Lease, the form of attestation clause was not one appropriate to a Deed (Conveyancing Act 1919, s.38) but, rather, was one appropriate to an agreement under hand. 
On 27 August 1990, this Court ordered that one Gavin Thomas be appointed
Liquidator of Penrado provisionally. Although the material before the Court does not establish it to have been so, one can but assume that, at some time thereafter, this Court ordered that Penrado be wound-up.

Although the material before the Court does not establish that it was so, one can but assume, that prior to the appointment of Mr. Thomas as provisional
Liquidator, rent in respect of the subject premises was up to date, but that, following the appointment of Mr. Thomas, no further rent was paid to the
Appellant in respect of the subject premises.

Although it would appear that, prior to the appointment of Mr. Thomas, no action had been taken by, or on behalf of, the Appellant to have the
Memorandum of Lease registered, it appears that, on 20 September 1990, the
Memorandum of Lease was lodged at the Land Titles Office with a view to registration.

On 2 October 1990, Penrado vacated the subject premises, following which the
Appellant re-let the premises to one Lindsay Lowe for a term commencing 3
October 1990 and terminating on 9 December 1994. In this regard it should be noted that, in the Summary of Plaintiff's Contentions, which was filed on behalf of the Appellant in these proceedings, there appears the following: - "5. On 2 October 1990 Penrado abandoned the premises thereby repudiating the first Lease.
 . On 3 October 1990 the Plaintiff: accepted the repudiation; and in mitigation of its damages re-let the premises to one Lindsay Lowe (`the second Lease') at a rental as particularised in the Schedule hereto.
 . The Plaintiff has (sic) and will suffer loss and damage, namely: the difference in respect of the period from 3 October 1990 to 9 December 1994 between the amount payable to it under the first Lease and the amount payable to it under the second Lease; and the fees and costs of re-letting the premises to Lindsay Lowe." 
The form of Memorandum of Lease the subject of these proceedings is said to have been registered on 16 October 1990. 
Although it would appear that there had earlier been commenced in the District
Court proceedings in which the Appellant sought to recover from the
Respondents damages based upon the Guarantee which it sought to raise in these proceedings, these proceedings were commenced on 18 October 1990 when there was filed on behalf of the Appellant the Summons herein, in which Summons the
Appellant sought (inter alia): - "1. Damages in the amount of $196,453.41.
 ..........
 . An order that proceedings No. 14098 of 1990 between the present Plaintiff as Plaintiff and the present Defendants as Defendants in the District Court of New South Wales at Sydney be removed into this Court and consolidated with these proceedings." 
Points of Defence and Cross-Claim were filed on behalf of the First Respondent on 30 November 1990. Although a number of grounds of defence were sought to be raised, it is sufficient for present purposes to record that, in his Points of Defence, the First Respondent charged the non-registration of the Memorandum of Lease and asserted that, in consequence, no estate had been granted to Penrado and that he was not liable under any Guarantee, and, further, that the Appellant, by re-entering and re-letting the subject premises, had determined any estate that Penrado might have had. In his Cross-Claim, the First Respondent sought to recover damages from his former solicitors for their alleged professional negligence in advising him, and, as well, claimed against the Second Respondent contribution to any sum for which he the First Respondent might be held liable to the Appellant.

Although the Second Respondent, who was represented on the hearing before Cole
J, filed Points of Defence, for reasons which will shortly become apparent, the appeal papers do not contain a copy of any Points of Defence which may have been filed on his behalf - however, it seems (Appeal Book p.41) that those Points of Defence do not seek to raise, as a ground of defence, the non- registration of the Memorandum of Lease, a fact which was dealt with by Cole J after he had delivered Judgment (Appeal Book p.42).

Thereafter, on 22 March 1991, Rogers CJ Comm Div ordered that there be tried as a preliminary matter the correctness of the contentions raised by the First
Respondent in paragraphs 2 and 5 of his Points of Defence, those contentions being that, by virtue of the fact that the Memorandum of Lease was not registered, no legal leasehold estate was conferred upon Penrado, and that, in consequence, the provisions of clause 11 of the Lease did not bind the
Respondents.

The trial of that preliminary issue took place before Cole J on 26 April 1991, the only evidence which was tendered being the Lease itself (Appeal Book p.17). At the trial, the Appellant sought to support its claim upon two grounds: - that, on the proper construction of clauses 10 and 11 of the form of
Memorandum of Lease, the phrase "this lease" where appearing in clause 11, was to be read as "this instrument" or "this form of Memorandum of Lease" rather than as "the legal estate in the land intended to be granted by this instrument", or "this instrument in its character as a lease", it following, so the submission ran, that the decision of the High Court in Chan v.
Cresdon Pty. Limited 1 had no relevance to the present case; alternatively, that, although the registration of the Memorandum of Lease could not, and did not, in law, operate retrospectively to grant a legal estate in the subject premises as from 10 December 1989, (see Bradshaw v.
Pawley 2; Cadogan v. Dimovic 3), the fact of registration of the
Memorandum of Lease gave it the effect of a deed containing covenants on the part of Penrado to pay rent for a period of 5 years as from 1 December 1989 and containing covenants on the part of the Respondents guaranteeing the performance by Penrado of its covenants under the Memorandum of Lease, and, thus, provided a basis upon which the Appellant could sue the Respondents, at law, to recover what were, in effect, damages for Penrado's breach of covenant while the First Respondent - whose submissions were adopted by the Second
Respondent (Appeal Book p.42) - sought to contest that he was liable under clause 11 of the Memorandum of Lease upon three grounds: - that clause 10 of the Memorandum of Lease was apt to apply only to a case in which the term intended to be granted was a term of 3 years or less, and, thus, did not have any relevance to clause 11 of the Memorandum of Lease, it following that clause 11 of the Memorandum of Lease was to be construed in accordance with the decision of the High Court in Chan v. Cresdon Pty.
Limited 4; alternatively, that upon the proper construction of clauses 10 and 11 of the Memorandum of Lease, the phrase "under this lease" and the phrase "this lease", where appearing in clause 11, were to be read as referring to the legal estate intended to be granted by the Memorandum of Lease rather than to the Memorandum of Lease as a document; that the fact that the Memorandum of Lease was later registered did not operate so as retrospectively to convert into breaches by Penrado of the covenants contained in the form of Memorandum of Lease, its failure to pay rent and its vacating the premises.

In the Judgment which he was to deliver on 1 May 1991, Cole J, while rejecting the First Respondent's contention that clause 10 operated only in respect of leases for a term of less than 3 years, nonetheless held that the guarantee applied only to those of Penrado's obligations which would arise as the result of the grant of the legal estate in the subject premises and not to any obligations arising out of an agreement for lease, or an equitable estate in the subject premises arising from an agreement for lease, or a tenancy at will arising out of an agreement for lease, coupled with entry and payment of rent.

Thereafter, on 3 May 1991, Cole J ordered that each of the proceedings and the
Cross-Claim be dismissed and that the Appellant pay the costs of each of the
Respondents of the proceedings, the costs of the First Respondent to include the costs which the First Respondent was ordered to pay to his former solicitors, the Second Cross-Defendants.

Thereafter, on 17 May 1991, there was filed on behalf of the Appellant a
Notice of Appeal in which the Appellant sought to raise the following grounds of appeal: - "1. His Honour erred in upholding paragraphs 2 and 5 of the Statement of Defence of the First Defendant.
 . His Honour wrongly construed the true effect at law of clauses 10 and 11 of the lease dated 29 June 1990 executed by the Appellant and the First and Second Respondents (Ex. A).
 . His Honour erred in failing to distinguish the legal effect of clause 11 in Ex. A from the clause contained in the lease considered by the High Court of Australia in Chan & Anor. v. Cresdan Pty. Limited <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 242.] and sought: - . A declaration that paragraph 5 of the First Defendant's Statement of Defence does not disclose a defence to the Plaintiff's Summons; . Direct that the proceedings be referred back to the trial Judge to hear and determine the balance of the First and Second Defendants' Statements of Defence." 
Although they do not provide an explanation for the delay which occurred prior to the appeal being brought on for hearing, several events which occurred after 3 May 1991 should be noted, since they bear upon the orders which should be made by this Court whatever be the outcome of this appeal. Those events, according to information provided to the Court both on, and since, the hearing of the appeal, were: - that, on 11 March 1992, a sequestration order was made in respect of the estate of the Second Respondent, Mr. O'Neill, in consequence of which: - 
Mr. O'Neill's property vested forthwith in the Official Trustee in
Bankruptcy (Bankruptcy Act 1966 s.58(1)(a)); except with the leave of a Court having jurisdiction in bankruptcy - and this Court has such jurisdiction (Bankruptcy Act 1966 s.27(1)(b)) - it was not competent for any creditor to commence any legal proceeding in respect of a provable debt or to take any fresh step in such a proceeding (Bankruptcy Act s.58(3)); all debts and liabilities, present or future, certain or contingent, to which Mr. O'Neill was subject at the date of bankruptcy were provable in his bankruptcy (Bankruptcy Act 1966 s.82(1)); if Mr. O'Neill were to die before he were discharged from bankruptcy, the proceedings in bankruptcy would, unless the Court otherwise directed, be continue so far as they were capable of being continued as if he were alive (Bankruptcy Act 1966 s.63); if he had not earlier died, then, unless there had earlier been an objection to his discharge from bankruptcy (Bankruptcy Act 1966 s.149A) Mr.
O'Neill would be discharged from bankruptcy at the expiration of 3 years from the date on which he filed his Statement of Affairs (Bankruptcy Act 1966 s.149(1), (4)); that, on 16 March 1992, Mr. O'Neill's former solicitor ceased to act on his behalf; that, apparently because the Short Minutes of the Orders which Cole J made on 3 May 1991 could not be found, the proceedings were listed before his
Honour on 22 April 1992 for the purpose of having his Honour note an agreement between the parties that a fresh form of Short Minutes of Order (Appeal Book p.79) which was then filed in Court constituted the substance of the Short
Minutes which had been filed in Court on 3 May 1991; that, on 16 April 1992, the Australian Government Solicitor, writing on behalf of the Official Trustee in Bankruptcy, as Trustee of Mr. O'Neill's bankrupt estate, wrote to the Appellant's solicitors informing them that, if what was proposed to be done on 22 April 1992 constituted the taking of a "fresh step" in terms of [s.58(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s58.html) of the [Bankruptcy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/), the
Official Trustee in Bankruptcy did not oppose the grant of leave for that step to be taken. Whether a formal order granting that leave was ever made by the
Federal Court of Australia or by Cole J does not appear; that, at some time after 11 March 1992, Mr. O'Neill died - it is believed that no grant of Probate of any Will, or of Letters of Administration of the
Estate, of Mr. O'Neill has been sought or granted.

Despite the matters to which I have just referred, no application had been made to have the record amended prior to the appeal being brought on for hearing.

When the appeal was called on for hearing, Mr. P.M. Jacobson Q.C. appeared with Mr. R.E. Dubler for the Appellant while Mr. R.E. Montgomery appeared for the First Respondent. It was at that time when the Court was made aware that
Mr. O'Neill's estate had been sequestrated and that he had since died. Neither then, nor at any time prior to the conclusion of the hearing of the appeal, was any application made to the Court, either, to have the record amended, or, for leave to be granted to the Appellant to prosecute the appeal insofar as related to the estate of Mr. O'Neill.

Although, in the Written Submissions which were filed on its behalf, the
Appellant, in addition to submitting that, upon the proper construction of clause 11 of the Memorandum of Lease, the phrase "this lease" was to be read as "this instrument" or "this Memorandum of Lease", also sought to advance a submission based on the effect of the registration of the Memorandum of Lease, on the hearing of the appeal that submission was abandoned (Transcript p.9).

The submissions advanced on behalf of the First Respondent mirrored the first two of those (see p.9 (above)) which had been advanced on his behalf at the trial before Cole J.

Since they have some bearing upon the approach to be taken to the question to be determined on this appeal, it is, perhaps, desirable that one should first record certain basic principles. They are as follows: - a lease, or attempted lease, of land under Old System title for a term in excess of 3 years is ineffective to pass any interest at law in the subject land unless made by deed (Conveyancing Act 1919 s.23B, s.23D(2)), and a lease, or attempted lease, of land registered under the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) for a term in excess of 3 years is ineffective to pass any estate or interest in the subject land unless, and until, registered in accordance with the provisions of the Act (Real Property Act 1900, ss. 53, 41, 36); however, a purported lease which either because - being in relation to land under Old System title - it is not by deed, or because - being in relation to land registered under the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) - it is not registered, does not of itself create a legal term in the subject land, nonetheless operates as an agreement for lease enforceable in equity. Two consequences flow from that fact, they being: - in the event of a repudiation by the putative lessor, the putative lessee would be entitled to seek relief in the nature of specific performance of that agreement for lease; and in the event of repudiation by either party to that agreement for lease, the innocent party, if he deems damages to be adequate, might sue on the agreement at law (see, for example, Leitz Leeholme Stud Pty. Limited v.
Robinson 5; Shevill v. The Builders Licensing Board 6; The Progressive
Mailing House Pty. Limited v. Tabali Pty. Limited 7); further, although the instrument in question may of itself be ineffective to create a legal or equitable estate or interest in the subject land, the underlying agreement which it represents, if capable of being made the subject of an order for specific performance, will, in accordance with the principles of equity, be effective to bring into existence an equitable estate or interest in the land (see, for example, Progressive Mailing House Pty.
Limited v. Tabali Pty. Limited 8; Chan v. Cresdon Pty. Limited 9); further, in the event that the putative lessee, in reliance upon the underlying agreement reflected in the ineffective instrument, enters into possession and pays some, even though not all, of the rent provided for, there will come into existence a common law tenancy at will terminable by a month's notice in writing but otherwise upon all the terms of the ineffective instrument applicable to such a tenancy (see Carberry v. Gardiner 10;
Australian Provincial Assurance Association Limited v. Rogers 11;
Dockrill v. Cavanagh 12; but although, in that event, there will come into being an estate in law in the subject premises, the underlying agreement reflected in the ineffective instrument will not merge in that tenancy, it following that the mere fact that that tenancy might be terminated will not extinguish the underlying agreement (see Leitz Leeholme Stud Pty. Limited v. Robinson 13); it follows that if the common law tenancy at will is later terminated in circumstances which reflected a repudiation of the underlying agreement reflected in the ineffective instrument, the innocent party, if he so chooses, will be entitled to sue at common law for damages (see Leitz Leeholme Stud
Pty. Limited v. Robinson 14; Progressive Mailing House Pty. Limited v.
Tabali Pty. Limited 15; at law, as in equity, the traditional view is that the liability of the surety is strictissimi juris and that ambiguous contractual provisions should be construed in favour of the surety (Ankar Pty. Limited v. National
Westminster Finance (Australia) Limited 16; see also, Chan v. Cresdon Pty.
Limited 17).

It is against this background that one must consider the submissions which have been advanced on each side on the appeal.

Since the Appellant appears to accept that, despite some linguistic differences, what might be called the "guaranteeing provisions" of clause 11 in the Memorandum of Lease are in substance the same as those contained in the form of lease [18] considered by the High Court in Chan v. Cresdon Pty.
Limited, it is clear that one's primary task is to construe the provisions of clause 10 of the Memorandum of Lease and to determine to what extent, if at all, clause 10, as so construed, affects the construction which the decision of the High Court in Chan v. Cresdon Pty. Limited 19 would suggest ought otherwise to be placed upon clause 11 of the Memorandum of Lease.

To say the least, endeavouring to determine the proper construction to be placed upon clause 10 of the Memorandum of Lease is a difficult task not merely because it reflects a thoroughly inept standard of draftsmanship, but also because it appears to reflect a less than complete understanding of what would have been the rights and liabilities of at least two of the parties - the Appellant and Penrado - to the Memorandum of Lease even if clause 10 had not been included in it.

The first question to be determined is whether, as has been submitted by the
First Respondent, clause 10 is to be construed as limited to forms of
Memorandum of Lease providing for a term of 3 years or less.

Although my reasons for so doing differ a little from those expressed by Cole
J in his Judgment, as did his Honour I have concluded that the First
Respondent's submission in this regard should not be accepted. It is, in my view, sufficient to point out that, subject to the construction to be given to clause 11 in the Memorandum of Lease, there would be no necessity to include the Memorandum of Lease a clause such as clause 10 if the term intended to be granted by the Memorandum of Lease was for 3 years or less - as what I have pointed out above would make clear, a lessee for such a term would be liable under the terms of the Memorandum of Lease whether it be registered or not, and, since the coming into operation of the provisions of [s.8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/iaaa1969240/s8.html) of the [Imperial Acts Application Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/iaaa1969240/) there has been no requirement that a guarantee be in writing, and still less that it be by deed. Whether or not, because of its inept draftsmanship, clause 10 of the Memorandum of Lease is capable of achieving its intended result, it seems tolerably plain that the result which was sought to be achieved, was to impose on the parties - whatever that phrase means in the context - obligations to which they might, or might, otherwise not have been subject if the Memorandum of Lease were not registered, a fact which would tend to indicate that clause was intended to operate at least in respect of leases for a term in excess of 3 years rather than being limited to leases for a lesser term.

But even if one proceeds upon the basis that the provisions of clause 10 are not to be limited in the manner submitted by the First Respondent, the question which remains is, what is the effect to be given to the provisions of that clause.

At the outset, two things might be noted in respect of clause 10, they being: -
that it is clear that, although it remained open to Penrado to require the
Appellant to cause the Memorandum of Lease to be registered, it was clearly within the contemplation of at least the Appellant and Penrado that the
Memorandum of Lease would not be registered; and that despite the inept draftsmanship, it was the intention of the draftsman to impose on the parties - whatever that phrase might mean in the context - obligations to which they would, or might, not have been subjected in the event that the Memorandum of Lease was not registered.

The significance of the first of these matters lies in the following passage in the joint Judgment of Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane and McHugh JJ in Chan v.
Cresdon Pty. Limited 20: - "Without looking to cl. 2.2 of the Agreement for Lease, it is obvious that the parties intended that the lease was to be registered. The lease was not, until registration, `effectual to pass any estate or interest in' the land: s.43 of the Act. Moreover, the lease was in a form appropriate for registration (Form E) and otherwise complied with the statutory requirements, so that it was in registrable form. In these circumstances the Respondent, by executing a lease which was intended to operate as a lease at law, was under an obligation to register, or procure the registration of, the lease: see Laurinda Pty. Limited v. Capalada Park Shopping Centre Pty. Limited <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 623"] 
The fact that, in their Honours' view, the parties intended that the lease was to be registered and that, in consequence, the respondent was under an obligation to register, or procure the registration of, the lease appears to have carried great weight in their Honours ultimate conclusion, in Chan v. Cresdon Pty. Limited 21, that the phrase "this lease" meant "the instrument of lease in its character as a lease". That this was so, in my view, is made clear by the following further passages in the joint Judgment [22]: "But even it be assumed that specific performance would be awarded in favour of the respondent, that is not enough, in our opinion, to establish liability on the part of the appellants as guarantors. What they guaranteed was the obligations (of Sarcourt) under this lease; that is, the instrument of lease in its character as a lease. In our view, only a lease at law would meet this description for the purposes of the guarantee. In Ankar Pty. Limited v. National Westminster Finance (Australia) Limited Mason ACJ, Wilson Brennan and Dawson JJ observed ((1982) <case>; [162 CLR 549] at 561): `At law, as in equity, the traditional view is that the liability of the surety is strictissimi juris and that ambiguous contractual provisions should be construed in favour of the surety.' 
In the light of this settled principle governing the interpretation of the contracts of guarantee, there is no justification for reading cl. 23.01 as extending to obligations which, at best, as between the landlord and the lessee, arise, not under the lease at law but under an equitable lease which is the equivalent of the lease at law.
 
In any event, s.43 of the Act presents an insuperable obstacle to the respondent's success. The section provides, in relation to land under the act, that, until registration, no instrument of transfer shall be effectual to pass an estate or interest in the land." and, later [23]: - "If we assume that the agreement for lease would have been specifically enforced in equity and that, as a result, an equitable lease for a term of five years came into existence between the respondent as lessor and Sarcourt as lessee, that equitable lease is a thing different from the unregistered form of lease executed by the parties. Although such an equitable lease would incorporate the terms of the unregistered lease, by virtue of s.43 it necessarily arises not from the instrument but from the agreement which lies behind it. On this score alone, it would be impossible to conclude that a liability to pay rent under the equitable lease was an obligation `under this lease' within the meaning of cl. 23.01." 
These passages, so it seems to me, provide the clue to clause 10 of the Memorandum of Lease which, while making it clear that the Memorandum of Lease was not necessarily intended to operate as a lease at law, nonetheless sought to impose upon "the parties" to the instrument the obligations set out in the Memorandum of Lease and to which they would have been subject if the Memorandum of Lease were in fact registered and thus operated as a lease at law.

The question, then, is whether the words "the parties" in clause 10 should be restricted to the Appellant and Penrado or whether they are apt to extend to include the Respondents.

As a matter of ordinary English, the word "party", in a context such as is provided by this case, means a signatory to the relevant instrument (see, for example, Concise Oxford Dictionary 7 Ed. (1982) p.747; Concise Macquarie
Dictionary Revised Edition p.912), a meaning which the word would commonly bear in a legal context. Thus, the first entry in Stroud's Judicial Dictionary (3 Ed. (1953)) under the title "party" is (Vol. 3 p.2102): - "`They that make a DEED and they to whom it is made are called parties to the Deed' (Termes de la Ley). So, the persons by and between whom an agreement is made are the parties to it.'" to which one might add that, in the first of the passages from the joint Judgment of Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane & McHugh JJ in Chan v. Cresdon Pty. Limited which I have earlier set out (see p. 19 (above)), their Honours refer to "the parties" in a way which clearly embraced the guarantors. In the present case, as it seems to me, there is nothing in the Memorandum of Lease which would displace the ordinary meaning to be given to the word "parties", it following that, as they executed the form of Memorandum of Lease - albeit not in a form appropriate to a Deed - the Respondents are, in my view, to be regarded as having been bound by the provisions of clause 10 of the Memorandum of Lease.

If clause 10 is to be given the meaning which I have attributed to it, then, as it seems to me, the present case is to be distinguished from that with which the High Court was concerned to deal in Chan v. Cresdon Pty. Limited , and that, by virtue of the joint operation of clauses 10 and 11 of the form of Memorandum of Lease, the Respondents are to be regarded as having guaranteed the obligations of Penrado under what, in the events which happened, was the underlying agreement between the parties. This being so, I conclude that the fact that the Memorandum of Lease was not registered prior to Penrado's vacating the subject premises did not provide the Respondents with a defence to the Appellant's claim in these proceedings.

For these reasons, and also with a view to overcoming the problems caused by
Mr. O'Neill's bankruptcy and subsequent death, I would propose the following
Orders: -
The Court noting that an order for the sequestration of the Estate of the
Second Respondent, Terrence Patrick O'Neill, now deceased, was made on 11th
March 1992 and that, by reason thereof, the Estate of the Second Respondent vested in the Official Trustee in Bankruptcy, ORDER that the proceedings be and be deemed to have been amended by substituting the Official Trustee in
Bankruptcy as a party/Respondent for the Second Respondent.
ORDER that further compliance with the rules of Court consequent upon the making of Order 1 up to and including this day, be and be deemed to have been dispensed with.
ORDER that the Appeal by upheld.
ORDER that Orders 2-4 inclusive, 6 and so much of Order 5 as provided "but these costs are to be included in the costs which the Plaintiff is to pay to the First Defendant" made by Cole J be set aside.
Pursuant to the provisions of Part 31 r.5(a) of the rules of Court,
RECORD as the opinion of the Court upon the question ordered to be tried separately that the matters alleged by the First Respondent in paragraphs 2 and 5 of his Points of Defence do not constitute a defence to the Appellant's claim in these proceedings.
REMIT the proceedings to the Commercial Division to be dealt with in accordance with the rules.
ORDER that the First Respondent pay the Appellant's costs of the trial of the separate issue and of the appeal.
  <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 242] [[1980] 1 WLR 10],14 [[1984] 1 WLR 609], 613-614, 616 supra  <case>; [(1981-1982) 149 CLR 620]  <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 549], 561 per
Mason ACJ, Wilson, Brennan and Dawson JJ supra at 256 per Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane and McHugh JJ [18] (1989) 168 CLR at 246 supra supra at 247-8 supra [22] supra at 256 [23] supra at 257-258 supra * * * 
