

Regina versus Bloomfield Matter No Cca 60328/97 [1998] NSWSC 342 (15 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
REGINA versus FREDERICK WILLIAM BLOOMFIELD 
CCA 60328/97 July 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Sully J, Ireland J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
HEADNOTE 
On two counts, one of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm, and, the other, assault occasioning actual bodily harm, the applicant was sentenced to two years and nine months imprisonment by way of a minimum term, with an additional term of one year. The applicant sought leave to appeal against the severity of this sentence.

Held:
His Honour expressly found that the jury had concluded that the assault "caused disastrous injuries" to the victim. There was nothing in the reasons on sentence similar to the doubt expressed by the trial judge in Overall [(1993) 71 ACrimR 170] as to whether or not there was some other cause of the injuries.
The use of sentencing statistics provided by the Judicial Commission discussed. In the present case, the Judicial Commission's statistics were useful to indicate how rare it has been for a sentence of this severity to be imposed for this offence. The facts of this case do not appear to be as remarkable as the severity of the sentence suggests.
The degree of violence involved in an assault is a material consideration with respect to sentencing. The violent act in the present case was limited to a single blow, albeit of considerable force. His Honour gave weight to the severity of the injuries but did not take into consideration the degree of violence involved. Sentence of three years substituted for four years.
As to the issue of "special circumstances" for the purpose of [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) , the assumption that an increase in the additional term necessarily involves a reduction in the minimum term is incorrect: Hampton, unreported, NSWCCA 25
June 1998; GDR [(1994) 35 NSWLR 376] at -378. If the appeal court comes to exercise the discretion afresh, it is entitled to review the total sentence.

ORDERS
Leave granted.
Appeal allowed.
Sentence quashed.
Applicant sentenced to a minimum term of two years and one month (commencing 31 January and expiring 28 February 1999) and an additional term of eight months (commencing 1 March 1999 and expiring 31 October 1999).
Applicant released on parole at the expiration of his minimum term.

REGINA versus Frederick William BLOOMFIELD 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: On 19 June 1997 the applicant was sentenced by Judge Shillington in the District Court to serve a term of imprisonment of two years and nine months by way of a minimum term, with an additional term of one year. The applicant had been charged with two counts; the first, maliciously inflict grievous bodily harm contrary to [s35](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s35.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) ; the second, in the alternative, assault occasioning actual bodily harm contrary to [s59](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s59.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) . 
The assault occurred on 4 August 1996 at Enmore. It involved an attack on Mr
Ian Roseboom. As his Honour indicated with respect to the finding of not guilty on the first charge: "It is clear from that finding that the jury were not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that you intended physically to injure Mr Roseboom." 
The evidence of what actually happened on the night is not comprehensive. The applicant engaged in a violent dispute with his girlfriend outside the home of
Mr and Mrs Roseboom. His Honour found: "He (ie Mr Roseboom) was with his wife upstairs and his wife has given evidence to the effect that he said, 'Well I don't have to put up with this type of conduct.' He then proceeded downstairs and out into the street. As to what precisely happened there it is not altogether clear. Unfortunately Mr
Roseboom suffered extremely serious injuries, which I will detail shortly, but one of the effects of his injuries is that he has absolutely no recollection as to what happened out on the street." 
There was, however, a bystander who gave evidence to the effect that the applicant hit Mr Roseboom on the forehead and that he moved two steps backwards and then fell on the cement. His Honour found: "I am satisfied that Mr Roseboom was responsibly trying to stop an ugly scene out on the street which was causing distress to he and his wife and you were clearly, as you described yourself, cranky and you struck out. The verdict of the jury implies that they were not satisfied that you had intended to physically injure Mr Roseboom, but clearly, in my view, they found that you had assaulted him, you had struck him in an angry and hostile fashion and quite clearly the striking caused disastrous injuries to Mr Roseboom." 
The nature of the injuries suffered had a major effect on the victim, who at that stage was an active pilot. His Honour found: "As a result of the blow which you struck he fell backwards he suffered sub- dural haemorrhage which required immediate surgical intervention. As a result of that he is permanently affected in many ways, both physically and mentally.
He is deprived from ever going back to work as a pilot. He has problems of a physical nature. He initially had paralysis on the left side but that has, to a certain extent resolved, although there is still weakness. He is affected in his balance. His voice has changed, it is described as high pitched and weak.
He has problems with bladder control. He has a clot in the leg which has required intervention by way of a filter to prevent any of that clot going to his heart. Mentally he has difficulty remembering things. He has to make notes to remind himself to do things. He has less control over his emotions, he becomes easily distressed. And quite obviously, and there has been no dispute about this on your behalf by Mr Odgers, the effect upon him, as I have said, has been a disastrous one, not only to himself but also to his family. I must take that matter into account.

The maximum penalty for an offence of this type is a term of five years penal servitude. I am satisfied that the attack made by you upon Mr Roseboom was a cowardly one, you a young, healthy, strong man, struck this middle aged man in the circumstances in which I have outlined. Those are the objective facts and in my view they require a substantial prison sentence." 
The applicant's position at the trial was that he had acted in self-defence.
That, as his Honour indicated, was not accepted by the jury.

His Honour took into account the applicant's long criminal record, which included a number of entries for offences of violence. His Honour also had a pre-sentence report which indicates his background. He was a child of an
Aboriginal mother and a white father. His Honour took into account both the applicant's youth and his aboriginality. His Honour concluded that the appropriate sentence would be one of four years penal servitude, being a three year minimum and one year additional term. His Honour went on to vary the one- third proportion between the minimum term and the additional term. The applicant had been in custody for about three months and this was deducted from the proposed minimum term, reducing it to two years and nine months.

In her submissions, Miss Marty, counsel for the applicant, attacked the severity of the sentence. She acknowledged that the bodily harm actually occasioned by an assault is a matter properly taken into account as an aggravating factor for the purpose of sentence. (Overall [(1993) 71 ACrimR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281993%29%2071%20ACrimR%20170 "View LawCiteRecord" ); Vella, unreported CCA 15 December 1995.) 
The first submission which was put to the Court on the basis of Hunt CJ at CL in Overall was that the actual bodily harm must be caused by the assault.
Counsel referred to the references in his Honour's remarks on sentence to the effect that what actually happened was "not altogether clear" and submitted that accordingly: " ... no finding could properly be made that the blow caused the victim the very serious injuries which were clearly a weighty factor in his Honour's deliberations on sentence." (Overall supra at 179-180 per Hunt CJ at CL.) 
This submission impermissibly canvasses the jury's ruling. An essential component of the charge was that the assault "occasioned" actual bodily harm. The mens rea for the offence does not require the prosecution to prove a specific intent to cause actual bodily harm. However, it is necessary that the accused intentionally or recklessly assaulted the victim and that actual bodily harm results. (Williams [(1990) 50 ACrimR 213] at 222.)
His Honour expressly found that the jury had concluded that the assault "caused disastrous injuries to Mr Roseboom." That must be so.

Counsel for the applicant said that the only evidence was that the victim "moved about two steps backwards and then fell to the ground" and that this was occasioned by a single blow. It is true that that was the evidence that his Honour particularly referred to in his reasons on sentence. That is adequate to establish the relevant causal relationship. It was open to his
Honour to so find. Furthermore, Mr Roseboom's wife gave evidence that she had a conversation in which her husband had said: "I'm sick of this we don't have to put up with this sort of language. I'm going out to tell them to go away." 
Her husband went downstairs. A few moments later when she followed him she saw him lying on his back with his arms and legs stretched out. She referred to checking the wound at the back of his head and that his left ear was bleeding and that he was unconscious.

The nature and effect of the assault was admitted by the applicant himself during the course of his cross-examination. He said: "Well, when I hit him he sort of bent his knees forward and started falling back." (Transcript p133 line 42.) 
It was clear from the medical report before his Honour that the nature of the injuries suffered by Mr Roseboom related either to the blow he received or to the injury to his head which occurred as he fell. There is nothing in the reasons on sentence in this case similar to the doubt expressed by the trial
Judge in Overall as to whether or not there was some other cause of the injuries. The reference by his Honour below that: "... as to what precisely happened there is not altogether clear" is not equivalent to the finding in Overall by the trial Judge to the effect: "I cannot say on the evidence whether the immediate blow caused sufficient loss of consciousness to make him fall or whether some other process brought that about." (Overall at 171.8 and 179.9). In my opinion, his Honour did in fact find causation and was entitled to do so.

There remains the issue as to whether or not a sentence of four years out of a maximum of five years was excessive in the relevant sense; that is, to justify the interference of this Court with the exercise of the trial Judge's discretion.

As noted above, his Honour indicated that he took into account the applicant's aboriginality. It is not clear what weight his Honour gave to this matter in the light of the very high sentence he imposed. Plainly, there were countervailing considerations, including the substantial criminal history of the applicant and the plea of not guilty.

The relevance of aboriginality is based upon the decision in Fernando [(1992) 76 ACrimR 58] at 62-63, where Wood J set out the relevant propositions.

In the present case, the pre-sentence report available to his Honour included the following: "Mr Bloomfield stated that both his parents drank excessively and his step- father used to hit him frequently.
 ..................

His past criminal history includes assaults and break and enters. He explained his past offences in terms of his family environment, associating with the wrong crowd, having a short temper and being harassed by the police.
It would also appear that his inability to read and write has limited his employment prospects and may explain some of his anger and frustration." 
In an affidavit filed in this Court without objection, the applicant elaborated on his previous offences and said: "I have acted badly in the past when white people in authority have told me what to do. A lot of my criminal record is from times when police have tried to arrest me or prison officers have told me to do something." 
The pre-sentence report before his Honour went on to indicate that the applicant was considered suitable for a community service order and also considered eligible for periodic detention.

Counsel for the applicant put before the Court certain statistics of the
Judicial Commission of New South Wales which showed that of the five hundred and thirty-nine offenders included in the data base who received a custodial sentence for assault occasioning actual bodily harm, only four offenders received a more severe full time term and two a more lengthy minimum term than those imposed on the applicant. This placed the case before the Court in the top one per cent of sentences. It does not appear that these statistics were made available to the trial Judge, although he was entitled to draw on his own knowledge of sentencing practices.

The Sentencing Information System maintained by the Judicial Commission is available as the major component of the on-line Judicial Information Research
System. It is a source of information on sentencing patterns for particular offences.

A number of Judges of this Court have referred to the use to which such statistics can be put. (Alexander NSWCCA 24 February 1995 pp6-7; Maguire
NSWCCA 30 August 1995 pp7-10; Caldwell NSWCCA 2 September 1996 pp7-8; EMC
NSWCCA 21 November 1996 p4; Mayne NSWCCA 20 December 1996 pp7, 12; Prior
NSWCCA 7 October 1997 p5; Sullivan NSWCCA 29 April 1998 pp5-6; Tocknell
NSWCCA 28 May 1998 p9.) 
There are other authorities which discuss the use of such statistics.
(Barber [(1976) 14 SASR 388] at 390;
Yardley versus Betts [(1979) 22 SASR 108] at 110-11;
Freeman versus Binnekamp [(1987) 44 SASR 114] at 116;
Hewett versus Lloyd [(1992) 58 SASR 146] at 150;
Heatlie versus SA Police unreported SA Sup Ct 30 July 1993; Brazel [(1993) 67
ACrimR 314] at 325; Zoccolli unreported Vic CCA 10 August 1993;
Torres unreported Vic CCA 16 September 1993.).

The following points appear to emerge from these cases: 
The sentence to be imposed depends on the facts of each case and for that reason bald statistics are of limited use.

Statistics may be less useful than surveys of decided cases, which enable some detail of the specific circumstances to be set out for purposes of comparison.

Caution needs to be exercised in using sentencing statistics, but they may be of assistance in ensuring consistency in sentencing.

Statistics may provide an indication of general sentencing trends and standards.

Statistics may indicate an appropriate range, particularly where a significant majority or a small minority fall within a particular range. Also when a particular form of sentence such as imprisonment is more or less likely to have been imposed.

Statistics may be useful in determining whether a sentence is manifestly excessive or manifestly inadequate.

Statistics are least likely to be useful where the circumstances of the individual instances of the offence vary greatly, such as manslaughter.

The larger the sample the more likely the statistics are likely to be useful.

In the present case, I have found the Judicial Commission's statistics useful to indicate how rare it has been for a sentence of this severity to be imposed for this offence.

The facts of this case do not appear to be as remarkable as the severity of the sentence suggests. The impact on the victim was devastating, but it is unlikely that that impact was so extraordinary as to call for an almost uniquely severe sentence - in the top one per cent of sentences for this offence.

The critical circumstance is that a single blow led to substantial injuries, occasioned to a significant degree by the particular fall rather than by the impact of the blow. There can be no doubt that the applicant himself must bear the consequences of those injuries. However, such an effect must have happened often in other assaults which are reflected in the statistics to which I have referred. Indeed, Overall itself was such a case. It had different subjective considerations; namely, a plea of guilty and the absence of any criminal history. Nevertheless, in that case this Court set aside a sentence of a six month minimum term and an additional term of two years as too severe, substituting a sentence of periodic detention.

Not without some hesitation, I have formed the view that the sentencing Judge did err on this occasion by imposing a sentence which was above the permissible range. Plainly, his Honour gave considerable weight to the very serious injuries occasioned by the assault, as he was entitled to do. It appears to me likely that he did not take into consideration the degree of violence involved in the particular assault. The degree of violence here was limited to a single blow, although one of very considerable force. In my opinion, the degree of violence involved in an assault is a material consideration when it comes to sentencing.

It is noteworthy that the more serious offence of the intentional infliction of grievous bodily harm, of which the applicant was acquitted, carries a maximum term of seven years. A sentence of more than half that maximum, in the particular circumstances of this case involving a single blow, is excessive.

Taking into account the range of matters considered by his Honour, but giving greater weight to the fact that the violent act was limited to a single blow, albeit of considerable force, I have come to the conclusion that the appropriate sentence is a total of three years rather than four, from which time served of three months is to be deducted, requiring a total of thirty- three months.

The final topic of submissions of the applicant concerned the issue of "special circumstances" for the purposes of [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) . It was submitted that such special circumstances did exist and that a longer than usual period of supervision would be in the interests of the applicant.

This submission was presumably based on the assumption that if there were to be an increase in the additional term this would necessarily involve a reduction in the minimum term. This assumption is not correct. I have recently dealt with this matter, and the proposition was rejected in this Court, in
Hampton, unreported, NSWCCA 25 June 1998, relying on GDR [(1994) 35 NSWLR ]
at 377-378.

There is no simple sequential or two-step process under [ss5(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) and [5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html)(2).
A decision on what is an appropriate total sentence is affected by the process of deciding its allocation to minimum and additional terms, and the process of determining minimum and additional terms is affected by the end result in a total sentence. General sentencing principles guide all relevant steps in the process. Accordingly, it should not be assumed that an increase in the additional term will necessarily result in a reduction of the minimum term to the same degree. If the appeal court comes to exercise the discretion afresh, it is entitled to review the total sentence.

This aspect of his Honour's judgment involves some difficulty. His Honour stated: "In the circumstances of this case, despite the subjective matters to which I have referred I do not find that it would be appropriate to find special circumstances. However, I do find special circumstances in that by adjusting the sentence which I would have normally imposed I am taking into account the period that you have been in custody. I would find it necessary to vary the proportion between the minimum term and the additional term." 
What his Honour seems to have done is to give the applicant the credit of the three months for the period he had already spent in custody by reducing it in its entirety from the minimum term. This had the consequence of changing it beyond the one-third to a small degree.

In this regard his Honour seems to have erred. The question his Honour should have asked himself is whether or not there were "special circumstances" which justified a larger additional term than one-third of the minimum term.
(Hampton supra at p5.) His Honour did not ask himself that question. All his
Honour did was to make a mathematical adjustment of the particular number of months involved. But the need for such a mathematical adjustment could not constitute a special circumstance in itself. In the light of his actual finding that there were no special circumstances, which I accept, the appropriate decision would have been to determine that the additional term was no more than one-third of the minimum term his Honour proposed; that is, a period of eleven months. In the sentence I propose the minimum term is limited to just less than one-third.

The orders I would make are: Leave granted.
 Appeal allowed.
 Sentence quashed.
 Sentence the applicant to a minimum term of two years and one month commencing on 31 January 1997 and expiring on 28 February 1999 and an additional term of eight months commencing on 1 March 1999 and expiring on 31
October 1999.
 Order that the applicant be released to parole at the expiration of his minimum term.

Subject to ordinary prison discipline permitting and administration permitting, I would make a recommendation that he serve the balance of his term at Long Bay.

SULLY J: I agree. 
IRELAND J: I also agree. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The orders will be as I have proposed. * * * 
