

Charlton versus Upjohn Company and Ors; Elliott versus Upjohn Company and Ors; Hesse v Upjohn Company and Ors; Jacobsen versus The Upjohn Company and Ors Matter Nos /95 [1998] NSWSC 1055 (22 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
JENNIFER DENISE CHARLTON versus UPJOHN COMPANY & ORS /95 
HAIDEE MARY ELLIOTT versus UPJOHN COMPANY & ORS /93 
PETER COLIN HESSE versus UPJOHN COMPANY & ORS /93 
PAUL JACOBSEN versus THE UPJOHN COMPANY & ORS /93 December 1998 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: By statement of claim filed in this Court each of the four present plaintiffs claims damages for personal injury alleged to have been caused by use of the drug Depo Medrol. The causes of action pleaded are in negligence, contract and under the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) ("the TPA"). For the purpose of this judgment only I will assume the truth of the allegations in each statement of claim. 
In each case the first and second defendants are, respectively, the Upjohn
Company and Upjohn Pty Limited (to whom I will refer as "the Upjohn companies" or, collectively, "Upjohn"), related companies which manufactured, marketed and distributed Depo Medrol in Australia. The remaining defendants are the medical practitioners (or, where they have died, their legal personal representatives) who prescribed or administered the drug, and the hospitals at which the drug was administered, or which employed the doctors. The cases presently before me are four of 122 claims having significant common elements all filed in this court. The plaintiffs claim damages against the Upjohn companies, medical practitioners and hospitals arising out of the supply, prescription and administration of Depo Medrol. The only defendants common to all claims are the Upjohn companies. All plaintiffs are represented by the same firm of solicitors.

No defences have been filed. The issues for ultimate determination are therefore not defined. It is, however, possible to discern the nature of some, at least, of the principal issues likely to arise. One that may be anticipated is the nature and extent of any injury or disability presently suffered by any plaintiff, including the impact of any such injury or disability on that plaintiff's ability to earn income; another is likely to be the extent, if any, to which such injury or disability is causally connected with the administration of the drug. Relevant to this question may be any medical condition or disability suffered by the plaintiff pre-dating the treatment, or any features of the plaintiff's medical history predisposing that plaintiff to the condition or disability now suffered. Another issue is likely to be the proper and appropriate standard to be applied in considering whether the treatment provided by the doctors and/or hospitals was negligent or in breach of contract.

The procedures adopted in relation to the pleadings give some idea of the extent of the commonality of the claims. A document entitled "Master Statement of Claim" was filed in matter No.12585/93 (Harris versus The Upjohn Company and
Ors.) This is not one of the matters the subject of the present applications. The master statement of claim contains detailed pleadings against the Upjohn companies, a doctor and a hospital. Abbreviated individual statements of claim have been filed in all remaining matters, incorporating and adopting the pleadings of the master statement of claim and adapted to the facts of the particular case. The claims against Upjohn are identical in each case.

There are, however, significant points of divergence. Amongst the batch of 122 are claims made by plaintiffs resident in every state and territory of
Australia. The majority are from NSW (31) or Western Australia (67). Three are residents of the United Kingdom. The defendants, other than the Upjohn companies, are equally widely distributed. The plaintiffs concerned in the present applications are from Western Australia, Queensland and Tasmania. The administration of the drug took place in the various states and territories where the parties live or are located.

In each of the four cases, by notice of motion, certain of the defendants (generally supported, where no separate notice of motion has been filed, by the remaining defendants other than the Upjohn companies) have sought a variety of orders, of which only two were pursued. The Upjohn companies have taken no active part in the applications and have adopted, effectively, a neutral position. The first order sought is that the substantive proceedings be transferred, pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/s5.html) of the [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/), ("the
Cross-Vesting Act")to the Supreme Court of the state in which the drug was administered, and where the causes of action are said to have arisen. I will refer to these applications as the transfer applications. The second order sought in each case is that the transfer application be removed into the Court of Appeal pursuant to SCR Part 12 r 2. I will refer to these as the removal applications.

The transfer applications are made in reliance on the Cross-Vesting Act, s (2)(b)(iii), which provides as follows: "(2) Where: a proceeding (in this subsection referred to as the "relevant proceeding") is pending in the Supreme Court (in this subsection referred to as the "first court"); and it appears to the first court that: it is otherwise in the interests of justice that the relevant proceeding be determined by the Supreme Court of another State or of a Territory, the first court shall transfer the relevant proceeding to that other Supreme
Court." 
The questions for determination are therefore whether it is in the interests of justice that any of the proceedings be determined by the Supreme Court of this state or territory where the drug was administered to the plaintiff.

Before moving to the merits of either application, it is convenient to outline the relevant facts and circumstances of each claim. What is stated below is drawn from the statements of claim, from undisputed Notices to Admit Facts served on the plaintiffs by some of the defendants, and from affidavit evidence filed on behalf of some defendants and of the plaintiffs, the content of all of which is also undisputed. The facts are uncontroversial, at least for the purposes of the present applications, but, for the purpose of considering the removal applications, it is necessary to make specific individual findings of fact.

Jennifer Denise Charlton 
Ms Charlton is a resident of Tasmania. She sues in relation to treatment she was given in Hobart in 1989 and 1990.

The defendants are the Calvary Hospital in Hobart, and Dr Michael Jackson who practises as a consultant anaesthetist at that and other Hobart Hospitals. Dr
Jackson's practice includes administering anaesthetic to between 12 and 15 patients each week, consulting in pain management for chronic, acute and cancer pain. In many cases his treatment is required urgently. He is one of a very limited number of practitioners in Australia carrying out some of the procedures he uses, and the only one in Tasmania.

All relevant records relating to the plaintiff's medical history, condition and treatment came into existence and are held in or near Hobart. The plaintiff has a complex medical history that includes a variety of conditions, treatments and admissions to the hospital. These may be relevant to questions of causation of whatever condition she now suffers from, and to the assessment of damages if that question arises. Ready access to the medical records will be required as part of the preparation of the case, and during the hearing. Ms
Charlton has taken previous proceedings in the Supreme Court of Tasmania alleging back injury caused by a workplace accident in 1988. This, too, may be relevant to the question of causation, and extent and quantification of damage, if liability is established against any defendant.

The issues likely to arise in Ms Charlton's claim include, but are not limited to, the accepted professional standards and practices relevant to the treatment of the conditions in respect of which she was administered Depo
Medrol, including the state of medical knowledge in Tasmania at the time of her treatment; the processes by which the hospital credentialled Dr Jackson and the arrangements between the hospital and Dr Jackson as to control or supervision of his treatment of patients; the nature and extent of the plaintiff's injury and complaint; and the cause of any such complaints.

It may be anticipated that a hearing of Ms Charlton's claims will take considerable time, although it is far too early to estimate with any precision just how long that will be. It is reasonable to assume that Dr Jackson's presence will be required for at least part of the hearing and that he will have to be available to instruct his lawyers and, possibly, to give evidence.
The hospital will also have to make available senior executive staff to instruct lawyers and conduct the proceeding on its behalf.

It is therefore obvious that, should the hearing take place in NSW, and require Dr Jackson's attendance, and/or the attendance of senior hospital staff, considerable disruption will be caused to Dr Jackson, his medical practice, his patients who rely on him for treatment and the hospitals where he treats patients. Similar inconvenience, if not as great in magnitude, can be expected in relation to the hospital.

Haidee Marie Elliott 
Ms Elliott's statement of claim was issued on 9 July 1993. She lives in
Townsville, Queensland and sues Dr Roger Watson, Dr Richard Keys, the
Townsville General Hospital, and the Park Haven Private Hospital in respect of treatment she received in 1985, 1987, and on another date she is unable to specify. Drs Watson and Keys are medical practitioners, practising in
Townsville. Both hospitals are in Townsville. All treatment on which Ms
Elliott brings her proceedings was administered in Townsville. Issues likely to arise in this claim include the nature and extent of the plaintiff's medical condition, her medical history both before and after the Depo Medrol treatment, and the cause of her current complaints; the procedures implemented by the hospitals for the appointment, supervision and evaluation of medical practitioners attached to them; and the standard of practice by which the allegations of negligence are to be judged. All relevant records are held in
Townsville or elsewhere in Queensland. A number of medical practitioners other than Drs Watson and Keys were involved in Ms Elliott's treatment. Two of these, an anaesthetist and a neurosurgeon, are identified as necessary witnesses for the hospitals. Both specialists are in private practice and provide Visiting Medical Officer services to the Townsville Hospital. The neurosurgeon also provides services to Cairns and McKay hospitals. It may be necessary for the hospitals to call other employees as witnesses. Current employees, obviously, live in the Townsville district, and it is likely that any former employees who will be required as witnesses do so also.

Very substantial costs would be incurred by the hospitals if the trial were to be held in NSW. The costs include the cost of replacing, by locum services, the specialists to be called as defence witnesses, compensating them for lost income by reason of their absence from their practices, and their air fares and accommodation. Similar costs would be incurred by the doctor defendants, if and when their presence in NSW is necessary for the purpose of instructing and giving evidence, which could be for a considerable time.

It is likely that, if the trial were to be transferred to the Supreme Court of
Queensland, it would be assigned to the Townsville registry, which could provide hearing dates approximately six to nine months from the date of transfer.

Having regard to the known dates of Ms Elliott's treatment (1985 and 1987) and the date the statement of claim was filed (9 July 1993) the action is, prima facie, barred by the operation of <case> of [Limitation of Actions Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/loaa1974226/) (Qld).
The Act contains in <case> provision for extension of time in the circumstances there set out. Ms Elliott has not invoked those provisions.

Paul Jacobsen 
Mr Jacobsen lives in Western Australia. Beside the Upjohn companies, he sues three medical practitioners and the executrix of a fourth, and two public and three private hospitals all located in Perth, in relation to treatment administered in 1980, 1981, 1982 and 1983. His statement of claim was issued on 9 July 1993. The three surviving doctors all live and practise in Perth, and did so when the treatment was administered. Issues similar to those identified in relation to Ms Charlton and Ms Elliott may reasonably be anticipated to.

All relevant records are in Perth or elsewhere in Western Australia.

The fourth defendant, Dr David Young, is a consultant anaesthetist. He administers anaesthetics for surgery six days each week, and provides emergency on call services for the Royal Perth Hospital (not a defendant) on one weekend and three week nights in every eight weeks. His practice includes provision of anaesthetic services to seven surgeons of different specialties practising in a variety of different hospitals. He is on call once a fortnight for the St John of God Hospital at Subiaco, the tenth defendant. One area of his practice is conducting repeat anaesthetics for patients with urological problems requiring regular anaesthetic. These patients become familiar with their anaesthetist and suffer some disadvantage or loss of security if their anaesthetic is administered other than by their regular practitioners. The sixth defendant, Mr Webb, is a consultant orthopaedic surgeon. He works ninety hours per week over seven days. He operates at least two hours each week at different hospitals, provides emergency on call services to an orthopaedic clinic one week in every seven, consults in private rooms in three locations, is head of orthopaedic services at the St John of God Hospital, and is there involved in organisational as well as clinical work. He sees, on average, 20 new patients each week. He is in charge of the organisation that runs the ambulance service, devoting approximately six hours per week to this commitment, and lectures in orthopaedics to nurses and undergraduate and post graduate medical students. From his home he conducts a primary production business (of a kind unidentified in the evidence). Should it be necessary for him to attend a trial in NSW both his own professional commitments and the interests of those who depend upon him, including many patients, will suffer.

Similarly, if the trial is to take place in NSW, it will be necessary for senior executive staff of the hospitals to be available to instruct, and possibly to give evidence. Disruption and delay in the hospitals' management would be likely to result.

Mr Jacobsen's claims against all defendants are prima facie barred by the operation of <case> of the Limitation Act 1935-78 (WA). He has not complied with procedures prescribed by that Act for commencement of actions against public authorities, which include the eighth defendant, the Armadale Kelmscott
Memorial Hospital. There appear to be no relevant provisions permitting extension of time for bringing the claim or for compliance with those procedures.

Peter Colin Hesse 
Peter Colin Hesse is also a resident of Western Australia. His statement of claim was filed on 9 July 1993. He sues five doctors and the executrix of another and three hospitals, in relation to treatment administered between and 1989. All remaining doctors except one still live in Western
Australia, and all hospitals are located in Western Australia. The fourth defendant, Dr Geoffrey Gee, is a consultant anaesthetist. He works five or six days each week, with appointments for patients made up to two months in advance. He conducts four to five anaesthetic lists each week, for six surgeons of different specialties. He is a partner and manager of a pain management clinic, providing services to patients in chronic pain. This occupies fifty to sixty percent of his time. There is an eight week waiting list for patients referred to the clinic. He sees ten to fifteen new patients weekly, provides emergency on call service to the hospital where he practises, and he manages an organisation providing weekly seminars on health related issues. He conducts pain management programs which run for ten weeks, and which require his participation at least once weekly. If it is necessary for
Dr Gee to attend a trial in NSW, both he and many patients and surgeons who depend upon him as an anaesthetist will be inconvenienced.

All relevant records are held in Western Australia, and it is likely that most if not all witnesses, as well as the parties to the proceedings, live in
Western Australia.

Both the fifth defendant, Dr Finch, and the seventh defendant, Dr Berrigan, are consultant anaesthetists, with heavy commitments.

Mr Hesse's claim is prima facie statute barred by <case> of the Limitation Act (WA) and, as against the public hospitals, by <case>, steps prescribed as necessary to be taken before commencing proceedings against public hospitals not having been taken.

I have outlined these facts in some detail in order to illustrate the degree of inconvenience, not only to the defendants, but also the numerous others, many of them vulnerable and in pain, should it be necessary for the doctors to be absent from his home cities for any protracted period of time.

On these facts, the defendants appear to have made out a powerful case for the transfer of each matter to the Supreme Court of the state in which the treatment was administered, where the hospitals are located, and where most of the medical practitioners and witnesses live, and where the medical and other records are kept and the plaintiff acknowledge as much. But there are other relevant circumstances.

Central to each plaintiff's case is one allegation. That is that the drug Depo
Medrol was not approved by Australian health authorities for use in the manner or for the purpose for which it was administered to him or her. The plaintiffs allege that although Upjohn submitted a general marketing application to the
Australian Department of Health for the registration of Depo Medrol for extradural/epidural use for pain relief associated with prolapsed lumbar intervertebral discs, that application was rejected, and officers of the
Department noted that such use might be associated with serious problems.
Notwithstanding that warning, on the plaintiffs' cases, the drug was administered to them extradurally or epidurally as a result of which they suffered injuries.

The allegations of negligence and under the TPA against Upjohn are common to all claims. They will presumably require exploration of the nature of the drug, its suitability for administration extradurally, and the circumstances of its marketing and promotion. The allegations against the doctors and hospitals have many common elements, although there will obviously be differences of detail. In the absence of concluded pleadings it is not possible to be more certain about the extent to which individual differences will emerge in the presentation of the cases.

One further relevant circumstance should here be noted. Presently pending in the Federal Court of Australia is another claim against the Upjohn companies, and doctors and hospitals arising out of the administration of Depo Medrol, in which allegations similar to those in the present cases are made (Brooks v
The Upjohn Company and Ors, No.9211/1993, filed 24 June 1994). The plaintiff in that case is represented by the same solicitors as all the plaintiffs in the present cases. Why that case was commenced in the Federal Court of
Australia, and all others in this court was explained by Mr Hirsch, appearing for the plaintiffs, by reference to the date of the treatment, which, in that case, was 1990, and within the limitation period prescribed by the TPA. It is, however, common ground that that case is not in any material respect different from those with which I am dealing, and has made some progress through interlocutory stages towards a final hearing date.

The Removal Applications 
It is obviously logical to deal with the removal applications first.

The defendants acknowledge that the real reason behind these applications is that no appeal lies from a decision under <case> of the Cross-Vesting Act (s ). They are made in reliance on SCR Part 12 r 2 which provides as follows: "2(1) Where any proceedings are commenced in a Division, the Court in the
Division in which the proceedings are pending may - in a case where the Court makes any order under Part 31 r 2 for the decision of the question of law; or in any other case, where the Court states the question to be decided or determined and is satisfied that special circumstances exist which render it desirable to make an order under this sub rule, on application by a party or of its own motion, make an order that the proceedings be removed into the Court of Appeal." 
Paragraph (a) is irrelevant. If the defendants are to succeed, they must succeed in persuading me that special circumstances exist which render it desirable to make an order for removal of the proceedings.

Each defendant/applicant sought orders in the alternative. There were slight variations in formulation but the orders sought were of essentially the same character. It is sufficient to set out a sample of the orders sought as framed in the notices of motion filed in Mr Hesse's claim. The order primarily sought, by notice of motion filed in court on the day of the hearing was: "Pursuant to Part 12 Rule 2(b) of the Supreme Court Rules, the question whether these proceedings be transferred to the Supreme Court of Western
Australia, Perth Registry, be removed into the Court of Appeal of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales." 
Whether the proceedings be transferred to the Supreme Court of Western
Australia is the ultimate question before me in the transfer applications. In effect, what the defendant/applicants seek, is removal of the proceedings in such a way as to cast upon the Court of Appeal the burden of balancing all the factors that go into the equation in determining whether it is in the interests of justice that some other court determine the plaintiffs' claims.

The alternative sought by notice of motion filed in Mr Hesse's (and other) cases was: "1. That orders be made pursuant to Part 31 Rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules for the decision separately from any other questions arising in the cross- vesting applications of all questions of fact on matters in the opinion of the
Trial Judge relevant to determination of the cross-vesting applications.
That liberty be reserved to the Fourth and Seventh Defendants to apply after the determination by the Trial Judge of such questions of fact, for appropriate orders pursuant to Part 12 r 2 of the Supreme Court Rules removing the proceedings to the Court of Appeal for determination of questions of principal (sic) raised by the cross-vesting applications." 
What the defendants really want is a definitive ruling on whether, in a cross- vesting application, the existence of limitation legislation in the proposed transferee jurisdiction should either influence the decision, or be decisive of it. Accordingly, in written submissions they proposed that after making relevant findings of fact, I should remove the proceedings stating four specific questions for determination by the Court of Appeal.

The specific questions of principle proposed are: 
As a matter of principle, should the existence of different limitation periods in the forum state and the proposed transferee state be taken into account on an application to cross-vest the proceedings? 
If so, is the fact that the plaintiff would, or would be likely to be, time barred in that transferee state a decisive or determinative factor in such an application? 
As a matter of principle, can the fact that, although a matter may be prima facie statute barred in both the forum court and the proposed transferee court, there exists the possibility of an extension of time in the forum Court but not in the transferee court be taken into account on an application for the cross-vesting of proceedings? 
Is the existence of differences either in terms of the limitation period or the possibility of an extension of time being granted a neutral factor in considering what is required by `the interests of justice' whether under s (2)(b)(ii)(C) or <case>(b)(iii) of the Cross-Vesting Act.

This is not the first time removal applications have been made. In February I heard argument on applications that were identical to the primary application now made, that is, for removal of the proceedings, identifying as the question to be stated the entire cross-vesting decision. The question the defendants then sought to have stated was framed as follows: "Should an order pursuant to [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/s5.html) of the [Jurisdiction of Courts(Cross-Vesting) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/) be made transferring the proceedings to the Supreme Court [ of the relevant State]?" 
Because, inter alia, of the breadth of the question, I then refused the orders sought. (Charlton versus The Upjohn Company, unreported, 29 February 1996)
Applications for leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal were dismissed. The
Court said: "For the same reason, that is the breadth of the question, this Court is not disposed to grant the application for leave to appeal. In our view the applications are premature and invite the Court, in many respects, to consider questions which may ultimately be nothing more than academic questions.

It should be said, however, that at a later stage in the proceedings, when findings of fact have been made, a trial judge may be disposed, upon application by one or other of the parties, to remove specific questions to this Court for determination. However, of course, it would be quite inappropriate for this Court to seek in any way to interfere in the conduct of the case by that Court." 
It was no doubt because of this passage that the alternative approach has been taken.

The primary application, that I remove the proceedings to the Court of Appeal, stating as the question for determination by that Court whether the proceedings should be transferred, can be dealt with quickly. The breadth of the question has not changed since 1996. I decline to state such a question or to remove the proceedings on the basis that the ultimate question for decision in the transfer applications is stated as the question for the determination of the Court of Appeal. The applications having been comprehensively argued and determined in 1996, the defendant/applicants must make out a strong case before they will be reconsidered, and must show some relevant change in circumstance since the previous applications. They have not done so.

There is more merit in the alternative proposal.

The most significant matter raised in support of removal concerns the correct approach to be taken to the Cross-Vesting Act. Given that there is no appeal from a cross-vesting decision, removal is the only way to secure an authoritative ruling if doubts exist: Bankinvest AG versus Seabrook [(1988) 14
NSWLR 711.] 
And given that the Cross-Vesting Act is part of a national scheme of legislation designed to facilitate the transfer of appropriate matters between jurisdictions (state, territory and federal) in order to avoid the inconvenience and expense that have occasionally been caused by the jurisdictional limits that are part of a Federal system (see the preamble), consistent application of the legislation is highly desirable.

The substance of the argument in 1996 was that divergences of opinion amongst judges of this and other courts applying the cross-vesting legislation have emerged. The divergences were said to relate to two matters: firstly, the relevance, if any, to a cross-vesting decision of the existence in the jurisdiction to which transfer is sought of a limitation period that would or might bar the claim; and secondly, whether any party carries an onus of proof in a cross-vesting application.

In at least three of the four present cases, the application of limitation legislation in the state to which transfer is sought would, prima facie, defeat the plaintiff's claim.

Having regard to the decision of the High Court in McKain versus R W Miller &
Co (S.A.) Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 1], if the proceedings are not transferred, NSW limitation law will be applied. It may be assumed that that law is more generous to the plaintiffs than that of their home states. Whether the application of limitation legislation in the proposed transferee state that would or might defeat the plaintiff's claim should be a factor in the transfer decision is therefore a significant question in individual applications.

In 1996 it was argued that, in the interests of achieving uniformity in the application and interpretation of the cross-vesting legislative scheme nationally, the authoritative pronouncement of a Court of Appeal is required to resolve these differences of opinion. To support the proposition that such differences of opinion existed I was referred to the decisions of three members of this court: Newton versus Queenstown Pty Limited, unreported, 7 May , Sully J; Magian versus Mount Isa Mines Limited, unreported 31 August , Studdert J; DJ versus Trustees of the Christian Brothers, unreported, 15
December 1994, Levine J. I was also referred to the decisions of judges of other states: Carnie versus Richmond, unreported, 3 November 1994, White J,
Supreme Court of Queensland; Taylor versus Trustees of the Christian Bros.;
Reidy versus Trustees of the Christian Bros. [[1994] Aust Torts Reports -288], Hayne J, then of the Supreme Court of Victoria. As I observed at the time, all three judges of this court were of one mind. Sully J considered that the existence of a limitation period in the transferee state that would defeat the plaintiff's claim was a relevant factor militating against transfer, and, indeed, considered that to transfer the proceedings in those circumstances would be "[to visit] upon the plaintiff a positive injustice to which he ought not be exposed." Studdert J followed Sully J's decision and Levine J appears also to have accepted it. Hayne J took a different view: that limitation legislation in the proposed transferee state should not affect the cross-vesting decision, at least in the application with which he was dealing.

That leaves the decision of White J in Carney, in which her Honour referred to a fourth single judge decision of this Court, that of Loveday J, in Jenkins versus Australian Shipping Company, unreported, 13 September 1991.
The text of that judgment was not then available but, from the precis of it given by White J, it was apparent that Loveday J took the view that, because an expired limitation period in the proposed transferee state operates as an advantage to one party, and a corresponding disadvantage to the other party, it is neutral in the cross-vesting decision.

Precisely the same argument was put in the present applications. That is, the defendants relied heavily upon the divergence of opinion between judges about the proper impact, if any, of the existence of limitation legislation in the proposed transferee state where a defendant seeks to have a claim transferred in such a way that the application of that legislation will, or might, terminate the plaintiff's claim. Only three additional matters were put before me. One was that the judgment of Loveday J in Jenkins, which could not previously be found, had now been found, and that its text strengthened the contention that, even amongst NSW judges, there was relevant disagreement.

The fact that the judgment is now before me does not alter my earlier view. In the first place, if the judgment could be found in 1997, it could have been found in 1996. I say this conscious that I observed in my previous judgment that my own staff and the court staff had not been able to find it.
Nevertheless, the efforts that turned it up in 1997 could have turned it up in
Of more importance is that from the material that was then available relating to that decision its effect was apparent. As I then inferred, the view expressed by Loveday J was that the existence of the limitation period operating to the disadvantage of the plaintiff and the advantage of the defendant was neutral. With the benefit of the whole of the judgment I remain of the view that that is the effect of his decision. Indeed, the transcript of argument in the present applications shows that that was the conclusion counsel sought to draw from the decision.

Another matter advanced as sufficient to warrant reconsideration of the removal applications is the publication of the decision of the High Court in
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 541], with particular reference to the passages in the judgment of
McHugh J commencing at p 552.

The judgment in Taylor was published on 2 October 1996, post dating both my previous decision and the refusal of the Court of Appeal to grant leave to appeal. The defendants' argument was that Taylor dictates a radical review by courts of their approaches to the existence of limitation periods, and that, where, in the past, (as evidenced by the views of Sully J, followed by
Studdert J and Levine J) courts have given undue weight to disadvantage accruing to plaintiffs by the application of limitation periods, and insufficient weight to the corresponding advantage to the defendant so created (and intended by the parliament which enacted the legislation) it is now necessary to accord full weight to the purposes for which the various jurisdictions have enacted such legislation.

It may or may not be the case that judges in the past have leant towards protecting the claims of plaintiffs at the expense of the prima facie statutory rights of the defendants as suggested. If it is, the strongly worded remarks of McHugh J will no doubt have the effect of arresting that tendency.
The passages cited will plainly be of considerable influence in cases where the advantage to one party and the corresponding disadvantage to another brought about by limitation legislation have to be balanced in a discretionary decision. Taylor operates as a powerful reminder that there are two sides to every limitation question and that justice is not limited to advancing the claims of plaintiffs at the expense of defendants. It has not, however, altered the law; it has, in my view, placed in perspective the attention that should be given to limitation periods.

I do not see Taylor as a reason for removal of the present applications to the Court of Appeal. The argument, it seems to me, depends upon an unstated premise: that is that a single judge of this court (or other state, territory or federal courts) will inevitably follow the decisions of another unless constrained by a binding judgment of an appellate court. The premise is incorrect. As a general rule, a single judge will follow the decision of another unless persuaded that the judgment of the first is plainly wrong.
However, where, as here, observations from the High Court, though not amounting to a technically binding ruling or interpretation, cast new light upon one aspect of a decision to be made, or suggest reconsideration of a question earlier decided, then a later judge may well depart from the decision of an earlier judge, without the necessity of a definitive appellate judgment.

Another matter raised by counsel in support of the applications was what they described as "doubts about the continued correctness" of McKain, in the light of different approaches to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s118.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/): see for example, the judgments of Gaudron J in McKain; and Kirby P (as he then was) in Thompson versus Hill; Clark versus Fowler [(1995) 38 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281995%29%2038%20NSWLR%20714 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Even if such doubts do exist, I do not see that as a factor favouring removal to the Court of Appeal. McKain relevantly stands as binding authority for the proposition (at least) that a NSW court exercising jurisdiction in respect of an interstate tort will apply NSW limitation law to that claim: Gardner v
Wallace  <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 95.] Any doubts about its continued correctness will be resolved in the High Court.

Having regard to the view I have reached on the substance of the transfer applications, I do not regard the differences of opinion in relation to the relevance of limitation legislation as amounting to special circumstances within the meaning of [Rule (b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s2.html) justifying removal to the Court of Appeal.

Since I have found it possible to resolve the transfer applications without consideration of the effect of limitation legislation, the question proposed is an academic one. The orders I will make will give the defendant the opportunity to seek the intervention of the Court of Appeal.

What I will do is make an order dismissing the application for removal; to identify the orders I propose to make on the cross-vesting applications, but defer making those orders until the defendants have had the opportunity to file applications for leave to appeal that decision; should such an application be filed in any case, I will further defer making orders until the applications (and any appeal for which leave is granted) has been determined.

The Transfer Applications 
There will, undoubtedly, be additional expense and inconvenience caused to the defendants if the hearings are to take place in NSW. Indeed, even if this court were able to travel to the cities where the defendants are located, there will be cost and inconvenience associated with the marshalling of material (including extensive documentary records) and having it available for pre-trial preparation and hearings. I do not underestimate these difficulties.
However, in litigation of this scale and magnitude, cost and inconvenience will exist, wherever the hearings take place. What I have to measure is the extent to which the cost and inconvenience would be increased if the proceedings were not transferred, and weigh that against the extent to which the cost and inconvenience would be increased by transferring proceedings with many common elements to the five other states and two territories of the
Commonwealth, with the result that common issues that could be dealt with once only will be dealt with at least eight times.

As I foreshadowed in my previous judgment, if the proceedings remain in NSW it will be necessary to devise procedures to facilitate the litigation and minimise inconvenience and disruption.

Counsel for the defendants argued that, if it is the case that any particular claim naturally "belongs to" another state or territory, then, regardless of potential overall savings of cost and inconvenience, I should not take a course of action that would cause a burden which should fall on the courts of the other states or territories onto the taxpayers of NSW. They made particular reference to the notorious fact that the resources of this court are already overstretched with the result that litigants who have properly commenced their proceedings in this court face lengthy delays. They also pointed to dicta to the effect that issues of professional standards are most appropriately litigated in the jurisdiction in which the professional services are rendered: Bankinvest, p 729; Ellis versus Wallsend District Hospital [(1989) 17 NSWLR 553]; Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538.] 
There is much to be said for the proposition that the cases that have originated in Western Australia belong naturally in that state, and should there be litigated, and that, for example, a Western Australian court is better placed to evaluate the proper standards of medical care for Western
Australia.

However, against that must be weighed the savings of cost and inconvenience that may be effected if all cases remain in one jurisdiction so that, for example, an expert witness need give evidence in chief only once, and be cross-examined by any defendant who wishes to do so during a single session of the trial. Further, a hearing in this manner is likely to produce a consistent outcome on common issues. Counsel for the defendants countered this proposition with the argument that, in the absence of some consensual arrangement, no finding of fact or conclusion of law made in one case will be binding in any other; and argued that there is nothing intrinsically wrong with different results in different cases. I do not accept this last submission. In my opinion where litigants in a federation bring cases that have significant common elements, consistent results are likely to avoid feelings of injustice that would naturally result from differential approaches to questions both of liability and damages. As for the former submission, even without consent it will be possible to arrange the hearings so that factual and legal issues are determined in a way that will bind the relevant parties.

Further, although the Upjohn companies played no part in the present application, I cannot think that it would be other than in their interest that the allegations against them be made and resolved in a consistent manner, and, so far as possible, in a single hearing. Certainly, cost and inconvenience to the plaintiffs will be minimised if the claims against Upjohn are determined in one jurisdiction.

In my opinion the overall benefits of dealing with these cases in a single jurisdiction significantly outweigh the disadvantage to individual defendants than being forced to litigate in a distant location will cause. I am therefore of the view that it is not in the interests of justice that any of these four proceedings be determined by the Supreme Court of the state to which transfer is sought.

It will be observed that in reaching this conclusion I have not had regard to the adverse limitation periods which, at least potentially, affect three of the present plaintiffs.

However, I would find it difficult to conclude, absent some specific evidence that the defendants' position had worsened during the time between the expiration of the limitation period and the time the claim was made, that it would be in the interests of justice to transfer a claim validly brought in
NSW to a jurisdiction where it would or might be defeated by the operation of limitation legislation. It is conceivable that in a particular case to do so might further the interests of justice; I have in mind the sort of case in which a material witness to relevant facts had died, or material records had been destroyed during that period. (If those events occurred before the expiration of the limitation period, the defendant would not be made worse off by reason of a more favourable limitation regime in the forum and they would be irrelevant). In my opinion the Cross-Vesting Act was not intended to defeat the rights of plaintiffs in the way they would if this court transferred proceedings validly commenced to a jurisdiction where the rights the plaintiff has in this jurisdiction were defeated. This is not to overlook the strong remarks of McHugh J in Taylor; but those remarks were made in the context of an application for extension of time under Queensland limitation legislation, and were directed to the rights that had accrued in that jurisdiction to defendants by the expiration of the limitation period. If an interstate limitation period does not operate to terminate or bar the rights of a plaintiff bringing an action in NSW, then those rights have not accrued to a defendant.

The first paragraph of the preamble to the Cross-Vesting Act notes the desirability of establishing a system of cross-vesting of jurisdiction between courts "without detracting from the existing jurisdiction of any court". It was not suggested that this court does not have jurisdiction in these claims; it was suggested that the interests of justice require determination of claims validly brought in NSW by another court. The interests of justice would not, in my opinion, be served if a plaintiff is deprived of a legitimate claim.

I have also considered whether it would be appropriate, under <case> of the
Cross Vesting Act, to transfer the proceedings to the Federal Court, particularly in the light of the Brooks litigation there under way.
However, as this was no party's preferred position, and as I understand that there exists some doubt about the validity of that section (on which the High
Court is to rule) I determined against that course.

I propose in due course, to discuss each transfer application.

The orders I make are:
The applications for removal to the Court of Appeal are refused;
The applications for transfer are stood over to a date to be fixed by arrangement with my Associate.
 * * * 
