

Leneghan-Britton versus Taylor Matter No 3569/97 [1998] NSWSC 218 (28 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 June 1998 
LENEGHAN-BRITTON versus TAYLOR /97 May 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The late Doris May Wennerbom died on 25th September 1994, as a result of an assault by the plaintiff, who is the deceased's granddaughter. The deceased left an estate comprising a house at Canley Vale said to be worth $120,000.00 to $150,000.00, furniture and effects of little value, and about $30,000.00 in bank accounts. By her last will dated 27th June 1964, the deceased appointed the defendant her executor; left the house to be divided equally between the plaintiff and her mother (the deceased's daughter) Phyllis Donovan, with the plaintiff having certain rights of residence; gave a legacy of $500.00 to another daughter, Jocelyn Cochrane; gave the contents of the house to the plaintiff; and gave the residue to be divided equally between the plaintiff, Mrs. Donovan, and the deceased's daughter-in-law, Elva Wennerbom. 
In these proceedings, the plaintiff seeks an order under the [Forfeiture Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/) modifying the effect of the forfeiture rule, that is, the unwritten rule of public policy that in certain circumstances precludes a person who has unlawfully killed another person from acquiring a benefit in consequence of the killing.
It is common ground that, without such an order, the plaintiff would be precluded by this rule from taking any benefit under the will of the deceased.
The plaintiff seeks an order excluding altogether the application of the rule, or alternatively modifying it to the extent of allowing the plaintiff to take some benefit under the deceased's will. The application is opposed by the defendant.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
The plaintiff was born on 26th April 1964. She was substantially brought up by the deceased and the deceased's husband, in circumstances outlined in the plaintiff's affidavit, and she had a very close relationship with the deceased until her death.

In 1992, the plaintiff and her husband Michael were living at North Katoomba, in a house that the plaintiff had purchased in the mid-1980s. During a visit by them to the deceased' house, the deceased said to them that she was finding it difficult to look after herself, and asked them to live with her. It was later agreed that they would do this, and would build a kit home at the rear of the deceased's property. According to the plaintiff, the deceased said: "I would be very pleased if you did that. The rest of the family have deserted me. I will change my will so that I leave the house to you".

On 26th May 1993, the deceased made a will giving $1,000.00 to each of her daughters Mrs. Donovan and Mrs. Cochrane, and gave the rest of her property to the plaintiff. In the Public Trustee Will Information Form, it was noted that the deceased did not think her other grandchildren would contest the will, as they were well-off, whereas the plaintiff needed the help.

Towards the end of 1993, the plaintiff sold her house at North Katoomba for about $90,000.00; and in about November 1993, the plaintiff and her husband moved to the deceased's house at Canley Vale. According to the plaintiff, she used $41,000.00 of the proceeds to purchase a kit home. She also purchased a car for about $18,000.00, and lent $25,000.00 to a friend of her husband in order that they become silent partners in the friend's business. She also purchased items to be used in the deceased's home: a refrigerator for $1,200.00, a washing machine for $900.00, a television for $650.00, and a microwave for $250.00.

After the deceased and her husband moved to Canley Vale, the husband did work on the outside of the house and the plaintiff did virtually everything else that had to be done around the house. However, no progress was made on erecting the kit home. There were difficulties in the plaintiff's relationship with the deceased who, according to the plaintiff, was very critical of everything the plaintiff did. At this time, the deceased was about 86, and her health was deteriorating. The deceased developed bowel cancer, and became feacally incontinent. The plaintiff found it increasingly difficult to live with and look after the deceased, and her relationship with the deceased worsened.

In March 1994, the plaintiff saw her local doctor and was diagnosed as suffering from depression. The doctor prescribed her Prozac.

On 27th June 1994, the deceased made her last will at the office of the defendant. It seems that she was accompanied there by the plaintiff's mother and aunt. The plaintiff was unaware that the will had been changed.

Between 5th and 9th August 1994, the deceased was in hospital, where she had surgery for bowel cancer. She then went to the Lady Davidson Home from 9th to th August.

On 30th August 1994, the deceased insisted on coming home. The deceased and the plaintiff then had a big argument about a trivial matter. Later that night, the plaintiff tried to commit suicide, by taking a large overdose of drugs. She was taken to Liverpool Hospital. A psychiatrist there noted that the plaintiff had been under considerable stress caring for her dying grandmother and had recently been told she could not fall pregnant. The plaintiff was offered psychiatric follow-up, which she declined. She was discharged on 3rd September 1994.

On 25th September 1994, the plaintiff and her husband attended a barbecue at the house of a friend, to watch the rugby league grand final. They returned home at a little before 8.00pm. It appears there was an argument between the plaintiff and the deceased, which led to a violent assault by the plaintiff on the deceased, resulting in her death. The plaintiff and her husband subsequently took steps to make it appear that the deceased had been killed by an intruder. About 10.00pm the same night, the plaintiff's husband took the plaintiff out to an RSL club, in an attempt to establish an alibi. The next morning, the plaintiff's husband telephoned the police to report finding the deceased's body. Both the plaintiff and her husband gave false accounts of the events of the previous night.

On 21st December 1994, the plaintiff and her husband were arrested and charged with murder of the deceased.

On 28th April 1995, for the first time, the plaintiff and her husband admitted involvement in the death of the deceased. On 9th December 1996, the plaintiff pleaded guilty to a charge of manslaughter, which was accepted by the Crown on the basis of diminished responsibility under s.23A of the Crimes Act. On the same day, the plaintiff's husband pleaded guilty to a charge of being an accessory after the fact to manslaughter committed by his wife. On 23rd
December 1996, Justice James sentenced the plaintiff to penal servitude for eleven years, consisting of a minimum term of seven years from 21st December , and an additional term of four years. He also sentenced the plaintiff's husband to a fixed term of two years from 21st December 1994, so that the plaintiff's husband was then released.

Psychiatric evidence before Justice James showed that the plaintiff suffered from a border-line personality disorder, and that, at the time of the crime, she was also suffering from a serious psychiatric illness, namely major depression; and that, as a result, her mental responsibility for her crime was substantially diminished. The reasons for sentence given by Justice James set out further details of the history of the matter and of the psychiatric evidence, which are accepted by the parties as accurate.

According to the plaintiff, she is now substantially without assets. The kit home was never constructed. It was taken away by purchasers before the arrest of the plaintiff and her husband, the price was not paid, and the plaintiff is now unable to locate the purchasers. The business of the friend of the plaintiff's husband has not been successful. The goods purchased for the home have been taken into storage by the plaintiff's mother.

The defendant gave evidence that the title to the Canley Vale property had been transferred into his name on 24th January 1995. It has now been let for a period of three years. The debts of the estate were paid by December 1994, and the defendant is holding $20,000.00 in a controlled money account. The estate has not been distributed because of "this matter", that is, the question concerning the possible entitlement of the plaintiff.

ISSUES 
This matter requires consideration of matters arising under [ss.5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/s5.html), [6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/s6.html),[7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/s7.html) and [9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/s9.html) of the [Forfeiture Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/). Those sections are in the following terms: (1) This Act applies to the following: an unlawful killing whether occurring within or outside the State, property: location within the State, or located outside the State, but only to the extent to which courts of the State have jurisdiction to make orders concerning the property.

This Act doe not apply to the following: an unlawful killing committed in the State that constitutes murder, an unlawful killing that would constitute murder if committed in the State.
 (1) The Supreme Court may make a forfeiture modification order in such terms and subject to such conditions as the Court thinks fit.

For example, the Court may modify the effect of the forfeiture rule in relation to property: in the case of more than one interest in the same property (for instance, a joint tenancy) affected by the rule - by excluding the operation of the rule in relation to any or all of the interests, and in the case of an offender who has an interest in real property (such as a family home) and personal property affected by the rule - by excluding the application of the rule in relation to all the property or some of the property.

If the Court makes a forfeiture modification order, the forfeiture rule is to have effect for all purposes (including purposes relating to anything done before the order was made) subject to modifications made by the order.
 (1) Unless the Supreme Court gives leave for a late application to be made under subsection (2), an application for a forfeiture modification order must be made: if the forfeiture rule operates immediately on the death of a deceased person to prevent the offender from obtaining the benefit concerned - within 12 months from the date of the death of the deceased person, or if the forfeiture rule subsequently prevents the offender from obtaining the benefit - within 12 months from the date on which the forfeiture rule operates to preclude the offender from obtaining the benefit.

The Court may give leave for a late application if: the offender concerned is pardoned by the Governor after the expiration of the relevant period, or the offender's conviction is quashed or set aside by a court after the expiration of the relevant period and there are no further avenues of appeal available in respect of the decision to quash or set aside the conviction, or the fact that the offender committed the unlawful killing is discovered after the expiration of the relevant period, or the Court considers it just in all the circumstances to give leave.
 (1) A forfeiture modification order may be made in respect of: an unlawful killing occurring before or after the commencement of this Act, or the application of the forfeiture rule in proceedings commenced but not determined before the commencement of this Act.

A forfeiture modification order is not to be made modifying the effect of the forfeiture rule in respect of any interest in property that, in consequence of the rule, has been acquired before the commencement of this Act by a person other than the offender or a person claiming through the offender.

However, nothing in this Act affects any determination of a court concerning the application of the forfeiture rule in any proceedings that was made before the commencement of his Act.

Three issues have been argued. First, does s.9(2) preclude the making of an order, in that a beneficial interest in the relevant property had been acquired by the plaintiff's mother Mrs. Donovan in about January 1995, prior to the commencement of the [Forfeiture
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/)? Second, is this application within time, or should leave now be given for a late application? Third, should an order be made, and if so, what? [Section 9(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/s9.html) 
Written submissions on this matter have been provided by Counsel for each party, and I will leave them with the papers.

Mr. Harris for the defendant submitted that, by February 1995, all executorial duties had been completed, so that thereafter all property was held by the defendant as a trustee: McCaughey v. Commissioner of Stamp Duties <case>; [(1946) 46 SR 192] at ; Certoma, Law of Succession in New South Wales, 2nd Ed., p.268.
Essentially, in this case, the executorial duties involved the collection of assets sufficient to pay the debts, funeral and testamentary expenses, the payment of those expenses, and the distribution of the estate. However, if all that is outstanding is the actual distribution, and there is no impediment to that distribution, then the assets are held as trustee: see Stokes v.
Churchill, Santow, J., 16th December 1993. At least, the defendant was trustee of the real estate, because he acknowledged Mrs. Donovan's ownership of that asset, in that he acted according to a direction by her to retain it so that it would be available as a residence for the plaintiff when she was released from gaol.

Mr. Moore for the plaintiff submitted that executorial duties had not been completed. In this case, executorial duties included distribution of the estate: see In the Will of Allen [(1912) VR 28]; Re King's Will
Trust [(1964) Ch. 542]; Harvell v. Foster [(1954) 2 QB 367]; Re Rowe [(1889) 58 LJ Ch. 703]; Attenborough v. Solomon <case>; [(1913) AC ];
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (Qld) v. Livingstone [(1964) 112 CLR 12]; Official
Receiver in Bankruptcy v. Shultz [(1990) 170 CLR 312]; Re
Hayes' Will Trust [(1971) 1 WLR 758] at 764; and
Re Langan [(1972) Qld.R 1.] Furthermore, Mr. Moore submitted that the defendant had not acknowledged the interest of Mrs. Donovan as beneficial owner of the property: in any event, at best, Mrs. Donovan would be entitled to a half- interest in the real estate under the specific gift, and a further one-quarter by reason of a half-interest in residue.

In my opinion, whether or not the executorial duties in this case required actual distribution, and whether or not there was anything from the defendant that could amount to an assent or acknowledgement, the defendant's executorial duties did extend to the defendant becoming satisfied as to who were the beneficiaries in the estate. The defendant has not asserted that at any time he became satisfied that the plaintiff was not a beneficiary of the estate.
Nor is there any evidence that the application of the forfeiture rule to the plaintiff was otherwise established, prior to her pleading guilty to manslaughter on 9th December 1996. I accept that the plaintiff was guilty of manslaughter in killing her grandmother on 25th September 1994, so that from that time on she in fact had no entitlement to the estate; but I do not think that means that the defendant can be regarded as having, prior to the commencement of the [Forfeiture
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/), ascertained and determined who were the beneficiaries, and thus who were the persons to whom the estate should be distributed or on whose behalf the estate should be held on trust. Indeed the evidence of the defendant that he refrained from making any distribution confirms that the defendant was not satisfied as to the persons to whom distribution should be made.

In those circumstances, I do not think that executorial duties were completed before the commencement of the Act, or that Mrs. Donovan can be considered as having acquired a beneficial interest in any particular asset of the estate prior to the commencement of the Act. The interest of Mrs. Donovan was merely a claim against the defendant to have the estate administered.

OTHER ISSUES 
Mr. Moore submitted that justice did require modification of the forfeiture rule. He pointed out that, in order to go to live with the deceased, the plaintiff had sold her own home, and now had very little left of the proceeds of that sale. He pointed to the psychiatric reports, showing that the plaintiff suffered from a border-line personality disorder and major depression, so that her mental responsibility for the crime was substantially diminished. He pointed to the psychiatric evidence confirming that the plaintiff's relationship with the deceased was a very close but very troubled relationship; that there was no premeditation; that there had been two serious attempts at suicide, one in gaol and the other when the deceased, aged 86 and suffering from bowel cancer, had insisted on coming home leading to a serious argument. The plaintiff had lived with her grandmother because of feelings of love and obligation, whereas by reason of her mental difficulties she was incapable of doing so. Mr. Moore referred me to Troja v. Troja [(1994) 33
NSWLR 269]; and he submitted that in this case, having regard to the seriously diminished responsibility of the plaintiff, the community would not be outraged by her taking under the deceased's will, and this would not involve unconscionability or any element of unjust enrichment. Mr. Moore also referred me to Re Keitley <case>; [(1992) 1 VR 583.] 
Mr. Harris submitted, in relation to a suggestion that, if the rule was not modified to allow the plaintiff to take the full interest under the will, the plaintiff could be allowed something under the will, that the Act gave no power to create a new bequest. At most, a plaintiff could be permitted, through modification of the rule, to receive part of some provision actually made in the will. In any event, the matter should certainly not be approached on the basis that, if a crime is not as serious as the most serious of crimes, then the perpetrator can be allowed to profit a little bit from it. In this case, justice did not require that the effect of the rule be modified. This was a most serious crime, far removed from the sort of cases which the legislature had in mind, having regard to the second reading speech. In this case, there was no provocation, the crime was in no sense the fault of the victim, and the plaintiff and her husband showed cold-bloodedness in their efforts to construct an alibi and to deceive the police as to what happened.
This was confirmed by the terms of the discussion between the plaintiff and her husband which had been secretly taped. There was no admission of guilt until very much later, following the intervention of a barrister.

I certainly accept Mr. Harris' submission that I should not approach this on the basis that, if the crime is less than the worst possible crime, then the perpetrator may be allowed to profit a little from the crime. Furthermore, this was a crime of extreme seriousness. The plaintiff did have substantial mental responsibility for it, albeit mental responsibility that was substantially diminished; and that substantial mental responsibility was reflected in the sentence imposed on her. The attempt to cover up the crime was deliberate and serious.

On the other hand, there was no premeditation. The plaintiff had no intention to profit by the crime. The situation arose because of the very close relationship between the plaintiff and the deceased, and because of the plaintiff's attempt to be of service to the deceased at a time when she was mentally unable to cope with this. If one could leave aside the crime itself, this would have to be seen as a case where the plaintiff had a strong moral claim: she had been brought up as a daughter, had a very close relationship with the deceased, had sold her home in order to assist the deceased and had little of the proceeds of sale left, and had attempted to assist the deceased when no other member of the family was making such an attempt. The benefit that the plaintiff may have obtained from the crime would at most be a very short acceleration of an entitlement under the deceased's will: it is clear that the deceased was already very ill, 86 years old, and her death would not in any event have been long delayed. The mental state of the plaintiff was one involving suppressed rage which could erupt against herself as well as others, as demonstrated by her serious suicide attempts. She has been appropriately punished for her crime. In all these circumstances, modification of the forfeiture rule would not, in my opinion, provide any incentive to any other person to act similarly, nor would it outrage the community. Indeed, in all the circumstances, I think justice does require modification of the rule, so that the plaintiff can receive the benefit provided by the will.

Mr. Harris made no specific submissions against the granting of leave for a late application; and in my opinion, it is just in all the circumstances to give that leave.

CONCLUSION 
In the result, I will make an order giving leave under [s.7(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/s7.html) of the [Forfeiture
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fa1995134/), and make a forfeiture modification order under s.6.1 of the Act having the effect that the plaintiff will receive the benefits provided in the will of the deceased.

My tentative view on costs is that the plaintiff must pay the costs of the proceedings. The plaintiff was seeking an indulgence from the Court. It was reasonable for the executor to oppose the application, or at the least require the plaintiff to make out a case for the making of an order. In my opinion, other beneficiaries should not be disadvantaged by the application. The costs have certainly not been increased by any unreasonable conduct by the defendant.
 * * * 
