

Regina versus L G Wilson [1996] NSWSC 20 (1 February 1996) 
REGINA v. Lyndsay George WILSON /95 February 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, STUDDERT J 
CATCHWORDS: THREATENING TO CAUSE A DETRIMENT TO A WITNESS INTENDING TO INFLUENCE THAT WITNESS TO GIVE FALSE EVIDENCE ADMISSIBILITY OF CERTAIN CROSS-EXAMINATION - UNSAFE AND UNSATISFACTORY VERDICT - INCONSISTENCY OF GUILTY VERDICT ON ONE COUNT WITH NON GUILTY VERDICE ON OTHER COUNT 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed. New trial ordered.

HEADNOTE 
The appellant was convicted of threatening to cause a detriment to a witness, intending to influence her to give false evidence in judicial proceedings against him.

Held: 
The trial judge applied an incorrect test in determing whether to permit cross examination of a witness on an allegedly prior inconsistent statement.
He determined that the prior statement was not inconsistent. The correct test was whether what she had allegedly said was capable of amounting to a prior inconsistent statement. It was. Accordingly it was for the jury to determine whether what she had said amounted to a prior inconsistent statement and whether that affected the verdict.

The judge erred in declining to permit cross examination of the witness on what she had previously said to her son.
As the matter could have been of importance the appellant was entitled to a new trial.
The verdict was not unsafe or unsatisfactory as there was a substantial
Crown case.

Orders . Appeal allowed. Conviction quashed.
New trial ordered.
 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ AT CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J, for the reasons which he has given.

SMART J: Lyndsay George Wilson appeals against his conviction of about 1 July 1993 threatening to cause a detriment to Janet Lorraine Kelly intending to influence her to give false evidence in judicial proceedings against him. The jury acquitted him of a charge of between 10 and 18 March 1993 offering to confer a benefit upon Kelly intending to influence her to give false evidence in judicial proceedings against him.

The appellant admitted that between 10 and 18 March 1993 judicial proceedings were pending in which he was the defendant and J L Kelly was to be called as a witness. Committal proceedings were due to start on 18 March 1993. The appellant also admitted that on 1 July 1993 legal proceedings were pending in which he was a defendant and J L Kelly was to be called as a witness. The appellant had been committed and was awaiting trial. Those proceedings involved the appellant's alleged serious misconduct towards one of Mrs Kelly's children.

The appellant contends that the judge wrongly declined to permit certain cross examination and that the verdict of guilty was unsafe and unsatisfactory and inconsistent with the verdict of not guilty on the other count.

Mrs Kelly had been employed for about five years driving the appellant's taxi cab on a part time basis. She had enjoyed a large measure of trust and she and the appellant had been good friends. The appellant sold the taxi plate prior to the trial and Mrs Kelly drove for the purchaser.

On the first count of offering a benefit, Mrs Kelly stated that on 17 March , the day before she was to give evidence at the committal proceedings the appellant telephoned and asked her to change her evidence from hearing him say that he had put his hands inside her daughter's tracksuit pants to he had put his arm around her and was just playing with her. She said that he offered to make it worthwhile if she changed her evidence. She assumed that he would pay her some money. She conceded in cross examination that her statement to the police was wrong where she attributed to him the admission that he had showered with the girls.

The appellant denied that any such telephone conversation occurred. Detective
Snr Cons Sicard said that on 3 August 1993 in response to her question the appellant stated that he had not spoken to Mrs Kelly about her evidence shortly prior to the committal hearing.

Det Sicard said that at a further interview on 21 August 1993 the appellant stated that since their first interview he had recalled an occasion prior to the committal proceedings at a meeting in person with Mrs Kelly in which he told her that she had got it wrong in her statement. There was never any showering with the girls and there was never any hands down pants. He had never made statements to this effect to her. He had told Mrs Kelly that he had tickled the child and that when she went back to court she should state correctly what he had told her. She replied that she would sound stupid.

There was no evidence supporting the complainant on the first count.

On the second count of threatening to cause a detriment, Mrs Kelly stated that she was at her daughter's place in Lithgow when the appellant came to the house to speak to her. Her daughter, Nicole Wilkinson who answered the door, told Mrs Kelly that "Lyn" (the appellant) was at the door and wanted to see her at his car. She went out to the car. He asked her if she had the $200 she owed him. She replied, "No" and that she would have it shortly. He asked her if she would change her evidence. She declined. He stated that he would go to the Taxi co-op and tell them that she owed him a lot of money.

In her evidence she claimed that he had commenced with a demand for $3000 and that the amount had risen to $4000. He said that he would write a letter and that he could be very nasty when he wanted to be. If she did not change her evidence he would make it hard for her. When he threatened her she got out of the car and went back inside.

She stated that she had borrowed $200 from the appellant to send her son to
Western Australia and still owed that sum to the appellant at the time of the conversation. She denied that she owed him $3000 or $4000.

She said that the appellant telephoned her several times and asked her if she had changed her evidence. She said "No". On 22 July 1993 the appellant came to the house. Her son, Peter Scott Kelly answered the door. She did not wish to speak to the appellant but he replied that it would only take a minute. She went to the door and he tried to give her a letter that he was going to give to the taxi co-op. The letter was in his hand but she did not read it. She was not going to change her evidence. It did not matter what he told the taxi co- op, it would not make any difference to her evidence. He also stated that he would speak to the man for whom she was working. That man had purchased the cab about 1 May 1993.

Mrs Kelly was cross examined extensively. She denied that the appellant said to her at the beginning of the conversation on 22 July 1993 that she owed him $3000 at least and that he wanted that money. She denied that she stated that she did not have any money to repay him and asserted that the only topic of conversation regarding money concerned the $200 with no mention of the $3000 at all.

During the cross examination a number of ways were suggested in which she came to owe that sum. They included that she had helped herself to moneys received from driving the taxi to which she was not entitled.

She denied borrowing money from the appellant on a number of occasions but agreed that she had borrowed money from him on two occasions. One amount was repaid and the other amount of $200 was never repaid. She agreed that in her statement to the police on 12 August 1993 she had said that she had paid back both amounts. Part of her statement was untrue. She claimed "it just slipped my memory".

She was asked why she had said in her statement "Lyndsay Wilson has never asked me for money that he felt I owed him." She replied that that was referring to the three thousand dollars. It was pointed out to her that the statement quoted followed on almost immediately after the statement about paying back both amounts of $200. She agreed that the statement quoted was untrue. She did not know why she made that statement - it just slipped her memory.

Mrs Kelly agreed that she had taken her taxi money bag into a licensed club from time to time between 1988 and May 1993. However, at the committal proceedings she had stated that she had never taken the taxi money bag into the club whilst she played the poker machines.

She had done nothing when she was served with a statement of claim seeking about $4000. She did not see a solicitor until after she became aware that judgment had been entered against her.

At the committal proceedings on 25 February 1994 she had stated that she had paid back the $200 borrowed from the appellant when he had picked up the last lot of moneys for the taxis. She had made this erroneous statement because she was "mixed up".

Her son, Mr P S Kelly said that on 22 July 1993 the appellant and his mother started talking about some money his mother apparently owed to the appellant.
He wanted the money back. He acknowledged that in his statement to the police he had specified the amount as $3000 but added that he did not remember whether this was the actual amount. He may have assumed or just guessed the amount. The appellant said that he was going to telephone the taxi Co-op and say over the air "is that thief Jan Kelly still working?" The appellant had a one page letter and handed it to his mother. Mr Kelly walked away.

In cross examination Mr Kelly said that his mother was talking to him and "Mum was talking something about $3000, Lyn and something about the Taxi Co-op or something." At P 66-67 of his cross examination these passages appear: 
Q. Well let's get it clear one way or the other; did he or did he not say to her at the front door "When are you going to pay the three thousand dollars?"
Did he or did he not say those words to her? 
A. Well he probably did. I don't know about the amount of money though, the three thousand dollars.
 and 
Q. So What you're saying is that when you told the police Wilson said " When are you going to pay the three thousand dollars?" that was, may or may not have been correct? Is that what -- 
A. Yeah well I've probably got it mixed up with the, like the other two or three thousand dollars or something she was going on about.
 and 
Q. ... I put to you, Wilson said "When are you going to pay the three thousand dollars? If you don't I'm going to ring the taxi corporation and say on the air 'Is that thief Jan kelly still working?'" Did you hear him say that? 
A. Yeah.

Q. And I put to you in fact that that entire statement that you made to the police is precisely what he said to her when he went to the front door that night? What do you say about that? 
A. Well that's probably correct -- 
Q. Yes I put to you that the statement as you've got it recorded in your statement to the police is in fact the way it was? 
A. Well it could have been but for that three thousand dollars I probably got that mixed up ' cause I wasn't actually listening to the conversation, I was watching TV too.

Q. In fact it's fair to say is it not that Wilson and your mother were arguing about money? 
A. Yeah about money.

Q. And that this discussion between him and her was going on for about ten minutes? 
A. I don't know about ten minutes but it was roughly around that time, five to ten minutes.

Q. Putting it another way there's no doubt about the fact is there that he was asking her for money regardless of the amount, that he said she owed him? 
A. Yeah that's right.

Mr Kelly said that his mother told the appellant that she could not pay him back. He said that he would go to the Co-op.

Unfortunately the appellant did broadcast over the Taxi Co-op radio, "I was just wondering do you know that you've got a thief driving today." He also sent a letter to the Taxi Co-op advising of the "blatant dishonesty" of Jan
Kelly. He accused her of systematically helping herself to moneys entrusted to her. The amount involved was in excess of $4000.

The appellant made a long rambling statement to the jury in which he explained the relationship he had with Mrs Kelly and how the amounts she was banking from the taxi takings began to fall. Mrs Kelly told him that $800 had been lost from the cab but she had not reported it to the police because it was her fault. She was going to borrow money from the Credit Union to repay the appellant. He explained how the money which was owed to him increased.

He said that she continued to drive and manage the taxi notwithstanding that he had been charged with offences in respect of one of her daughters. They had dealings in respect of the taxi and the takings. About two days before the committal proceedings in respect of those offences began, he came to Lithgow to deal with some problems with the taxi. The engine was 'missing'. There was a conversation in her lounge room. In relation to the evidence she was going to give at the committal she said "Lyn I feel bad about this" ... "I always gave that statement to help you." The appellant replied "... you might as well get it right, there is a couple of things in there really that you got wrong."
The appellant said "we talked about them and she agreed she had got them wrong" but she said "I can't change them or I'd sound stupid". He replied "well it's up to you Jan". This was the last time he had mentioned the evidence or the court case or anything to Mrs Kelly.

He said that after the committal and about mid April 1993 she telephoned him and advised that her house had been robbed and that "$700 or $800 in the bank book has been taken." That is a reference to taxi takings of $700-$800 being held by her pending banking.

He travelled from Sydney to her home in Lithgow and said that he was taking the taxi, that he wanted his stereo gear and that she would not be driving the taxi any more. When the taxi plate was finally sold the purchaser did not want the vehicle. The appellant and Paul Polliti went to collect it to enable
Polliti to do some work on it. In the presence of Polliti, the appellant said to Mrs Kelly "something about the money" and "Jan you've just got to start."
She replied "Yes Lyn I'll start paying the money." The appellant stated that he had gone around to Mrs Kelly's home and spoken with her including once in the car. The subject was her failure to pay back the money.

The appellant broadly adopted the version of the conversation at the house given by P S Kelly in his police statement. The appellant asked her when she was going to pay the $3000. She said that she was not going to pay the money.
He told her that he was going to write the letter he had with him to the Co- operative. He was going to place it in the hands of the owners.

He also stated that he was going to come up on the radio telephone and tell the other drivers of her dishonesty. He said to her that if she was not going to repay the money he would make sure she never drove in Lithgow again. She replied that she could cause him more trouble than he could cause her.

Paul Polliti gave evidence that between 1 January and 31 December 1993 he drove to Mrs Kelly's house with the appellant. He could not remember the exact date (nor the month). He did not hear all the conversation. He was a little distance away from where the appellant and Mrs Kelly were speaking. The key words which he heard were "money" and "when are you going to pay me." Overall,
Mr Polliti's evidence was not significant. He was on the fringe.

Appeal Ground 1: The Judge erred in rejecting cross examination of Mrs Kelly as to a statement allegedly made to her son about her indebtedness to the appellant.

It was put to Mrs Kelly during cross examination relating to count 2 that after the appellant left her house on 22 July 1993 there was a conversation between her and her son. She did not remember. As the appellant's counsel attempted to put what was allegedly said objection was taken. A voir dire examination was held. Counsel put to Mrs Wilson that during that night she told her son that she believed that she owed Wilson $3000 or thereabouts. She denied that she had said this. She said that she told her son Peter that the appellant was threatening to say that she owed him money - "three or whatever it was." She did not understand, after the appellant left, that he was going to attempt to recover $3000 from her.

She said that she told her son that the appellant was going to tell the taxi co-op that she owed him $3000. She said that she did not say that she owed it to the appellant.

In the statement of 1 September 1993 of Mr P S Kelly this passage appears: "At about 7.00 pm on the 22nd of July 1993 I was at home with my mother when a person I know as Lindsay Wilson came over. I was present when he had a conversation with my mother. Wilson said 'when are you going to pay the $3000.

If you don't I'm going to ring the taxi corporation and say on the air, "Is that thief Jan Kelly still working." ...

Mum and Lindsay Wilson were arguing about the money.
 ...

Wilson was there for about ten minutes before leaving." 
In Mr Kelly's evidence at the committal proceedings he stated: "... And then this three thousand dollars come from somewhere which I don't know much about and as far as I know that's what mum was owing to Lyn. Just going by her and then she doesn't think so." and "... and then this three thousand dollars come from somewhere which I'm not real sure about it and that's what I put in my statement what Mum told me it was three thousand dollars." 
In the course of his discussion with counsel the judge commented that the
Crown was going to call Mr P S Kelly and that if Mr Kelly gave evidence that his mother had said that she owed the appellant $3000 counsel would have elicited the desired evidence.

The judge expressed the view that the appellant could only cross examine the complainant on what she had said to her son if he could say that she had made a prior inconsistent statement. The judge thought that the statements of the son were somewhat confused ('higgledy - piggledy') and that the remarks of the mother as set out in the son's statements were not sufficiently clear to amount to a prior inconsistent statement. He described what the son said as "pretty unintelligible" and appeared to take the view that whatever the mother's remarks may have meant, they were ambiguous and did not support the assertion that the mother told the son that she owed the appellant $3000.

The judge ultimately ruled that he would not allow counsel to use the remarks of the mother as relayed by the son as a prior inconsistent statement as it had not been demonstrated to be such a statement. The judge indicated that counsel could cross examine the son as to what his mother said to him.

The judge concentrated upon an incorrect test. The test is whether the words used were capable of meaning that she said that she owed the appellant $3000.
The test is not whether the words were hard to understand. There were the inter-related questions whether he asked her for the $3000 she owed him and whether she accepted or did not refute that she owed him $3000. The remarks of the mother as summarised by the son in his statement and in his evidence were capable of meaning that the appellant asked for the $3000 she owed him and that she accepted that she owed him $3000. What the words used meant was ultimately a question for the jury.

I am of the opinion that the judge should have permitted counsel for the appellant to cross examine the complainant that she had told her son that she owed the appellant $3000. She denied any such statement in her cross examination on the voir dire. The son made some limited concessions in his evidence.

The issue was capable of being important. It was the appellant's case that he was trying to get Mrs Kelly to repay the moneys which she owed. She did not want to re-pay the moneys and devised the story that he was threatening her.
An effective way of not having to pay the money was to have the appellant convicted of a criminal offence and put in gaol. This would destroy or adversely affect his credit when he sought to recover the money. The oral admissions which she alleged he made to her about his conduct with her daughter were damaging. It was not improper for him to point out that she had made mistakes when she raised the subject. She conceded in court that some remarks she had made in her police statement about him were untrue.

It was not improper for him to seek to recover moneys which she allegedly owed him. However, it was malicious for him to announce over the radio network of the Taxi Co-operative that she was a thief and to write in the terms which he did. It was also malicious to threaten to take such actions. With such threats and actions and the pending criminal charges in respect of the daughter a jury could readily conclude that her version of the meeting on 1 July 1993 was correct. Her evidence was supported by evidence she gave of subsequent events and that given by others.

A central issue in the trial was whether the threats of detriment were made to endeavour to obtain repayment of the moneys owed or to influence the evidence she gave. This was the way the case was fought and the way in which the evidence was given. The other possibility was that the threats were made for both reasons. Mrs Kelly, for obvious reasons, would not have accepted that possibility nor would the appellant. Depriving the appellant of the right to cross examine Mrs Kelly on whether she had told her son that she owed the appellant $3000 was of importance.

The impression which the evidence of the son leaves is that he was trying to back away from the suggestion that his mother told him that she owed $3000 and his statement that the appellant had sought payment of $3000. Her answers and re-actions in cross examination and her denial may have been important. Both the appellant and Mrs Kelly had a strong interest in putting a spin on the various conversations.

It is surprising that the appellant did not lead any documentary evidence such as bank records to show that the amounts banked were on the low side or at least explain the absence of such records. Nevertheless, the refusal to permit cross examination on a matter which could have been important entitles the appellant to a new trial. It is not a case for the application of the proviso.

The appellant did not make any separate submissions based upon the principle that motive to lie is a well recognised exception to the collateral fact rule:
Cf R V McNamara, CCA, unreported, 15 December 1995.

I have found it unnecessary to deal with the appellant's contention that the statement made to the son in the appellant's absence was admissible as evidence of her state of mind.

Appeal Ground 2 - Unsafe and Unsatisfactory Verdict 
The appellant contended that the verdicts were inconsistent and could not stand. Both depended on the truth of what she said occurred during her conversations with the appellant. There was considerable supporting evidence as to the second count. That included the presence of the appellant at Mrs
Kelly's house on 1 and 22 July 1993 and the conversations which were held, the threats and the appellant's actions in carrying out those threats. The Crown case on the second count was much stronger. The verdicts should not be regarded as inconsistent.

The appellant relied on Mrs Kelly making at least three incorrect statements to the police which were not on inconsequential matters. She admitted that at least two of her statements at the committal proceedings were incorrect. They were not minor and went to her financial probity and truthfulness. It could not be suggested that her evidence was wholly reliable. There was also the conflict in the evidence she gave and that of her son as to what happened on July 1993. In his evidence he seemed to be trying to adjust his position.

The appellant's threats and actions were capable of providing substantial support for Mrs Kelly's version. As mentioned, the appellant in his statement to the jury said, when dealing with non payment of the moneys allegedly owed, that he told her he was capable of getting very nasty and that he would make sure Mrs Kelly did not drive in Lithgow again.

The jury could have taken the view that the appellant did not appear to be financially destitute, that repayment of $3000 was a minor consideration and that the thrust of all the appellants' efforts was to have Mrs Kelly change her damaging evidence. The jury could have been sceptical about the appellant not producing any financial records to substantiate his claims. The appellant did not give evidence. Having made my own independent assessment of the evidence, I conclude that the verdict could not be classed as unsafe and unsatisfactory. It was well open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant did threaten to cause a detriment to Mrs Kelly intending to influence her to give false evidence. The jury may also have thought that the threats had the purpose of making her pay $3000 to the appellant.

The next question is whether there should be a new trial or the entry of a verdict of acquittal. The appellant received a sentence of 2 years 6 months penal servitude comprising a minimum term of 9 months and an additional term of 21 months. He has served 3 months and 23 days of that sentence, the sentence dating from 8 February 1995 and the appellant being released on bail on 31 May 1995.

The appellant was a man of prior good character. He was strongly supported by his two older children both of whom are in the professions. There is the unfortunate historical circumstance of the appellant's trial on the prior charges miscarrying, his imprisonment on those charges and the subsequent acquittal. However, the offence is a serious one and it must not be overlooked that the judge correctly thought that a lengthy additional term was appropriate so that the appellant could receive extended support and supervision. If there were a verdict of guilty at a new trial, a judge may send him to gaol or take the view that in the light of the unusual history a recognizance with suitable conditions was appropriate.

There should be an order for a new trial. It will be a matter for the Director of Public Prosecutions to decide whether to proceed with a new trial.

I propose the following orders:
Appeal against conviction allowed.
New trial ordered.
 
STUDDERT J: I agree with Smart J.
 * * * 
