

Regina versus Jill Margaret Scott [1997] NSWSC 243 (27 June 1997) 
REGINA versus Jill Margaret SCOTT /96 
Wednesday 27 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, McINERNEY J, IRELAND J 
SENTENCING - EMBEZZLEMENT - HARDSHIP TO APPELLANT'S CHILD - CONDITIONS OF RECOGNIZANCE 
The appellant, a middle-aged woman with an infant child, pleaded guilty to embezzling $107,000. She was sentenced to a minimum term of one year and an additional term of four months. She was also required to enter a recognizance which included as one of its conditions that, on her release from prison, she pay a substantial monthly sum for an extended period. The sentencing judge did not, in his reasons, address the question of her ability to pay that sum and, in particular, of her prospects of obtaining employment. There was evidence that her incarceration was having a serious effect on her child.

HELD ) The minimum term of imprisonment was the least punishment that could reasonably have been imposed in all the circumstances.
 ) The problem concerning the child was one to be dealt with administratively under s29(2)(c) of the Prisons Act 1952.
 ) The relevant condition of the recognizance was inappropriate and should be deleted.

ORDERS 
Leave to appeal granted.
Appeal allowed in part.
Sentence varied by deleting the third condition of the recognizance.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentences imposed by Downs DCJ in the District Court on 28 June this year. In my view leave to appeal should be granted and I will refer to Mrs Scott as the appellant.

The appellant pleaded guilty to six charges of fraudulent deception. In brief, the evidence shows that over a period between 1986 and 1995, whilst she occupied a senior position in the administration of a credit union, the appellant engaged in a number of fraudulent transactions at the expense of her employer. It appears that the total amount of money involved in defalcations which were the subject of the charges in the indictment was $107,000, but compensation in a larger amount was sought by the credit union, and I have inferred that that is explained by matters on a Form 2 Schedule which were taken into account by the sentencing judge.

The appellant at the time of sentencing was a married woman aged fifty-one.
She had a grown-up son, but she also had a young child aged two years named
Matthew, and there has been a deal of evidence put before the Court by consent concerning the effect upon that child of her incarceration. That is a matter to which I will return in due course.

The appellant had no previous convictions. She gave herself up to the authorities. She pleaded guilty from the outset and the learned sentencing judge found that there was no prospect that she would re-offend.

There is no suggestion that his Honour's remarks on sentence show any error of fact in relation to the objective circumstances of the case. His Honour took into account the subjective matters that were relied upon on behalf of the appellant, and he ultimately sentenced the appellant as follows: in relation to each of the five counts in the indictment his Honour sentenced the appellant to imprisonment for a minimum term of one year and an additional term of four months. The minimum term was to commence on the date of sentence, ie 28 June 1996. The appellant will be released on 27 June 1997.

In relation to the sixth count on the indictment, his Honour deferred passing sentence on the appellant on condition she enter into a recognisance self in the sum of $1000 to be of good behaviour for a period of five years. There were three conditions of that recognizance.

It is important to emphasise that the first two conditions of the recognisance were in substance volunteered by the legal representatives of the appellant and were taken into account in favour of the appellant when she was sentenced by his Honour. The first condition was that she would assign the benefit of her long service leave to her ex-employer. The second part was she would at a future date when it was possible for her to do so, assign the benefit of certain superannuation payments to her employer. The third condition, which was not volunteered or agreed to in any sense by the appellant, was that she would pay at the rate of $400 per month to the Criminal Registry of the
District Court, Castlereagh Street, Sydney, an amount of money, the first payment to be made on 1 June 1997 and the last payment on 1 June in the year .

The first ground of appeal is his Honour erred in imposing the conditions in the recognizance to which I have referred, and in particular the third condition. In my view there is no merit in this ground insofar as it relates to the first two conditions of the recognizance. They were volunteered on behalf of the appellant and relied upon in mitigation of sentence. There is no occasion for this Court to permit the appellant at this stage to resile from what she agreed to at the sentencing proceedings.

However, the position is different in relation to the third condition. The imposition of the third condition by the learned sentencing judge was obviously aimed at recovering, for the benefit of those who had suffered loss, some part of the moneys which had been embezzled by the appellant.

There is, in my view, a real question of principle as to the appropriateness of the use of a long term recognisance for a purpose of that kind. This is not a case in which there is any real suggestion that this appellant is likely to be other than of good behaviour when she is released from custody.

It is not necessary in the present case, however, to express a final view on the question of principle to which I have referred. There is in my estimation a simple practical reason why the imposition of a condition such as that is inappropriate in the present case.

The appellant, as I have indicated, is a woman of middle age. She is obviously intelligent and skilled in her work. But there must be a serious doubt as to her prospects of gaining employment when she is released after having served a prison term for fraud. The amount of $400 per month, payment of which is required to commence virtually immediately upon her release from custody, is an amount which it is unrealistic to expect her to be able to find. His Honour made no finding of fact, and the evidence did not support any finding, that there is a substantial sum of money, perhaps the proceeds of her previous ill- gotten gains that have been stored away by the appellant, that will be available to her on her release from prison. The fact his Honour expressed this condition in the form of a monthly payment over a long period of time rather suggests that his Honour did not have that in mind as some kind of source of available funds.

The evidence as to the income of the appellant's husband indicates that he will not have any spare money available to provide these funds, and the only possible source of such funds, as it appears from the evidence, would be surplus income earned by the appellant if she were to obtain employment.

In his reasons for sentence the learned judge does not address the critical question of the prospects of employment of the appellant upon release from prison. His Honour makes no finding of fact one way or the other on that subject. But that is a matter that goes to the essence of the practical ability of the appellant to comply with this condition.

In my view it was not an appropriate exercise of his Honour's discretion to impose that as a condition of the recognizance in question.

The other ground of appeal that has been argued on behalf of the appellant is that the sentence imposed by his Honour in relation to the first five counts in the indictment was excessive. Because the appellant also argues that this
Court should intervene to re-sentence if we find error in relation to the matter the subject of the ground of appeal, it is appropriate that I should express a view upon the sentence imposed in respect of the first five counts in explanation of the conclusion that this Court should not interfere with those sentences even having regard to the re-consideration that we must give to the position of the appellant.

Having regard to the objective features of the case, and the subjective circumstances of the appellant, I find it difficult to see how the learned judge could reasonably have imposed a lesser sentence than the sentence of imprisonment which he imposed in relation to the first five counts on the indictment.

There is a substantial body of material before the Court, tendered by consent, relating to events that have occurred since the sentencing proceedings in relation to the boy Matthew. That evidence shows that the incarceration of the appellant, Matthew's mother, has caused serious family dislocation and intense personal stress to the child. Without question this is a very sad circumstance. It needs to be remembered, however, that it is by no means uncommon for hardship, and sometimes grave hardship, to be caused to third parties by sentencing a person to prison. Judges and magistrates are routinely required in the course of their duty to sentence to prison parents of children, people who are carers of others who are weak or vulnerable, employers upon whom workers depend for their livelihood, and others, in a variety of circumstances, whose incarceration will cause hardship to third parties.

In the present case the Court's attention has been drawn to the provisions of s29(2)(c) of the Prisons Act 1952, which is designed as an administrative measure to deal with precisely such a case as the present. The evidence before the Court shows that the administrative authorities have under active consideration the position of the appellant, and the possibility of granting appropriate administrative relief under s29(2)(c). There is no basis for a conclusion by this Court that the relevant discretion available to the authorities will not be exercised in a proper and sensitive fashion. On the contrary, the evidence in the affidavit of Lee Sharon Downs of 26 November goes into substantial detail about the attention that is being directed by the authorities to the position of the appellant, her young child, and the possibility of relief of that position under s29(2)(c).

In those circumstances it does not seem to me to be a case in which it would be appropriate for this Court to interfere with the sentences that have been imposed by Downs DCJ in respect of counts one to five in the indictment.

The orders of the Court I would propose are as follows. The appellant should have leave to appeal. The appeal in relation to the sentences imposed in respect of counts one to five in the indictment should be dismissed. The appeal in relation to the sentence on count six in the indictment should be allowed to the extent that the order made by his Honour in respect of the sixth count should be varied by deleting the third condition of the recognizance in question.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed by the Chief Justice and for the reasons he has advanced. I do not think I can usefully add any material to what his Honour has already referred to, except in relation to the ground of appeal based on the ground that his Honour did not find special circumstances in this particular matter. It is submitted by Mr Nicholson that on the authorities there is now a well-established principle of sentencing in cases of fraud involving first offenders that special circumstances should be found. I do not, however, think that the statements in cases such as R versus Corbett would require judges to find special circumstances in such cases. Each case must be considered on its own merits but, as the Chief Justice has said in his remarks, this sentence in my view was an appropriate one and to reduce the minimum term to be served in custody below his Honour's sentence in my view would not reflect adequately the period of custody that the applicant should serve for the serious criminality involved in these offences.

It must be understood that his Honour, the sentencing judge, was of the view that the appellant would not re-offend, and furthermore she had a home, a husband, and a child to return to on her release. It seems realistically in the circumstances a period of supervision in her case would not be required.

I agree, however, with the orders proposed by the Chief Justice.

IRELAND J: I agree with the Chief Justice and with what has fallen from McInerney J.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the court will be as I have proposed.
 * * * 
