

Regina versus L L Swan [1996] NSWSC 418 (7 September 1996) 
REGINA versus LESTER LLOYD SWAN /95 
THURSDAY 22 AUGUST 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GROVE J, JAMES J, HAMILTON AJ 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: In this matter I ask James J to give the first judgment.

JAMES J: Lester Lloyd Swan has appealed against his conviction after a trial conducted in the District Court at Narrabri before Judge Gibson QC and a jury on one count of aggravated sexual assault under <case> of the Crimes Act.

The appellant had been charged that on 20 July 1993 at Moree he had sexual intercourse with a woman who I will refer to simply as "the complainant" without her consent and knowing that she was not consenting. The circumstances of aggravation alleged were that the offence was committed in the company of others.

The appellant stood trial with two co-accused, his brother Desmond Royce Swan, known as "Boy Boy" and Noel Bruce Swan, both of whom were also found guilty on the same charge. It will be convenient to refer to the appellant's two brothers as Desmond and Noel respectively. A fourth alleged offender, Paul
Smith, had been found unfit to be tried. The trial took place in March 1995, that is before the commencement of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), and hence that Act did not apply to the trial.

The appellant was sentenced to a sentence of six years penal servitude, consisting of a minimum term of fours years and an additional term of two years. His Honour made the sentence commence from 8 September 1993. Apart from a period of about six weeks when he had been at liberty on bail, the appellant had been continuously in custody since he was arrested on 21 July 1993. The two co-offenders were also sentenced in effect to sentences of six years' penal servitude but there were differences in the dates of commencement of these sentences and the lengths of the minimum terms imposed.

A notice of appeal was filed in June 1995. We were informed that when the appeal came before this court, differently constituted, on 28 June 1996, the appellant was unrepresented and that when members of the Bench expressed some concern, the matter was taken out of the list on that day. The appellant has been represented before us by Mr Sides QC.

The Crown case at the trial can be briefly summarised as follows. During the day of 20 July 1993, the date of the offence, the complainant had been at her home at Moree where she lived with her parents and a number of other relatives. She said that in the morning she drank two bottles of beer and that she then slept for the rest of the morning and most of the afternoon. In the late afternoon she woke up. She dressed and left the house, intending to go to the Moree Hospital. On the way to the hospital she met a group of four persons, consisting of the appellant, the two co-accused and Paul Smith. She had known the three Swan brothers most of her life and she had known Paul
Smith for a long while. While she was in the company of the four men she saw her brother, H, and was seen by him.

Desmond and the complainant went to a hotel in Moree and bought a flagon of port. They then went to a caravan park where the appellant, Noel and Smith were waiting. The group then walked down to a river, across a bridge and up to the top of a small hill on the other side of the river, where there was a little cleared spot. The group sat down and drank the flagon of port. The complainant said that she had about three drinks of the port. The complainant then decided that she should go to the hospital and she walked down the hill towards the bridge. At this stage Smith was standing on the bridge. Noel was on the other end of the bridge and the appellant was sitting down on the other side of the bridge. The complainant also noticed someone else standing on the bridge. She described this other person as a "little fellow", who she did not know. The complainant had no idea whether he was an aboriginal or white person but said that he was fair skinned. In cross-examination the complainant said that this person might have been with the group earlier.

When the complainant got to where Paul Smith was standing, Smith punched her and knocked her down. Smith removed the clothes from the lower part of the complainant's body and dragged her by the hair to one end of the bridge.
Whilst this was happening the appellant remained sitting where he had been sitting. Smith then had penile/vaginal sexual intercourse with the complainant. Desmond and Noel then had intercourse with the complainant. After
Noel had had intercourse with the complainant he called out to the appellant, "you want a go?" The appellant then had intercourse with the complainant. At the time he was having intercourse with the complainant he was kneeling and had lifted the complainant's legs into the air.

After the appellant had intercourse with the complainant, the complainant felt a hard, cold object inserted into her vagina but did not know who inserted it.
The complainant temporarily lost consciousness. When she came to, the group of four consisting of the appellant, his two brothers and Smith were on one side of her, a few metres away. She did not know what had happened to the "little fellow".

The complainant got up, ran and hid in a gully. After a while she left the gully. Although the complainant did not herself give evidence of it in her evidence in chief, there was evidence in the case that she was pursued by Noel
Swan and assaulted by him. She was rescued by a cousin of hers who called out to a passing car to stop. The complainant was taken in the car, first to her home, and then to the police station where she reported she had been sexually assaulted. Later that evening she was examined by a doctor.

The appellant did not give evidence, call any evidence or make any unsworn statement at the trial. Nor did either of the co-accused give evidence, call evidence or make a statement. The court was simply informed by counsel that all the accused would exercise their rights to silence.

The appellant had been interviewed by police in an electronically recorded interview on 21 July 1993, the day after the day of the alleged offence, and the tape recording of this interview became an exhibit at the trial. In the interview the appellant said that he knew the complainant, that he had seen the complainant the previous day, that is 20 July, and that when he saw the complainant he was with Noel, Desmond, Paul and Steven (Steven is apparently the name of the person described by the complainant as "the little fellow").
The complainant said she was going to the hotel. Noel said he would get a flagon. Noel and the complainant went to the hotel and got a flagon. The group walked to the river, crossed the bridge and went up to the top of the hill on the other side of the bridge.

So far, there is a high degree of correspondence between the appellant's answers in the interview on 21 July and the complainant's evidence at the trial. However, in the interview the appellant said that he did not have anything to drink out of the flagon, that he left with Desmond virtually as soon as he got to the top of the hill and that he then went to a succession of houses belonging to acquaintances. In the interview the appellant denied that he had had sexual intercourse with the complainant, denied that Desmond had had sexual intercourse with the complainant and said that he did not know whether Paul Smith or Noel had had intercourse with the complainant.

In cross-examination of the complainant by counsel for the appellant it was put, consistently with the answers that the appellant had given in the interview, that the appellant and Desmond had left before any sexual activity took place. This suggestion was denied by the complainant.

At the trial it was not disputed, nor could it have been disputed, that the complainant had been violently sexually assaulted by some person or persons.
Her evidence that she had been violently sexually assaulted was strikingly confirmed by the evidence of the doctor who examined her later on the evening of 20 July. In his summing-up the trial Judge said, without objection, that counsel had addressed the jury "along these lines: that she was, in fact, raped this night".

Nor was it suggested at the trial that the complainant had been in any way a dishonest witness. The principal submissions made on behalf of the appellant were that the complainant was mistaken and unreliable in her evidence, because she had drunk more alcohol than she had conceded and was affected by the amount of alcohol she had drunk, because she was affected by the blows that she had received from Smith and because she was affected by her extreme emotional distress after she was first attacked by Smith.

Counsel for the appellant on the appeal stated in written submissions that two grounds of appeal were to be argued, namely, 1. That the trial judge erred in not giving directions as to identification in accordance with Domican versus the
Queen <case>; [(1991-2) 173 CLR 555] especially at 561-2.2. That the verdict of guilty against the appellant was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

In oral submissions in reply on the hearing of the appeal counsel sought to rely on the further ground that the summing-up of the trial Judge was unbalanced to the point that there had been a miscarriage of justice.

In the event of the appeal against conviction being dismissed, the appellant seeks leave to appeal against sentence.

I turn to the first ground of appeal against conviction, that the trial Judge erred in not giving directions about identification in accordance with
Domican versus the Queen. Counsel for the appellant referred to the well known passage in the joint judgment of six members of the High Court in Domican where their Honours said, at page 561-2: "Whatever the defence and however the case is conducted, where evidence as to identification represents any significant part of the proof of guilt of an offence, the judge must warn the jury as to the dangers of convicting on such evidence where its reliability is disputed. The terms of the warning need not follow any particular formula. But it must be cogent and effective. It must be appropriate to the circumstances of the case. Consequently, the jury must be instructed 'as to the factors which may affect consideration of (the identification) evidence in the circumstances of the particular case'. A warning in general terms is insufficient. The attention of the jury 'should be drawn to any weaknesses in the identification evidence'. Reference to counsel's arguments is insufficient. The jury must have the benefit of a direction which has the authority of the judge's office behind it. It follows that the trial judge should isolate and identify for the benefit of the jury any matter of significance which may reasonably be regarded as undermining the reliability of the identification evidence." 
In his summing-up, the trial Judge did not give directions of the kind which would be required to fully comply with this passage in the judgment of their
Honours in Domican. The trial Judge did not give any warning to the jury such as is required by Domican to the effect that there would be dangers in convicting the appellant on the evidence of the complainant. Nor did he, in drawing to the jury's attention matters which might reasonably be regarded as weaknesses in the prosecution evidence, say that he was doing so on his authority as the trial Judge, as distinct from saying that he was repeating submissions made by counsel for the appellant. No application for directions in accordance with Domican was made by counsel who appeared for the appellant at the trial. However, it was submitted by counsel appearing for the appellant on this appeal that, if the directions should have been given, leave under r 4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) should be granted and the appeal against conviction should be upheld.

I would agree that if, in a case where directions in accordance with
Domican should have been given, those directions have not been given, then usually at least leave under r 4 should be granted and the appeal against conviction should be upheld. It was, however, submitted by the Crown that the present case was not a case in which directions as to identification in accordance with Domican were required to be given and hence there had not been any error in his Honour not giving such directions.

In my opinion, this was not a case where evidence as to identification represented a significant part of the proof of the appellant's guilt of the offence and hence the trial Judge was not required to give directions as to identification in accordance with Domican.

In a trite sense, proof of guilt of an offence always involves identification, in that the Crown always has to prove that it was the accused who was the offender. However, this does not mean that directions as to identification in accordance with Domican have to be given in every criminal trial. As the
High Court stated in Domican, it is only where evidence as to identification represents a significant part of the proof of guilt that such directions have to be given.

In the present case it is true that the central issue in the case against the appellant was whether the complainant was mistaken in the evidence she gave incriminating the appellant. However, in my opinion, this issue was not correctly stated as being whether she was mistaken in identifying some person who had sexual intercourse with her as being the appellant. The issue was whether she was mistaken in saying that the appellant, a person with whom she was very familiar and in whose company she had been for some time that very evening, had had sexual intercourse with her.

The complainant said in her evidence-in-chief that she had known the appellant most of her life. She said that at one stage the appellant and his brothers had lived next door to her. Not only was she not challenged in cross- examination on this part of her evidence in chief, but it was put to her by counsel for the appellant, and she agreed, that she had known him and the other offenders for all her life, that before the incident she had been "mates" with them and that she had trusted them. If an identification parade including the appellant had been held, the complainant would have had no difficulty in picking the appellant.

I have already referred to the appellant's answers in the electronically recorded interview. As I have already recorded, the complainant's evidence that on the evening of 20 July she had met the appellant and the others and had remained in their company for some time was undisputed, the appellant simply contending that after the group had reached the top of the hill and before any port had been consumed or any sexual activity had taken place, the appellant and Desmond had left, leaving the complainant, Smith and Noel together. There was no suggestion in the evidence that anyone other than the appellant, his two brothers, Paul Smith and the "little fellow" had been present when the offences were committed. The complainant was thoroughly familiar with the appellant, his two brothers, and Paul Smith. At the trial no suggestion was made to the complainant in cross-examination to the effect that the person who had had sexual intercourse with her on the fourth occasion could have been one of the others, rather than the appellant.

It is true that the appellant did not previously know Steven Barber. However she described him, and her evidence on this point was not challenged in cross- examination, as being a "little fellow" and "fair skinned". In my opinion, it would be fanciful to suppose that there was any possibility that the complainant might have mistakenly identified Steven Barber as being the appellant. The appellant is an adult aboriginal.

It is also true that in a proper case directions in accordance with
Domican have to be given "whatever the offence and however the case is conducted". However, in my opinion, it is not without significance that there is nothing in the transcript of the trial to suggest that, in a trial lasting more than a week, anyone out of the trial Judge, who is a most experienced criminal Judge, the two counsel who appeared for the accused and the Crown
Prosecutor, thought that the case was a case calling for identification directions. The issue fought at the trial and what, after reading the appeal papers, I consider was indeed the issue in the case was whether the complainant, an admittedly honest witness, was nevertheless mistaken, by reason of the alcohol she had drunk or the physical assaults she had suffered or her emotional distress or some other factor, in saying that the appellant had remained at the place where the complainant was assaulted and had himself sexually assaulted the complainant.

I would myself reject the first ground of appeal.

I turn to the second ground of appeal, that the jury's verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. The principles to be applied by a Court of Criminal Appeal in deciding whether a verdict of guilty was unsafe and unsatisfactory have been stated by the High Court in M versus the Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] especially at 493-5 and by this Court in R versus McKnoulty [(1994) 77A CrR 333] at 338-9 and it is not necessary to repeat these principles in this judgment.

As I have already stated, it was undisputed at the trial that the complainant had been sexually assaulted by some person or persons on the evening of 20
July 1993 and it was undisputed that at least the man Smith, who was not being tried, had sexually assaulted her that evening. However, notwithstanding the large number of witnesses called by the Crown, the Crown case that the appellant had sexually assaulted the complainant did depend entirely, or almost entirely, on the evidence of the complainant and the trial Judge accordingly directed the jury that they had to carefully scrutinise the evidence of the complainant in the light of the criticisms which had been made of it.

It was submitted that the verdict should be regarded as unsafe, because, contrary to some evidence given by the complainant but not, it seems to me, contrary to the greater part of her evidence, it would have been dark by the time the complainant was sexually assaulted and that, before the complainant claimed that she had been sexually assaulted by the appellant, she had been violently physically assaulted by Smith and temporarily stunned and had been sexually assaulted by three men, that is Smith, Desmond and Noel and had become acutely emotionally distressed At the trial endeavours were made in cross-examination of the complainant, to bring out weaknesses or inadequacies in her evidence and to procure an admission from the complainant that she had had more alcohol to drink than she had said in her evidence-in-chief.

I have myself made an examination of the evidence in order to determine whether, upon the whole of the evidence, it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty.

I have already summarised the evidence of the complainant. The complainant was cross-examined in cross-examination which extends over about eighty pages of the transcript, by counsel who appeared for Noel and by counsel who appeared for the appellant and Desmond. The jury had the important advantage of seeing and hearing the complainant give her evidence-in-chief and then be extensively cross-examined.

There were a few discrepancies in the complainant's evidence. As already mentioned, there were inconsistencies in her evidence about whether it was light or already dark when certain events happened. It was some time after .00 when the complainant left her house and it was just after 8.00 when she arrived at the police station. It does seem probable that it had become dark by the time the complainant was assaulted. In her evidence in chief the complainant did not mention that the man Smith had had sexual intercourse with her a second time after the appellant had had sexual intercourse with her. The complainant said in cross-examination she had forgotten about this act of intercourse. Smith, of course, was not on trial and the second act of intercourse by him occurred after all the alleged acts of intercourse charged against the co-accused had occurred. The complainant also admitted in cross- examination that in statements she had given to the police she had made incorrect assertions that the sexual intercourse had occurred on the bridge and not, as she said in her evidence, under a tree off the bridge to which
Smith had dragged her from the bridge and also that while Smith was punching her Desmond had held her down. However, in my opinion such discrepancies as can be discovered in the complainant's evidence or between her evidence and previous statements made by her to the police are quite limited and do not seriously affect the credibility of her evidence.

At the trial it was repeatedly put to the complainant that she had had more alcohol to drink on 20 July than the two bottles of beer she said she drank in the morning and the three mouthfuls of port she said she had in the evening.
The complainant resisted these suggestions. The police officer who saw the complainant shortly after 8.00 thought the complainant to be moderately intoxicated. It is clear that at the time the police officer saw the complainant the complainant was very distressed by her experiences. On the other hand the doctor who saw the complainant at 10.00 did not think that the complainant appeared to be drunk at all. He thought the complainant was "much more distressed by the event (that is, by what had happened to her) than alcohol".

The Crown case gained a measure of support from the admissions by the appellant that he had been in the company of the complainant on the evening of July 1993 until a short time before she was sexually assaulted. The jury could well have been sceptical about his assertions in the interview that, having accompanied the complainant and the others with the flagon down to the river and across the bridge and up to the top of the small hill, he had then left virtually immediately.

I have indicated that the complainant gave evidence and was extensively cross- examined. The appellant, on the other hand, exercised his right to silence and there was no material from him before the jury, not even an unsworn statement, apart from his answers in the electronically recorded interview.

In my opinion, after taking into account the submissions that have been made by counsel for the appellant and such discrepancies or weaknesses in the complainant's evidence as are revealed in the transcript, but making allowance for the advantage enjoyed by the jury in seeing and hearing the complainant give her evidence, I consider it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty and I do not feel any doubt of the kind described by the High Court in M. I would reject this ground of appeal.

As I have already indicated, a belated submission was made by counsel for the appellant in his submissions in reply that the court should find that the summing-up by the trial Judge was unbalanced to the point that it constituted a miscarriage of justice. I have taken into account the submissions made by counsel but I have reached the conclusion that there is no substance in them.

I turn to the application for leave to appeal against sentence. As I have already stated, the sentence imposed on the appellant was a sentence of penal servitude for six years consisting of a minimum term of four years and an additional term of two years. His Honour made the sentence commence from a date in September 1993, to allow for the appellant's presentence custody.

The sentences passed by his Honour on the two co-offenders were also in substance sentences of six years' penal servitude. These sentences differed in some respects from the sentence passed on the appellant. The offender, Noel
Swan, was in custody at the time his Honour passed sentence and his Honour made the sentence that he imposed on Noel for the present offence contain a minimum term of three years with an additional term of three years, the sentence to commence from a date in January 1997. Because of a discrete period of presentence custody amounting to four to five months, the sentence his
Honour imposed on Desmond contained a minimum term of three years seven months and an additional term of two years.

It was not submitted by counsel for the appellant that the sentence passed on the appellant, standing by itself, could be challenged. However, an argument based on disparity was mounted.

It was submitted in written submissions that the criminality of Noel was greater than the criminality of the appellant, in that there had been more criminal activity by Noel in the sexual offences perpetrated on the complainant, that Noel had been convicted of an additional offence of physically assaulting the complainant, that Noel had been on bail at the time the offence was committed and that Noel's criminal history was significantly worse than the criminal history of the appellant. On the other hand, as was recognised by the sentencing Judge, Noel suffered from a psychiatric condition. The sentencing judge also had to have regard to the requirements of the principle of totality, as Noel was already in custody serving a sentence which would not expire for some time. It was virtually conceded by counsel for the appellant in his oral submissions that there were such differences between the cases of the appellant and of Noel that it would be difficult to rely on the sentence passed on Noel as giving rise to a legitimate sense of grievance in the appellant.

However, it was submitted that the appellant was entitled to feel a legitimate sense of grievance in that he had been sentenced to substantially the same sentence as that passed on Desmond, in circumstances where it was submitted he should have been sentenced to a lesser sentence. The circumstances relied on by counsel for the appellant were that there had been greater involvement by
Desmond in the criminal activity which occurred on 20 July, that Desmond's criminal history was significantly worse than the criminal history of the appellant and that, according to a presentence report which was before his
Honour, the appellant's prospects of rehabilitation were significantly better than Desmond's.

Counsel for the Crown conceded in her oral submissions that it could well be the case that his Honour should have distinguished between the cases of
Desmond and the appellant. I have reached the conclusion that the appellant would be entitled to feel a legitimate sense of grievance in having received a sentence substantially equivalent to that passed on his brother Desmond, when the criminality of Desmond was greater, the criminal history of Desmond was worse and the appellant's prospects of rehabilitation were better.

I would accordingly propose that leave be granted to appeal against sentence and that the appeal against sentence be upheld; that the sentence passed by
Gibson DCJ on 16 June 1995 be quashed and that in lieu thereof the appellant be sentenced to a sentence of penal servitude for four and a half years consisting of a minimum term of three years commencing on 8 September 1993 and expiring on 7 September 1996 and an additional term of one and a half years.
My reasons for finding special circumstances are the same as those stated by the sentencing judge. The earliest date on which the appellant will be eligible for release on parole will be 7 September 1996.

GROVE J: I agree with James J.

HAMILTON AJ: I agree with James J also.

GROVE J: The formal orders of the court are, appeal against conviction dismissed; application for leave to appeal against sentence granted; appeal allowed; sentence quashed. In lieu thereof the appellant is to be sentenced to a total term of four and a half years' penal servitude with a minimum term of three years commencing on 8 September 1993 and expiring on 7 September 1996 together with an additional term of 18 months. I specify the appellant is to be eligible for parole from 7 September 1996.
 * * * 
