

Regina versus Walsh Matter No Cca 60297/97 [1998] NSWSC 262 (5 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
REGINA versus CHRISTOPHER JOHN WALSH /97 March 1998 
Wood J, Smart J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Downs DCJ 
FILE NO/S: 60297 of 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 5 March 1998 
DELIVERED: 5 March 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Christopher John WALSH 
JUDGMENT OF: Wood, Smart, Sperling JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - T A Game SC 
RESPONDENT - C K Maxwell QC 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - Ardens & Assoc 
RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor, Solicitor for Public Prosecutions 
RESULT: Conviction upheld - sentence reduced. 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - appeal against sentence - intentional infliction of grievous bodily harm (Crimes Act <case>) - Whether guilty plea vitiated by appellant's alleged lack of knowledge that intent an essential element of guilty plea - whether guilty plea constituted true admission of guilt - whether in sentencing evidence accepted that offence committed on the spur of the moment - whether in sentencing psychiatric evidence of appellant's state of mind taken into account. 
No. of pages: 13 
Regina versus Christopher John WALSH 
The appellant deliberately ran down his former wife who suffered multiple injuries. He pleaded guilty to maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm with intent to do grievous bodily harm (Crimes Act <case>) in lieu of the more serious offence of causing grievous bodily harm with intent to murder (Crimes
Act <case>) and was sentenced to penal servitude for six years and eight months with a five year minimum term. He appealed against the conviction and in the alternative against sentence.

Conviction 
There were two grounds of appeal against conviction: that the guilty plea was vitiated by his alleged lack of understanding that intent was an essential element of the offence. The appellant asserted that in pleading guilty he was not aware that he was admitting to such an intention and had not instructed his legal advisers that he had any such intent. At the appeal hearing, the appellant submitted that his recollection of events had been affected by anti-depressants which he had been taking prior to committing the offence and that in the circumstances he thought he had no alternative but to plead guilty to the lesser charge.
 the judge had erred in accepting the appellant's guilty plea in the light of the evidence the appellant gave during the sentencing proceedings. When asked by his counsel to confirm his guilty plea and in particular, to concede that, in running down his wife, he had intended to harm her, he had stated: "I am unable to answer that". He agreed that he had driven the car at his wife "on the spur of the moment" with the intention of hitting her in the legs. The appellant submitted that the intent to do grievous bodily harm had accordingly been placed in issue.

HELD: There was ample evidence from the record of interview, from the sentencing proceedings and from the evidence given on appeal that the appellant had intended, albeit on the spur of the moment, to cause grievous bodily harm to his wife, that he had given instructions to that effect to his legal advisers before entering the plea, and that the elements of the offence had been explained to him, as was confirmed in written instructions signed by him. Examination by a psychiatrist shortly before the plea did not support his contention that his recollection of events or mental functioning was affected by his anti depressant medication. On this basis the sentencing judge had been correct to accept the appellant's guilty plea, and it was not vitiated by lack of understanding on his part. 
Applied 
Maxwell versus The Queen <case>; [(1986) 184 CLR 501] 
Regina versus Liberti [(1991) 55 A Crim R 120] 
Regina versus Boag [(1994) A Crim R 35] 
Sentence 
The appellant submitted that in sentencing, his Honour failed to give sufficient weight to psychiatric evidence relating to his state of mind at the time of the offence, and had erred in not accepting his evidence that the offence had been committed on the spur of the moment.

HELD: The failure by the judge in sentencing to give weight to the psychiatric evidence in the assessment of objective criminality constituted an appellable error. Appellable error was also shown in that the appellant had been sentenced on the basis that his actions relating to the offence had been premeditated, although both the prosecution and the appellant accepted that he had acted on the spur of the moment. Overall sentence reduced to five and a half years, including a minimum term of three and a half years. 
Considered: 
Regina versus Moffitt [(1990) 20 NSWLR 114] 
Regina versus Morrissey (CCA unreported 15 July 1994) 
ORDERS 
Appeal against conviction dismissed; leave granted to appeal against sentence; appeal allowed - sentence quashed. In lieu, the appellant sentenced to a minimum term of penal servitude for three and a half years to commence from 2
November 1996, to expire on 1 May 2000 - an additional term of two years- upon that basis the appellant would be eligible for release on parole on 1 May .

REGINA versus CHRISTOPHER JOHN WALSH 
JUDGMENT 
WOOD J: At his arraignment on 18 April, 1997 the appellant pleaded guilty, before Blanch DCJ, to an offence of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm with intent to do grievous bodily harm. The appellant adhered to that plea when appearing for sentence on 6 June, 1997 and the plea was then accepted in full satisfaction of the indictment charging the more serious offence of causing grievous bodily harm with intent to murder. 
The appellant was sentenced to penal servitude for six years and eight months with a minimum term of five years. He now seeks to have the conviction set aside upon two bases, the first of which is that upon the evidence placed before the sentencing judge the plea should not have been accepted. The second ground relates to the assertion that he did not understand the nature of the plea which, on his account, was not properly explained to him by his legal advisers. In the event of the appeal being disallowed, he seeks leave to appeal against the severity of sentence.

Conviction Appeal 
The Crown case was that the appellant deliberately drove his vehicle at his former wife while she was about to open the door of the bread van that she was driving. He struck her with his vehicle occasioning her multiple lacerations and hairline fractures of the ribs, pelvis and knee. After striking his former wife the appellant sped away before deliberately ramming his vehicle into a telegraph pole with the intention of killing himself. At the scene of the collision he informed civilians, ambulance and police personnel that he had killed his wife.

The two grounds of appeal against conviction are substantially related. The first point rests primarily upon evidence given by him in chief during the sentencing proceedings to the following effect: "Q. You pleaded guilty to a charge that involves an intention to do serious harm to your wife. You concede that you did form that intention? 
A. I am unable to answer that.

Q. Certainly had you formed such an intention at a period before you drove the car towards her? 
A. I hadn't had any intention of carrying out anything in that respect.

Q. What you are saying is that you drove the car at your wife, you decided to do that on the spur of the moment? 
A. Yes, that's exactly what I did." 
Upon the basis of this exchange it was submitted that the appellant was placing in issue the intent to do grievous bodily harm, even though that was an essential element of the offence in respect of which the plea was accepted.
In Maxwell versus The Queen <case>; [(1986) 184 CLR 501] at 511 Dawson and McHugh JJ stated: "The plea of guilty must however be unequivocal and not made in circumstances suggesting that it is not a true admission of guilt. Those circumstances include ignorance, fear, duress, mistake or even the desire to gain a technical advantage. The plea may be accompanied by a qualification indicating that the accused is unaware of its significance. If it appears to the trial judge, for whatever reason, that a plea of guilty is not genuine, he or she must (and it is not a matter of discretion) obtain an unequivocal plea of guilty or direct that a plea of not guilty be entered. But otherwise an accused may insist upon pleading guilty. That is illustrated by Regina v
Martin where the trial judge, the Chief Justice, suggested that the accused should enter a plea of not guilty. The accused declined to do so and insisted upon pleading guilty".

I will return to the balance of the evidence which concerns the primary point in a moment. However, before doing so it is convenient to note that the appellant has asserted, in an affidavit filed on the appeal, that prior to the plea he was not advised by his solicitor or by the Public Defender that it was an element of the offence that he intended to cause grievous bodily harm. He said that he was unaware that by his plea he was admitting to such an intention and added that he had not instructed his solicitor or the Public
Defender that he possessed any such intention. These assertions have been placed squarely in issue by affidavits sworn by the Public Defender who appeared on sentence and by the instructing solicitor who had spoken to the appellant on several occasions before the plea was entered. The latter deposed to the fact that in the course of a conference with the appellant on 16 April, , that is two days prior to arraignment, she had explained the elements of the offences under sections 27 and 33 of the Crimes Act, which were charged as alternatives on the indictment; and had discussed with him the meaning of grievous bodily harm. On this date the appellant indicated his desire to plead guilty to the s33 offence and signed a memorandum of instruction to that effect, which included an acknowledgment in the following terms: "I Christopher John Walsh, hereby instruct my solicitor, Meredith Phelps of the Legal Aid Commission, that I wish to enter a plea of guilty in relation to the charge of "maliciously inflict grievous bodily harm" under s33 of the
Crimes Act, in lieu of the charge of "attempt murder" under s27. I do so being fully aware of the elements of each offence as well as the potential penalty I face as a result of entering the plea of guilty." 
The instructing solicitor was satisfied that the appellant understood the elements of the charge to which he would be pleading guilty on arraignment.

The Public Defender was instructed to appear on sentence after the original plea had been entered. He had a first conference with the appellant at Long
Bay Prison Hospital on 23 May, 1997. Although that conference was mainly concerned with subjective matters relevant to the sentencing hearing, he confirmed that there was some discussion as to the circumstances of the offence. He confirmed that the appellant instructed him that he: "Had formed the intention to seriously hurt his wife but had formed that intention only a matter of seconds before he drove into her".

He added that: "Those instructions were given in the context of a discussion of whether he had formed the intention to drive into his wife on the spur of the moment or whether he had a pre-conceived plan to do so, as some of the answers in his record of interview seem to have implied." 
The appellant was called this morning to give further evidence, in the course of which it became apparent that he was not in a position to dispute the accounts given by the solicitor or by the Public Defender. Neither of those deponents has been required for cross-examination. In those circumstances, I see no reason why their evidence should not be accepted. Particularly is that so when regard is given to the following passages of evidence from the appellant today: "Q. When you pleaded on 18 April 1997, did you appreciate that you were pleading to a crime which had, as an element of it, an intention to do serious injury? 
A. Yes I did." ...

Q. Going on to a later part of your affidavit, paragraph 9, you state that you were visited by your solicitor and Mr. Scouler, the Public Defender? 
Q. I know there were other matters that you discussed, but did you discuss with him the question of what was in your mind when you drove up towards your wife? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you tell him that you had formed the intention to seriously hurt your wife but that you had only formed that a matter of seconds before you drove into her? 
A. Yes." 
At the sentencing proceedings the appellant gave additional evidence to that which has been mentioned so far. In particular he gave the following further answers in chief in relation to his intention while driving his car at his former wife. After referring to an attempt two days previously to ram her van, he gave the following evidence: "Just before the incident I did the same thing again. I went down the street and came up, sped towards the van, pulled out, stopped, and parked behind the van.

Q. What happened from then on? 
A. I was having an argument, an internal argument where I kept on saying to myself, 'Stop playing this silly game. Go back to Newcastle. You can't do this sort of thing. Think of the effects that it would have on my family'. As my brother pointed out a few months earlier, that my mother would be totally upset, the rest of the family would be.

Q. That's if you committed suicide? 
A. Yes, that's what I'm talking about, yes.

Q. Did you then catch sight of your wife? 
A. I then started to worry that she might see there. As I looked up, she came out with the boxes, the bread boxes. It seemed like it just represented everything she had stolen off me. She used my work. She had stolen all my money, and it just seemed like it represented just everything she had stripped off me. Just something happened and I said to myself, 'I'll just hit her in the legs'. When I did it I just couldn't believe that I had done such a thing.
As I was driving past I saw her lying still on the road, and I thought, 'Now look what you have done, you have killed her.' Then I just, you know, I just completely lost it.

Q. I think you then drove to Marrickville, did you? 
A. Yes.

Q. Deliberately rammed into the pole? 
A. That's correct.

Q. In an attempt to commit suicide? 
A. Yes." 
He was then asked some questions relating to his record of interview with the police: "Q. When you were interviewed by the police - this is at page 4 of the record of interview - question 40, you were asked this question: 'Q. Why were you following your wife? 
A. I had thoughts of hitting her, but I wasn't sure I'd do it. I was going to commit suicide about three or four days ago in Newtown Park without seeing her.' 
What did you mean by saying that you had thoughts of hitting her Mr Walsh? 
A. I had all these thoughts that came up in my mind. You know, you get these thoughts that flash through your head that you will do harm to a particular person. I had just come out of an operation, I had a collapsed lung and a broken tallus. I was having difficulty breathing through the collapsed lung when I was giving that interview. But that's what I meant. I was previously told that my wife was all right, that she had gone home from the hospital, she had just got a couple of scratches. I was, you know, completely open with the police." 
The matter which had been discussed in conference concerning the formation of his intent was taken up in the following passage, again in chief: "Q. The real question I suppose is did you have those ideas of running into your wife? Did you have a definite plan of running into your wife when you followed her around on the morning of 2 May, 1996? 
A. No, I had no intention of doing anything like that.

Q. For the intention (sic - more likely `you formed the intention') to do that when you saw her come out with the bread boxes, is that what you are saying? 
A. Yes.

Q. I think you indicated at question and answer 44 on page 6 and following, you travelled in your car about five metres before hitting your wife? 
A. That's correct.

Q. And you were travelling at about ten kilometres and hour? 
A. Five or ten.

Q. And your intention was to hit her in the legs with the side of your car? 
A. That's correct." 
Finally, in cross-examination, the following questions and answers appear: "Q. Would it be true to say that you had only just formed the intention to hit your wife as your vehicle moved towards her, you thought about it before and rejected it? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you thought about it a few days before and you also rejected it? 
A. Yes.

Q. So you had not just formed the intention, you thought about it again? 
A. I thought about those things for ten, twelve months." 
During the course of his evidence this morning the appellant suggested that his decision to enter the plea, and his recollection of events at the time he appeared for sentence, had been affected by the anti-depressant medication which he was then taking, to the point that he really had no memory of what had happened. The suggestion he made was that, in those circumstances, he thought he had no practical alternative other than to plead guilty to the lesser charge. He added that, having gone off anti-depressants in November of last year, he then acquired "a crystal clear recollection of what had happened". He gave a version of events this morning which, in substance, was not greatly different from that given in the sentencing proceedings. There were some additions, including the suggestion that while waiting in his vehicle near the van, he debated with himself as to whether he should go ahead, that he had an attack of the DTs, and that he heard a voice in his head suggesting: "Look, just hit her in the legs, that'll be all right". He suggested that he drove up to the side of the van and became transfixed on the eyes of his former wife. After the incident he woke up "as from the trance".

The difficulty with this account becomes crystal clear when it is recalled that on 14 and 15 April, that is four and three days respectively before arraignment, the appellant was examined and assessed by a psychiatrist, Dr
Tony Mastroianni. In the course of his report Dr Mastroianni noted that the appellant had been receiving a low dose of Zoloft (an anti-depressant medication). It was his professional opinion that this medication did not interfere with the appellant's performance during examination. Dr Mastroianni went on to observe that there was no indication that Mr Walsh - "Suffers from any current cognitive impairment or limitation. He was alert, and oriented to time, place and person. His ability to attend and concentrate were sound, as were his memory abilities. His abstract reasoning abilities were sound, as was his social judgment. There were no indications in Mr
Walsh's self report or clinical presentation that he suffers from any psychotic symptomatology. There was no indication of a formal thought disorder as his ideas flowed logically and sequentially." 
That opinion must occasion grave doubt as to the credibility of the account given by the appellant this morning. Moreover, it is to be observed that the history provided, to the psychiatrist and earlier in the record of interview (at which time he was not receiving medication) were largely consistent with the account which the appellant gave when appearing for sentence.

The credibility of the appellant was further questioned by the evidence that he gave this morning suggesting that the only image in his mind was one of his car hitting her "in the ankles" with the vehicle, accompanied by the suggestion that she simply got in the way and he "just let the car to roll towards her". Taken together with the evidence from his solicitor and the
Public Defender, I am not satisfied that the evidence of the appellant this morning should be accepted. He was in fact a most unimpressive and unpersuasive witness, and his attempt to explain the written instructions unacceptable. Whether his evidence was a matter of confabulation arising from the residual effects of his mental state at the time of the offence and his unwillingness to accept responsibility for what he did, or a deliberate attempt to place a false account before this Court in order to advance the appeal need not be decided. I am of the view that the evidence from his solicitor and the Public Defender should be accepted, and that the question whether the appellant was in any doubt as to the nature of the charge or as to the ingredients to be proved should be resolved, contrary to the proposition which he has sought to advance. I am satisfied that he was an educated person with dual tertiary qualifications and a lengthy record of employment teaching at senior levels, who was well able to understand the relevant principles and issues, and who elected to enter the plea of guilty for reasons which were well based. No miscarriage of justice arose in that respect.

The acknowledgment by the appellant that he formed an intention, albeit one on the spur of the moment, to drive a motor vehicle at his former wife and to hit her in the legs was, in my view, a sufficient basis for his Honour to accept the plea. The first answer in the passage relied upon by the appellant in support of the appeal did not amount to a denial of the existence of the necessary intent. The remaining answers in that passage have to be understood in the light of the balance of the evidence, which I have summarised; the effect of which was to show, in my view, that his act was a deliberate act, although not a pre-meditated act. Rather it was one that occurred on the spur of the moment.

The only sensible inference available from the admitted fact that the appellant deliberately drove a motor vehicle at a speed of between 5 and 10 kilometres per hour at a person standing on the roadway with the intention of hitting her legs, is that he intended to occasion that person at least grievous bodily harm. Any other conclusion would, in my view, beggar common sense. The intention would be no less of an intention because it was formed upon the spur of the moment. There is no requirement in law that the Crown prove that a specific injury, as distinct from harm attracting the quality of grievous bodily harm be intended.

In those circumstances, having regard to the principles which govern this kind of appeal, as stated in Regina versus Liberti [(1991) 55 A Crim R 120] at , and in Regina versus Boag [(1994) 73 A Crim R 35], and in particular taking into account the desirability of finality and the degree of circumspection which must attach to applications such as the present, I am of the view that the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

Sentence Appeal 
I turn then to the matter of sentence. It was submitted that his Honour erred in two respects: first, in failing to give sufficient significance to the psychiatric evidence; and secondly, in proceeding to sentence upon the basis of a finding that the act of the appellant was pre-meditated.

In his report, Dr Mastroianni expressed an opinion which, while excluding any form of psychiatric illness in the appellant of a significant kind, offered a diagnosis of two forms of mental disorder within DSM (IV) criteria which he described as follows: "With specific regard to Mr Walsh, he is a 46 year old man who at the time of the index offence and in the year or so leading up to it, was experiencing severe and chronic psycho-social stressors. These included a bitter and litigious marital separation, unemployment and significant financial difficulties. It is my opinion within reasonable medical certainty that at the time of the index offence and in the year or so preceding it, Mr Walsh was diagnosable with an Adjustment Disorder with Depressed Mood.
 ...

Mr Walsh's means of coping with his distress was to abuse large qualities of alcohol over an extended period. Alcohol is known to cause mood disturbances, especially depression, when used chronically. An adjunctive DSM (IV) diagnosis of an organic mood disorder can be made at the time of the index offence." 
The impact of this condition in relation to the appellant was described in the following terms: "With the specific regard to Mr Walsh's state of mind at the time of the index offence, Mr Walsh's self confessed assault on his ex wife occurred in a state of intense arousal and distress. If we accept the statements that he made immediately after the index offence, and which he has continued to affirm, it was not his intention to kill his ex wife. Instead, it was an impulsive gesture of revenge to demonstrate his anger towards her because he perceived her to be the cause of his current life crisis. This impulsive gesture may have been triggered by the sight of his wife conducting the bread delivery business from which he felt entitled to have received greater financial compensation.

In my opinion Mr Walsh's disordered state of mind on that morning of the index offence was not capable of applying the kind of rational considerations which an ordinary person would normally subject such a proposition to harm his ex wife. His heightened state of arousal at the time of the index offence may also have been exacerbated by alcohol withdrawal symptoms after having ceased his chronic alcohol use over a day earlier. When he committed that impulsive act, his capacity to understand the full extent of what he was doing, his capacity to control his impulsive actions and his capacity to know that he ought not do the act were all impaired, albeit on a temporary basis. I would not argue that these capacities were impaired on the basis of a major mental illness." 
Dr Mastroianni considered that the appellant would benefit from on-going support from psychological services in a community setting aimed at helping him come to terms with his recent losses, to develop better coping strategies in the future and to address his alcohol abuse problems. In a subsequent report Dr Mastroianni noted that there were a number of positive prognostic indicators in the applicant which supported the view that psychological treatment should continue in a prison setting and/or as part of a probation or parole order.

In my view this material, in the light of the prior good record of the appellant, suggests that his objective criminality should have been regarded as diminished although by no means excluded. That was a matter which should properly have been taken into account both as an objective and subjective circumstance. Failure to do so would, in my view, have constituted an appealable error. It is by no means clear that his Honour paid regard to it in his assessment of the objective criminality of the appellant, since there was no mention made of his mental state in this context.

The second matter which was identified as involving error on the part of his
Honour related to the fact that that he did not accept the appellant's evidence that the offence was committed on the spur of the moment. I am satisfied that his Honour did fall into error in this regard. The cross- examination of the appellant by the Crown makes it very clear that it accepted that the offence was one committed on the spur of the moment. While there was material which raised as a possibility that the appellant had previously considered exacting revenge upon his former wife but had held back from it, it was inappropriate for his Honour to sentence him upon the basis that his action on the day of the offence was pre-meditated.

The appellant was not placed upon notice, either from the statement of facts tendered for the purpose of sentence or from the way that he was cross- examined, that he might be sentenced upon any basis other than that his act arose as a spur of the moment decision. I am accordingly of the view that appellable error has been shown such that it would be necessary for the applicant to be re-sentenced.

It may be observed that the objective circumstances of this case were very serious, and such as to warrant a sentence reflecting a substantial personal deterrent. This is reinforced by the circumstance that there was an apprehended domestic violence order already in place in respect of the appellant. To use a motor vehicle for offensive purposes is always a matter of serious criminality, for the reason that it is bound to lead to significant harm. Against that circumstance needs to be balanced the psychiatric evidence and the spur of the moment nature of the offence, along with the several subjective matters identified by his Honour. They included the early plea of guilty - although on one view the effect of that might be said to have been diminished by the fact of this appeal; his co-operation with the police; his record of dedicated service as a school teacher prior to the marriage break down; his history of depression and attempted suicide both preceding and associated with the event; and his favourable response to treatment while in custody. As to the first matter, I do not think that this Court should hold that against the appellant. I suspect that the application to go behind the plea and the evidence given today have a relationship to the appellant's continuing inability to face up to the reality of what he has done.

Making due allowance for those circumstances I am of the view that an overall sentence of five and a half years penal servitude would be appropriate. I am also of the view that the appellant has made good the submission that this is a case where special circumstances should be found. It is one where a person without any criminal antecedents acted in an entirely atypical manner, in a somewhat disturbed state of mind. It is also a case where the appellant is clearly in need of ongoing psychiatric treatment and supervision. The desirability of an extended period to allow such an offender to receive treatment and supervision after release back to the community, and to be liable to call up to complete the sentence in the event of a breach of parole is well recognised (see Regina versus Moffitt [(1990) 20 NSWLR 114.] It is, on the other hand, necessary to ensure that the minimum term reflects the criminality of the offence (see Regina versus Morrissey CCA unreported 15
July, 1994).

I would accordingly propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed, that leave be granted to the appellant to appeal against sentence and that such appeal be allowed and the sentence below be quashed. In lieu I would propose that the appellant be sentenced to a minimum term of penal servitude for three and a half years to commence from 2 November, 1996 and to expire on May, 2000. There should, in my view, be an additional term of two years.
Upon that basis the appellant would be eligible for release on parole on 1
May, 2000.

SMART J: I agree. 
SPERLING J: I also agree. 
WOOD J: The order of the court accordingly will be as I have proposed. --- * * * 
