

Gladio Pty Ltd versus Buckworth [2015] NSWSC 922 (14 July 2015) 
Last Updated: 14 July 2015 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Plaintiff to have judgment against first defendant for $145,000 plus interest.
Judgment for second defendant and for cross-defendants. Costs reserved.
Parties to bring in draft orders.  
Catchwords: 
CONTRACT - rescission - contract for sale of shares in company - where shares carried right to exclusive occupation of an apartment held in 'company title' - where cl 6.1 of the contract required the company to consent unconditionally to the transfer - where consent was given, provided that the purchaser accede to certain amendments to the 'house rules' - whether such consent sufficient for cl 6.1  
CONTRACT - rescission - where cl 10(g) of the contract required company to keep proper records - whether cl 10(g) a condition or a mere warranty - where company failed to minute a decision to grant a revocable licence allowing the former shareholder to install an air-conditioning system - where purchaser had no means of ascertaining the existence of that licence or that it was revocable at will - whether purchaser entitled to rescind under cl 10(g)  
EQUITY - innocent misrepresentation - where vendor at all material times had a copy of a letter setting out the terms of the licence - where vendor failed to disclose licence to purchaser - where a reasonable purchaser would assume the air-conditioning was included - whether vendor's omission amounted to an implied representation that the air-conditioning was entirely 'within Unit 20' - whether it amounted to an implied representation the purchaser would have exclusive rights to use the air-conditioning  
CONVEYANCING - requisitions - where vendor incorrectly answered requisition concerning the existence of licences - whether that requisition goes to title or merely to quality - where answer did not induce the purchaser to enter into the contract - where innocent misrepresentation in the context of requisitions was not fully argued 
TRADE PRACTICES - misleading and deceptive conduct - whether sale of land occurred 'in trade or commerce'  
EQUITY - unconscionable dealing - where statutory unconscionability under <case> of the Australian Consumer Law only applicable to acts 'in trade or commerce' - where general law unconscionability requires knowing exploitation of special disadvantage - where those elements not pleaded - finding of no unconscionability - relief against forfeiture sought on basis of same alleged unconscionability therefore also unavailable  
CONTRACT - frustration - [Frustrated Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fca1978247/) - whether change of house rules after contract and before settlement frustrated contract - where both the company's articles of association and the house rules formed part of the background of the contract - where neither confined the ability of the company board to make amendments  
TORT - negligence - purchaser's alternative claim against company - where, after the earlier email granting approval conditionally, company suggested in later email that approval had not been given - whether purchaser vulnerable - whether company owed purchaser a duty of care to ensure its communications to the purchaser were accurate - construction of communications in their context - whether communications relied upon  
TORT - negligence - company's cross-claim against its managing agent - where agent owed company duties of care in tort and in contract - earlier email - whether agent breached its duties by neglecting to inform purchaser, as instructed, that final approval was conditional upon a successful interview with the company - whether damage caused by that email foreseeable - later email - whether agent breached its duties by failing to highlight to the company that the later email was inconsistent with the earlier email - where agent normally had no independent role in the drafting of correspondence - conveyancing searches - whether agent failed to make relevant documents available to purchaser's searcher  
EVIDENCE - admission of letters headed 'without prejudice' - where part of letter written to negotiate a settlement of the dispute - exclusion of that part under [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) (Cth) [s (1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s131.html) - where response letter did not relate to negotiation of settlement - admission of response letter - defendant's resultant choice to withdraw objection to admission of earlier letter  
PROCEDURE - where defendant seeks to withdraw deemed admission - where material fact admitted through a drafting technique whereby defence was silent as to facts that were admitted - where defendant claims not to have understood the significance of the fact so admitted - where that position untenable on the evidence - withdrawal of admission refused  
JUDGMENT
HIS HONOUR: What should have been a simple claim for return of a deposit of $145,000.00 has given rise to a hearing extending over six days in this Court, occupying the attention of four separately represented parties. Litigation on that scale over such a sum defies common sense. It is very difficult to see how parties, properly advised and aware of their obligations under [s 56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) , could have permitted matters to come to such a pass.

Nature of the case
The deposit was paid pursuant to a contract for sale of shares, ownership of which carried the right of exclusive occupancy of a "company title" home unit in a building, known as "Ashdown", at Elizabeth Bay. The first defendant (Ms Buckworth) was the vendor. The plaintiff (Gladio) was the purchaser. The second defendant (Ashdown) is the proprietor of the land, and is the company, the shares in which were the subject of the contract for sale. The cross-defendant (SCTM) was Ashdown's managing agent.
Gladio's primary case is that it rescinded the contract for sale pursuant to an express right to do so. It brings alternative cases against Ms Buckworth alleging misleading or deceptive, or unconscionable, conduct. Alternatively, it says, the contract for sale was frustrated. Ms Buckworth cross-claims against Gladio (for damages for breach of contract) and against Ashdown (for indemnity, in the event that Gladio succeeded against her).
Gladio says, alternatively, that Ashdown owed it, and breached, a duty of care in relation to communications. There was also an alternative case brought against Ashdown, alleging misleading or deceptive conduct.
Ashdown joined its managing agent, SCTM, as a cross-defendant. Ashdown says that if it had some liability to Gladio, that liability arises out of acts or omissions of SCTM. In addition, Ashdown raises issues of proportionate liability, involving not only the parties to the litigation but also a legal searcher, EYEON Group Pty Ltd (Eyeon), which caused to be carried out pre-contractual searches of the records of Ashdown maintained by SCTM.
Those disputes generated three versions of a statement of a claim, and responsive pleadings (and of course the cross-claim pleadings). The final articulation of Gladio's case is to be found in the Further Amended Statement of Claim (FASOC) filed on 12 May 2015. That is a prolix and absurdly over-complicated document. It comprised 16 prayers for relief and 142 paragraphs defined into 10 "Chapters", one of which was subdivided into four "Divisions".
The prolix and overly complex nature of the FASOC, and the corresponding complexity of the defences to it, make it impossible to attempt any more helpful distillation of the real issues in dispute than the brief and inadequate summary that I have given already. Thus, although with reluctance, I propose to deal with the matter by setting out the background (and mostly uncontroversial) facts, and then turning to the case against each of the defendants, and to the cross-claims. To the extent necessary, when I deal with the case against one or other of the defendants, and to the cross-claims. I will make such further findings of fact as are necessary to explain the conclusions to which I have come.
Once I have dealt with the issues between the parties, I shall deal with two interlocutory rulings. One is the ruling on the admissibility of documents, to which objection was taken on the basis of "settlement privilege" ([Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) , [s 131).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s131.html) The other is an application made by Ms Buckworth for leave to withdraw an admission.

Background facts
Prior to 24 April 2009, Ms Buckworth and her then partner Ms Daley bought shares in the capital of Ashdown that gave them the exclusive right of occupancy of what was known as "unit 20" (which included a separate car parking space). At some time after April 2009, the relationship between Ms Buckworth and Ms Daley having broken down, Ms Daley transferred her interest in the shares in question to Ms Buckworth.
The previous owners of the shares, who were the vendors to Ms Daley and Ms Buckworth, had sought and obtained the consent of Ashdown to the carrying out of certain works. Those works included the construction of a pergola on a terrace located at the western end of unit 20, and the installation of air-conditioning. The ducting and some of the machinery for the air-conditioning were to be installed in the roof space above unit 20 - in what would be "common property" if the building were a strata title development.
It seems that the previous owners had made application to Sydney City Council for consent to those works. Of necessity, that application required the consent of Ashdown, which consent had been given. Although Ms Buckworth and Ms Daley wanted to have a pergola and air-conditioning, what they wanted varied from what had been approved. Accordingly, they had to make application for a variation to the existing consent (see [s 96](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s96.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) ). That [s 96](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s96.html) application required the consent of Ashdown.
On 24 January 2009, Ms Daley wrote to a member of the Board of Ashdown. She enclosed a "completed application request for Renovation". That application disclosed the nature of the works as: 
RELOCATION OF EXISTING APPROVED (BUT UNBUILT) TERRACE PERGOLA FROM NORTH TO
SOUTH RUNNING, TO JUST LOCATED ON SOUTH SIDE 
REINSTATEMENT OF AIR-CONDITIONING DA
The "affected areas", as to the air-conditioning, were said to include the living room, the dining room, the main bedroom and the second bedroom. The "affected surfaces" were said to include the walls and the ceilings.
In response to a question "Do you wish to remove any walls in part or whole? (Please specify)" the reply was given: 
ONLY TO FACILITATE THE AIR-CONDITIONING VENTS
Both Ms Buckworth and Ms Daley signed the application.
Documents attached to the application dealt with the change to the pergola. None of them seems to have referred specifically to the air-conditioning.
The application was considered at a meeting of Ashdown's directors held on 31 March 2009. Item 6 of the minutes is in the following terms: . Renovations Unit 20. Detailed drawings were tabled for consideration. The work involved includes the installation of air conditioning and a free standing pergola. As these items had been deleted by the previous [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s96.html) application it will be necessary for another [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s96.html) to be lodged with Council. 
After discussion it was agreed:-  * These renovations will not need to be presented to the shareholders as they were on the original Development Application approved by the shareholders,  * Permission be given for the lodgement of the [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s96.html)
Application,  * Luca Turnbull will be engaged to inspect the membrane when the pavers are removed and before the timber decking in [sic] installed,  * Weir & Phillips, architects, to inspect the installation of the air conditioning in the roof space,  * The shareholders will undertake to address any problems with the air conditioning such as noise but the Board of Directors reserve the right to withdraw the approval for the air conditioning if the problems can be resolved,  * The pergola will not be attached to the building and will be held down by the timber decking,  * All of the heavy planter pots will be removed from the roof deck.
On 24 April 2009, Ms Daley and Ms Buckworth wrote to Ashdown in the following terms: 
Virginia Buckworth and Louise Daley, owners of shares in Ashdown Home Units
Pty Limited relating to apartment 20, as part of the application for air- conditioning seek consent to utilise the roof space above our apartment to locate ducting and the compressor unit in accordance with the specifications that have been presented to the Board. 
In making this application we acknowledge:  the space we seek to utilise for the above purpose is company property and not subject to any rights of exclusive use; and  in the event the company decides to use, for any purpose, all or part of the roof space within which the ducting and compressor unit is located, then we agree to remove these items as required, at our expense, and agree that we are not entitled to any compensation for the loss of use of this space and removal of those items. 
We note that if any problems arise with the installation in the roofspace, we will be given the opportunity to resolve these issues, but that the Board of Directors reserves the right to withdraw approval for the air conditioning installation if problems continue. 
We will locate the air conditioning items in the roof space as close as possible to the terrace at the Western end of the area, and should there prove to be noise disturbance to unit 21 from the operation of the air conditioning unit, we will install agreed acoustic separation. 
We also note that this arrangement will also apply to any future shareholders of Unit 20, and that House Rules of Ashdown Home Units will be amended to include these conditions of approval."
There is no evidence of any resolution that in terms accepts, or agrees to, that letter prior to 28 October 2013 (after the contract for sale between Ms Buckworth and Gladio was made and (purportedly) rescinded). On 28 October 2013, the Board resolved as follows: 
House Rules: The Board resolved that a new Rule 22 would be made as follows:  . AIR CONDITIONER FOR UNIT 20: Unit 20 was permitted to install an air- conditioner and related equipment on company property in the roof space above the apartment. The terms and conditions on which this permission was granted are set out in the letter (and documents accompanying the letter) dated 24
April 2009 attached as Appendix 1 to these Rules (Letter). As indicated in the
Letter, the shareholder(s) of Unit 20 from time to time is (are) bound by the terms of the Letter. 
Carried, with L. Roylance abstaining.
The abstaining director, Ms Roylance, gave evidence. She was the only person (at least, who gave evidence) who had been a director both in 2009 and 2013. She accepted that there was no record of any resolution, dealing with the letter of 24 April 2009, between the date that letter was written and 28 October 2013. Her attention was not (in this context) directed to the email dated 9 August 2013, to which I refer at [52], [53] below.
On 25 or 27 April 2009, Ashdown gave its consent to the <case> application. It did so by affixing its common seal to the document. That was authorised by two directors, Ms Cannane and Mr Carter (on 25 April), and the company's secretary, Ms McDonald (on 27 April). (The evidence suggests that the company secretary of Ashdown from time to time was an employee of whoever was its managing agent at the time.)
The works were in due course carried out. The installation of the air-conditioning involved, as I have said, the location of some machinery within the roof space of the building. The parties conducted the litigation on the basis that this was outside the boundaries of "unit 20".
It was Ms Buckworth's case that the ducting for the air-conditioning was located, at least in part, within the roof space. However, such evidence as there was on the point suggests that the ducting is located: * (1) in some rooms, within a bulkhead that was constructed below the soffit of the ceiling; and * (2) in other locations, in the walls of unit 20.
There were no drawings in evidence which would show the details of the air-conditioning installation. However, as a matter of common sense, it must be the case that even for the outlets located in the bulkheads to which I have referred, some ducting is likely to pass from the machinery through a part of the roof space to the ducting located within those bulkheads.
On 10 December 2012, Ms Buckworth leased unit 20 to Mr Robbiati. Mr Robbiati is the sole director and shareholder of Gladio. The lease to Mr Robbiati required, and had, the consent of Ashdown (given by its directors). It is apparent that, at least in the opinion of some of the directors and some of the residents of Ashdown, Mr Robbiati was not a satisfactory tenant. Apparently, his partner would from time to time visit him and bring with her a dog. It seems that the dog was given to barking (not an uncommon habit of the canine species, particularly when kept in confined spaces), and that its barking was a source of annoyance to other residents.
Ms Buckworth wanted to sell "unit 20". Mr Robbiati was interested in buying it. Ultimately, on 16 July 2013, they made the contract for sale of shares that is the subject of this litigation.
For reasons that are unclear (and in any event are probably irrelevant), Mr Robbiati decided to buy the shares in the name of Gladio. He instructed a firm of solicitors, Day Legal, to act for Gladio. Mr Day of that firm had responsibility for the matter. Ms Buckworth instructed Hunt & Hunt. Mr Lane of that firm had responsibility on her behalf.
Before contracts were exchanged, Mr Day caused searches to be made by Eyeon. Eyeon retained an independent searcher, Ms Kritikos, to carry out searches of Ashdown's records. Ms Kritikos did that, at the offices of SCTM, on 21 June 2013.
Gladio's pleaded case was that the records made available to Eyeon on 21 June 2013 did not include the 24 April 2009 letter or any Board minute or other records relating to the air-conditioning in unit 20. It will be necessary to return to the detail of that evidence. However, for present purposes, it is enough to note that I find that the records made available to Ms Kritikos for inspection did include, in at least two places, copies of the letter of 24 April 2009; and included, further, a copy of the Board resolution of 31 March 2009, with item 6 in the terms set out at [17] above.
I do accept (and it was not challenged) that the report that Eyeon made to Day Legal did not include any reference to that letter or that resolution. It follows, and I find, that Mr Robbiati caused Gladio to enter into the contract for sale unaware of the terms of the letter of 24 April 2009. In particular, I find, Mr Robbiati caused Gladio to enter into the contract for sale unaware of the circumstances that (as that letter records): * (1) Ashdown could require the air-conditioning equipment to be removed if it wished itself to use the roof space; * (2) the approval for the air-conditioning installation could be withdrawn in the case of "problems" - either with the installation generally, or specifically with noise; and * (3) the terms of "this arrangement" were to be reflected in the House Rules so as to make them applicable to future shareholders.

The contract for sale and subsequent developments
The contract for sale identified the subject matter of the sale as certain identified "Shares" in the capital of Ashdown. It recited that those shares: ... entitle the holder to the exclusive use and occupation of the home unit no. 20 and garage space 2 contained in the building situate at... Elizabeth
Bay NSW (collectively referred to in the agreement as "Unit").
By cl 4, a 5% deposit was payable, in the sum to which I have referred, direct to Ms Buckworth: . Deposit 
Upon the date of the making of this agreement the Purchaser will pay the
Vendor a deposit of 5% of the Price being $145,000.00 which will be accounted to the Vendor forthwith and the balance of the Price must be paid to the
Vendor's solicitors in cash on completion or as they may otherwise direct in writing.
Clause 6.1 dealt with consent: . Consent to transfer  .1 Date by which consent to be obtained  
This agreement is subject to the written consent of Ashdown Home Units Pty
Limited ACN 000 176 009 ("the Company") to the transfer of the Shares to the Purchaser. If consent is not obtained within 38 days from the date of the making of this agreement either party may by notice in writing to the other rescind this agreement and thereupon the deposit will be refunded to the
Purchaser and upon return to the deposit neither party will have any claim on the other arising out of this agreement.
It was common ground on the pleadings that the last date for satisfaction of cl 6.1 was 23 August 2013.
Clause 9 dealt with Ashdown's Constitution and "House Rules": . Memorandum and Articles of Association and House Rules  .1 Copy attached  
The Shares are held by the Vendor and sold subject to the provisions of the
Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Company and the House Rules and a copy of each is attached to this agreement ("Articles of Association and
House Rules"). The Purchaser has satisfied itself from its review of the
Articles of Association and House Rules that on completion of the sale, ownership of the Shares will entitle the owner (subject to the provisions of the Articles of Association and House Rules and the Lease) to the exclusive right of use and occupancy of the Unit.  .2 Purchaser review  
The Purchaser acknowledges that prior to entering into this agreement it has satisfied itself as to the Articles of Association and House Rules of the
Company.  .3 No warranty  
The Vendor discloses that it made application to the Company before the date of this agreement for a complete copy of the Articles of Association and
House Rules, inclusive of any resolutions to vary or amend as may have been resolved by the Company from time to time. The copy of the Articles of
Association and House Rules attached to this agreement were supplied by the
Company to the Vendor in response to the Vendor's request and the Vendor makes no warranty they are complete or accurate. The Purchaser must satisfy itself in regard to the completeness and accuracy of the Articles of Association and
House Rules prior to entering this agreement and can make no claim, requisition, and objection or purport to rescind or terminate this agreement on the grounds of anything referred to in or arising from this clause.
Clause 10 set out a number of "conditions of sale", including, relevantly: . Conditions of sale acknowledged by vendor  
The Vendor acknowledges and agrees that it is a condition of this agreement:  ...  that the respective registers of members, directors and charges and all other books of the Company required by law to be kept by it are properly kept;
Clause 12 dealt with requisitions: . Requisitions  
All requisitions which the Purchaser is entitled to make will be made and delivered to the Vendor or their solicitor within 21 days of the date of the making of this agreement and all requisitions not so made shall be deemed to be waived. If the Vendor is unable or unwilling to comply with or remove any objective or requisition which the Purchaser has made and not waived within 14 days after the Vendor has given to the Purchaser written notice of intention to rescind this agreement the Vendor will be entitled to rescind this agreement and all money paid or given by the Purchaser will be refunded and the Vendor will not be liable to any sum for damage or expenses whatsoever.
The annexures to the contract for sale included the lease to Mr Robbiati, the Articles of Association of Ashdown, and the "Rules and Regulations" (or, as they were often called, "House Rules"). Relevant provisions of the Articles include articles 41, 118, 121 and 161: . The right of members to transfer their shares shall be restricted as follows:- 
Shares shall only be transferable in the groups specified in Articles 4 and 4(a). 
The Directors may refuse to register any transfer of a group of shares upon which the Company has a lien. 
No transfer shall be made to an infant or person of unsound mind but the Directors shall not be bound to enquire as to the age or soundness of mind of any transferee. 
Deleted 25.9.72 New Article Substituting: 
Companies Act, 1936, 
Section 98. 
Ashdown Home Units Pty. Limited  
At the Annual General Meeting of the abovenamed company duly convened and held at the Mansions Hotel, Room 100, Kellett Street, Kings Cross on Monday, September, 1972 the following alteration was made to the Articles of
Association for the company.  "By deleting paragraph (d) of Article 41 and substituting the following new paragraph: 
Subject to the provisions of Clauses (a) (b) (c) of this Article, the
Directors may decline to register any transfer of shares to a transferee of whom they do not approve (and who they have not previously resolved is approved as suitable to be a member of the company) and shall not be bound to assign any grounds or reason for so declining. If the Directors refuse to register a transfer of any shares, they shall forthwith send to the transferee notice of their refusal as required by Section 97 of the Companies Act." 
DATED at Sydney this Twenty-fifth day of September, 1972. 
P. C. ABRAHAMS 
SECRETARY  . The Directors shall cause minutes to be duly entered in books provided for the purpose:- 
Of the names of the Directors present at each meeting of the Directors and of any Committee of Directors. 
Of all declarations made or notice given by any Director pursuant to the requirements of Section 129 of the Companies Act. 
Of all orders made by the Directors and Committees of Directors. 
Of all resolutions and proceedings of General Meeting and of  meetings of the Directors and Committees. 
And any such minutes of any meeting of the Directors or any 
Committee of the Company if purporting to be signed by the Chairman of such meeting or by the Chairman of the next succeeding meeting, shall be receivable as prima facie evidence of the matters stated in such minutes. The books containing the minutes of General Meetings shall be kept at the office and shall during business hours be open for the inspection of members.  ...  . The Directors shall provide for the safe custody of the Seal and the
Seal shall not be used except by the Authority of the Directors or a Committee of the Directors, and in the presence of at least two Directors who shall sign every instrument to which the Seal is affixed and every such instrument shall be countersigned by the Secretary or some other person appointed by the
Directors.  ...  . The Directors may from time to time make regulations for the efficient and economic conduct of the building known as "Ashdown" and a copy of such regulations and of any amendments from time to time thereto shall be forwarded to every shareholder or other the occupier for the time being of flats in the said building and such regulations shall have effect as if they had been incorporated in and formed part of these Articles.
As to the annexed House Rules, all that needs to be said is that they did not include any rule relating to the air-conditioning installation that serviced unit 20, nor did they contain any rule of the kind contemplated by the last paragraph of the 24 April 2009 letter.
No copy of that letter was annexed to the contract for sale. Nor was a copy of the relevant resolution of 31 March 2009 annexed. There was nothing in the contract that would have alerted Mr Robbiati or Mr Day to the existence of the letter, or to the terms of the resolution preceding it.
Day Legal made requisitions on title on 22 July 2013. Requisition 21 was as follows: . If the Vendors have a lease or licence agreement with the company:-  an assignment of such lease or licence agreement, with the consent of the company endorsed and signed by the Vendors, must be handed over on completion, or  a new lease or licence agreement between the company and the
Purchasers, executed by the company, must be handed over at settlement. 
Please provide us before settlement with the documentation for the
Purchasers to sign.
Hunt & Hunt replied on 3 September 2013. The reply to requisition 21 was: . The vendor does not have a lease or licence agreement with the company.
It is convenient to note at this point that Mr Lucarelli of Counsel, who appeared for Gladio, submitted that the 24 April 2009 either was, or evidenced the terms of, a licence to use what he called "common property" in connection with the unit 20 air-conditioning. Mr Grieve of Queens Counsel, who appeared for Ms Buckworth, maintained that requisition 21 was not a proper requisition on title, and hence that even if the reply were incorrect (which I do not think he conceded), nothing turned on it.
On 24 July 2013, Hunt & Hunt sought Ashdown's consent to the transfer of shares from Ms Buckworth to Gladio. The letter and its attached documents made it clear that Mr Robbiati was the sole director and shareholder of Gladio. The letter said of him that: ... that gentlemen [sic] presently rents the property and he was previously approved by the company to occupy the premises as a tenant.
It is clear that the Board of Ashdown was concerned by the possibility of having Gladio as a shareholder, and Mr Robbiati as an "owner" / resident. Some of that concern at least appeared to relate to the "barking dog" issue. There was also a question, in the minds of some of the directors at least, as to whether Ashdown's constitution permitted corporate shareholders.
By the end of the hearing, it was common ground between Ashdown, Ms Buckworth and Gladio that whether or not SCTM had actual authority to communicate, so as to bind Ashdown, matters such as (for example) approval or non-approval of applications to become a shareholder, it had at least ostensible authority to do so. It was equally clear that, on matters of any importance whatsoever, as between Ashdown and SCTM, the latter was only to communicate on the instructions of, and in the terms authorised by it, Ashdown. On important matters, the precise terms of the reply were communicated by Ashdown to SCTM, so that they could be cut and pasted into an email or letter by SCTM to whoever was to be the recipient of the communication.
On 31 July 2013, Mr Greene, an employee of SCTM, sent an email to Mr Lane. It was Ashdown's practice to communicate through SCTM rather than direct. That email stated, so far as it is relevant: 
We are the managing agents for Ashdown Home Units. 
I have been informed by the directors of Ashdown Home Units that they are not prepared to accept the above transfer in its present form. 
Ashdown Home Units Pty Ltd is unable to consider a request to transfer shares to a company, as it is clear in the Articles of Association that only a person can be a shareholder.. 
Please advise your client to change the entity of the proposed shareholder to a person. 
Once this is done, and a fresh application is received, it will be considered in the normal manner with an interview to follow. 
Please advise this position to your client and let me know the new arrangement.
Mr Lane responded swiftly, saying that he had to leave the office and would communicate further upon his return and after he had spoken to his client. The next day, Mr Lane replied in the following terms:​ ... 
We have reviewed the constitution of Ashdown Home Units Pty Ltd. We cannot see any reference in the constitution that prohibits a shareholder from being a corporation. 
To the contrary, the constitution does indeed clearly provide for non- natural persons to hold shares and we draw your attention to:  the definition section in clause 1 whereby the term "person" also means a "corporation"; and  clauses 82 and 83 which set out the proxy requirements for a shareholder that is a corporation. 
Copies of the above clauses are highlighted and attached to this email. 
If, as you contend in the 3rd sentence of your email, "it is clear in the
Articles of Association that only a person can be a shareholder" then could you please direct us to the relevant provision within the constitution that supports that position. We do not believe that is the case and this is clearly supported by the clauses in the constitution we have brought to your attention in the attached. 
We would appreciate the executive reviewing its decision in light of the above and look forward to receiving a formal response to our client's request for consent to the transfer of her shares. 
Please also note that our client is incurring additional legal fees in having to deal with the position as presented in your email yesterday and we reserve her rights.
Not surprisingly, Mr Lane's reply led to considerable discussion between the directors of Ashdown. Those directors included (I think this is a recognised collective noun) a quarrel of lawyers: highly experienced and well-regarded legal practitioners. One matter which arose out of those discussions was "an additional rule to cover shareholders who are not real persons". In the course of those discussions, it seems that Mr Bell (a solicitor, and a director at the time) spoke to Mr Robbiati. Their conversation covered the following matters (email from Mr Bell to other directors of 2 August 2013): ... 
I just spoke to Tarek.  . He said he is amenable to give an undertaking to comply with the rules as if her [sic] were a shareholder himself personally.  . He is unaware of the air conditioner unit agreement - I told him I would send him a copy of that.  . His partner has a dog when she comes from Melbourne. He said he might as well state now that he will be making an application for the dog. I told him we had amended the rules to prevent the board from having any power to permit dogs. I explained to him the problem we've had. No [sic] sure we resolved anything, but told him that dogs were a problem.
On 5 August 2013, Mr Lane emailed Mr Greene in the following terms: ... 
I refer to our telephone conversation this morning and understand that the directors will consent to the share transfer on the proviso that the corporate shareholder director provides some agreement to be personally liable for levies etc. 
As mentioned this morning, I am representing a client mid-conveyance and would appreciate if the [illegible - to the effect of "directors could"] clarify their position in writing as soon as possible.
Mr Greene forwarded that email to the Board for instructions. He was instructed to reply in terms to the following effect: ... it will require a change to the House Rules to accommodate the request for a corporate entity to buy shares in Ashdown. This at least is easier than a change to the Articles of Association. An out-of-course director's meeting has been scheduled for Thursday 8 August to discuss a new rule to accommodate the request. Naturally the Board has taken legal advice to ensure the new rule or rules protect both the prospective purchaser and Ashdown... 
A copy of the new rules will be sent to your promptly after the meeting.
You can then send them to Mr Dale [sic; presumably, "Mr Day"].
On 9 August 2013, Mr Lee on behalf of the Board emailed Mr Greene, giving him instructions on the application by Gladio to become a shareholder. Those instructions were: ... 
Last night the Board discussed the application by Gladio Pty Ltd to purchase shares and become a member of Ashdown. The Board has agreed to this purchase, as usual subject to interview, and therefore asks you to contact Mr
Robbiati and ask him when he might be available for this interview. 
The Board has amended two rules (15 has been tightened and 20 has been liberalised, both in the light of recent experience) and created two new ones (22 and 23). The new rules 22 and 23 were created specifically to accommodate
Gladio Pty Ltd's purchase of the shares. They are not especially noteworthy (and certainly not in the least oppressive) and are designed merely to satisfy the Board of continuity of current arrangements under the new ownership structure. Could you please inform Mr Robbiati's solicitor of these changes and send him a copy of the amended rules. 
Could you also please inform Chris Dale [sic] of this news and send him a copy of the amended rules for his information.  ...
The attached House Rules read as follows: . AIR-CONDITIONER FOR UNIT 20: Subject to the terms of a letter from the owners of that unit to the Board dated 24 April 2009, unit 20 was permitted to install an air-conditioner and related equipment on company property in the roof space above the apartment. In the event of any complaint or dispute (for example over noise), the owners of unit 20 are obliged either to remove or sound-proof the air-conditioner at their expense. The Board has the right to withdraw this permission at any time and the air-conditioner's removal will be entirely at the expense of the owners of unit 20 if such permission is withdrawn.  . SHAREHOLDING BY A COMPANY: In the event that a company becomes a shareholder of Ashdown, whoever is a director of that company at the time of purchase shall be bound to comply with all Articles and Rules of Ashdown as if they were a shareholder. The director must provide full details of the purchasing company to the Board before any shares are registered in the name of the purchasing company. The only persons permitted to occupy the unit thus purchased are those who were directors or the immediate family of directors at the time of purchase. Thus the standard residence requirements of shareholders as outlined in the Articles and Rules apply to the directors of a company purchasing the shares.
Mr Greene did not comply precisely with the terms of the instructions given to him. On 9 August 2013, he emailed Mr Lane in the following terms: ... 
Please be advised that the board of directors of Ashdown have given approval to the above sale proceeding provided you instruct your client of the amended rules and regulations here attached. (in particular to clause 23) 
I hope this has cleared the obstacles to this conveyance matter.  ...
Significantly, Mr Greene did not note that the "approval" was "as usual subject to interview".
Ms Buckworth relies on SCTM's email of 9 August 2013 as being a sufficient consent for the purposes of cl 6.1 of the contract for sale. Gladio says otherwise. It was not in dispute - at least, by the time of submissions - that if the email is to be characterised as a consent, it was, in all the circumstances, a consent binding on Ashdown notwithstanding that it went beyond, or did not reflect, the terms of the instructions given by Ashdown to SCTM.
On 12 August 2013 (9 August was a Friday and 12 August was the following Monday), Mr Lane forwarded SCTM's email of 9 August 2013 to Mr Day, noting "that your client has been approved as transferee of the shares".
Also on 12 August 2013, an employee of Day Legal sent two documents to Mr Greene to be executed by or on behalf of Ashdown. Mr Greene sent those documents on to Ashdown. He did so by forwarding an email chain which included Mr Lane's email to Mr Day noting that Gladio had been approved as transferee of the shares. To jump ahead for a moment: some days later, on 22 August 2013, Mr Greene forwarded to the Board another email from Mr Lane, which included the comment that: 
My client appreciates that the Board approved the transfer of her shares to
Gladio...
Perhaps not surprisingly, Mr Day was concerned by the amendments to the House Rules by the inclusion of rules 22 and 23. He emailed Mr Lane on 16 August 2013 commenting among other things that: 
It is disturbing, to say the least, that it appears that a number of the amendments to the Rules and Regulations which were not disclosed in the
Agreement for Sale of Shares have been made specifically by the Board of
Directors in response to the Purchasers [sic] request for consent to register the Transfer of Shares.  ... 
In the meantime, I reiterate that we reserve all of the Purchaser's rights, including the right to rescind...
On 26 August 2013, Mr Day sent a further email to Mr Lane in which he "formally reiterate[d] the reservation of the Purchaser's rights..."
Mr Lane's position, as expressed in his email in reply, was simple: 
Your client was approved as transferee of the shares on 9 August 2013 as confirmed by email from the company's managing agent... which was forwarded to you on 12 August 2013. 
The condition precedent in clause 6 of the contract was satisfied within the time provided by that clause.
There was further discussion and correspondence, both among the directors of Ashdown and between Day Legal and Hunt & Hunt. Ultimately, Gladio took the view that cl 6.1 had not been satisfied. It instructed Day Legal to give notice of rescission on its behalf. This Day Legal did on 26 September 2013. The notice recited the grounds to rescind as follows: ... 
The Purchaser's grounds to rescind the Agreement include:  . That the Company did not consent to the transfer of the Shares from the vendor to the Purchaser within the time and upon the terms specified in the
Agreement,  . In the alternative, that the Company did not unconditionally consent to the transfer of the Shares from the Vendor to the Purchaser within the time and upon the terms specified in the Agreement,  . In the alternative, that the Rules attached to the Agreement were not the Rules of the Company as at 16 July, 2013,  . In the alternative, that the Vendor did not disclose in the Agreement that the Airconditioning System is located wholly outside the Apartment and no right to retain the Airconditioning System attaches to the Shares or the exclusive use and occupation of the Apartment,  . In the alternative, that the Vendor did not disclose the terms of the
AC Agreement to the Purchaser in the Agreement or prior to 16 July 2013,  . In the alternative, that the Agreement does not comply with the provisions of the [Home Building Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/) and the
Regulations made under that Act, and  . In the alternative, that the Vendor has engaged in deceptive and misleading conduct in the terms of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and other
NSW and Australian legislation.
The expression "the AC agreement" was a reference to what was (in Gladio's view): ... 
A written agreement between, inter alia, the Vendor [Ms Buckworth] and the
Company [Ashdown] dated 24 April 2009... that the company could enforce the removal of the Airconditioning System at any time.
In turn, the "Airconditioning System" was said to be: 
The airconditioning system, plant, condenser unit, fan unit and ducting which are a fixture to the Apartment... [which] is located wholly outside the
Apartment and no right to retain the Airconditioning System attaches to the
Shares for the exclusive use and occupation of the Apartment.
In passing, it might be wondered how something could be both "a fixture to the Apartment" and "located wholly outside the Apartment"; or how something which was "a fixture" could not be the subject of a right of exclusive use and occupation of that to which it was affixed.
The asserted claim under the [Home Building Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/) was not a matter that occupied any attention in the pleadings, nor time at the trial.
The notice of rescission made no reference to the breach of cl 10(g) which was pleaded and which was in issue at the trial. That breach, according to Mr Lucarelli, is to be found in the failure of Ashdown to minute and retain what he said must have been the decision, or resolution, of the Board to accept the terms of the 24 April 2009 letter.
Mr Lucarelli submitted that his client was entitled to rely on that breach of condition even though it had not been relied upon in the notice of rescission. He relied on the principles stated in Shepherd versus Felt and Textiles of Australia Ltd <case>; [(1931) 45 CLR 359.] at [97] and following).

Validity of the notice of rescission
The principal bases on which Mr Lucarelli sought to uphold the rescission were that: * (1) Ashdown had not given a consent, of the kind for which cl 6.1 calls, by 23 August 2013; * (2) in any event, Gladio was entitled to "rescind" for breach of the condition stated in cl 10(g); and * (3) alternatively, Gladio was entitled to rescind for innocent misrepresentation.
However, the notice of rescission (see at [62] above) set out a greater number of grounds (which did not include breach of the condition set out in cl 10(g)). I propose first to deal with those that were addressed at trial, in the order that they appear in the notice (grouping some together for convenience), and then to deal with the further pleaded grounds on which Gladio relied.

No sufficient consent? 
Clause 6.1 provided that the agreement was subject to Ashdown's written consent to the transfer of the subject shares to Gladio. It is not necessary to consider whether it was the agreement itself which was intended to be conditional, or the performance of the agreement up to and including completion. If consent were not obtained by the specified time (agreed to be 23 August 2013), either party had the right to rescind.
In my view, in calling for "written consent... to the transfer of the Shares" to Gladio, cl 6.1 required that there be an unambiguous and unqualified statement of consent. For example, a statement of consent "subject to interview" (which may be what the Board of Ashdown had instructed Mr Greene to convey) would not have satisfied cl 6.1.
The question is whether the email of 9 August 2013 communicated an unconditional approval to the contract. Mr Grieve submitted that it did. Mr Lucarelli submitted that it did not, both in terms and, in particular, when read against the background of the preceding email correspondence between Mr Lane and (through SCTM) Ashdown.
Mr Lucarelli submitted that everyone knew that Ashdown would not give consent to the transfer of shares until there had been an interview. The interview process had been intercepted, because of the debate as to whether Ashdown's constitution provided for corporate shareholders.
Mr Lucarelli then submitted that, viewed against the background of the correspondence relating to that debate, the "approval" that was stated to have been given could only have been an approval of the concept of a sale to a corporate entity (i.e., a reversal of the directors' initial view on that point). That was confirmed, Mr Lucarelli submitted, by the expression of a hope that "this has cleared the obstacles to this conveyance matter".
The proper characterisation of the 9 August 2013 email must depend to some extent on the context in which it is to be placed. However, in my view, that context should be confined to matters of which both contracting parties - that is to say, Gladio as well as Ms Buckworth - had knowledge. As I have said, Mr Lane took the view that the 9 August 2013 email did communicate approval, and sent an email to Mr Day on 12 August 2013 informing him among other things that by the email (which Mr Lane forwarded), "your client has been approved as transferee of the shares".
There is no suggestion that Mr Day was aware of the detail of, let alone provided with copies of, all the correspondence between Mr Lane and Ashdown (through SCTM) that preceded SCTM's sending of its 9 August 2013 email.
When Mr Lane sought Ashdown's consent to the transfer of shares to Gladio, he noted that the proposed transferee was a company of which Mr Robbiati was the sole director and shareholder; and that Mr Robbiati had previously been approved as a tenant in the building. That should be taken to suggest that Mr Lane was aware that, as Gladio was a corporate entity, the question of approval would need to be assessed by reference to the person who stood behind it and who would receive the benefit of residence conferred by the shares if they were transferred to Gladio.
In my view, the most significant matter of mutually known background which is referable to the proper construction of the 9 August 2013 email is article 41(d). I have set that out at [38] above. It grants the directors power to "decline to register any transfer of shares to a transferee of whom they do not approve (and who they have not previously resolved is approved and suitable to be a member of the company)". By the terms of that paragraph, the essential question is approval of someone as a transferee of shares. Plainly enough, where the proposed transferee is a corporate entity, the question of approval would require consideration of the natural persons who stand behind the corporation, and who would benefit from the corporation's exercise of the rights attached to the shares if the transfer were registered.
Mr Lucarelli submitted, in another part of his case, that Ashdown's directors must have realised that contracts for the sale of shares in its capital would contain a provision, such as cl 6.1 of the contract for sale, making completion dependent on consent. I think that is correct. It is not necessary to find (and I do not find) that Ashdown's directors knew of the precise terms of the contract for sale from Ms Buckworth to Gladio. It is enough to find, as I do, that they must have realised, had they turned their minds to the question, that the contract would be subject to their giving approval to the transferee.
Although those submissions were made in respect to another part of the case, they are in my view equally relevant to the present issue. That is because they focus attention on precisely what meaning is to be attributed to the giving of "approval to the above sale proceeding" as stated in the 9 August 2013 email. What would a reader of that email, armed with the mutually known background knowledge to which I have referred, make of that expression? In my view, that reader, knowing what cl 41(d) said as to the necessity of approval, would have understood that the approval that was given was an approval in terms of cl 41(d).
True it is that there were other matters in dispute which, if resolved one way, could prevent the sale from proceeding. But they were, for one reason or another, reasons why the Board might decide to decline to approve the transfer. Put perhaps less delphically, they were reasons why the Board, pursuant to the discretion conferred by article 41(d), might decline to approve of Gladio as a transferee.
Thus, in my view, the plain meaning of the 9 August 2013 email is that the directors, in exercise of a power vested in them to do so, have given approval to the sale proceeding - by inference, to completion. Although article 41 included three other reasons why the right to transfer shares was restricted, any person having knowledge of the mutually known background facts must have understood that the only power to approve was that contained in para (d). Thus, logically enough, such a person would have read the email as constituting an exercise (by granting approval) of the power to approve.
In my view, read in context, the email does signify objectively that the Board of Ashdown has resolved to approve Gladio as a transferee of shares in the capital of Ashdown. Further, in my view, that reading of the email would stand even if it were permissible to take into account those other matters of background, known only to Ms Buckworth, to which Mr Lucarelli referred in his submissions on this point.
As I have noted, Mr Lucarelli submitted also that any approval given was given on a proviso, which rendered it relevantly qualified, and thus not an unconditional approval of the kind for which cl 6.1 of the contract for sale called. I accept that submission.
What follows the statement of approval is a proviso: ... provided you instruct your client of the amended rules and regulations here attached. (In particular to clause 23).
That of itself cannot be regarded as a condition of approval. It is no more and no less than a requirement that Mr Lane (the addressee of the email) advise his client of those amended rules. In passing, one might think that it was more important for Mr Day to advise his client of those matters. However, I do not see anything of particular significance turning on this.
The proviso could not be regarded sensibly as a condition of approval, which if not satisfied would undo the approval or render it ineffectual. The Board would have no way of knowing whether "you" had ever "instructed" "your client" of the matters referred to. There is no basis for regarding something of which, by its nature, the Board could never be satisfied, as capable of amounting to a qualification on, or a condition possibly capable of undoing if not satisfied, the approval that had just been stated to be given.
However, that analysis is insufficient to dispose of the point. The real question is not whether the "proviso" itself should be regarded as some sort of condition. It is, rather, whether read as a whole the "proviso" indicated, objectively and with reasonable clarity, that there were further obstacles to be cleared before the Board would register the transfer to Gladio. In my view, read in that way, the email did indicate that there were further obstacles.
The starting point is that the email expressly related the "approval" that had been "given" to the "amended rules and regulations here attached". It drew attention "in particular to clause 23". In my view, considered objectively, the clear implication from the email as a whole (including the attachment) is that the approval incorporated, or was subject to the terms of, the new House [Rule 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s23.html) (and, for that matter, the new House [Rule 22).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s22.html)
House [Rule 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/s23.html) purported to state "the standard residence requirements of shareholders as outlined in the Article and Rules apply to the directors of a company purchasing shares". However, in my view, the rule imposed conditions on corporate purchasers that were more onerous than those imposed on natural person purchasers.
Clause 4 of the Articles specified the rights given to shareholders: "the exclusive right subject to these Articles to use and occupy the flat" to which the shares were tied. It seems to me to be reasonably arguable that a natural person who held shares in Ashdown could "use" the relevant flat by (for example) permitting members of his or her family to reside there, and perhaps (again for example) by permitting others beyond the family to reside there, if they did so as part of a household including the shareholder. That use might also extend to permitting guests to reside in the flat.
However, where the shareholder is a corporation, "[t]he only persons permitted to occupy the unit... are those who were directors or the immediate family of directors at the time of purchase". And the concept of "use" finds no mention in Rule 23.
Further, it seems to be reasonably clear that, for natural person shareholders, "use" may extend to letting in certain circumstances. That is covered by House Rule 20, which reads as follows: . TENANTS: Shares are intended for purchase by owner occupiers only and letting is not permitted. However, in certain extraordinary circumstances, after a period of not less than twelve months residence, shareholders may apply for, and if thought fit, receive approval to let to a tenant for a minimum of twelve months and a maximum of twenty four months. All proposed tenants must be interviewed and approved by the Board of Directors, after signing an agreement to abide by the Rules and Regulations of the Company. The shareholder will be required to lodge a refundable bond equivalent to one year's maintenance levy with the company against any damage to the building by the tenant.
Where the shareholder is a corporation, there is only a right of occupation given to directors or their immediate family at the time of purchase. The word "use" does not appear. It seems to me to be at least arguable that, in the case of corporate shareholders, letting is not permissible even "in certain extraordinary circumstances" as contemplated by House Rule 20.
It is not necessary to consider whether the House Rules impermissibly restrict the rights granted by the articles: either generally, or specifically in the case of corporate shareholders. It is enough to note that, so far as the directors of Ashdown were concerned, their "approval to the... sale proceeding" was clearly intended to be given on the basis that House Rules 22 and, in particular, 23 applied to Gladio. Thus, in my view, properly read, the 9 August 2013 email is to be regarded as making the approval relevantly conditional.
Further, House Rule 22 imposed conditions on the enjoyment of the air-conditioning in unit 20. As I have said, the clear implication is that the approval given by the email of 9 August 2013 required Gladio to accept, and abide by, those conditions. It matters not that Ms Buckworth was similarly bound. The simple fact is that Gladio, and purchasers from it, would be equally bound.
Of course, it was open to the Board of Ashdown to make House Rules at any time. Provided they exercised their power to do so in good faith and for the benefit of the company as a whole, it is unlikely that any shareholder could challenge the exercise. Thus, if an unqualified approval had been given and Gladio become registered as a shareholder, it might have been open to the Board to make rules such as House Rules 22 and 23. But that is not the point. The point is that they did so between contract and settlement, and in substance required Gladio to acknowledge that the rights that it would acquire on registration were to be limited in the terms suggested by those rules.
Thus, in my view, the approval that was given was relevantly, and in an onerous way, conditional. It was not an approval sufficient to satisfy the requirements of cl 6.1 of the contract for sale.

Non-disclosure of the rules as at 16 July 2013
The House Rules attached to the contract for sale did not include rules 22 and 23. However, on the evidence, those rules were not made until about 8 August 2013. That is apparent from Mr Lee's email of 9 August 2013 to Mr Greene, giving him instructions in relation to the question of approval. That email (see at [52] above) suggests that the rules were agreed at the Board meeting held "last night" - i.e., 8 August 2013.
It follows that this asserted ground for rescission is not made out.

Rescission for misrepresentation 
The right was characterised as a right to rescind in equity for innocent misrepresentation.
The misrepresentation case proceeded on the basis that at all material times, Ms Buckworth had in her possession a copy of the letter of 24 April 2009. That was pleaded at FASOC [76]. It was not traversed. Although Ms Buckworth sought leave to withdraw the admission thereby taken to have been made, I refused to grant such leave. My reasons for doing so appear at [372] to [399] below.
Thus, among other things, Ms Buckworth's evidence (taken only on her application for leave to withdraw the admission), that she did not have a copy of the letter in her possession at the relevant time, is not evidence for the purposes of the hearing before me. However, I add that even if it had been admitted for all purposes, I regard it as inherently unpersuasive, having regard to her cross-examination on the point. I shall return to this.
The submissions on this issue (and also on the related issue of misleading or deceptive conduct) at times appeared to be based on an unstated premise, that the subject matter of the sale was real estate. However, it is necessary to bear in mind that the subject matter was shares in Ashdown. Thus, what is important is the question of the rights attached to those shares. Subject to any limitation in the contract for sale, Gladio as purchaser would expect to have the unfettered and undiminished enjoyment of whatever those rights may be, under and subject to Ashdown's constitution.
As I have pointed out at [93], article 4 makes it apparent that those rights are "the exclusive right subject to these articles to use and occupy the" relevant flat. There are additional rights given in respect of garage spaces (article 4 (a)) and further rights in respect of roof space (article 4(c), which in fact are part of the "unit 20" rights), but nothing turns on these additional rights.
The expression "the flat" is not defined. Clearly enough, the Articles proceed on the mutually understood basis that there were some 31 flats in the building, each separately numbered, and that rights of use and occupation that were given related to a particular numbered flat, the identity and location of which could be established by inspection.
It seems to me that the expression "the flat" must include not just the physical space (analogous to a strata lot; but the analogy is imperfect in the extreme) but also the benefits or, more broadly, advantages (and disadvantages) pertaining to it.
For example, each flat presumably has the benefit of electricity, water and (perhaps) gas. Of necessity, those benefits would be provided by services that come from outside the physical boundaries of the flat into the flat, terminating in light switches, power points, taps and the like. It would be fanciful to suggest that the rights conveyed by ownership of the shares did not include the rights to use water, electricity and (if available) gas.
At this point, and in reference to one of Mr Grieve's submissions, it would be obvious that the wiring which conveyed electric power to light switches and power points, and the piping which conveyed water to taps, must in part come from locations outside the physical boundaries of the flat. The wiring presumably passes through walls or ceilings; likewise, perhaps, water pipes. But it could not be said, simply because the source of those amenities lay outside the physical boundaries of the flat, that the right to use them was self-evidently by way of licence only, at the entire discretion of the Board.
It may be accepted that air-conditioning falls into a somewhat different category to basic utilities such as electricity and water. Nonetheless, it was an obvious and attractive feature of unit 20: * (1) that it enjoyed the benefit of air-conditioning; * (2) which had been installed in what clearly appeared to be a permanent fashion.
By way of illustration of the second point, this is not simply a case where an air-conditioning unit was bolted to the external wall, and fed air into the apartment by means of piping drilled through the wall. The installation was sophisticated, involving as I have said ducting through a bulkhead, vents at the end of the bulkhead, and vents in other walls. One would not ordinarily expect that the benefit of that sophisticated built-in system could be lost at the discretion of the Board.
Mr Grieve submitted that the very fact that the air-conditioning installation was apparent to people in Mr Robbiati's position, and should have been known to include ducting and other apparatus outside the boundaries of the flat itself, should be taken to convey that the benefit of the air-conditioning was available only at the discretion of the Board. I do not agree. On the contrary, in my view, someone who saw and appreciated the sophisticated nature of the installation would assume that it was a permanent feature of unit 20.
I turn to the pleaded implied representations. To my mind, each of them overstates the position. I shall start by setting out FASOC [83] to [86]: [83] By not disclosing the 24 April 2009 Letter to Gladio Ms Buckworth has impliedly represented to Gladio that all the necessary air-conditioning equipment servicing Unit 20 was entirely within Unit 20 or, that to the extent any such equipment was located on common property then the owner of the Shares had exclusive rights to use such common property for that purpose.  [84] In the alternative, by not disclosing the 24 April 2009 Letter to
Gladio Ms Buckworth has caused Gladio to assume that there was no fact, matter or circumstance that would or could enable the Board of Ashdown to require the owner of the Shares at its expense to dismantle and remove the necessary air- conditioning equipment servicing Unit 20.  [85] In the alternative, by not disclosing the 24 April 2009 Letter to
Gladio Ms Buckworth has caused Gladio to assume that all the necessary air- conditioning equipment serving Unit 20 was entirely within Unit 20, that to the extent any such equipment was located on common property then the owner of the Shares had exclusive rights to use such common property for that purpose.  [86] At all material times prior to and as at 16 July 2013 Ms Buckworth knew or ought to have known that, according to the express terms of the 24
April 2009 Letter, the House Rules were to be amended so as to apply the terms of the 24 April 2009 Letter to successors in title from Ms Buckworth.
As to FASOC [83]: there could be no implied representation "that all the necessary air-conditioning equipment... was entirely within Unit 20". On the contrary (and to this extent, I accept Mr Grieve's submission), it must have been plainly apparent to Mr Robbiati that some at least of the equipment was located outside the physical boundaries of unit 20. I should note that the concept of the physical boundaries of unit 20 was not addressed in any detail in the course of submissions. Indeed, the submissions at one stage appeared to conflate that concept with the concept of a strata title lot: in other words, that "unit 20" was, relevantly, the cubic space defined by the inner surfaces of the ceilings, walls and floors. It is not necessary to pursue that question. Whatever "unit 20" might comprise, it would not ordinarily be thought to comprise the roof space above the flat (and no one submitted that it did).
Further (and still dealing with FASOC [83]), I do not think that there was an implied representation of "exclusive rights to use... common property". I do not focus on the infelicity of the expression "common property" in this context. The point is, rather, that the representation overstates what in my view a hypothetical reasonable purchaser would be entitled to assume.
That purchaser would know that the subject matter of the sale was not real property (strata title or otherwise) but a parcel of shares. It would thus know that the substance of what was intended to be sold and bought was the rights attaching to those shares. The primary source of such rights is to be found in the Articles. In my view, the purchaser would be entitled to assume (for the reasons I have given) that the rights included the benefit of services such as utilities and, in this particular case, air-conditioning. However, the benefit of air-conditioning does not necessarily depend on some concept such as "exclusive rights to use... common property". At most, the representation would be that all necessary permissions for the installation of equipment outside the boundaries of unit 20 had been given, and were not unreasonably revocable.
I turn to FASOC [84]. That does not in terms plead a representation. It pleads an assumption that Ms Buckworth is said to have caused Gladio to make. Even if this is to be understood as pleading a representation, again it overstates the case. I do not think that it would be reasonable for any intending purchaser to assume that there could be no circumstance that would justify Ashdown or its Board in requiring the removal of the air-conditioning equipment. I accept that a purchaser would have thought that removal could not have been required arbitrarily, capriciously or unreasonably. But that is not the pleaded case.
I turn to FASOC [85]. Again, in terms, that does not plead a representation but, rather, an assumption that Ms Buckworth is said to have caused Gladio to make. Treating it as a pleading of representation, it seems to me to suffer from the defects in FASOC [83] (which, accepting that [85] pleads an assumption rather than a representation, [85] otherwise mirrors).
Since the pleaded misrepresentation case assumes in effect that Gladio made the assumptions that are set out in FASOC [84], [85], it follows from what I have said that I do not regard those as assumptions that it was reasonable for Gladio to make in all the circumstances. And to the extent that the case is based on the representation pleaded at FASOC [83], I do not think that the representation is made out.
Accordingly, in my view, the pleaded case, that the rescission was justified on the basis on the alleged innocent misrepresentation, must fail.

Rescission based on incorrect answer to requisition 
This is pleaded at FASOC [92A], which I set out (omitting its particulars): 
A. Further, or in the alternative, upon receiving Ms Buckworth's answers to Gladio's requisitions on title Gladio was entitled to rescind the Share
Sale Agreement for misrepresentation or alternatively treat that answer as a repudiation of the Share Sale Agreement, accept such repudiation and terminate the Share Sale Agreement.
The requisition and reply are set out at [41] and [42] above.
One important matter, which was not addressed in submissions, is whether, assuming (as I conclude) that the answer is incorrect (or, as Mr Lucarelli characterised it, "false"), Gladio would have been entitled to rescind.
As I have noted, Mr Grieve submitted that requisition 21 was not a requisition on title. That was so, he submitted, because it did not go to the title of that which was sold. It was, at most, a requisition as to quality.
Mr Grieve relied on well-known cases such as Fletcher versus Manton <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 37] He placed particular reliance on the judgment of Young J in Eighth SRJ Pty Ltd versus Merity (1997) 7 BPR 15,189. Those cases concerned contracts for the sale of land.
In Fletcher, the alleged defect was a demolition order made, by a government authority having power to do so, after the contract was made but before completion. In Carpenter, the alleged defect was the absence of building approval for improvements erected on land the subject of a contract for sale. In Eighth SRJ, the alleged defect was termite infestation (the significance of which was to be assessed against representations made by the vendor's agent to the effect that minimum maintenance was required, and that the purchaser would not have to do any work). It was held in each case that the defect was one as to quality, not as to title.
Young J summarised the distinction between defects in title and defects in quality in Eighth SRJ at 15,193 as follows: 
A very fine, but real, distinction exists between defects in title which entitle a person to rescind and defects in quality which do not. 
What is a defect in title is difficult to define, but usually encompasses the situation where the vendor is unable to convey the full estate which it promised to convey to the purchaser. A defect in quality merely means that the purchaser obtains the appropriate title to the land but that there are some facts relating to the quality of the property sold which affects [sic] its value.
With the greatest of respect both to the learned judges who decided those cases and to Mr Grieve, I am not sure that the decisions are of any real assistance where the subject matter of the sale is not real estate but, rather, shares in a "company title" scheme. The subject matter of the sale in this case is not just the shares - pieces of paper or their digital equivalents - but the rights that attach to them under the Articles of Association, as amplified (or perhaps confined) by the House Rules. The question is therefore whether the particular thing that is said to be a defect in title goes in some way to those rights, so as to proscribe or limit the purchaser's enjoyment of them.
That is no doubt an interesting question. Mr Grieve's submissions did not really engage with it, because he rested his case on the basis of the real estate authorities to which I have referred. Mr Lucarelli's submissions did not engage with it at all.
Mr Grieve's submission appeared to proceed as if the subject matter of the sale were real estate. It was not. The subject matter of the sale was shares in a special purpose company. The shares assured the right of use and occupation of a designated flat. The question is, thus, what were the nature of (and limits upon) those rights? So framed, in my view, a requisition inquiring as to a lease or licence agreement which could affect or limit those rights was, in context, a requisition on title.
Even if I were wrong, and the requisition is not to be taken as one on title, the simple fact is, as I have noted, that Ms Buckworth answered it, and did so wrongly. She had in her possession at all relevant times a copy of the 24 April 2009 letter. She knew that it was an important legal document which would be highly material to any prospective purchaser, and that it was intended to bind any prospective purchaser (T114.1-.13): 
Q. You understood full well, when you signed this letter, that the terms of this letter were intended to bind any purchaser of your shares, correct? 
A. Correct. 
Q. Now let's just pause there. You understood, didn't you, when you signed this letter that the terms of this letter were supposed to bind any purchaser of your shares, correct? 
A. Correct. 
Q. And that therefore you must have known when you signed this letter that this letter would be highly material to such any [sic] prospective purchaser of your shares, correct? 
A. Correct.
Further, Ms Buckworth agreed that to her knowledge the letter, intended as it was to bind any purchaser of her shares, formed part of her rights and obligations as a shareholder (T116.42-117.14): 
Q. Have I understood your evidence, Ms Buckworth, you've agreed with me have you not that you knew that this letter of 24 April 2009 was an important legal document, correct? 
A. Correct. 
Q. You knew it was intended to bind any purchaser of your shares, correct? 
A. Correct. 
Q. And you knew that the terms of this letter formed part of your rights and obligations as a shareholder of Ashdown, correct? 
A. Correct. 
Q. You knew that this letter was supposed to bind any purchaser of your shares, correct? 
A. Correct. 
Q. You knew that the terms of this letter set out the basis upon which
Ashdown consented to your section 96 application, correct? 
A. Yes. 
Q. You knew that this letter contained two independent bases upon which
Ashdown could withdraw its consent, correct? 
A. Yes.
Ms Buckworth agreed that when the contract for sale was prepared, her solicitor asked for all documents relevant to the shares and to unit 20 (T133.45-.48). She gave the solicitor some documents, including those relating to the <case> application. She did not give the solicitor a copy of the 24 April 2009 letter.
Ms Buckworth was asked about the requisitions on title. She said she knew that they (and answers to them) were "part of the normal processes of conveyancing", and that "the answers to these requisitions had to be correct" (T138.20-.26). She knew, further, that it would be serious if an answer were wrong or incorrect (T138.47-.49).
Ms Buckworth agreed, further, that she received a copy of the requisitions from her solicitor at about the time they were made, and that she "needed to give [her] solicitor accurate and complete instructions in order to respond" (T139.1-.7).
Ms Buckworth did not accept the proposition that the letter of 24 April 2009 was "in fact a licence agreement with the company", although she accepted that it was "an important agreement concerning [her] licence to use the roof space" (T140.3-.9).
In my view, the letter of 24 April 2009 was, or evidenced, a "licence agreement" between Ashdown and Ms Buckworth, for the purposes of requisition 21. Whether the letter is to be taken as an acceptance of the terms of the Board's resolution of 31 March 2009, or whether it is to be taken as an offer that was accepted by implication or conduct, it sets out the terms on which Ashdown was prepared to permit Ms Buckworth (and, at the relevant time, Ms Daley) to use roof space that, on any view, was outside "unit 20". That roof space, forming part of the realty, was vested in Ashdown. Ashdown had the right to use that, subject to the Articles, for the benefit of members as a whole. Any decision to permit one member to use part of that property, if it did not grant rights of exclusive use and occupation so as in law to amount to a lease, must be a "licence" as that term is understood both by ordinary English speakers and by lawyers.
Thus, in my view, the answer given to the requisition was wrong. I accept that it was given innocently, in the sense that Ms Buckworth did not, before giving instructions for the answer, consciously turn to the subject matter and decide to withhold relevant information from her solicitor. Mr Lucarelli did not contend that it constituted anything other than an innocent misrepresentation.
However, it was not a misrepresentation that preceded the making of the contract for sale. Thus it cannot be said to have induced Gladio to enter into the contract for sale.
The question of rescission for innocent misrepresentation based on the requisition was not argued in any detail. It was addressed in Mr Lucarelli's opening written submissions, but not in his outline submissions handed up on the conclusion of the evidence. Mr Grieve addressed the point on the basis that there was no requisition on title and, hence, that there was no right to rescind.
In circumstances where the matter was not fully argued, and where its resolution is not necessary (as between Gladio and Ms Buckworth) I shall leave the point undecided. The relevant facts have been found (and are not to any extent controversial in any event). I have summarised each party's submissions; and in any event, a more complete account of them is available from the written submissions and the transcript.

Misleading or deceptive conduct
The factual material relied upon to support Gladio's claim that Ms Buckworth had engaged in misleading or deceptive conduct related, in substance, to her failure to disclose the 24 April 2009 letter before making the contract for sale. In that respect, it covered the same ground as the (pre-contractual) evidence relied upon in support of the claim for rescission for innocent misrepresentation.
Although the source of the prohibition against misleading or deceptive conduct was not expressly mentioned in the FASOC, it was clear that Gladio relied on <case> of the Australian Consumer Law (Schedule 2 to the [Competition and Consumer Act 2010](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caca2010265/) (Cth), which has effect as a law of New South Wales by [s 28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s28.html) of the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) ).
The immediate problem with reliance on [s 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s18.html) is that it proscribes misleading or deceptive conduct "in trade or commerce". Mr Lucarelli pointed to two matters as engaging that requirement: * (1) that, because the sale was subject to Mr Robbiati's tenancy, it was a sale of an income-producing asset; and * (2) that the purchaser, Gladio, was a corporation.
There have been numerous cases that consider the reach of the expression "in trade or commerce". An early but important (for present purposes) decision is that of the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia in O'Brien versus Smolonogov [(1983) 53 ALR 107.] That case related to the sale of land. The appellants offered a number of parcels of land for sale. The respondents were interested in buying one of those parcels. The respondents asserted that, in a telephone conversation, one of the appellants made misleading or deceptive statements about the land. The primary judge held that the sale was conducted in trade or commerce. The Full Court disagreed. Their Honours, after considering a number of cases including many from the United State of America, concluded that the sale had not taken place in trade or commerce. They said at 113-114: 
In the present case, it cannot be suggested that the lands acquired by the appellants became trading stock (see FC of T versus St Hubert's Island Pty Ltd (in liq)  <case>; 138
CLR 211). Nor is it a case where the taxpayer's activities amounted to more than the mere realization of a capital asset and constituted the carrying on of land development (see capital asset and constituted the carrying on of land development (see FC of T versus Whitfords Beach Pty Ltd <case>; [(1982) 39 ALR 521).] The land itself was not used for any business activity: it was not used for farming or grazing. 
It follows, in our opinion, that the only possible feature of the case which could conceivably be relied upon to suggest that the impugned conduct occurred in trade or commerce was the resort by the appellants to a newspaper as a medium of public advertisement of the land and the use made by the parties of the telephone for the purpose of conducting negotiations. It is true, as the learned judge observed, that the use of such facilities is common practice in the conduct of trade or commerce. It is also true, as Mason J observed in Whitfords Beach, supra (at 537) that there is ambiguity in the adjectives "business", "commercial" and "trading" which "have about them a chameleon-like hue, readily adapting themselves to their surroundings". As his
Honour said, in some contexts, phrases such as "business deal" and "operation of business" may signify a transaction entered into by a person in the course of carrying on a business; in other contexts they "denote a transaction which is business or commercial in character" (at 537). The same may be said of "commercial" or "trading". But, in our view, the mere use, by a person not acting in the course of carrying on a business, of facilities commonly employed in commercial transactions, cannot transform a dealing which lacks any business character into something done in trade or commerce. Of course, the facilities mentioned have applications which are not commercial in any sense: advertisements in newspapers and the telephone are used by persons for purposes which are not commercial at all. With all respect to the learned judge, we are not persuaded that resort to them can create the business context required by the reference to "trade or commerce" in <case>. The conduct complained of was not something done by the appellants in the course of carrying on a business and it lacked trading or commercial character as a transaction. It thus fell outside the scope of <case>.
In Argy versus Blunts & Lane Cove Real Estate Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 26 FCR 112], the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of Western Australia came to the conclusion that the relevant sale was sufficiently connected to activities of a trading or commercial nature so as to warrant the conclusion that it occurred "in trade or commerce".
Murphy JA (with whom Martin CJ and, relevantly, Buss JA agreed) considered the words "in trade or commerce" and their application at [102] and following. His Honour identified at [105] some eight matters that, at the time the sale was made, the respondents relied upon to justify the conclusion that it occurred in trade or commerce. His Honour agreed. His reasons are found at [108], [111] and [112] (omitting footnotes): [108] In my view, the matters referred to by the Davies are sufficiently connected in time and subject matter to the grant of the option as to provide relevant context to an assessment of whether the grant of the option occurred in trade or commerce. They formed part of the forensic contest at trial on the question of whether the alleged conduct was in trade or commerce, as is evident from the parties' written submissions at trial and the judge's reasons. They do not go beyond the scope of the matters litigated at trial.  ...  [111] I accept the thrust of the Davies' contention to the effect that the matters identified in [105] above import a commercial character to the grant of the option. The grant of an option is, in itself, typically regarded as a species of commercial transaction. It is a step removed from the ordinary sale and purchase of a home. The language and subject matter of the option deed - a 'call option' in respect of subdivisible property - also import the notion of commerciality into the transaction. The optionor's obligations under the deed were designed to assist the optionee in exploring the potential for, and in obtaining, subdivision of the property. The provision dealing with confidentiality also gives the transaction a commercial character. Further, the transaction falls to be considered in the context of the Shones' related dealings with a land developer and the earlier steps undertaken by the Shones with a view to subdividing the land.  [112] In these circumstances, it cannot be said, as it was said by the court in O'Brien versus Smolonogov, that the grant of the option 'lacked ...
commercial character as a transaction'. Nor can it be said, as it was said in
Argy versus Blunts, that the 'present is purely a case of a person selling his house'. The house here was merely an incidental aspect of the land the subject of the option and was not in any sense a feature of the transaction. Further, none of the matters referred to by the Shones in [106] above assist in shaking off what is essentially the commercial character of the transaction.
In essence, his Honour found that the context in which the transaction was effected and the way in which it was effected - specifically, by the grant of options - gave it a commercial character and removed it "from the ordinary sale and purchase of a home".
In this case, the subject matter of the contract for sale was shares in a company. No doubt there will be cases where the sale of shares does have a commercial character, so as to be something done in trade or commerce. But in this case, the shares carried with them, and were to be bought for the purpose of assuring to Gladio, the right of use and occupation of a home unit. In substance (and I think that the question of characterisation must depend on substance rather than form or technicality), what was sold and bought was a residence. In substance, Ms Buckworth agreed to sell her residence and Gladio agreed to buy it. Gladio did not buy it for commercial exploitation. It was not put to Mr Robbiati that (for example) he was to pay a commercial rent which would assure a commercial return to Gladio on the very substantial amount of money that it was required to pay to acquire the shares.
Nor do I see any relevance in the fact that the sale was expressly subject to Mr Robbiati's tenancy. The property was not sold as an income-producing asset; as I have said, it was not put to Mr Robbiati that he intended, through Gladio, to exploit the income-generating potential of unit 20. It was sold so that Mr Robbiati could continue to enjoy, as "owner" (through Gladio) rather than as tenant, the benefits of use and occupation of unit 20.
The reason for making the contract for sale subject to Mr Robbiati's tenancy was, presumably, to ensure that, since his title as tenant would not merge in his title as owner on completion (because he was not to become the owner), Gladio could not object to the tenancy.
In my view, the sale is exactly analogous to the sale of someone's own residence discussed in Argy, and is a transaction of a private and non-commercial character. Nor do I think that this conclusion changes simply because the purchaser is a company controlled by the individual who proposes to reside in the property, the right to occupy which goes with the subject matter of the sale.
It follows that [s 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s18.html) of the Australian Consumer Law has not been engaged. The claim based on misleading or deceptive conduct must fail.
There is no need to analyse the facts to see whether or not there were misleading or deceptive conduct. The relevant facts appear from what I have said already. There is no need to lengthen these reasons by analysing those facts through the statutory lens.

Rescission for breach of cl 10(g)
As I have said, this was not a ground for rescission alleged in the notice. However, Mr Lucarelli submitted, on well-known principles, that his client was entitled to rely upon it. Mr Grieve did not appear to contest that proposition. Mr Grieve did however submit that cl 10(g) was not to be regarded as a "condition" of the contract, properly so called.
The essence of Gladio's case on this point is that there must have been some decision or resolution by the directors of Ashdown to accept the terms proposed by Ms Buckworth and Ms Daley in the 24 April 2009 letter. That followed, Mr Lucarelli submitted, because the letter was not in terms referable to the resolution of 31 March 2009. Rather, he submitted, it was a submission of the terms that Ms Buckworth and Ms Daley proposed, in order to satisfy the requirement, specified in the minutes of 31 March 2009, for "[t]he shareholders [to] undertake to address any problems with the air-conditioning such as noise...".
The first point that Mr Lucarelli made was that the letter of 24 April 2009 went well beyond this requirement. It did of course undertake to deal with problems, both generally and in relation to noise. As to problems generally, it acknowledged that the approval could be withdrawn "if problems continue". And as to noise, it agreed that if necessary "we will install agreed acoustic separation". However, Mr Lucarelli submitted, the letter went further in at least two ways. First, it acknowledged as a separate matter that the air-conditioning must be removed, at the expense of the shareholders, if the company decided to use the roof space for its own purposes. Second, it specified that the arrangement was to apply to future shareholders and that the House Rules would be amended accordingly.
In those circumstances, Mr Lucarelli submitted, there must have been some decision or resolution, because the installation had proceeded, Ms Buckworth and Ms Daley had enjoyed the benefit of the air-conditioning, and the Board had not required them to remove it. In those circumstances, Mr Lucarelli submitted, Ashdown was required to keep a minute, and had not done so. He relied on [s 251A(1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s251a.html) of the [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth).
Mr Grieve submitted that there was no evidence of any decision or resolution, and hence that there was nothing was that required to be recorded by way of minute. He submitted that the question had not been addressed until, admittedly belatedly, the Board turned to it on 28 October 2013. Since that resolution was passed well after the contract for sale was made, nothing turned on it in Mr Grieve's submission. (His submission would also deal with the alternative date propounded at [101] above.)
Although it is not necessary to decide the point, I shall do so, as it was fully argued. It seems to me, on reflection (and contrary to my initial view), that the position for which Mr Lucarelli contends is correct.
The first point to note is that the letter speaks in the present tense: Ms Buckworth and Ms Daley "seek consent to utilise the roof space". As Mr Lucarelli submitted, that is inconsistent with the existence of approval as at 24 April 2009. Likewise, the letter is in terms an "application": something that would not be necessary had approval been given already.
Those linguistic considerations gain force when the letter is put in context. The only evidence of any prior decision of the Board is that contained in the minutes of 31 March 2013. The subject matter of the discussion was the application for approval to the renovations. The Board decided in principle to give approval (that follows, if from nothing else, from the resolution to give consent to the <case> application). However, there were conditions that remained to be satisfied including, of present importance, the requirement "to address any problems with the air-conditioning such as noise" and the reservation of right "to withdraw the approval... if the problems cannot be resolved". Read in context, that seems that the consent that had been given was unconditional as to the renovations excluding the air-conditioning; but conditional (and revocable) as to the air-conditioning.
Against that background, the letter, dealing as it does specifically with the question of the air-conditioning, should be read as setting out the terms that Ms Buckworth and Ms Daley proposed, in order to satisfy the Board's requirements. However, those terms go well beyond what is suggested by the resolution. It does not seem to me to be credible that Ms Buckworth and Ms Daley would have offered those extra terms unless there had been specific negotiations with the Board as to the form and content of what it was the Board would find acceptable.
When the matter is put in that way, it seems to me to be inescapable that either there was a "done deal" recorded in the terms of the letter (notwithstanding its language), or there was a decision by the Board after 24 April 2009 to accept the terms of the letter as setting out the basis on which the unit 20 shareholders from time to time could use the roof space for the purposes of their air-conditioning equipment. On either analysis, it seems to me, there must have been a "decision", even if not formally resolved at a meeting, that the terms set out in the letter recorded the terms of use of the roof space for that purpose.
If that analysis is correct, there was, as referred to in [s 251A(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s251a.html), a resolution (perhaps of an informal kind, without a meeting), which was required to be minuted. It was not.
I should add that it would be quite extraordinary if the matter were left unattended for more than four years, until 13 October 2013. And when the Board did turn its attention (in my view, again) to the question, it did not deal with the terms of the letter of 24 April 2009 at large. It did not, for example, resolve to accept those terms. What it did was, relevantly, to pass the new House Rule 23, which formalised the last matter referred to in the letter: namely, attempting to make the terms of the letter binding on successors on title to Ms Buckworth and Ms Daley.
I turn to the proper characterisation of cl 10(g).
Mr Grieve submitted that, in contrast to other paragraphs of cl 10, para (g) was not to be characterised as a condition. He relied on the decision of the High Court of Australia in Koompahtoo Local Aboriginal Land Council versus Sanpine Pty Limited <case>; [(2007) 233 CLR 115.]
Mr Lucarelli submitted that the parties had contracted that each of the provisions of cl 10 was to have the status of "condition" and that it should be construed accordingly.
Although I have set out cl 10(g) above, it is convenient at this point to set out the whole of the clause: . Conditions of sale acknowledged by vendor  
The Vendor acknowledges and agrees that it is a condition of this agreement:  that on completion the Shares will be fully paid up and that no moneys will be owing by the Vendor to any person or corporation in respect thereof, and that the Shares will be free from any lien charge or encumbrance whatsoever;  that the Vendor will subject to the provisions of this agreement perform all obligations in respect of the Shares up to the date of completion and that any accruing amount or payment due to the Company for which the
Vendor or the Purchaser may be liable will be adjusted on completion in accordance with the provisions of this agreement;  that the land upon which the Unit is erected is the land described in
Certificate of Title Identifier 1/79741 or Volume 4325 Folio 161 ("land") and that the Company will be registered as proprietor of the [land] for an unencumbered estate in fee simple subject only to the notifications, if any, shown on the Certificate of Title at the date of this agreement;  that the Company is duly incorporated as a Company limited by Shares that it is not in liquidation nor so far as is known to the Vendor, liable to be wound up and that no action is pending in any court for the liquidation of the Company and that so far as is known to the Vendors no meeting has been called or is contemplated for the purpose of winding up the Company and that there are no proceedings pending in any Court against the Company;  that all liabilities of the Company other than current commitments and accruals have been fully paid and satisfied;  that until this agreement is completed the Company will not have entered into any agreement deeds contracts or agreements except in the ordinary or normal course of the Company business;  that the respective registers of members, directors and charges and all other books of the Company required by law to be kept by it are properly kept;  that the Unit or the Land is not at the date hereof affected by any:  scheme or proposed scheme under or pursuant to the [Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) other than as disclosed in the attached certificate pursuant to [s.
](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s149.html) of that Act;  road widening (or proposed road widening) scheme of any competent authority or by any other scheme (whether of a like or different nature) of any other competent authority; and  should the Purchaser before the expiration of the time limited herein for the making of requisitions establish that at the date of this agreement the Land was affected as aforesaid the Purchaser is entitled to rescind this agreement but will not be entitled to make any other objection requisition or claim.
When one looks at the various paragraphs of cl 10, it is apparent that many of them, quite apart from the parties' express designation of them as "conditions", are of such significance that they would be so regarded in any event. For example (and this by no means an exhaustive list), para (c) - that Ashdown will own the land and that its interest will be relevantly unencumbered; and para (d) - that Ashdown will neither be in nor liable to be placed in liquidation.
The plurality in Koompahtoo (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Heydon and Crennan JJ) dealt with the question, whether a contractual term should be treated as a condition or a warranty, in the context of breach entitling termination. At [47], their Honours noted that a breach by one party would entitle the other to terminate "where the obligation with which there has been failure to comply has been agreed by the contracting parties to be essential". Their Honours' noted that "[s]uch an obligation is sometimes described as a condition".
Their Honours referred to the judgment of Jordan CJ in Tramways Advertising Pty Ltd versus Luna Park Ltd (1938) 38 SR 632 at 641-642. In the course of those reasons, Jordan CJ said that: 
The question whether a term in a contract is a condition or a warranty, i.e., an essential or a non-essential promise, depends upon the intention of the parties as appearing in or from the contract. The test of essentiality is whether it appears from the general nature of the contract considered as a whole, or from some particular term or terms, that the promise is of such importance to the promisee that he would not have entered into the contract unless he had been assured of a strict or a substantial performance of the promise, as the case may be, and that this ought to have been apparent to the promisor.
Although the plurality in Koompahtoo qualified some aspects of what Jordan CJ said in that passage, they did say at [48] that: 
It is the common intention of the parties, expressed in the language of their contract, understood in the context of the relationship established by that contract and (in a case such as the present) the commercial purpose it served, that determines whether a term is "essential", so that any breach will justify termination.
To my mind, both the observations of the plurality at [47], [48] and the observations of Jordan CJ that I have set out above suggest that if parties explicitly agree that a particular contractual term is to be treated as a condition, then, ordinarily at least, the Court will give effect to that agreement. This may be expressed, in terms of construction, by saying that, objectively, the intention of the parties that the term in question should be a "condition" is made manifest by their language.
No doubt, there may be cases in which the Court might be justified as treating a so-called "condition" as a warranty only. That might be so, for example, if it were plain that the parties had not had the benefit of legal advice, and if they had used the words "term", "condition", "promise", or "warranty", and other such expressions, indiscriminately; and if it were plain, objectively, that the particular so-called "condition" was not, and had not been seen to be, essential. This is not such a case. The parties had the benefit of legal advice, of a high standard. The contract was drafted by Ms Buckworth's solicitor and, presumably, approved by Gladio's solicitor. The word "condition", when used in a contract, has a meaning that is well-understood to lawyers. On any view, some of the covenants stated in cl 10 would be treated as "conditions" even if they had not been so described.
In my view, the Court should not in this case disregard the clear intention of the parties, manifested objectively by the language of cl 10 read in context, that each of the "conditions" stated in it was to be treated as a condition in the sense described by the plurality in Koompahtoo, and by Jordan CJ in Tramways, in the passages quoted above.
In any event, in the context of an agreement for sale of shares, ownership of which gave the right of exclusive occupation of a home unit, I see no reason for treating para (g) in any different way to the other paragraphs of cl 10. The subject matter of the sale is the rights attaching to shares, not real estate. In a very real sense, it seems to me, a purchaser of shares in a company such as Ashdown has a very real and substantial interest in knowing that registers, books and records, which may record matters affecting the extent of and encumbrances or limitations on those rights, are properly kept.
It is common experience, and was not in dispute in this case, that prospective purchasers in the position of Gladio will (usually if not always) cause searches of the company's records to be made before entering into the contract. The purpose of such searches is to give the prospective purchaser information as to factors that might adversely affect either the value of the shares or the enjoyment of the rights attached to them. The efficacy of such searches depends in part on the extent to which resolutions and the like are recorded in the company's books and records. Of course, such searches cannot be guaranteed to produce that result: either because they may fail to turn up something which was available to be seen (as, it will be seen, is in my view what happened in this case), or because the relevant material was not required to be recorded in the company's books and records.
Making those allowances, it remains the fact that, so far as possible, it is of great importance to prospective purchasers that, in relation to the company's books and records, what they see is what they get. So regarded, the condition stated in para (g) fits neatly into the scheme of cl 10 as a whole.
However one deals with the question, the result in my view is that cl 10(g) did state a condition of the contract: that is to say, a state of affairs, breach of which would give a right of termination. The word "breach" is inapt, since cl 10(g) imposed no obligation on Ms Buckworth. It is, nonetheless, a convenient term to use to describe the non-existence of the state of affairs prescribed by, or non-satisfaction of the requirement stated in, cl 10(g). 
Accordingly, were it necessary to do so, I would conclude that Gladio was entitled to "rescind" (or terminate) for breach of cl 10(g). Whether rescission or termination is the correct concept depends on the proper characterisation of cl 10(g), and the consequences of "breach" (in the sense just explained). It is unnecessary to pursue this.

Unconscionability; relief against forfeiture of deposit
It is convenient to consider these two claims together, because Mr Lucarelli put the claim for relief against forfeiture of the deposit on the basis that Ms Buckworth's conduct had been unconscionable to the point where, in conscience, she could not retain the deposit.
Mr Lucarelli relied both on unconscionability under the general law and on "statutory" unconscionability - that is, <case> of the Australian Consumer Law.
Again, the conduct relied upon is the conduct that I have discussed in connection with the claim for rescission for innocent misrepresentation. I am not sure whether Mr Lucarelli intended to include the evidence relating to requisition 21 and the answer. For reasons that will become apparent, it matters not to my conclusions whether that is or is not included within the range of material relied upon.
So far as <case> is concerned, there is again the requirement that the conduct must have been engaged in "in trade or commerce". For the reasons I have given, the conduct upon which Mr Lucarelli relied was not conduct "in trade or commerce".
As to general law unconscionability (and leaving aside <case> of the Australian Consumer Law, which again imports the requirement of "in trade or commerce"), the concept imported by the equitable doctrine of unconscionability is the knowing exploitation of special disadvantage.
Mr Lucarelli submitted (I think) that there was no requirement to demonstrate special disadvantage, in the sense in which the authorities use that expression. He relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal of this State in Tonto Home Loans Australia Pty Ltd versus Tavares  <case> Mr Lucarelli relied in particular on what Allsop P said at [291]. His Honour observed that the word "unconscionable" involved concepts such as "a high level of moral obloquy" or must be "irreconcilable with what is right or reasonable".
His Honour was talking of statutory unconscionability: the equivalent of <case> of the Australian Consumer Law. That is apparent from [291] itself, where his Honour observed that "the concept of unconscionable in this context is wider than the general law and the provisions are intended to build on and not be constrained by cases at general law and equity".
Nothing in the reasons of Allsop P in Tonto Home Loans suggests that the general law requirement for knowing exploitation of special disadvantage has gone by the board.
There was no pleading of circumstances that created the necessary relationship of special disadvantage (or the knowing exploitation of that disadvantage). Mr Lucarelli did not seek to identify any such circumstances in his submissions. Accordingly, unless there has been some unheralded change in the equitable doctrines relating to unconscionability, these aspects of Gladio's case must fail.
I directed Mr Lucarelli's attention to the decision of the High Court in Australian Competition and Consumer Commission versus CG Berbatis Holdings Pty Limited [[2003] HCA 18](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/SydLawRw/2004/12.html "View Case" ); [(2003) 214 CLR 51.] at 415 remained, so far as Gleeson CJ was concerned, the touchstone: 
It [the doctrine of unconscionability] applies whenever one party to a transaction is at a special disadvantage in dealing with the other party because illness, ignorance, inexperience, impaired facilities, financial need or other circumstances affect his ability to conserve his own interests, and the other party unconscientiously takes advantage of the opportunity thus placed in his hands.
After citing that passage with evident approval at [13], Gleeson CJ said at [14] that: 
Unconscientious exploitation of another's inability, or diminished ability, to conserve his or her interests is not to be confused with taking advantage of a superior bargaining position.
At [15], his Honour confirmed the importance of the requirement that there be not merely "disadvantage" but, in the relevant sense, "special disadvantage": 
In the present case, there was neither a special disadvantage on the part of the lessees, nor unconscientious conduct on the part of the lessors. All the people involved in the transaction were business people, concerned to advance or protect their own financial interests. The critical disadvantage from which the lessees suffered was that they had no legal entitlement to a renewal or extension of their lease; and they depended upon the lessors' willingness to grant such an extension or renewal for their capacity to sell the goodwill of their business for a substantial price. They were thus compelled to approach the lessors, seeking their agreement to such an extension or renewal, against a background of current claims and litigation in which they were involved.
They were at a distinct disadvantage, but there was nothing "special" about it. They had two forms of financial interest at stake: their claims, and the sale of their business. The second was large; as things turned out, the first was shown to be relatively small. They had the benefit of legal advice. They made a rational decision, and took the course of preferring the second interests. What they lacked was the commercial ability to pursue them both at the same time.
In joint reasons, Gummow and Hayne JJ likewise emphasised the requirement for special disadvantage and knowing exploitation, at [55]: 
In Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd versus Amadio (77), Mason J referred to passages in the judgments of Fullagar J and Kitto J in Blomley versus Ryan (78).
Mason J said (79): "It is made plain enough, especially by Fullagar J, that the situations mentioned are no more than particular exemplifications of an underlying general principle which may be invoked whenever one party by reason of some condition [or] circumstance is placed at a special disadvantage vis-a-vis another and unfair or unconscientious advantage is then taken of the opportunity thereby created. I qualify the word 'disadvantage' by the adjective 'special' in order to disavow any suggestion that the principle applies whenever there is some difference in the bargaining power of the parties and in order to emphasise that the disabling condition or circumstance is one which seriously affects the ability of the innocent party to make a judgment as to his own best interests, when the other party knows or ought to know of the existence of that condition or circumstance and of its effect on the innocent party." 
His Honour went on to emphasise (80) the need for the plaintiff seeking relief to establish the taking of unconscientious advantage of the plaintiff's disabling condition or circumstance. It will be apparent that the special disadvantage of which Mason J spoke in the passage was one seriously affecting the ability of the innocent party to make a judgment as to that party's own best interest.
In circumstances where neither special disadvantage nor knowing exploitation was pleaded, and where the evidence that might support the existence of both those requirements was not addressed in submissions, I conclude that the case based on equitable unconscionability must fail.
As I have said, Mr Lucarelli put the case for relief against forfeiture fairly and squarely upon unconscionability. Accordingly, that claim too fails.

Frustration
Mr Lucarelli relied also on the [Frustrated Contracts Act 1978](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fca1978247/) .
The asserted act of frustration was the Board's act in resolving to make House Rules 22 and 23 after the contract was made and before it was completed. Mr Lucarelli submitted, in substance, that this had the effect of altering, in a way that was highly disadvantageous to his client, the rights that it had contracted to buy and their value.
I do not accept the submission. True it is that the contract for sale was made on the basis of (and included a warranty as to) the articles of association, and the House Rules, as they stood at 16 July 2013. However, there is nothing the articles or in the House Rules that confines the ability of the Board to make new House Rules simply because a shareholder has entered into, but has not completed, a contract for sale of the shares that he or she holds. On the contrary, it is implicit that the power to make and amend House Rules can be exercised at any time. The parties must be taken to have contracted with the knowledge that this could occur.
Once it is accepted that the contract was made on a basis which involved recognition of the fact that the House Rules might be amended between contract and completion, there is no warrant for regarding some amendments as frustrating, and others as not.
Of course, Gladio could have sought to protect itself. It could have required (for example) a warranty that there would be no amendments to the articles or the House Rules before the date of completion. It is not uncommon in contracts for the sale of shares to see a term to the effect that certain matters are warranted to be correct (or are agreed to be conditions of sale) both at the date of contract and up until and at the date of completion.
Whether or not that degree of commercial sophistication should be imputed to their parties (and bearing in mind that each of them had very capable legal advice, there is no reason not to do so), the simple fact is that the risk of amendment of the House Rules is necessarily implicit in the contract, and thus ought not be regarded as an event of frustration.
Finally (on this issue) and fundamentally, nothing in those House Rules made further performance of the contract for sale impossible.

Gladio's claims against Ashdown 
The claim in negligence 
The first pleaded claim that was pressed was that set out in the FASOC, chapter 9. Two duties of care were pleaded, at FASOC [122], [123]: [122] Upon receipt of that application for its consent to the proposed transfer of the shares, Ashdown came under a duty of care to Gladio to ensure that all communications relating to the issue of it granting its consent sent by Ashdown or on its behalf were accurate and not misleading.  [123] Further, or in the alternative upon receipt of that application for its consent to the proposed transfer of the Shares, Ashdown came under a duty of care to Gladio to ensure that all communications by it or on its behalf in relation to Ashdown's consent were duly authorised.
However, it is apparent from FASOC [127] that the only duty of care said to have been breached is that pleaded at [122]: [127] If, which is denied, it is found that Ashdown had given its consent prior to the Consent Date and that, as a result, Gladio was not entitled to rescind pursuant to clause 6.1, then by causing, allowing or permitting STCM [sic] to send the 10 and 19 September 2013 letters asserting Ashdown had not yet consented, Ashdown breached its duty of care to Gladio. 
Particulars  
If, which is denied, it is found that Ashdown had given its consent prior to the Consent Date, then STCM's [sic] 10 and 19 September 2013 letters asserting Ashdown had not yet consented were not accurate and were in fact misleading.
The letter of 10 September 2013 was sent by SCTM to Mr Robbiati. There is no doubt that it was sent on the instructions on Ashdown; indeed, I think, it was drafted by Mr Bell.
At one point in that letter (the purpose of which was to set out Ashdown's position in relation to the letter of 24 April 2009, and to invite discussions as to the form of House Rules 22 and 23), SCTM (or Ashdown through SCTM) said: ... 
If it was not disclosed to you (whether in the contract or otherwise), that is not the fault of the Board or any member of it. The Board at the time in granted an indulgence to the then owners of Unit 20 to install the air conditioning equipment on common property on the terms in the letter. There is no right to exclusive use as a result. To grant you such a right would be in effect to appropriate common property to the shareholders in respect of Unit
The directors have great difficulty seeing how this could be justified in the interests of the company as a whole, even assuming it is within their powers.
At the end of that letter, SCTM (or Ashdown) said: ... 
As things presently stand, the directors have required that you correspond in relation to the air conditioning issue through us, SCTM, the managing agent engaged by Ashdown to receive and process such correspondence. Finally, all of the directors have requested that we convey their sincere hope that should the transfer of the shares to Gladio Pty Limited be approved, and you continue as a resident of Ashdown, it will be possible for everyone at Ashdown to put this behind them and enjoy good neighbourly relations for the years to come.
The letter of 19 September 2013 responded to a letter sent by Mr Robbiati on 16 September 2013. In that letter, Mr Robbiati set out his view of the relevant background circumstances, and what he said was the substance of a conversation with Mr Bell. He then identified what he said were "the issues at hand" and proposed a way of dealing with those issues.
The letter of 19 September 2013 stated that "the directors do not propose to respond to each of the matters you raise in detail". Having said that, it made a number of points. The first was: 
At the present point in time, your company is not a shareholder. The transfer of shares to your company is not yet approved. The directors do not understand how, as a prospective shareholder, your company would have any right to be consulted about real changes.
Since both those letters were said to be "without prejudice", there was an argument as to their admissibility. I give my reasons for concluding that the letters should be admitted in part (and explain why, ultimately, they were received in full) at [355] to [371] below.
In essence, Gladio's case was that each of the letters amounted to a negligent misstatement because it said (either by necessary implication or expressly) that the transfer of shares to Gladio had not been approved, whereas in truth it had been approved.
Of course, this sits less than squarely with Gladio's primary case: namely, that there was no sufficient approval. However, the claim against Ashdown was brought in the alternative to the claim against Ms Buckworth. For that reason, the claim against Ashdown does not really arise for consideration. Nonetheless, I propose to continue what I have started, and deal with it.
Ashdown's first line of defence was that it owed no duty of care to Gladio. In my view, that submission was well-founded. On any view, the duty alleged is one to avoid the suffering of pure economic loss. Vulnerability, as a touchstone of the existence of such a duty, has been recognised very recently in Brookfield Multiplex Ltd versus Owners Corporation Strata Plan 61288 <case>; [(2014) 313 ALR 408.]
Mr Lucarelli did not contest the proposition that vulnerability, in the relevant sense, was necessary for the duty of care pleaded in FASOC [122]. He did however submit that the duty of care pleaded in FASOC [123] was founded on express assumption of responsibility and known reliance, and submitted that this was a separate basis for finding the existence of a duty of care. As I have observed, the only pleaded and particularised breach is of the duty of care pleaded in FASOC [122].
Mr Izzo of Counsel, who appeared for Ashdown, referred to the decision of the High Court in Tepko Pty Ltd versus Water Board <case>; [(2001) 206 CLR 1.] In that case, Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ (who with Gaudron J formed the majority) dealt with the concept of assumption of responsibility and known reliance at [47] to [49]. Their Honours said that, if the law were to impose a duty of care on someone who provides information or advice, there were two particular matters that must be demonstrated. The first was that the speaker did realise, or the circumstances should be such that the speaker ought realise, that the recipient proposed to act on the information or advice in connection with some serious matter. The second factor was that it must be reasonable in all the circumstances for the recipient to seek advice and to rely upon it when given.
In my view, Gladio was not relevantly vulnerable. It knew that it could not become registered as owner of the shares unless the Board approved it, and directed registration of the transfer to it. It knew that Board approval could not be taken for granted. (This must be so a fortiori in the particular case, where to Mr Robbiati's knowledge a number of residents had expressed concern at aspects of his use of the premises during his tenancy.) Thus, Gladio must have known that the contract between it and Ms Buckworth needed to contain provisions that would protect it in the event that approval was withheld. The contract did in fact contain such a provision.
If (as Ms Buckworth submitted) the Board had given approval to Gladio as a purchaser, for the purposes of article 41(d), then that was the end of the matter. Thus, if the email of 9 August 2013 did constitute an approval, the requirements of cl 6.1 would have been satisfied. I say that because, if approval had been given, it could not later be withheld or withdrawn (except perhaps - I need express no view - in circumstances such as fraud). This follows from para (d) itself which, when empowering the directors to decline to register a transfer to a transferee of whom they do not approve, excludes from the power to decline those whom they have "previously resolved is approved as suitable to be a member of the company".
However, if it were thought that there were some risk that approval once given might be taken away, it would have been a simple matter to word cl 6.1 by including a requirement that the approval once given should not be withdrawn or retracted. That was not done - perhaps because the lawyers recognised that once approval was given, that was the end of the matter.
Regardless, the question is whether there was relevant vulnerability. Mr Lucarelli pointed out, correctly, that his client was dependent on Ashdown to make a decision, and submitted that it was "vulnerable" to intimations of a change in that decision. Again, I do not agree. As I have said, that is something that could have been covered in the contract for sale were it thought to be a real problem.
Further, if there were intimations that the Board proposed to withdraw an approval that had been given, Gladio was well able to deal with that situation. It had ready access to legal advice, and ready access to Ashdown's Articles of Association.
Thus, in my view, Ashdown owed no duty of care to Gladio.
It follows that the claim in negligence must fail for this reason. However, in my view, it must also fail on the facts. There are at least four reasons for this.
First, the letters do not say in terms that any approval that had been given has been withdrawn. The letter of 10 September 2013 is premised on the absence of final approval, but does not state that the approval which (on Ms Buckworth's case) had been given, was withdrawn.
The letter of 19 September 2013 makes the point that Gladio is not a shareholder (unarguably correct), and states that the transfer has not been approved. Again, it does not say that any approval given is withdrawn.
In substance, each of those letters attributes a particular characterisation to SCTM's 9 August 2013 email. Neither says that if approval were given by that email, it was revoked.
The second and related reason is that, objectively, the letters did not mis-state the position at all, because on the view to which I have come of the email of 9 August 2013, there was no approval for the purposes of cl 6.1. Translating that into the dispute between Gladio and Ashdown, there was no sufficient approval, so that the statements as to absence or want of approval were not inaccurate. Nor is that analysis affected because, subjectively, Ashdown's position (or the position of its directors) at the time was that there was no complete or final approval, because there had been no interview. 
The third reason is that in my view, Mr Robbiati did not rely on the statements in those letters. Further, if he did so rely, it could not have been reasonable.
If the 9 August 2013 email did amount to a sufficient approval for the purposes of cl 6.1, Mr Robbiati or his legal advisers must have appreciated that, on the proper construction of article 41(d), it was not open to Ashdown to revoke that approval. If they overlooked this aspect of article 41(d), that is not something for which Ashdown should bear responsibility.
Mr Robbiati's evidence of reliance was exiguous; and what little there was, was not credible. The starting point is that the letter of 10 September 2013 was not even mentioned in the notice of rescission. This suggests that it could not have figured in the thinking that led to the giving of that notice. Indeed, when Mr Robbiati replied to the 10 September letter on 16 September 2013, he did not make any reference to the assertion that approval had not been given.
Mr Robbiati's affidavits made no mention of reliance on either or both of the letters as a factor in his decision to cause Gladio to rescind the contract for sale. The only evidence on the issue to which Mr Lucarelli could point came out in cross-examination. Although Mr Lucarelli relied on that evidence, it was in my view directed to a different issue.
Mr Robbiati said that he did not believe Gladio had received consent to the transfer of the shares (T70.6-.11): 
Q. What were the other reason or what was the other reason or reasons for your decision to have Gladio purportedly rescind the share sale agreement? 
A. I believe I never received from Ashdown consent for the actual transfer of the shares to take place and that was a condition precedent in the sales agreement that was not fulfilled and that is one of the main reasons why I decided that Gladio should rescind the contract.
If that were his state of mind, the letters of 10 and 19 September could have had no effect but to confirm it.
A little later in his cross-examination, Mr Robbiati equivocated on this point. He was questioned about an email he sent on 19 September 2013 to Mr Day. In that email, Mr Robbiati forwarded to Mr Day the letter of 19 September 2013. He said of it: ... 
Please see the attached letter. What is interesting is that they are saying that the transfer of shares to Gladio is NOT approved by the Board of the
Company, therefore this has implications in relation to the Notice to complete and the deadline of 28 September that was imposed on us by Virginia and Chris.
I think we need to hold firm and reiterate that we are surprised at the assertion that the share transfer was not approved. We were told it was approved subject to the Rules which have been significantly amended, between signing and completion.  ...
Of course, Mr Robbiati's primary position was that there was no approval; that the email of 9 August 2013 did not give approval. Clearly, it could be thought that what he said, in the paragraph of his email of 19 September that I have just set out, was inconsistent. He suggested first of all that he was confused, and that his email of 19 September should not be read as suggesting that he knew or believed that Gladio had been approved as a purchaser (T74.10-.34). However, he accepted that his email to Mr Day "probably... should be read" as saying that he had been told that the transfer was approved subject to the House Rules. Nonetheless, he maintained at the end of this passage of his cross-examination that he found it "highly ambiguous". I set out the whole of this passage of his evidence (T74.10-75.39): 
Q. The email from Mr Green says that, "The board of directors of Ashdown has given approval to the above sale proceeding provided you instruct your client of the amended rules and regulations here attached." You agreed with me earlier that you had seen that email at about the time it was sent to Mr Day, do you remember that? 
A. Yeah. 
Q. So that when you say in the 19 September email "we were told it was approved subject to the rules", that is presumably isn't it a reference to what you had been told by Mr Green through Day Legal? 
A. No, because there was prior to the email of 9 August there was discussion as to whether or not the transfer of shares to the company could be authorised and approved. And that appeared to have been cleared and when I drafted that email on 19 September I was referring to that issue not necessarily and I'll come back to this to whether the actual transfer of shares to Gladio was actually approved. I found the email of 9 August incredibly confusing because Mr Lane was not my solicitor and he was asked to instruct his clients. That can't be me because he wasn't acting for me, on the amended rules and regulations here attached, in particular rule 23. And rule refers to shareholding by a corporation hence my confusion when I read the August 2013 email from Mr Green. So I hope I gave you an understanding of why I am confused as to whether it's the approval of a transfer of shares to a company that has been approved, which I'm told it was, or whether the actual transfer of the shares was approved, which in my mind in the letter of 19
September I'm told it's not. 
HIS HONOUR 
Q. Mr Robbiati, if you look at your email of 19 September? 
A. Yeah. 
Q. The second sentence says that, "they" presumably Ashdown "are saying that the transfer of shares to Gladio is not approved by the board of the company", is that correct? 
A. Yes, your Honour. 
Q. And then in the last sentence in the first paragraph you say, "We were told it was approved subject to the rules", et cetera. The "it" that you were told is approved was clearly the transfer of shares to Gladio, wasn't it? 
A. You can take it like this, your Honour, but I was incredibly confused by the whole sequence of events. 
Q. The plain reading of a letter as I see it is that the "it" refers back to the transfer of shares to Gladio. Are you saying that the letter should or should not be read that way? 
A. The letters says that a transfer of shares to Gladio is not approved. 
Q. Yes, and then you say two sentences later? 
A. Yes. 
Q. "We were told it was approved". What I am saying is, that I understand that letter to mean that you were told that the transfer of shares to Gladio was approved subject to the rules? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Are you saying that's not how it should be read? 
A. Well it's probably how it should be read. 
Q. Yes, well whereabouts was the approval given to which you refer in the sentence, "We were told it was approved"? 
A. There were a number of phone calls, conversations between the conveyance lawyers and this notion that and there were actually phone calls with the real estate agents as a matter of fact, and that's what I am referring to. And yes, there is this 9 August email which I found highly ambiguous, that is part of the context, your Honour. 
Q. While I am interfering, you were asked to assume that the attached letter referred to in the first sentence of your email was the letter at tab
Does it accord with your recollection that is the letter you are referring to? 
A. Certainly, yes, that I agree. 
IZZO 
Q. May I ask you a further question about this, Mr Robbiati? Can I suggest to you that the only fair reading of the sentence that we have been looking at, "We were told it was approved subject to the rules", which have been amended, a fair reading, the only fair reading of that is that you believed on September that Gladio had been previously told that the transfer to it of
Ms Buckworth's shares have been approved subject to the rules. Do you agree with that? 
A. Yes, I agree with that.
I interpolate that, if this were Mr Robbiati's understanding at the time then, properly advised (as to article 41(d)), he could not rationally have regarded either of the September letters as withdrawing or revoking approval. A fortiori, he could not rationally have relied on those letters as a ground for rescinding on the basis of want of approval.
Mr Robbiati then gave the following evidence, which Mr Lucarelli said was evidence of reliance (T75.45-76.19): 
Q. Ultimately you rescinded the share sale agreement on bases that included the fact that in the 19 September letter Ashdown indicated that it had not given its consent to the transfer. Do you agree with that? 
A. I agree with that. 
Q. You took that step without first asking Ashdown of what the reasons were for the inconsistency between the 19 September letter and what you had previously been told about the transfer being approved subject to the rules, didn't you? 
A. May I ask you to rephrase the question, Mr Izzo? 
Q. Yes. You took the step of rescinding the share sale agreement on bases that included what is contained in the first dash point of the 19 September letter without first asking Ashdown for the reasons for the inconsistency between that first dash point and what you had been previously told about the transfer having been approved subject to the rules? 
LUCARELLI: I object to that. Relevance, your Honour. 
HIS HONOUR: I allow the question. 
WITNESS: So the answer to your question is I made the decision I'm paraphrasing it I made a decision to rescind the contract on the basis of what was contained in the 19 September letter without checking with Ashdown as regard to the inconsistency between that letter and prior communications.
When one puts that passage in context, it is in my view clear that Mr Robbiati was accepting the proposition that one of the grounds given for rescission was the statement contained in the letter of 19 September 2013 to which his attention had been drawn. That is a long way from saying that, subjectively, he relied on the truth of that statement as a basis for rescinding the contract.
To my mind, this whole passage of Mr Robbiati's evidence is lacking in credibility. Mr Robbiati impressed me as an intelligent man. I think that he perceived the conflict between his primary case and his email to Mr Day of 19 September 2013, and that he sought to tailor his answers to accommodate that difficulty.
As I have said, Mr Robbiati gave no evidence in chief to the effect that, subjectively, he relied on the letter of 19 September 2013 (or on the earlier letter, or on them both) as a factor that led him to cause Gladio to rescind the contract for sale. If that were his case, it should have been supported by evidence in chief so that Ashdown in particular could have an adequate opportunity of meeting it. In those circumstances, and repeating my observations as to the lack of credibility of this aspect of his evidence, I do not think that evidence directed to a different purpose, which in any event does not squarely confront the issue, should be accepted as sufficient to prove reliance.
Mr Izzo submitted that Gladio would have rescinded the contract for sale in any event, regardless of the question of consent or the purported withdrawal of a consent that had purportedly been given. That is correct. However, as Mr Lucarelli submitted, if the reasons for rescission did include (contrary to my finding) reliance on the letters of 10 and 19 September 2013, the fact that there were other causal factors would not break the chain of causation.
The fourth reason why, in any event, Gladio's claim in negligence fails is based on Mr Izzo's "Tepko" submission. It is necessary to identify the purpose for which the letters were sent, and the context in which they were sent, to see whether Ashdown should have realised that Gladio intended to rely on the communications and the purposes for which Gladio would rely. That will inform both Ashdown's appreciation of the significance of what it was saying and analysis of the question of reasonableness.
The letters were sent to and fro in the course of the parties' discussion of the letter of 24 April 2009 and House Rule 22. Mr Robbiati's concern, and complaint, was that his enjoyment of the benefit of the air-conditioning might be curtailed summarily and for any reason. The directors of Ashdown were seeking to meet that concern. No doubt, that is why they invited Mr Robbiati to submit a form of rule that would be acceptable to him.
It was in that context that Ashdown sought to make the point that, as a prospective shareholder only, Gladio had no right to be consulted when House Rule 22 was made. The thrust of its correspondence was directed at rebutting Mr Robbiati's complaints about non-consultation. It was not directed at questioning whether or not approval had been given at all (and I accept, as Mr Izzo submitted, that subjectively the directors did not believe that unconditional approval had been given at that point).
It may be correct to say that, in relation to the air-conditioning, the directors should have realised that Mr Robbiati might rely and act upon what they said. It could not be correct to say that they should have realised that he would rely and act upon it for a totally different purpose: namely, to rescind the agreement because approval to the transfer had not been given.
Before leaving the topic of negligence, I should note that Mr Izzo submitted that Gladio did not suffer loss by reason of the rescission. He relied on the fact that, on 12 November 2013, the directors resolved to honour the terms of the 9 August 2013 email, and waived the interview requirement. That decision was communicated to Mr Day on 12 November 2013. It said, among many other things: 
Having now become aware of [the statement in the 9 August 2013 email] having been made, they consider they should no longer require the usual interview, as that statement having been made to Ms Buckworth's solicitors by STCM [sic], it should, in the circumstances, be honoured by the directors. They have now approved the transfer of shares to Gladio.
The notice of rescission was given on 26 September 2013. Once that notice was given, Mr Lane sent an email to Mr Greene referring to the notice and to the email of 9 August 2013. He said: 
Please issue a notice that retracts any statement that the transfer of shares from my client to Gladio... is not approved immediately given that is not the case and that the directors had approved the sale transfer on 9 August .
However, on the same day, Mr Lane wrote to Mr Day, stating that Ms Buckworth treated the notice of rescission as a repudiation, and terminated the contract for that repudiation and forfeited the deposit.
If the notice of rescission did constitute a repudiation of the contract for sale (and for the reasons I have given, it did not) then the acceptance of that repudiation and termination in reliance upon it brought the contract for sale to an end. Accordingly, by 12 November 2013, there was in that hypothetical universe no extant contract for sale which could have been performed.
Were it necessary to decide, I would conclude in any event that the claim against Ashdown must fail.

The claim for misleading or deceptive conduct 
Gladio said, in the alternative, that the facts relied upon in support of its negligence case against Ashdown gave rise to a claim for misleading or deceptive conduct. Again, that claim invoked <case> of the Australian Consumer Law.
In my view, the relevant actions of Ashdown, in causing the letters of 10 and 19 September 2013 to be sent, did not amount to conduct in trade or commerce.
Ashdown was the proprietor of the home unit complex. Its function was to maintain and manage the building for the amenity of residents. It did not make a profit from that activity. Ashdown acted gratuitously in dealing with the consideration of Gladio's application, and in its correspondence with Gladio more generally. It derived no revenue from that activity.
In not dissimilar circumstances, in E versus Australian Red Cross Society <case>; [(1991) 27 FCR 310], Wilcox J said that the gratuitous supply of blood to hospitals was not something done in trade or commerce (at 350). To my mind, that is the position in this case also.
Were I wrong in this, I would conclude, nonetheless, that the conduct in question was not misleading or deceptive. In essence, the reasons follow from what I have said.
First, when one considers the context in which the letters were sent, they were dealing with the dispute over the air-conditioning and House Rules 22 and 23. They were not dealing with the question of whether the Board of Ashdown had approved Gladio as a purchaser. The statements contained in the letters as to want of approval should be read in that context.
Second, if it were Gladio's position and understanding that approval had been given under article 41(d), it must have appreciated that the approval could not in effect be revoked (again, with the possible exception of circumstances such as fraud; and I stress that there is no suggestion of fraud in this case). Thus, it could not have been reasonable for Gladio to rely on the statements as to want of approval in determining to act as it did, and give notice of rescission.
Third, and again for the reasons I have given, Gladio did not in fact rely on those statements for that purpose. If that were its case, it was incumbent on Mr Robbiati to give evidence in chief directed to reliance. He did not do so. And this cannot be said to be a case where it was obvious, or likely, or intended, that Mr Robbiati would rely on those statements for the purpose of rescinding the contract for sale on the ground of want of approval.

Further but withdrawn allegation 
I should note that Gladio had alleged also a separate duty of care, to comply with its statutory obligations and obligations under the articles to keep proper records of resolutions and the like, to make all such minutes available for inspection, and to make available for inspection the letter of 24 April 2009. That was part of the withdrawn claims pleaded in chapter 10 of FASOC. It is not necessary to consider it, although for the reasons I give below, I conclude that both the minutes of 31 March 2009 and the letter of 24 April 2009 were made available for inspection to Ms Kritikos.

Ashdown's defence of compromise
Ashdown submitted that it had reached a binding agreement for compromise with Gladio. It sought, by notice of motion, specific performance of that alleged agreement.
The evidence was confined to three affidavits made by the solicitors involved: two by Mr Dillon, for Ashdown; and one by Mr Super, for Gladio.
There was no cross-examination of either deponent.
The only issue was whether the "deal" that undoubtedly they struck was one intended to be immediately binding, or intended to become binding only on the execution of formal documents giving effect to it.
Since there is no dispute as to the facts, and the evidence falls within a very narrow compass, I will not take this matter any further.

Ms Buckworth's cross-claim against Gladio
Ms Buckworth cross-claimed against Gladio for damages for breach of contract. That cross-claim was withdrawn during the trial.

Ms Buckworth's cross-claim against Ashdown
Ms Buckworth seeks contribution or indemnity from Ashdown, in the event (which has happened, or will in due course happen) that Gladio's claim against her succeeds. Her cross-claim is based on terms alleged to be found in what she calls the "constitutional contract": the contract between her and Ashdown formed pursuant to [s 140](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s140.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/). As the case was put in final submissions, some four separate terms were relied upon: two implied, and two express.
As to the alleged implied terms, the starting point seems to me to be that the Court should be slow to imply terms into such a contract. The reasons why this is so were explained by Young J in Stanham versus National Trust of Australia  [(1989) 15 ACLR 87] at 90-91.
The first reason that his Honour gave was that "it is far more difficult to imply a term in a case where parties have purportedly spelt out their rights and obligations in an extensive set of articles than it is where there is only a very summarised version of such rights and obligations".
The second reason given was that "it is customary in corporations to place very great store on the actual wording of each of the articles and very often parties govern themselves on the exact grammatical construction of each individual article".
The third reason given was the power of companies to amend their constitutions by special resolution. His Honour said that for this reason even if "there is a defect in the rules rather than imply a term the Court may very well leave the parties to have the majority pass the appropriate resolution".
In the present case, two of the implied terms relied upon relate to topics that are expressly dealt with in the articles.
The first implied term is said to be that Ashdown would maintain records such as the 24 April 2009 letter and other records relating to the unit 20 roof space. However, the articles deal with record-keeping in article 118. In my view, bearing in mind both the general principles relating to implication of contractual terms and the specific matters relevant to corporations to which Young J referred in Stanham, the Court should not imply a term additional to, although dealing with the same general topic covered by, article 118.
The second implied term is said to be that the Board must, on receipt of a reasonable request for transfer of shares, hold a meeting and promptly resolve to approve the transfer. It may be accepted that when a request for approval is received, the Board should deal with it promptly. As I have said, it is clear that the individual members of the Board would have appreciated that contracts for the sale of shares in the capital of Ashdown typically required consent to be given by a particular date (although there is no reason to think that they knew of the precise provisions and date in the contract between Ms Buckworth and Gladio). However, to say that the Board was required promptly to pass a resolution approving the transfer is inconsistent with article 41(d). That article expressly (and without any express qualification) permits the Board to refuse to register a transfer to a person who has not previously been approved and of whom it does not approve.
The third term relied on is an express one: namely, the provision of article 41(d), to which I have referred already, to the effect that the Board cannot refuse to approve someone who it has previously resolved to approve as a suitable member of the company.
In this context, too, I note that the correspondence relied upon did not purport to refuse or withdraw approval; it noted that approval had not yet been given. There was thus no breach of article 41(d). Mr Grieve did not submit that the approval of Mr Robbiati as a tenant meant that the Board could not withhold approval of Gladio as a shareholder.
The fourth term relied on is article 118. However, the case misconstrues that article. It was said that article 118 imposes an obligation on Ashdown to keep minutes of meetings of directors. That is not correct. The obligation is imposed on the directors. If the directors fail to perform that obligation, that failure might be actionable at the suit of Ashdown. However, there would be no contractual right in members to have the article enforced, let alone a remedy in damages for alleged breach. I refer again to the decision of Young J in Stanham, at 90. His Honour said: 
If one elevated every matter in the articles of association of a company to the status of a contractual right vested in each and every member the rule in
Foss versus Harbottle... would be able to be completely disregarded. The whole effect of that rule, despite the growth of exceptions, is that ordinarily the
Court does not interfere at the suit of a member with an alleged wrong done with respect to administration of the company. True it is that it is sometimes difficult to draw the line between an individual right and a representative right...; nonetheless the rule for the most part prevails.
In this case, the line is not at all difficult to draw. It is plain that article 118 confers no right on individual members.
For those reasons (which do not exhaust the whole of the arguments on the point) Ms Buckworth's cross-claim against Ashdown must fail.

Ashdown's cross-claim against SCTM
The premise of this cross-claim was that Gladio succeeded in its case against Ashdown. Since I have concluded that its case fails, it follows that the cross-claim should be dismissed. However, since the facts are not clear, I will deal with it as briefly as may properly be done.
The case that Ashdown advanced against SCTM was summarised in para 64 of Mr Izzo's closing written submissions. I set out that paragraph, omitting the footnoted reference to Astley versus Austrust Ltd (1999) 197 CLR 1: 
Gladio's alternative claim based on the 10 and 19 September 2013 letters . If Gladio succeeds in its alternative case alleging negligence or misleading and deceptive conduct against Ashdown arising from the sending of the 10 and 19 September 2013 letters, Ashdown seeks to recover from SCTM any loss it suffers as a result. This aspect of the cross-claim is based on the contention that SCTM breached contractual and tortious duties of care owed to
Ashdown by reason of the following: a. on 9 August 2013, Ashdown instructed Mr Greene by email to notify Ms
Buckworth that Ashdown had approved the transfer of shares to Gladio subject to interview (CB Tab 94); b. Mr Greene appreciated that Mr Lane had been chasing a response to Ms
Buckworth's application for a transfer of her shares and that it was a matter of some significance to him to know what the Board was going to say about the application (Tr 196.39-42). He also appreciated that he needed to take care in sending any communication of importance to outsiders to ensure that what he said accurately conveyed Ashdown's position (Tr 193.4-14);  c. despite this, Mr Greene proceeded to inform Mr Lane that Ashdown had approved the transfer of shares to Gladio, without informing her [sic] that the approval which Ashdown had given was subject to interview (CB tab 98);  d. at no time before November 2013 did Mr Greene say to Mr Lee or any other director that in his 9 August 2013 email he had omitted to mention to Mr Lane that the Board's approval was subject to interview (Tr 200.5-22). This is despite the fact that 
Mr Greene had received Mr Lane's email of 22 August 2013 stating "My client appreciates that the Board approved the transfer of her shares to
Gladio Pty Ltd" (CB tab 111, p 863) and knew that assertion was incorrect (Tr .20-21) 
Mr Greene accepted he would have read Mr Bell's email (CB tab 111, p ) asking him to indicate what had been communicated to the vendor and purchaser about the sale (Tr 203.17-18);  e. Mr Greene subsequently sent the 10 and 19 September 2013 letters without first notifying Ashdown that, in so far as those letters suggested that
Ashdown had not given its consent to the proposed transfer of shares to
Gladio, they were inconsistent with the terms of the 9 August 2013 email. That is in circumstances where Mr Greene had read, at least, the text of the 19
September 2013 letter before he sent it (Tr 205.22-23).
I accept that SCTM owed the duties alleged (and this was not in dispute). The question is, did it breach them: * (1) by sending the 9 August 2013 email without stating that the approval was subject to interview? * (2) By sending the letters of 10 and 19 September 2013 without first warning Ashdown that they were inconsistent with the terms of the 9 August 2013?
There was also a question as to whether SCTM had breached its duties to Ashdown by failing to make available to Ms Kritikos the letter of 24 April 2009.

Breach of duty in relation to correspondence?
Ms Horvath of Counsel, who appeared for SCTM, submitted (and I agree) that the 9 August 2013 email should be viewed in context. Much of that context has been set out already. She submitted that it should have been apparent to everyone, including Mr Robbiati, from that context that the Board had not intended to waive, nor had it waived, the requirement for an interview.
The starting point for analysis is that Mr Greene did not act in accordance with his instructions when he sent the 9 August 2013 email, because he did not include in it a statement that the approval was subject to interview. Whether or not Mr Lane (or for that matter Mr Day) should have appreciated that the approval would in any event be subject to interview is beyond the point. Mr Greene was given an express instruction to state that the approval was subject to interview. This he failed to do.
Further, Mr Greene was made aware a few days later (on 12 August 2013) that both Mr Lane and Mr Day regarded SCTM'[s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s9.html) August 2013 email as evidencing approval of Gladio as the transferee of the shares. That awareness must have come from Day Legal's email to Mr Greene of 12 August 2013 forwarding documents to be completed or executed by Ashdown. That was sent as part of a chain of emails which included Mr Lane's email to Mr Day earlier on 12 August 2013, forwarding Mr Greene's email of 9 August 2013, and noting "that your client has been approved as transferee of the shares".
Mr Greene forwarded the documents onto Ashdown for execution. He did not tell Ashdown that both Ms Buckworth and Gladio took the view that Gladio had been approved as transferee. He did not disabuse Hunt & Hunt or Day Legal of the notion that unconditional approval had been given. He did not tell them that he had made a mistake, and that the approval had been given subject to interview. Had he done so, there was ample time for the interview to be conducted prior to 23 August 2013.
Ms Horvath's submissions addressed [s 5B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla2002161/s5b.html) of the [Civil Liability Act 2002](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla2002161/) . There is no doubt that [s 5B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla2002161/s5b.html) (and succeeding sections) are relevant: see [s 5A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla2002161/s5a.html) Ms Horvath submitted that the relevant risk of harm was "that Ashdown would suffer loss if SCTM did not identify in the 9 August email that the approval was subject to interview" (compare Gummow J in Roads and Traffic Authority versus Dederer [(2007) 234 CLR 330] at [59]).
In my view, that may misdescribe the relevant risk of harm. The risk of harm may be that Ashdown would suffer loss if Ms Buckworth and Gladio proceeded on the assumption that unconditional approval had been given, rather than that the approval was subject to interview. However, in the event, I am not sure that it matters whether what I have just said is the correct characterisation of the risk, or whether it is to be characterised as Ms Horvath submitted it should be.
In terms of [s 5B(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla2002161/s5b.html), the foreseeable risk of harm, following from the failure to disclose that the approval was subject to interview, was that Ashdown would be held to an unconditional approval: that is to say, that it would be required to accept as an "owner" / occupant, someone whom it had not been able to interview and of whom it might well disapprove. To my mind, that risk was not insignificant, and was one against which precautions could easily have been taken. However, even if Ashdown had lost the opportunity of interviewing Mr Robbiati, and even if it were forced to accept him as an "owner" / occupant, it is difficult to see how any recoverable loss could have followed from those matters. (One might think that the more likely loss would have been suffered by SCTM: being dismissed, for failing to comply with its instructions, as a result of which Ashdown was saddled with an "owner" / occupant of whom it did not, subjectively, approve.)
Were it necessary to decide the point, I would conclude that SCTM did owe a duty of care to Ashdown, to take reasonable precautions to ensure that the email of 9 August 2013 accurately reflected the instructions given by Ashdown to SCTM. However, it would not follow from that the foreseeable damages flowing from breach of that duty would include such amount (if any) as Ashdown might be ordered to pay to Gladio or Ms Buckworth, as the case may be, arising out of the termination of the contract for sale.
The second alleged duty relates to the letters of 10 and 19 September 2013. Ashdown says that SCTM should have appreciated that the statements in those letters, concerning the want of approval, was inconsistent with the actual position.
Cutting to the chase, I do not accept that there was such a duty. The reason is simple. The two statements as to want of approval formed part of longer and more complex letters. The letters were dealing (and SCTM should have seen them as dealing) not with approval, but with a different question: namely, the disputes in relation to air-conditioning and House [Rule 22.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla2002161/s22.html)
Further, SCTM had passed on to the directors of Ashdown both its own email of 9 August 2013 and a letter from Mr Lane asserting that, by reason of that email, unconditional approval had been given for the shares to be transferred to Ashdown.
The directors of Ashdown included a number of lawyers. One would expect that they would read with some care correspondence passed onto them, particularly where that correspondence related to something that was quite clearly the subject matter of dispute. In my view, Mr Greene and through him SCTM were entitled to think that they had sufficiently apprised Ashdown of the view that consent had been given, and were not required to point out specifically the import of the correspondence that Mr Greene had passed on to the directors.
In addition, it is clear that the relationship between Ashdown and SCTM was that, in all matters of significance, Ashdown would give instructions to SCTM, extending to drafting letters for SCTM to cut and paste and then send out on its own letterhead. The suggestion that it was part of SCTM's functions to vet such letters to ensure that they were accurate is not persuasive.
Of course, if SCTM were left to draft the letters as it chose, or at its discretion, very different considerations might apply. In those circumstances, SCTM might come under some duty to ensure that letters sent out by it on behalf of Ashdown were accurate, or reflected accurately what (to SCTM's knowledge) had occurred. But this is not such a case.

Breach of duty in relation to Ms Kritikos' search? 
The next aspect of the cross-claim relates to what SCTM did when it made available to Ms Kritikos, for her inspection, the documents of Ashdown. Ms Kritikos is the sole director of a company known as Searches R Us Pty Ltd. She worked as a contractor to Eyeon. Eyeon retained Ms Kritikos' company to search the records of Ashdown. There is no doubt that Ms Kritikos attended Ashdown's premises at Willoughby on 21 June 2013, and that she there inspected records that were made available to her.
Ms Kritikos gave evidence of her "usual procedure" when performing such an inspection (affidavit sworn 28 May 2014, paras 8 to 10): . My usual procedure when performing a property record inspections (including company title inspections) is to:  look through the minute book for the past five years - this is because all changes have to be minuted and voted upon, and the strata company is obliged to maintain its records for at least five years;  look through the correspondence file - this is usually archived for three years, depending on the title manager and the size of the file;  check insurance documents, fire safety statements and other reports; and  look through any other documents available for inspection.  . If I find anything that is relevant, particularly if it is in relation to continuing matters involving the subject lot or unit or any records indicating that something is costing the strata or company ongoing money, I will make a note of it in my report. I will also make a note in my report of any records which I believe to be important and which appear to exist but which appear to be missing from the records.  . I will attach copies of important documents to the inspection report.
For example, I will attach the minutes of at least the latest four meetings and at least up until the last annual general meeting. This is because the budget, levies and other major decisions are voted on by members or owners at annual general meetings.
Ms Kritikos said that when she went to SCTM's offices, she spoke to the receptionist and was directed to an area where she was given "hard-copy documents relating to the Ashdown building in general". She did not recall being provided with a file specially relating to unit 20. That is not surprising, since SCTM did not maintain files for individual units in complexes under its management.
For the purpose of swearing her affidavit, Ms Kritikos was provided with a number of documents. Of present relevance, the documents shown to her included the <case> application and the letter of 24 April 2009. As to the first document, Ms Kritikos said that she did not recall seeing it, but that her usual practice was to take note of "DAs" (development applications).
Ms Kritikos said that she was "quite certain" that the letter of 24 April 2009 was not among those shown to her when she inspected records on 21 June 2013. She said that she would have taken note of it because it related specifically to unit 20; it stated in essence that the air-conditioning might have to be removed; and it stated that the arrangements would be binding on successors on title. Ms Kritikos said, further, that as a matter of practice, had she seen that letter, she would have included it in her report.
Ms Kritikos said, of various other documents that were shown to her for the purpose of swearing her affidavit, that it is likely that, had she seen them, they would have prompted her to carry out further investigations, even if they might not have been annexed to her report.
Ms Kritikos said in para 34 of her affidavit: 
I do not recall seeing any documents, including correspondence, board resolutions, board minutes, or reports relating to the installation of an air- conditioner for the Unit in 2009. In fact, I do not recall seeing a separate file for Unit 20 at all.
SCTM called four witnesses. The first was Ms Wood. She was the founder and principal of SCTM until 3 December 2012. On that date, she sold two businesses, including SCTM, to a company known as Prudential Investment Company of Australia Pty Ltd (PICA). Ms Wood worked as a consultant to PICA for six months after the sale, until 14 May 2013.
Up until 14 May 2013, SCTM had carried on its business from offices at Rockdale. On 14 May 2013, it moved to the Willoughby premises.
Ms Wood gave evidence of system. She said that she instructed her staff to maintain the filing system that she instituted. That system included the following features: * (1) all records for one company (such as Ashdown) were kept and stored together under that company's name.
* (2) She did not keep a separate folder for each unit in a company title building.
* (3) Documents were stored in coloured folders, according to the nature of the document. Correspondence was kept in green folders, minutes of meetings were kept in buff folders, and "documents" were kept in blue folders.
* (4) What Ms Wood called "documents" included "documents that were ongoing such that we might need to look at them in the future... plans, signed agreements, articles of association, House Rules, survey reports and anything that was a legal document".
* (5) Within the blue documents folder, relevant documents were grouped together and placed in a clear plastic sleeve.
* (6) When a folder became full, a new folder was started, maintaining the colour coding system.
* (7) Older correspondence (green) folders were stored in boxes.
* (8) All emails were printed out and placed in the correspondence folder; correspondence was filed in that folder in the order it was received.
* (9) Documents were not retained in filing trays; staff were instructed to file them promptly and appropriately in the relevant folder in the order it was received.
I accept Ms Woods' evidence generally. Specifically, I accept her evidence of system and that she sought to ensure that her staff followed that system.
Ms Wood said that SCTM took over the management of Ashdown from a company known as Fay McDonald & Associates (FMA) on 29 June 2009. When that happened, FMA handed over the records of Ashdown that were in their possession. Shortly after the handover, Ms Wood said, and I accept, that she refiled the records according to the system that I have described.
Ms Wood was provided with the documents that had been shown to Ms Kritikos for the purpose of swearing her affidavit. She said that she had no recollection of seeing any of them (and this is hardly surprising). However, she said, had those documents been among the ones she received from FMA, she would have filed them according to her system.
Ms Wood was given a plastic sleeve holding documents. I am satisfied that the plastic sleeve was taken from Ashdown's records maintained by SCTM: specifically, from the blue documents folder. The plastic sleeve had "U20" written in the top right hand corner. Ms Wood identified that as her handwriting.
The first document in the plastic sleeve was a printout of an email from Ms Roylance (then a director of Ashdown) to Ms Wood. The email referred to documents that Ms Roylance had given to Mr Lloyd of SCTM (who, at that time, had responsibility within SCTM for managing Ashdown's affairs). The email asked Ms Wood to forward a copy of what Ms Roylance described as "the original of an agreement signed by Virginia Buckworth and Louise Daley regarding the addition of a timber structure on the penthouse terrace", with the attached "copy of the DA variation".
Ms Wood wrote on the printout of the email: 
Please copy documents and give to MB "MB" was a reference to Ms Wood, who for business purposes used her former name Muriel Barrass.
Ms Wood gave evidence, which I accept, that, based on her usual practice, it is likely that she received the email, and arranged for the documents to be copied and sent to Ms Roylance. She then said that "following which, in accordance with my usual practice, I would have filed the plastic sleeve of [documents] in Ashdown's "documents file".
SCTM produced the original files and they were tendered. It was not suggested that they had been disturbed, or otherwise molested, before they were produced. The documents to which Ms Wood referred (the documents in the plastic sleeve) were located between a letter dated 22 October 2013 (which was below the relevant sleeve) and a certificate issued on 23 May 2014 (which was above the relevant sleeve). The explanation for that is I think to be found in the evidence of Mr Greene.
On the topic of records and their inspection, Mr Greene's evidence was as follows. First, he substantially confirmed Ms Wood's evidence as to the way in which documents were filed and kept. I might add that this evidence was confirmed by the other witnesses called for SCTM, Ms Cruz and Mr Lloyd, neither of whom was required for cross-examination.
Mr Greene said that on 18 September 2013, he received an email from Mr Bell asking for confirmation that the letter of 24 April 2009 was filed among Ashdown's records. Mr Greene said that he searched through what he called the "Boxed Records" - that is to say, older records which had effectively been "archived" and stored in cardboard boxes. Those boxes, he said, were kept close to SCTM's reception desk. Mr Greene found a copy of the 24 April 2009 letter in those records.
On 8 November 2013, another member of Ashdown's Board, Mr Peter Barakate, inquired if the 24 April 2009 was, as Mr Greene put it, "on SCTM's files which are available for inspection by searchers".
Mr Greene then spoke to Ms Cruz. He ascertained that the records provided to searchers were the current records: namely, the coloured folders to which I have referred. Mr Greene then reviewed all those records. He found the 24 April 2009 letter in the "U20" sleeve in the blue folder, together with the print-out of the email from Ms Roylance to Ms Wood and the <case> application.
Mr Greene's evidence suggested that the blue folder was not maintained chronologically, and that it was from time to time taken apart and refiled. He gave the following evidence (T189.45-191.8): 
Q. Ordinarily that blue folder is maintained chronologically, in the sense that material is added 
A. I wouldn't say chronologically that's not true. Because these files are available to anybody; any inspector; any week, month or year; and they obviously don't put things back where they belong. So, they're not in any great order. 
Q. But putting aside any change in order by a search agent, ordinarily those documents would appear in the order in which they are placed on the file, correct? 
A. No. 
LUCARELLI: Could I approach, your Honour? 
HIS HONOUR: Yes. 
LUCARELLI 
Q. The plastic sleeve with the asterisk appears after correspondence dated
October 2013. Do you see that? 
A. Yes, I see that. The point I'm trying to make is a lot of people over a period of time pull these files apart. From there they take out the files they want - whether it's for copying, faxing or whatever - and put them back, not in necessarily the same order, so - I've seen plenty of people do that: inspectors, company title searchers. 
Q. Perhaps even your staff? 
A. True. 
Q. The location of that plastic sleeve, being after unrelated correspondence of October 2013, suggests to you, doesn't it, that at some time after October 2013 - wherever it was on that file - it's been put back? 
A. Correct. 
Q. In its current location? 
A. In the file somewhere - correct. 
Q. That is, assuming it was in the file before October 2013? 
A. Sure. 
Q. You can't give this Court any direct evidence, can you, at all as to whether that sleeve was on that file prior to November 2013; correct? 
A. Correct. 
HIS HONOUR 
Q. May I just ask you this, Mr Green, as a matter of practice among SCTMs employees at least, if a document is removed from a file for inspection or copying, or whatever, is it normally after that is completed placed back in the same file? 
A. Yes, correct. I'm sorry, sir, this is the same file? 
Q. The blue folder, yes, the documents folder, as I think it's being called? 
A. Yeah. 
Q. Has that been the position for as long as you've been at SCTM? 
A. At that stage, I was only there for about four months. I started in
June, 
June, correct. 
Q. As a matter of practice, documents that are removed from a particular file or folder are normally returned to that file or folder? 
A. That's correct. 
Q. Once the particular purpose for which they're removed has been satisfied? 
A. Correct, yes
Ms Cruz gave affidavit evidence that, once the SCTM business was sold to PICA, she worked solely for SCTM in what she called "client support". Her duties included booking inspections of records, preparation of the records for inspection, and general administrative support. In addition, she was SCTM's receptionist after the sale to PICA.
Ms Cruz said that the system for filing company title records that Ms Wood had instituted was maintained after the move to Willoughby, and has been maintained up to the present time.
Ms Cruz gave evidence of her usual practice at inspections. That practice included the following matters: * (1) she would take the current records for the building from the place where they were stored and placed them on a desk that was allocated for the inspection; * (2) she would print out certain financial and other records and place them with the documents for inspection; * (3) when the searcher arrived, Ms Cruz would take the searcher to the place where the documents were located and leave him or her there to do the work; * (4) after about 15 minutes, Ms Cruz would inquire of the searcher whether he or she required any further information.
Ms Cruz said that most searchers completed the task within two hours.
I am satisfied, on the basis of Ms Cruz's evidence, that the current records for Ashdown, including the coloured folders to which I have referred, were made available to Ms Kritikos for inspection on 21 June 2013.
Mr Lloyd, a former employee of SCTM, gave evidence by affidavit. He was from mid-2009 until early December 2012 the person within SCTM who had responsibility for managing Ashdown's affairs. He confirmed Ms Wood's evidence of system.
Mr Lloyd from time to time attended meetings of Ashdown's Board. He recalled attending a Board meeting in early December 2012. His diary confirmed the date as 6 December (and Ms Roylance agrees that he attended a meeting on that date). It was at that meeting that Ms Roylance said she handed over documents including the 24 April 2009 letter and the <case> application. Although Mr Lloyd had no recollection of being given those documents, he said that if he were given them, he would have placed them in the current green correspondence folder, which it was his practice to take to meetings.
A green correspondence folder for Ashdown was tendered. It included a copy of the letter of 24 April 2009 together with the <case> application. Those documents appear between a letter dated 11 December 2012 (immediately before the 24 April 2009 letter) and a letter of 16 January 2013 (immediately after it). Bearing in mind Ms Wood's evidence of system - specifically, that correspondence folders were maintained chronologically - I find that the particular copy of the letter of 24 April 2009 (with the <case> application) was placed in the correspondence folder between those two dates. I say that because I accept that the particular copy of the letter (with the <case> application) was given to Mr Lloyd on 6 December 2013.
It was not suggested to any of SCTM's witnesses that the correspondence folder had been dismembered or molested, or that the copy of the letter of 24 April 2009 had been placed there at some later date.
The evidence of SCTM's present and former employees (including Ms Wood within that category) suggests very strongly that copies of the letter of 24 April 2009 and <case> application were located within the records of SCTM in three locations when Ms Kritikos carried out her inspection on 21 June 2013. Specifically: * (1) one copy was located within the blue documents folder; * (2) another copy was located within the green correspondence file; and * (3) another copy was located within a box containing older, or archived, correspondence.
There is no dispute, and I find, that the blue and green folders were made available to Ms Kritikos for her inspection. Equally, there is no dispute, and I find, that the archive boxes were not made available, although they would have been made available had Ms Kritikos asked for them.
Ms Kritikos was shown a number of folders, including a blue folder relating to insurance (which is of no present relevance), and also the blue documents folder in which, at the present time at least, there is the "U20" sleeve and the documents to which I have referred within it. Of that folder, Ms Kritikos gave the following evidence (T35.19-36.14): 
Q. Can I show the witness another folder of blue headed documents. Again, excluding any documents that postdate 21 June 2013, can you indicate whether this is a folder of documents that you saw during your inspection on 21 June ? 
A. I can't recall. 
Q. So is it possible that this folder was amongst the records that you reviewed on 21 June 2013? 
A. I don't recall sighting it. 
Q. Are you certain that you didn't sight it, or do you just not have a recollection one way or the other? 
A. I don't have a recollection. 
Q. So you cannot exclude the possibility that this was one of the folders that you inspected on 21 June 2013? 
A. Yeah, no. 
Q. My question was 
A. Sorry. 
Q. That's okay. My question was that you cannot exclude the possibility that this was one of the folders that you inspected on 21 June 2013, can you? 
A. I can't absolutely discredit it, no. 
Q. Can I ask you to have a look at the seventh plastic sleeve from the front, I think it is the seventh plastic sleeve, so long as my maths is right? 
A. Mmm. 
Q. That's the plastic sleeve with the "U20" written on the plastic sleeve, isn't it? 
A. Yes. 
Q. That is the one that Mr Izzo asked you about, I won't repeat his questions, I promise. Your evidence is that you can't positively exclude the possibility that that folder was amongst the folders that you inspected on 21
June 2013, that's correct isn't it? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Is it also true to say that you cannot positively exclude the possibility that that plastic sleeve with that material was amongst that folder on 21 June? 
A. Correct, but again if I did sight it I would have taken more note of it being noted as Unit 20. 
Q. In accordance with your usual practice? 
A. Yes.
At this point, I note that although Ms Kritikos could not recall seeing or "sighting" this folder - seemingly, she had no recollection one way or another - I find, on the basis of the substantially unchallenged evidence for SCTM to which I have referred, that it was among the records made available for her inspection on 21 June 2013.
Ms Kritikos was then shown the green correspondence folder. She could not recollect if it was one of the folders that she looked at (T36.45), although she did inspect correspondence included in a folder which contained plastic sleeves (T36.47-.37.5). I find that she was given the green correspondence folder to inspect.
Ms Kritikos gave the following evidence in relation to the correspondence folder (T37.7-.19): 
Q. Can I ask you to turn, when you are ready, I am not trying to rush you, there is an orange divider almost at the back. If you go to that and then go seven plastic sleeves forward. Go seven forward from there. I think you will see the letter of 24 April 2009? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Do you accept that it is possible that (a) you did see that folder on 21
June 2013? 
A. It is possible. 
Q. And it is possible that when you inspected it on 21 June 2013 that the letter of 24 April was in the plastic sleeve there, isn't it? 
A. Possible, but I can't guarantee, I can't be certain.
More generally, Ms Kritikos accepted that she had no clear recollection of the inspection (and that is hardly surprising) (T22.35-23.3). It is not necessary to set that evidence out.
Ms Kritikos was also shown the buff minutes folder. Ms Kritikos agreed that it was possible that this was the file of minutes that she saw on 21 June 2013; it looked like it (T34.1-.10): 
Q. Ignoring anything post 21 July 2013, can you have a look at that file and indicate whether that is the file of minutes that you saw on 21 June 2013? 
A. It is possible, yes. 
Q. You certainly can't exclude the possibility that that is the folder of minutes that you saw on 21 July 2013? 
A. It looks like it. 
Q. Most likely? 
A. Yes.
Ms Kritikos said, and affirmed in cross-examination, that her usual procedure was to look at a company's minute books for the previous five years. However, she said, she did not read every line of every minute, paying more attention to the more recent minutes (T24.28-.44).
Ms Cruz said, and I find, that the documents made available for Ms Kritikos to inspect included the buff minutes folder. Ms Kritikos said that if (as seemed to have been the case) the folder of minutes she was first shown only went back to 2011, she would have asked for earlier minutes (T26.11-.21). I have no doubt that other, older, folders of minutes would have been given to her in answer to that request.
Ms Kritikos was then shown a copy of the minutes of 31 March 2009. She accepted that she had "no particular recollection" of seeing that document on 21 June 2013.
That is of some significance, because those minutes were not among the records shown to Ms Kritikos for the purpose of swearing her affidavit, in respect of which she gave the evidence that I have summarised at [304] to [307] above. Thus, there was no evidence in chief from Ms Kritikos that those minutes were not among the records shown to her.
Although the minutes folder that was tendered only went back to 2011, Ms Kritikos' evidence is that she would have asked for the earlier folder. Having regard to the evidence of system, I find that the earlier folder (that is to say, the folder which included minutes around the period 31 March 2009) would have included the minutes of 31 March 2009. Thus, I find, the records made available to Ms Kritikos for inspection did include those minutes.
Ms Kritikos agreed that those (31 March 2009) minutes were not referred to in the report that she furnished. She accepted that this could be for a number of reasons (T29.5-.33): 
Q. I think you will agree with me that these minutes aren't mentioned in your report? 
A. Correct. 
Q. That could be for a number of reasons, can I suggest to you. First, it might be that you just didn't read these minutes particularly closely, is that a possibility? 
A. Correct. 
Q. Or, that you didn't read minutes going as far back as 2009, is that another possibility? 
A. Board meeting minutes? 
Q. Yes, board meeting minutes? 
A. No, possibly, yes. 
Q. You would agree with me that ultimately whether you end up noting in your report something that comes out of the board meeting minutes of Ashdown is going to depend on you first of all reading a particular minute closely enough to appreciate that a matter in it might be significant, you would agree? 
A. Yes. 
Q. That would have to happen if you are going to pick it up? 
A. Correct. 
Q. If there are particular minutes you didn't read very closely which spoke about approvals for Unit 20, then you wouldn't end up being in a position to note those things in your report? 
A. Yes.
Considering the evidence on this point in its totality, and taking into account the concessions that Ms Kritikos made in cross-examination, I am satisfied, and find, that the letter of 24 April 2009 and the accompanying <case> application were among the documents provided to Ms Kritikos for inspection on 21 June 2013. I find that there was a copy located in the blue documents folder and another copy located in the green correspondence folder. I find that both those folders were made available to Ms Kritikos for inspection on 21 June 2013.
I find, further, that the documents made available to Ms Kritikos for inspection on 21 June 2013 included the minutes of the directors' meeting held on 31 March 2009.
It is possible that Ms Kritikos overlooked the significance of the letter of 24 April 2009. It is possible that she did not read it carefully in the correspondence folder, because of its date (and there are passages in her cross-examination that suggest that she paid more attention to recent rather than older documents). It is equally possible that she paid no attention to it in the blue "documents" folder because it was behind the print-out of the email from Ms Roylance to Ms Wood of 3 January 2013.
In the ordinary way, one would think that a sleeve marked "U20" would have attracted Ms Kritikos' attention. However, for whatever reason, she appears to have overlooked it.
For those reasons I find that SCTM did not breach whatever duty it owed to Ashdown to make current records available for inspection on request.

Proportionate liability
As I have said, Ashdown raised a "proportionate liability" defence. Mr Izzo and Ms Horvath put competing submissions as to the way in which any liability on their respective clients should be carved up. Those submissions were recorded and transcribed.
The conclusions to which I have come make it unnecessary to express a conclusion on those submissions. Nor is there any point in doing so, since of necessity that would be an exercise based on entirely hypothetical circumstances.

Reasons for ruling: the letters of 16 and 19 September 2013
Mr Izzo objected to the tender of each of those letters. He did so because each was headed "without prejudice", invoking [s 131](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s131.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).
For convenience, I set out [s 131:](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s131.html) [EVIDENCE ACT ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) - [SECT ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s131.html)  
Exclusion of evidence of settlement negotiations 
Evidence is not to be adduced of:  a communication that is made between persons in dispute, or between one or more persons in dispute and a third party, in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of the dispute; or  a document (whether delivered or not) that has been prepared in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of a dispute. 
Subsection (1) does not apply if:  the persons in dispute consent to the evidence being adduced in the proceeding concerned or, if any of those persons has tendered the communication or document in evidence in another Australian or overseas proceeding, all the other persons so consent; or  the substance of the evidence has been disclosed with the express or implied consent of all the persons in dispute; or  the substance of the evidence has been partly disclosed with the express or implied consent of the persons in dispute, and full disclosure of the evidence is reasonably necessary to enable a proper understanding of the other evidence that has already been adduced; or  the communication or document included a statement to the effect that it was not to be treated as confidential; or  the evidence tends to contradict or to qualify evidence that has already been admitted about the course of an attempt to settle the dispute; or  the proceeding in which it is sought to adduce the evidence is a proceeding to enforce an agreement between the persons in dispute to settle the dispute, or a proceeding in which the making of such an agreement is in issue; or  evidence that has been adduced in the proceeding, or an inference from evidence that has been adduced in the proceeding, is likely to mislead the court unless evidence of the communication or document is adduced to contradict or to qualify that evidence; or  the communication or document is relevant to determining liability for costs; or  making the communication, or preparing the document, affects a right of a person; or  the communication was made, or the document was prepared, in furtherance of the commission of a fraud or an offence or the commission of an act that renders a person liable to a civil penalty; or  one of the persons in dispute, or an employee or agent of such a person, knew or ought reasonably to have known that the communication was made, or the document was prepared, in furtherance of a deliberate abuse of a power. 
For the purposes of paragraph (2)(j), if commission of the fraud, offence or act is a fact in issue and there are reasonable grounds for finding that:  the fraud, offence or act was committed; and  a communication was made or a document was prepared in furtherance of the commission of the fraud, offence or act;  the court may find that the communication was so made or the document so prepared. 
For the purposes of paragraph (2)(k), if:  the abuse of power is a fact in issue; and  there are reasonable grounds for finding that a communication was made or a document was prepared in furtherance of the abuse of power;  the court may find that the communication was so made or the document was so prepared. 
In this section:  a reference to a dispute is a reference to a dispute of a kind in respect of which relief may be given in an Australian or overseas proceeding; and  a reference to an attempt to negotiate the settlement of a dispute does not include a reference to an attempt to negotiate the settlement of a criminal proceeding or an anticipated criminal proceeding; and  a reference to a communication made by a person in dispute includes a reference to a communication made by an employee or agent of such a person; and  a reference to the consent of a person in dispute includes a reference to the consent of an employee or agent of such a person, being an employee or agent who is authorised so to consent; and  a reference to commission of an act includes a reference to a failure to act. 
In this section:  "power" means a power conferred by or under an Australian law.
The letters must be placed in context. There was a raging dispute between Gladio and Ms Buckworth as to the former's entitlement to rescind the contract for sale for non-disclosure, and (conversely) the latter's right to insist on completion. That debate arose from the very belated disclosure of the letter of 24 April 2009, and the subsequent change in the House Rules, apparently, as to Rule 22, pursuant to the last paragraph of that letter.
Whilst Day Legal was waging a correspondence battle with Hunt & Hunt over this dispute, Mr Robbiati was pursuing directors of Ashdown in an attempt to find a solution. He had a conversation with Mr Bell on 9 September 2013, in which (among other things) House Rule 22 was discussed. The next day, 10 September 2013, SCTM sent Mr Robbiati a letter drafted by Mr Bell. That letter, among other things, noted that the directors were reviewing the Rule and solicited Mr Robbiati's "views on the possibility of passing a rule which simply gives direct effect to the letter".
The first letter to which Mr Izzo objected - the letter of 16 September 2013 - was written in reply to SCTM's letter of 10 September 2013. In the letter, Mr Robbiati gave what in his view was the "brief background of the purchase transaction currently in flight [sic] for unit 20", and replied "to the assertions contained in your letter in relation to my conversation with Mr Austin Bell of 9 September 2013".
The letter of 16 September 2013 was plainly headed "WITHOUT PREJUDICE". After the introductory paragraph that I have summarised, it dealt, in four numbered sections, with some four topics. The first section after that paragraph set out Mr Robbiati's view of the "background". The second section set out his account of the conversation with Mr Bell. Looking at the matter in terms of <case>, nothing up to and including the second (numbered) section of the letter could be regarded as "a communication... in connection with an attempt to negotiate a settlement of [a] dispute".
The third section of the letter set out what (in Mr Robbiati's view) were "the issues at hand". There were three such issues: the process to be followed for Ashdown's rules to be changed; "proper disclosure standards"; and "rule 22".
The fourth section of the letter set out Mr Robbiati's view as to a "proposed way forward".
I do accept that, read together and in context, the third and fourth sections of the letter should be taken as articulating (in Mr Robbiati's view at least) the issues on which he and Ashdown were "in dispute" for the purposes of [s 131(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s131.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) and a proposal "to negotiate a settlement of [that] dispute". Thus, in my view, the third and fourth numbered sections of the letter should be excluded from the tender, under [s 131(1)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s131.html)
Implicit in that view is the proposition that the statutory proscription is capable of application to part only of a document such as a letter. That is to say, it is implicit in the view that I have set out that the "communication" may be part only of a document. I raised that with Mr Izzo in the course of argument. He accepted that it was correct.
Thus, in my view, where part of a letter dealing with several topics is a "communication" of the kind referred to in [s 131(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s131.html), the statutory proscription applies only to so much of the letter as is, or constitutes, that "communication". There may be an exception, if the rest of the letter is so closely intertwined with the proscribed "communication" that it cannot be sensibly be separated out. However, that does not arise in the present case. As I have said, the letter contains an introductory paragraph, and then has some four discrete numbered sections.
Accordingly, I ruled that the third and fourth numbered sections of the letter should be excluded, but that the balance should be admitted.
SCTM's letter of 19 September 2013 was written in reply to Mr Robbiati's letter of 16 September 2013 (that is not expressly stated, but it was common ground that the later letter did reply to the earlier). Again, the letter of 19 September 2013 was clearly headed "WITHOUT PREJUDICE".
The first two sentences of the letter read as follows: 
We are instructed by the directors to respond to your letter as follows. 
The directors do not propose to respond to each of the matters you raise in detail.
Nothing in the letter responded to, or commented on, the third and fourth sections of the letter of 16 September 2013. Nothing in the letter contained any communication proposing, or seeking to negotiate, a resolution of the issues that then existed between Mr Robbiati (or Gladio) and Ashdown. Although the letter was headed "WITHOUT PREJUDICE", that was presumably because it was a reply to a letter similarly headed. In truth, there is nothing in the letter of 19 September 2013 that could conceivably fall within [s 131(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s131.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).
The letter of 19 September 2013 was admitted into evidence accordingly.
Mr Izzo submitted later that, if the letters were to be admitted, he would prefer that the whole of the earlier letter be admitted. Accordingly, and accepting that he took this position based on the ruling I had given, the previously rejected portions of that letter - [sections 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s3.html) and [4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s4.html) - were also admitted into evidence.

Reasons for ruling: application for leave to withdraw admission
The admission, leave to withdraw which was sought, was made in respect of [76] of the Amended Statement of Claim (ASC) (the version preceding FASOC). To give some context to the debate, and to enable Ms Buckworth's cross-examination on this topic to be understood, I set out the first three paragraphs of "Chapter V" of the ASC, which was headed "Rescission for misrepresentation": . At all material times prior to 16 July 2013 Ms Buckworth knew that
Ashdown's consent for her to use the roof area above Unit 20 to install the requisite air-conditioning equipment to enable Unit 20 to be air-conditioned was on the terms set out in 24 April 2009 letter.  . At all material times prior to 16 July 2013 Ms Buckworth had in her possession, custody or control a copy of the 24 April 2009 Letter.  . At all material times prior to 16 July 2013 Ms Buckworth knew or ought to have known the 24 April 2009 Letter was highly material to any prospect purchaser of Unit 20.
Chapter V continued for a further 17 paragraphs, but it is not necessary to set them out.
By her amended defence (filed in answer to the ASC) Ms Buckworth: * (1) said nothing - remained silent - as to [75], [76]; and * (2) said that she "does not admit paragraph 77 of the amended statement of claim".
It is clear, comparing the ASC and the defence to it, that the drafting technique employed was such that, where an allegation of fact was admitted, nothing was said as to that allegation of fact. In those circumstances, there was a deemed admission of that material fact (UCPR r 14.26(1)). By way of example only of this deliberate drafting technique, the ASC alleged at [74] that "Ms Buckworth has failed to refund to Gladio the Deposit". Plainly, that was correct. The Amended Defence was silent as to that paragraph. Plainly, the drafter of the defence intended that the deemed admission for which the Rules provide would be sufficient. The same may be said of numerous other allegations of material fact which were plainly correct, and hence (as I see it) were not traversed in the defence.
This analysis of the pleading technique is confirmed by an exchange of correspondence between Minter Ellison (acting for Gladio) and Hunt & Hunt (acting for Ms Buckworth) in May 2014. Minter Ellison wrote on 15 May 2014, stating among other things: 
We note the Amended Defence does not plead to a number of paragraphs of the
Amended Statement of Claim that are pleaded against your client. ... by not pleading to those paragraphs..., your client is taken to have admitted them.
We will be proceeding to trial on that basis.
Hunt & Hunt's reply of 19 May 2014 said, as to this paragraph, that: 
You may take it that we are aware of the relevant rules.
I infer both from the structure of the pleadings and from that exchange of correspondence that the decision not to plead to ASC [76] was deliberate.
Ms Buckworth agreed in cross-examination that she had read the ASC although, she said, not carefully (T83.26-.31). She understood that it included a complaint about non-disclosure of the letter of 24 April 2009 (T83.49-84.11). She knew that she needed to respond by way of defence (T84.25-.27).
Ms Buckworth was asked whether her solicitors specifically asked her about her possession of the 24 April 2009 letter, for the purpose of drafting her defence. She denied that. However, upon being shown a document, she did not stand by that evidence, and accepted that she had been asked about her possession of the letter (T84.29-85.22). Her evidence on this was a little bit confused but it ended in the following question and answer (T85.45-.47): 
Q. Did your solicitor ask you the question, namely, did you have a copy of the 24 April 2009 letter for the purposes of preparing your defence, yes or no? 
A. Yes.
The "solicitor" concerned did not give evidence. The obvious inference is that the instructions to him or her, in answer to the question asked of Ms Buckworth, were consistent with the non-traverse of ASC [76].
It might be noted that "Mr Grieve was closely involved with the drafting of [Ms Buckworth's] defence" (T85.50-86.1). However, Mr Grieve did not give evidence as to the reasons why there was no traverse of ASC [76].
I should make it perfectly clear that I am not in any way critical of the decision, apparently taken deliberately, to "admit" non-contentious pleadings of material fact by the technique of not traversing them. On the contrary, the use of that technique spares the reader the task of ploughing through numerous paragraphs stating, in effect, "the defendant admits paragraph XXX of the amended statement of claim". It enables the reader's attention to be focused on those allegations of material fact that are either "not admitted", or are denied; and on the additional substantive matters pleaded in answer to some of them.
On the evidence as I have summarised it, there is simply no explanation for the decision to "admit", by not traversing, ASC [76]. The failure to explain what is now said to be a mistake is compounded because Ms Buckworth accepts that she was asked whether she had a copy of the letter in her possession, but did not say (either in her affidavit or in her oral evidence) that she told the solicitor she did not have a copy of the letter in her possession.
I should however note that Mr Grieve sought to re-examine on this topic. He asked (T93.7-.10): 
Q. You were shown a document which has been marked 8 for identification and you were then asked a question to the effect did your solicitor ask you whether you had a copy of the letter of 24 April 2009 to which you responded in the affirmative. I ask you what was your answer to the solicitor's question?
Mr Lucarelli objected, on the basis that the re-examination did not arise from the cross-examination. The objection was in my view well-taken. Accordingly, I rejected the question.
The obvious inference, as the evidence stands, is that the answer that Ms Buckworth gave to the solicitor justified his or her decision not to traverse ASC [76]. In drawing that inference (as I do) I take into account that the solicitor has not been called to say that he or she was given an answer inconsistent with the non-traverse of that paragraph, and no explanation has been given for the failure to call that solicitor.
The significance of those matters is reinforced by the correspondence to which I have referred. Minter Ellison told Hunt & Hunt plainly and clearly that Gladio was going to trial on the basis of, among other things, the admissions on the pleadings.
Ms Buckworth said in her affidavit (in support of her notice of motion) that she was not aware of the significance of the deemed admission until Mr Lucarelli opened the case for the plaintiff. This aspect of her evidence was not attacked directly in cross-examination. However, that affidavit was read on the notice of motion. It was not admitted as evidence on the hearing; nor was the cross-examination on it.
In any event, that evidence (if it could be taken into account) would not assist Ms Buckworth. She agreed that she had been given a copy of Minter Ellison's letter of 15 May 2014 at or about the time it was written, and had read it carefully. Likewise, she agreed that (probably) she would have received a copy of Hunt & Hunt's reply of 19 May 2014 at or about the time it was written, and would have read and understood it (T89.32-91.14).
There is another relevant factor. Ms Buckworth affirmed an affidavit on 11 May 2014 which set out her evidence in support of her amended defence, and referred specifically to the ASC.
In para 3 of that affidavit, under the heading "Air-conditioning", Ms Buckworth set out the circumstances in which the letter of 24 April 2009 had been drafted. She did not say, in that paragraph or elsewhere in the affidavit, that she did not have a copy of the letter.
Paragraph 4 of the affidavit dealt with the use (or non-use) of the air-conditioning. Paragraphs 5 and following turned to the ASC. In para 5, Ms Buckworth referred to ASC [77] and said that up until 16 July 2013 she "did not know or consider that the 24 April 2009 letter was "highly material to any prospective purchaser of unit 20"..." for reasons which she said had already been set out.
She gave the following evidence (T88.12-.37): 
Q. Please read paragraph 77 of the amended statement of claim and tell me when you have done so? 
A. I've read it. 
Q. You respond to that paragraph 77, do you not, in paragraph 5 of your affidavit of 11 May 2014, correct? 
A. Correct. 
Q. You respond to paragraph 77 by telling the Court that you did not consider the 24 April 2009 letter as highly material, correct? 
A. Correct. 
Q. It is the case, isn't it, that when you read paragraph 77 of the amended statement of claim you also read paragraph 76 of the amended statement of claim? 
A. Yes and there's an explanation for that. 
Q. The answer is yes, you read paragraph 76 of the amended statement of claim prior to swearing your affidavit of 11 May 2014, correct? 
A. Correct.
Having observed Ms Buckworth in the witness box, and having taken note of her insistence on answering - not always responsively - propositions that she thought were not correct, I have to say that I find it unlikely in the extreme that, having read ASC [76], she would not have mentioned it in her affidavit had she thought that what it said was incorrect. Again, she gave no evidence of having given instructions to the solicitor who assisted in the drafting of her affidavit (or to Mr Grieve, who apparently settled it) in relation to ASC [76]. Again, neither the solicitor nor Mr Grieve gave evidence on this issue.
The evidence does not support the proposition that the failure to traverse ASC [76] arose from a mistake on the part of the solicitor to whom Ms Buckworth gave instructions, or on the part of Mr Grieve who settled the amended statement of defence. The cumulative failures to deal with the material fact alleged in ASC [76] - first in the amended statement of defence, and next in the affidavit affirmed on 11 May 2014 - coupled with Ms Buckworth's insistence on rigour and accuracy (as I perceived it in the witness box), make it very difficult to accept that the failure to traverse ASC [76] was the result of oversight or mistake.
In circumstances where Ms Buckworth's solicitors were specifically warned, and where she understood, that Gladio was preparing for trial among other things on the basis of the admissions deemed to have been made, the want of any explanation whatsoever for the failure to traverse ASC [76] was, in my view, fatal to the application for leave to withdraw the admission.
I should add that even if Ms Buckworth had been permitted to answer the question referred to at [385] above, and had said in substance that she told the solicitor that she did not have a copy of the letter, my view would be no different. That would still leave totally unexplained the cumulative failures to traverse ASC [76], and to include in her affidavit of 11 May 2014 (or in any subsequent affidavit prior to the one sworn in support of the application for leave to withdraw the admission) what Ms Buckworth now says was the correct state of affairs - namely, that she did not have a copy of the letter of 24 April 2009 in her possession at any material time.
Further, bearing in mind the time at which and the circumstances in which the application was made, and the possible consequences for the hearing if leave to withdraw the admission were given, and taking into account the amount at stake, it seemed to me (as it still does) that, analysed in terms of [s 56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), 2005 the interests of justice required that Ms Buckworth not be given leave to withdraw the admission. The inevitable result of that alteration to the litigious landscape would have been an application to adjourn, and perhaps an application for disclosure of documents. In all the circumstances, the additional cost and delay would have been totally unconscionable, and totally disproportionate to the amount at issue.

Conclusions and orders
Gladio is entitled to judgment against Ms Buckworth in the sum of $145,000.00, together with interest from the date of rescission (26 September 2013) to the date of judgment. Those parties are to prepare an agreed calculation of interest, including the "daily rate", up to 28 July 2015.
Although Gladio sought declaratory relief as to its entitlement to have the deposit refunded, there is no utility in the grant of the declaration sought. Gladio's right to the deposit will be sufficiently vindicated by the judgment for $145,000 plus interest in its favour.
Ashdown should have judgment in its favour on Gladio's claim against it.
Each of the cross-defendants should have judgment in its favour on the cross-claim against it.
All questions of costs should be reserved (Mr Izzo expressly requested this, and I would have done so in any event).
I stand the proceedings over for entry of judgment and for directions on 28 July 2015 at 9:30am before me. The parties are to produce an agreed minute setting out the orders to be made in accordance with what I have just said. On that occasion, I will hear from the parties as to the best way of dealing with the costs disputes that are undoubtedly likely to arise.
 * * * 
