

Gregory Michael Hall versus Raymond Patrick Murrihy [1996] NSWSC 87 (1 May )

GREGORY MICHAEL HALL versus RAYMOND PATRICK MURRIHY AND ORS /96 
Wednesday 1 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff is a jockey. On 30 March last he rose a horse called Merlene in the 1996 Tooheys Golden Slipper Stakes run at Rosehill Gardens Racecourse. After the race the stewards held an inquiry, charged the plaintiff with careless riding, found him guilt of an offence, fined him $50,000 and suspended him for two months. 
He appealed to the Committee of the Australian Jockey Club under the provisions of section 32 of the [Australian Jockey Club Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ajca1873224/).
During the hearing of that appeal the Chairman of the Committee said words to the effect that the Committee had decided to charge the plaintiff with improper riding. It is common ground that that is a more serious charge than the charge of careless riding.

On the application of the plaintiff the hearing of the appeal to the Committee was then adjourned to enable him to take advice and then it was adjourned again.

The plaintiff then commenced this action claiming various kinds of relief. He asserts that neither the stewards nor the Committee had jurisdiction over him.
He asserts that the Committee demonstrated actual and apprehended bias. He asserts a want of procedural fairness in the proceedings before the Committee.
The summons was filed 29 April and is returnable today.

Earlier today the second and third defendants, that is to say the Chairman and members of the Committee of the Australian Jockey Club, proffered an undertaking to the Court without admissions. That undertaking had two parts.
The first was that the second and third defendants will not, either tomorrow or on any other day, proffer any evidence against the plaintiff on a charge of improper riding or any other charge arising from his riding on the horse
Merlene in the race I have mentioned.

The second part of the undertaking was that the second and third defendants would take steps to see that the improper riding charge was dismissed provided that those steps did not affect the right of the Committee to give judgment as it proposes to do tomorrow.

I should have said earlier that the immediate urgency of the case is that the
Committee proposes to give judgment tomorrow morning dealing with the appeal from the decision of the stewards. As is clear from the undertakings that I have just referred to, the Committee does not propose to take any further step related to a charge of improper riding.

Earlier today I expressed the view that the undertaking proffered was sufficient to protect the plaintiff's position until the final hearing of this case except in relation to the proposed delivery of judgment tomorrow morning on the appeal from the decision of the stewards. That question has now been debated. I am prepared to assume in the plaintiff's favour that the plaintiff has made out a serious question to be determined on the final hearing as to what might be described as the merits of the matter before the Committee. It may be that he will be able to persuade a judge, when all the evidence is in, that there was either actual or apprehended bias or that there was a want of procedural fairness in the proceedings before the Committee. Additionally, it may be that he will be able to establish that neither the stewards nor the
Committee had jurisdiction over him.

At the moment, however, it does not seem to me that when one comes to consider the balance of convenience the plaintiff has made out a case for an injunction restraining the delivery of judgment by the Committee tomorrow morning. As I see the position for the moment the plaintiff is presently at risk, subject to the possibility of a further appeal to the Racing Appeals Tribunal or subject to the final judgment in this case, to an order suspending him and an order fining him. It may be that the Committee will tomorrow allow his appeal and reduce the fine or the suspension. I do not see, on the evidence now before me, how he can realistically show there is a possibility of anything more than that, for his appeal is limited to the severity of the orders made against him. It is also possible that the Committee will increase the penalty tomorrow, that is to say, increase the period of the suspension or the amount of the fine, or both.

In either event he will have a right of appeal to the Tribunal from whatever decision the Committee makes tomorrow and he will also have the right to proceed to final judgment in the present action.

If the plaintiff's first contention is correct, that is to say, if it is correct to say that neither the stewards nor the Committee had any jurisdiction over him, then the giving of judgment tomorrow is of no moment at all. Perhaps it is right to say that a decision of the Committee tomorrow might lead to a practical termination to the litigation. It does not seem safe to proceed on that assumption, however. Perhaps the result of the delivery of judgment by the Committee tomorrow will be that the matter will go to the
Tribunal and the decision of the Tribunal will, in a practical sense, result in the early termination of this litigation.

In any event it does not seem to me at the moment that the balance of convenience points to the granting of the injunction sought. As I see it at the moment the delivery of the judgment tomorrow is just another step along the path of this litigation. In all the circumstances I will accept the undertaking proffered and decline to grant any other interlocutory injunction at this stage.
 * * * 
