

Sheslow versus Kostin Matter No 3875/94 [1997] NSWSC 171 (2 May 1997) `  
Taisia Sheslow versus Anatoli Kostin` ` 3875/94` `2 May 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /94 - TAISIA SHESLOW V ANATOLI KOSTIN 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff is the daughter and executrix of the late Lidia Kostin. The defendant is Lidia Kostin's brother, the plaintiff's uncle and also her godfather. 
The plaintiff makes various claims against the defendant but only three are actually pressed at the hearing, these being (a) that this Court should impose a constructive trust on the defendant because of contributions made by the late Lidia Kostin to real property that he holds; (b) that a constructive trust attaches to property because of a promise to make mutual wills between the defendant and Lidia Kostin; and (c) that the defendant should be ordered to give proper account with respect to certain moneys of Lidia Kostin that he had in his possession at her death.

The protagonists are part of a family which came to Australia from Europe in
May 1950. The plaintiff was actually born in Sydney on 20 April 1957. The plaintiff's mother separated from the plaintiff's father shortly after the plaintiff was conceived and went back to live with her brother, the defendant.
Accordingly at most material times the defendant, Lidia Kostin, the plaintiff and the plaintiff's grandmother Maria lived together in Cabramatta.

Shortly after first coming to Australia the defendant worked as a labourer on the New South Wales railways. He continued in this employment until probably somewhere around 1993. From May 1951 until shortly before her marriage, the plaintiff's mother worked in a hospital. She stopped working shortly before her marriage but recommenced after the birth of the plaintiff in the middle of
She continued deriving income from that employment until 30 December .

The four people I have mentioned and other members of the extended family lived at 224 St Johns Road, Cabramatta, up until 15 December 1978 when No 224 was sold to the Fairfield Council for $26,500. No 224 had been acquired in
October 1954. However, it is necessary to go back to the first property that the extended family purchased, namely a property at 8 Quarry Road, Bossley
Park. The Bossley Park property was purchased in the names of Ivan Kalceff and the defendant. Ivan Kalceff was the defendant's brother-in-law, having married the defendant's other sister Neonila. Each of the defendant and Ivan Kalceff paid 100 pounds and the balance was borrowed from a bank.

There were ten members of the extended family living in cramped conditions and in 1954 Ivan Kalceff bought out the defendant's interest for 500 pounds and the defendant used this money plus 1700 pounds borrowed from the Bank of New
South Wales to acquire 224 St Johns Road, Cabramatta. The loan was fully paid out on 5 February 1962.

The rate at which the loan was paid out, as put by Mr Slattery QC who appeared with Mr G Colman for the plaintiff, has been a very significant matter. Mr
Slattery QC tendered Exhibit PX08 which is the Bank of New South Wales
Housing-Essential Interest Rate statement from 1956 to 1976 which shows that the bank's interest rate at least on paper was 5.25 per cent. Mr Slattery QC says that it would have cost some 23 shillings and four pence per month to discharge the mortgage at such a rate of interest by 5 February 1962.

As the defendant in his answers to interrogatories as to what were his annual wage earnings for the period 1952 to 1962 answered "approximately ten pounds per fortnight", Mr Slattery QC submits that the inference must be drawn that the mortgage was paid out because of contributions from elsewhere.

As people of the world we know that folk who were living on small incomes in extended families on the outskirts of Sydney in the past were not only content to live on the breadline, but were keen to earn extra money through overtime, through the sale of produce, or otherwise. It seems to me very difficult to infer anything merely from a statement that a man's wages were ten pounds per fortnight.

I should add that interrogatory 5, which was also tendered in evidence, produced the answer from the defendant that the required payments were 34 pounds per year, but he repaid more to pay the property off as soon as possible.

Today Mr Slattery QC endeavoured to tender a document, MI 12, which purports to be the calculation from a firm of accountants as to the moneys that would be required to pay the loan off in 88 months at 5.25 per cent. I rejected this tender because it seemed to me that there were so many imponderables that it could not assist me in coming to a conclusion in the matter.

When a commercial institution speaks of "5 per cent" it in itself can mean a number of things: 5 per cent flat, 5 per cent reducible on annual, semi- annual, quarterly or monthly rests and various other permutations and combinations. Also various other fees can be added in and it is again rather naive to think that a bank's published rate is necessarily the rate that it is going to charge any particular customer. Accordingly it seems to me that this material was so flimsy that I should not admit it. Further- more I do not consider that I should draw the inference that Mr Slattery QC wishes me to draw.

Returning to the title of the property of 224 St Johns Road, it was sold in and another property was acquired at 164 St Johns Road. The purchase price for this property was $44,000. The defendant says that the balance of $17,000 odd was paid out of his account with the then New South Wales
Permanent Building Society. The defendant says that the Building Society deposit book and statements are no longer in existence but there has been no challenge to that particular statement except as to its admissibility.

The four people I have mentioned moved into 164 St Johns Road on 15 December
The plaintiff married and moved out of the home on 2 September 1979.
Maria died on 3 May 1983. That left the only people living in No 164 as the defendant and Lidia.

Lidia was struck down with cancer somewhere in 1991 and was in ill-health, having two operations for her cancer, until she died on 2 August 1993. Shortly afterwards the defendant left the premises of No 164 and commenced living with relatives and the property was let out to tenants.

After Lidia stopped working at the end of 1982 it seems common ground that, until she became too ill to do so, she did all the housework and almost all the gardening around the property.

Again Mr Slattery QC wishes me to draw the inference that no woman would have so behaved were it not for the fact that she had an actual interest in the property. Again I do not consider that I should draw such an inference. The motives of a lady who had left her husband and had been re-absorbed into the family home and who was living in that home without, it would seem, payment of rent or board, may be explained by many hypotheses other than that she was working because she had an interest in the property. She could be working out of a sense of duty. She could be working out of a sense of repaying others for looking after her in her time of need or for a myriad of other reasons. I do not consider that I should draw the inference that she was acting with respect to the property and doing the housework because there was some agreement or even understanding that she would have an interest in the house.

The first part of the case as I have set it out is that there is a constructive trust because of the conduct of the parties which showed that there must have been an agreement that Lidia Kostin would be making her contributions and doing the work on the property on the basis that she would have an equitable interest in the property.

I cannot find that there was any such agreement or even an understanding.

Mr Slattery QC put the case at its highest when he said that at the time when
No 164 St Johns Road was purchased, the deceased had already made her contributions and accordingly she had a claim to an equitable interest in 224
St Johns Road which carried through into No 164. So, he says, at the time when
No 164 was acquired, she had made her contributions and left her contributions in the kitty on the basis she would have an equitable interest in the property. It is the strongest way of putting the case because as Hope JA said in the Court of Appeal in Austin versus Keele, 22.11.1985, unreported, which was affirmed by the Privy Council in the last appeal ever from New South
Wales, [(1987) 72 ALR 579], it is possible for a person to prove a common intention that they have an equitable interest in the property by contributions made after its acquisition. However, it is much harder to prove such a case than to prove one made initial contributions with that aim in mind. The reason for this is obvious. Parties do direct their minds when they are acquiring a property as to who is to be the "real" owner, they usually do not do so when they are paying out for the day to day maintenance of the property or for the mortgage payments. Moreover, the obligation undertaken when one becomes a party to a mortgage and is liable on a personal covenant is a different thing to a person who uses her money to pay someone else's obligation under a mortgage in the knowledge that she is not liable under any personal covenant.

There is no doubt at all that the money that Lidia earned went into the payment of the household expenses. To what extent that money went into the household expenses is unclear. One can rationalise with the defendant's view that with a young child to feed, with herself to care for and a domestic's wages in the 1950s being relatively small, there was little money left over to go into the house to pay the mortgage. On the other hand the other consideration is that the people concerned did not have a very high standard of living, the defendant himself said that at various occasions there was just not enough money even to have enough food. They tended to use the money for the payment of the mortgage ahead of any creature comforts so that it may be that despite the fact that one would not expect Lidia to have very much spare money, she did in fact generate money for the house. I am fairly sure on the whole of the evidence that she did.

Here, however, we run into a bit of a problem. The plaintiff at that stage, that is about 1960, was a young girl of about three. Her affidavit contains a whole lot of assertions as to what she says was the accounting between Lidia and the defendant. She says that at least some of this information came through her hearing conversations between older members of the family. She says that these conversations led her to the view that her grandmother Maria was the dominating force in the family and imposed her will generally.

As the plaintiff grew older and as she spoke better English than other people and she was involved in an education which later led to her qualification as a legal secretary, it is clear that the plaintiff had a greater appreciation of some of the issues than she had earlier. However, it would not seem to me that she would have been in a position to have appreciated what was going on between the older members of the family until she was say 14 or so in 1971.
Accordingly, in my view, a lot of the material presented by the plaintiff was from reconstruction and what she has talked herself into believing must have happened rather than from any first-hand knowledge.

It was significant that when the plaintiff was cross-examined as to many of the details, even details of what happened in the 1980s and 1990s, that she had to deviate from what she had previously said because she had "remembered" something or her memory had been jogged or she could see that an earlier detail was not correct. I think as one goes back from the 1980s towards the s so the question of the plaintiff's evidence being what she feels must have happened rather than what did happen becomes the stronger.

However, this means that really the only person who is in a position to know what did happen was the defendant. Before 1995 where the knowledge of what had happened was purely within one person's camp then it required relatively little to prove a case on the balance of probabilities. It still, however, required the plaintiff to establish her case.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) still requires proof on the balance of probabilities. Indeed as I have said recently, the section imperiously says that the Court must find a plaintiff's case proved if that case has been proved on the balance of probabilities.
[Section (2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s14.html) says that the courts may take into account the nature of the subject matter of the proceeding but does not really go so far as to deal with the old rule that where the material is in the defendant's camp, that the plaintiff's evidentiary burden is lightened. However, for present purposes I will assume that the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) did not intend to destroy the old rule.

When one looks at the evidence of the defendant again, it is not very satisfactory. Although he gives a lot of details in his affidavits, the defendant's basic philosophy on life which appeared from his cross-examination was that he knows what is right and he is not going to let mere questions from barristers upset that point of view. Mr Slattery QC spent about three hours cross-examining the defendant mainly because the defendant for a long time would just refuse to face the facts and would give the answer he wanted the
Court to find. He said over and over again, for instance, that in his 1992 will he intended to have his three nephews and his niece benefit equally when it was quite plain that the question that was being put to him was a direct question as to why, if that were so, he named the plaintiff (his niece) as the beneficiary of No 164.

I formed the view that a lot of what the defendant said was just reconstruction as to what he believed ought to have happened rather than necessarily what did happen. Again the flavour of the evidence was, to a degree, that of a man in Eastern Europe in earlier years who was the master of his family's destiny. That feeling to a degree fitted in with the plaintiff's reconstruction, but I do not consider that it goes far enough for me to hold that, as the plaintiff claims, the title of the land was just put into the name of the defendant because he was the man and that was the Russian way. I cannot see any material that contradicts the defendant's point of view that the house was his and that he paid for it. Also, although the evidence is in an unsatisfactory state, I accept the defendant's version that Lidia Kostin did contribute moneys to household expenses but she did not actually pay for the mortgage, he did. I think, however, it does follow that he was able to pay off the mortgage far more quickly because of her contributions in other areas.

That, however, is not enough. There is no hint of any agreement between the parties or even an understanding that those contributions to household expenses were to give Lidia an interest in the house. Nor is this a situation where parties have entered into a joint venture which has come to an end without attributable blame on any side, where it is unconscionable that one party should obtain a windfall or profit.

I cannot see how there is any acceptable evidence which would allow me to find on the balance of probabilities that there is a constructive trust because of contributions made in the understanding, engendered by the defendant, that
Lidia Kostin would have an interest in the property.

Indeed, I feel that the highest that the plaintiff's case could have gone is that there might have been a lien for some of the moneys which had gone to discharge the mortgage in 1962. However, that is not a very substantial matter because one does not know how much money is involved and all this happened 35 years ago. It would be very doubtful if equity, especially after the death of
Lidia Kostin, would give force to such a lien.

I now pass to the mutual wills part of the case. This is in one sense connected with the earlier part of the case because if I had found that there had been an understanding between the parties that Lidia was to have an interest in the property, the mutual wills part of the case would be so much easier to find for the plaintiff. However, it does not seem to me that failure to find such an understanding is fatal to the mutual wills case. This is because, as I understand it, there is consideration if a person gives up a bona fide claim which she thinks she has and it does not matter at all that, had the claim been adjudicated on by a tribunal, the tribunal would have found for the defendant.

The law as to mutual wills has been discussed thoroughly between myself and counsel. It is a strange doctrine which seems to have emanated originally from the judgment of Lord Camden LC in Dufour versus Pereira (1769) 1 Dick 419, [21
ER 332], a case which is evidently more fully reported in Hargrave, Juridical Arguments and
Collections (1799) vol 2 p 311. Unfortunately we do not seem to have a copy of
Hargrave in Sydney so that for this report, which is said to be a far more detailed report and taken from Lord Camden's notebook, one must rely on the judgment of Morritt J in Re Dale [[1994] Ch 31] at 39-42. However, as Morritt J says at 38-39, Lord Camden's judgment has been described as energetic and eloquent and ingenious.

Essentially the judgment says that if parties agree that they will make wills in a certain way which they are not going to revoke except with the consent of the other party, a trust will attach to the property of the contracting parties. That trust may be enforced either by the other party or, after the death of the relevant party, by the intended beneficiaries.

Under the principle in the 16th edition of Williams Mortimer & Sunnucks,
Executors, Administrators and Probate, Stevens, London, 1982 p 120, the learned author talks in terms of a compact in equity. This led to a discussion between myself and counsel as to whether the principle of mutual wills only applied where there was an enforceable contract at law or whether it could lie in a wider set of circumstances.

One can understand the principle being limited to an enforceable contract at law because there are a series of cases where equity gives a special remedy where there is an action at law but the remedy at law is insufficient and the cases on breach of promise to make a will are a good example of that type of case. As Gleeson CJ said in Aslan versus Kopf (Court of Appeal, 16 May 1995, unreported), the mutual will case is merely one of a set of cases where there is a contract not to revoke a will and where damages are not an adequate remedy. Of course, the other aspect of the case in equity is that a third party, namely the disappointed beneficiary, can be the plaintiff directly whereas at common law the doctrine of privity of contract would prevent that happening.

However, all the cases seem to me to insist on there being a contract which is enforceable at law before the principles can apply. This, I think, comes out most clearly In Re Cleaver <case>; [(1937) 57 CLR 666] at 686 makes it clear that unless there is a contract enforceable at law the principle does not apply.

At the heel of the hunt Mr Slattery QC made an application to amend par 21 of the statement of claim to allege in the alternative to his case on trust and estoppel that there was a compact in equity to make what could loosely be called mutual wills. This amendment was opposed by Mr Greenwood for the defendant because of three reasons: first, prejudice, that he may have conducted the case differently or called extra evidence, secondly, the way the case was conducted and thirdly, it would be futile to grant the amendment.

The first and third reasons seem to me to be sufficient for not granting the amendment. There is some support for the proposition that one could make a solemn promise in equity which would be enforced even though it was gratuitous. However, even the most avant garde of writers on the subject concede that this matter cannot be pushed forward too far. Some would argue that in the Middle Ages the Court of Chancery followed the old Ecclesiastical
Courts in enforcing a promise which was made "by his faith" (see Barbour, The
History of Contract in Early English Equity, Oxford University Press, 1914 at p 163). However, Charles Ames points out in his article "Parole Contracts
Prior to Assumpsit in 1885" [8 Harvard Law Review 252] at 254 that, generally speaking whenever the Church courts tried to do this in purely temporal cases after the Constitutions of Clarendon a prohibition would issue as of course. Ames says that Anon Cary 5; <case>; [21 ER ] clearly states, "Upon nudum pactum there ought to be no more help in Chancery than there is at common law." Ames says at p 257 that equity would, at least up to assumpsit taking over the field of contract, enforce promises where the promisor had caused damage to a person who relied on the promise or upon the basis of unjust enrichment, but after assumpsit it retreated to giving relief only in cases where specific performance was involved.

Any rule as to enforcement of gratuitous promises has only survived in one particular area, that is that a declaration of trust in favour of a volunteer is enforceable notwithstanding lack of consideration (see Johns versus Lock [[1865] 1 Ch App 25], 28).

There have been cases where a father has told his elder son that because he thinks his estate is not as large as it previously was, he intends to alter his will and the elder son has dissuaded the father from so doing on the basis that he will look after his brothers and sisters. Such a case is
Chamberlaine versus Chamberlaine (1678) 2 Freem 34; [22 ER 1041] which has never been doubted and indeed was referred to by the High Court in Birmingham v
Renfrew. However, when one analyses that sort of promise closely one really finds that there is consideration at law because the elder son received a benefit and the father suffered a detriment in not altering the will in the way he intended to do so.

Mr Slattery QC also relied on the moral obligation of the defendant to support the promise. Unfortunately this submission is too close to Lord Mansfield's views of consideration. This is reflected in what Sir James Mansfield CJ said in Lee versus Muggeridge (1813) 5 Taunt 36, 46; <case>; [128
ER 599], 603, "Where a person is bound morally and conscientiously to pay a debt, though not legally bound, a subsequent promise to pay will give a right of action."
However this doctrine was virtually abandoned for all time in Eastwood v
Kenyon <case>; [(1840) 11 Ad & E 438], and I do not consider that it should be revived at least in a case where, according to accepted principles of equity, the defendant's conscience is not affected.

Accordingly I do not consider that there is a separate principle that in equity a solemn promise is enforceable where it would not be enforceable at common law as a contract because it is not supported by consideration. It does not lie upon the conscience of the defendant in such a way that the Court would impose a constructive trust.

If it were otherwise, then generally speaking the whole doctrine of consideration could be out-flagged by merely relying upon the conscience of the defendant, see Eastwood versus Kenyon, supra at (ER) 486-7.

I considered this point at length because I accept the evidence of Mr Valentin
Sheslow that around the dinner table on an occasion about 1992 Lidia did ask the defendant to make a will leaving the house property at No 164 to the plaintiff and he replied "No worries". This was a promise made by the defendant. The defendant was also making the promise on a solemn occasion to his sister who he knew was dying of cancer. If ever there was room for an equity court to enforce against the conscience of the promisor a moral gratuitous promise, this was the case. However, it does not seem to me that the authorities go sufficiently far for me to allow it.

Accordingly, the amendment would be futile even apart from the objections to the amendment on the ground of prejudice.

I now return to the mutual wills case. It seems to me that it falls down on almost every aspect. First of all, it is necessary not only to find that the parties made corresponding wills but also that they made an agreement that they would not revoke their wills except on notice to the other party (see for instance Aslan versus Kopf (supra)).

Although the plaintiff says that the parties made mutual wills in 1984, the will that Lidia made in that year is not in evidence. It is hard to see how the parties did make corresponding wills. The defendant had the property at St Johns Road to devise, Lidia had no property to devise. Accordingly, it is not the classic situation where the parties have property which they will to each other and then to the children of one of them. In any event, there is no promise by either expressly made, or which I should imply, that the wills were to be irrevocable. Furthermore, I cannot see any consideration for any such promise as a matter of law. There is no material from which I should find that Lidia ever knew that she had any claim to the property. There is no evidence that she ever got legal advice to that effect or that she ever asserted such a claim.

Mr Slattery QC says that I should draw inferences that she made a request at the dinner table in 1992 that the property should go to the plaintiff.
Further, he says that I should hold that she did give consideration for the promise made by the defendant to leave the property to the plaintiff. This is because had he not made the promise she may well have obtained legal advice and she may well have made a claim for an equitable interest in the property.
However, because of the promise made by the defendant she did not do so. I give credit for the ingeniousness of this argument, but it does seem to me to be very much in the realm of speculation. It is equally consistent with what happened that a dying woman was asking for a boon from her brother and that he was prepared to grant it.

In fact the defendant did make a will leaving the property to the plaintiff.
Indeed he made it twice. He was given the will and he took it to the railway yards at Clyde where he was employed and it was executed but not in proper form. He took it home and had a conversation with the plaintiff and the plaintiff did a diagram on an envelope, which is DX07, showing how the will should be executed. He then took it back to the railway yards and had it executed in accordance with her suggestion and thereafter kept it in his possession.

The defendant says that he was virtually locked in the bedroom by the plaintiff and the plaintiff asserted influence over him at a time when he was depressed and his sister was dying and that he would do anything she said. I do not accept that. I have seen the defendant in the witness box. He is a very determined gentleman who would do what he liked.

The defendant says that his attitude towards the plaintiff changed when there was an argument, shortly before Lidia's death, over some bank books. The plaintiff demanded her mother's bank books from the defendant, who said that he would give them to her after the death. She threatened to sue and he said that if he was being threatened with being sued, he would remove her from any benefaction. He in fact changed his will about three weeks after he left No St Johns Road. However, the flavour of his affidavit is that he was not under any influence by the plaintiff at any stage. In fact, the affidavit tends to suggest that he never really was very fond of her. As his evidence is full of half suggestions that the plaintiff was not a very nice sort of person
I just cannot see how she was, in his eyes, in any position to assert any influence over him even in the late stage of his sister's illness.

Accordingly, it seems to me that all the mutual wills case amounts to is that the defendant did make a promise to his sister at a time when the plaintiff was present, that he would leave the plaintiff the house, but he reneged. But there is no contract and there is nothing in equity or by way of estoppel which would warrant the Court in holding him to his bargain.

I have not spent much time dealing with the case of estoppel because it seems to me that virtually the same principles apply as apply to the other aspects of the case. I cannot see how Mr Slattery QC makes good his proposition that
Lidia suffered a detriment in losing the potential of making a claim against the property by reason of the promise which the defendant made.

A third aspect of the claim is for an account. There is evidence which was not objected to and so was admitted for all purposes that Lidia told her daughter that she had $20,000 in cash in the house. The plaintiff has constantly demanded money from the defendant. The defendant has indicated that he had spent some money on behalf of Lidia during her illnesses out of Lidia's funds and he paid some money to the plaintiff on Lidia's request or the plaintiff's request but that he has no further moneys.

During the course of the trial, a bundle of damaged banknotes in a plastic bag was handed over as was a coin purse containing some coins and banknotes. Mr
Greenwood says that this shows that the defendant is not keeping anything back because of his volunteering this material. The other way of looking at it is that even now as the case is progressing, further material has come from the defendant's camp. The plaintiff seeks an account. Mr Slattery QC says the defendant is a fiduciary because the defendant was, on any version of the case, holding money and property on behalf of Lidia and the plaintiff is
Lidia's executor.

The law would appear to be that the plaintiff is entitled to an account as against a fiduciary almost as of right (see Daniell's Chancery Practice, 7th
Edition Stevens 1901 p 498).

Accordingly, as she has requested it, I should order it, but it will be on the basis that the plaintiff is at her own risk as to costs and should a Master find that there is little or no money owing after taking the account doubtless the Master will order the whole of the costs of the account to be paid by the plaintiff.

It seems to me that the account aspect has been a very minor aspect of the case. Indeed I would agree with Mr Greenwood that it was reasonable to assume that until Mr Slattery QC's final address that that aspect of the case was not being pressed. Indeed I made a provisional note to that effect myself last night.

Accordingly, apart from giving the plaintiff liberty to apply for an account by taking out a notice of motion before the Master for that purpose at her own risk as to costs, the plaintiff's suit should be dismissed with costs.

The exhibits should remain with the papers for twenty-eight days.
 * * * 
