

In The Estate of Stefan Miegoch No. 119295/93 Wills - Solicitors [1996]
NSWSC 68 (15 April 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES (PROBATE DIVISION)
SANTOW J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 16, 17 May, 30 October, 8, 22 November 1995 #DATE 22:3:1996 #ADD 15:4:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs       L J Ellison 
Solicitors for the Plaintiffs     
Chris Nadolski and Assoc.
 
Counsel for the Defendants       J Fernon 
Solicitors for the Defendants     Nowacki and Company
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
ESSENTIAL ISSUES
SANTOW J Was the Will purportedly made by the Deceased, Stefan Miegoch on 
June 1992 ("the 1992 Will") a valid and subsisting will? Did it thus revoke all previous wills including the most recent one of November 1988 ("the 1988
Will") or, having regard to the applicable onus of proof, both legal and evidentiary, did the 1992 Will fail for lack of testamentary capacity on the part of the Deceased so as to leave the 1988 Will still on foot?
The Plaintiff/Cross-Defendant,
Nieves Redroff, is sole executrix of the Will whilst the First Defendant, Janina Meigoch, is the sole executrix of the 1992
Will. The Plaintiff seeks an order granting probate of the 1988 Will in solemn form and attacks the validity of the 1992 Will, claiming lack of testamentary capacity at the relevant time, or a failure on the First
Defendant's part to satisfy the applicable onus of proof in that regard. The
First Defendant, Janina Miegoch, as Executrix and beneficiary of the 1992 Will and the Second Defendant,
Janusz Szanser, as beneficiary of the 1992 Will, contend that the 1992 Will is valid and that the Deceased did not lack testamentary capacity.
The Plaintiff accepts that the 1992 Will was duly executed and rational on its face and thus that the evidentiary onus of proof as the validity of the
Will shifts from the Defendants, as proponents of the 1992 Will, to the
Plaintiff. The Plaintiff seeks to raise sufficient doubts about the Deceased's testamentary capacity such that the evidentiary onus again shifts back to the
Defendants. The Plaintiff claims to have done so and that the Defendants have failed to discharge that onus, so far as the Testator's testamentary capacity is concerned.
The Defendants contend that the Plaintiff has not raised sufficient doubt, but in any event that the Defendants have discharged any applicable onus, so far as establishing testamentary capacity in relation to the 1992 Will is concerned.
 
ELABORATION OF FACTUAL BACKGROUND
The Principal Parties
Before dealing with the specific chronology of events,
I will briefly describe the principal parties involved. The Deceased, of Polish origin, was born in 1910 and his later de facto wife,
Tamara Redroff, in 1923.
The Deceased first married the First Defendant, Janina Meigoch, in 1948 in
Germany. In 1956 the Deceased and the First Defendant separated, and in 1959 the Deceased divorced the First Defendant.
Around 1959 or 1960 the Deceased entered into a de facto relationship with
Tamara Redroff at 195 Cleveland Street, Redfern, a boarding house owned by the
Deceased.
By 1979 the Deceased's de facto wife, Tamara Redroff, ceased her employment as a seamstress. In 1980 the Deceased terminated his employment at
Tooheys. There was uncontested evidence that whilst Tamara Redroff was working as a seamstress, she also found time to assist with the twenty boarders at the
Redfern house in which they lived. Thus she did all the washing of linen, cleaning, rent-collecting and dealing with the boarders and letting of the rooms as well as doing all the shopping, cooking and cleaning for herself and the
Deceased.
It appeared that the Deceased and Tamara Redroff stayed on speaking terms with Jartina Meigoch as the ex-wife of the Deceased.
 
The 1988 Will and comparison with 1992 Will
On 2 November 1988, the Plaintiff executed the 1988 Will appointing the
Plaintiff, Nieves Redroff, as Executrix. I should explain at this point that the Plaintiff is the daughter-in-law of Tamara Redroff, having married one of
Tamara Redroff's sons, Nick Redroff, by her previous marriage.
The 1988 Will was duly executed in the presence of Josie Shand and
Wladyslaw Buda who duly attested and subscribed that Will in the presence of the Deceased.
Under the 1988 Will, the Deceased provided that his de facto wife, Tamara
Redroff should be allowed to reside in his property at Redfern for a period of three years and he left to her 50 per cent of his residuary estate, provided she survived him. I have estimated that the half interest would have been worth around $150,000, based on his main asset being then his Redfern property, sold in 1992 for $300,000. I deal later with Tamara Redroff's position in 1992, taking into account both gifts by the Deceased to her prior to the Will and then the effect of her omission from the 1992 Will altogether.
The Deceased left the remaining 50 per cent of his estate as to $10,000 to the congregation of the Sisters of the Holy Family of Nazareth for the benefit of the Holy Family Polish
Nursing Home at Marayong and directed that the remaining balance of that 50 per cent share be divided as to:  per cent to his nephew Janusz Szanser, and as to the remaining 80 per cent thereof to his executrix
Nieves Redroff.
Janusz
Szanser was a nephew of the Deceased who, at the time, resided in
Poland and continues to do so, though at one time he evidently intended to migrate with his son to Australia. Mr Szanser gave affidavit evidence to the effect that the Deceased had been financially assisting Mr Szanser's mother since at least October 1964 until her death in October 1977. The Deceased financially assisted Mr Szanser since at least September 1973 until August with small and not infrequent payments, some 86 transfers in all, totalling approximately $20,100 (see JS2 to Mr Szanser's affidavit of 30
November 1994). In the period of approximately two to three years immediately preceding the death of the Deceased, it appears these money transfers were made through the First Defendant, Janina Miegoch.
It appears that the Deceased, of Polish origin, was able to speak English reasonably fluently although he had an accent. He was able to read
English and there is no suggestion until about 1991 of any behavioural changes. In the meantime he was well able to understand what he read in English. However, it is clear that in June 1992, when in Hospital and whether for reasons of his emotional aggression exacerbated by decline or simply because his English was hard to understand, or both, two of the doctors who saw him felt the need for a Polish interpreter, though in one case, settling for a friend as second best.
It appeared that at one stage after the
Deceased had retired, he went to
Poland to visit his family and one may take it that he would have visited
Janusz Szanser. It appears from the evidence of Nieves Redroff that the visit was not an entirely happy one in that he apparently considered that his family were all drunks and that he wouldn't care if he never saw them again. However, that needs to be balanced against the fact that he did continue to send financial assistance to one of his four nephews, Janusz Szanser.
I should note that while Janusz Szanser was not left out of the 1988
Will, he simply received a fifth of fifty per cent of the Deceased's estate after a gift of $10,000 to a charity; in arithmetic terms that would have amounted to approximately $28,000. This is based on the then crudely estimated value of his estate. Thus (as I explain later) in 1992 the Redfern property, which appears to have comprised the bulk of his then estate was sold for $300,000. Treating the estate in 1988 as worth approximately that amount, one half of $300,000 is $150,000; deducting $10,000 and taking one-fifth of the balance of $140,000 produces $28,000. Clearly this is a very rough estimate as it assumes no substantial change over four years in the value of the Redfern property (and no other significant assets).
The comparison with the 1992 Will is one where he receives for no apparent reason a good deal more, namely the whole of the then estate, less $10,000.
This amounted to half of a property at Granville worth approximately $82,500, plus a further sum of approximately $42,000, totalling $124,500 (1988
Will $28,000). The Deceased had kept $52,697.87 for himself from the sale of the Redfern property, providing the source for $10,000 to go under his 1992
Will to his former wife Janina Miegoch. The Deceased, around March 1992, gifted to his de facto wife the equivalent of $135,197, in the circumstances I elaborate below ("Events in 1991 and following"); this can be compared to $150,000 to her under the 1988 win.
Finally, it should be noted that the Deceased wholly omitted Nieves
Redroff from the 1992
Will. This was both as beneficiary and executor. She was replaced in the latter capacity by the Deceased's former wife, Janina Miegoch, who also became a beneficiary for the first time in the amount of $10,000. In contrast, in the 1988 Will, Nieves Redroff was to receive eighty per cent of the remaining fifty per cent of the Deceased's estate after deducting $10,000 for the charity. That is to say,
Nieves Redroff would have received approximately $112,000 (based on the earlier estimated value of the 1988 estate) as against zero under the 1992 Will.
There is nothing in the evidence to indicate that the Deceased gave any specific consideration to the question of excluding Nieves Redroff in this way as both beneficiary or executor. Likewise with the other changes; in particular the total omission of his de facto wife in 1992.
I refer later to the report of 16 June 1992 of Dr Burley, a Psychiatrist at Concord Hospital (who did not, however, give evidence). Dr Burley refers to the patient as suspecting the wife as "trying to appropriate his money" as of
June 1992, though Dr Burley cites no basis for such suspicion beyond quoting "the patient"; see under "The Deceased's
Hospitalisation" below; patient notes of 16 June 1992. Apart from this aside, there is no evidence before me of any disaffection between the Deceased and Tamara Redroff. Dr Burley, to put matters in perspective goes on to write "wife" has cared for him for 20 years and it appears to have been a stormy relationship...... On the evidence, it appeared that she coped admirably with his aggression and mental deterioration, still demonstrating assiduous and loving concern for the
Deceased, despite what must have been considerable strains and tensions from that aggressive behaviour.
 
Events in 1991 and following
Turning to the last year or so before the death of the Deceased, commencing in 1991, evidence was given both by Nieves Redroff and Tamara
Redroff as well as by Nick Redroff that the Deceased started to suffer from behavioural changes. Thus it was said by Nieves Redroff in her affidavit of 14
September (paragraph 18): "During the twelve (12) months prior to the death of the
Deceased to my observation his behaviour become very erratic. At home he was usually asleep in his chair but he could be very aggressive with people around him. I observed that he would often kick, push, and hit out and wave his fists and yell and scream. However, the Deceased was always very good with me.
Often when I spoke with him I noticed that he was having memory lapses. He would go out and forget where he lived On one occasion he was missing for about six (6) hours and had been wandering up and down trying to remember where he lived. He had been reported missing to Redfern Police Station on about three occasions and so Tamara and I put the
Deceased's name, address and telephone number in his pocket if he went anywhere."
Tamara Redroff in her affidavit of 31 September 1994, at para 7, gave evidence to similar effect: "In the year preceding his death the Deceased's behaviour started to change. He stopped going out. At times he would sit in his armchair without talking for hours on end. At other times he would become extremely aggressive in that he called me names, swore at me and hit me. I also observed the Deceased being aggressive with other people around him. During that time I noticed that the Deceased started to loose his memory.
He would go out and forget where he lived. On one occasion when he came home after he was missing for about six (6) hours he said to me words to the following effect: "I could not find our home ". The Deceased had been reported missing to
Redfern
Police Station on about three (3) occasions. At one stage my daughter-in-law Nieves Redroff and I attached a piece of cloth with the Deceased's name, address and telephone number to the inside of the Deceased's pocket so he could be easily identified."
I do not need specifically to refer to the evidence of Nick Redroff in his affidavit of 10 April 1995 beyond noting that it was to similar effect and gives examples of the Deceased's forgetfulness and aggressive behaviour.
I should emphasise at this point, that there was no evidence of any disaffection on the Deceased's part towards either Tamara Redroff or Nieves
Redroff. No doubt his aggression would have created some strains, but the aggression appears to have been a general trait rather than directed at any particular person.
I should note that by March 1992 the Redfern property had been sold for $300,000. The Deceased then purchased a property at Granville in the name of himself and Tamara Redroff as tenants in common in equal shares for $165,000.
Of the surplus proceeds from the sale of the Redfern property and the purchase of the Granville house, the Deceased kept $52,697.87 for himself and gave the same amount, $52,697.87, to Tamara Redroff.
In argument on behalf of the Second Defendant, it was contended that by so selling the property at Redfern, purchasing the house at Granville with
Tamara Redroff and himself holding as tenants in common in equal shares and then distributing the surplus proceeds from the sale and purchase between the
Deceased and
Tamara Redroff equally, the Deceased provided for Tamara Redroff in much the same way as he provided for her in the 1988 Will, worth around $150,000. Comparing that to what Tamara Redroff received following the sale of the Redfern property, a half share of the Granville house would represent $82,500 plus half the surplus proceeds namely $52,697.87, totalling $135,197.87. According to Nieves Redroff, who accompanied her mother to the solicitors with the Deceased, Tamara Redroff was apparently surprised that the
Granville house was bought as tenants in common though she assumed he was going to buy it in both names; see Transcript 16-17. However, there was no evidence that the Deceased specifically directed his mind, when making the Will, to his de facto wife's comparative circumstances.
 
The Deceased's hospitalisation: January 1992 to July 1992
Prior to the sale of the Redfern property, in January 1992, the
Deceased collapsed in his Redfern home and was admitted to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital for about three weeks. Nieves Redroff states that the cause of that collapse was never determined. It may well be that the Deceased was suffering from
Huntington's Chorea, having regard to the later recognition of that condition when, around 4 June 1992 till 25 June 1992, the Deceased was re-admitted to
Concord
Repatriation Hospital where the hospital notes record that condition as well as Bell's Palsy.
There is considerable evidence that during this six month period the
Deceased continued to have spells of aggression which Tamara Redroff observed after his return from Royal Prince Alfred and before his re-admission to
Concord. The Deceased would demand to be taken home and at times became difficult to understand, again according to the evidence of Tamara Redroff.
The hospital notes describe him, at Concord, as becoming "quite aggressive and uncooperative with sudden unprovoked explosive outbursts. There was some confusion regarding what his normal behaviour pattern was".
The Concord notes go on to state that "he was referred to the Psychiatric and
Geriatric team and transferred to Ward 17 (the Psycho-Geriatric Ward). He was commenced on a small dose of haloperidol. Here he settled somewhat although continuing to be verbally aggressive at times.
His family and friends seem to indicate that this was his normal behaviour at home." (See notes by Resident Medical Officer Chia from Concord of June 1992.)
I now reproduce a transcription of certain of the Concord hospital notes and, where relevant and known, the sources thereof. These are as transcribed by Counsel for the Second Defendant to remove abbreviations and the like and which were not, as a transcription, the subject of any objection from the
Plaintiff. "On 5 June it was noted of the Deceased.
"charming elderly man, 87 years old" "left Bells palsy" "Huntingtons chorea"
On 6 June 1992 it was noted: "Patient needs little help in feeding himself...
patient needs a speech therapist and occupational therapy consult as soon as possible. The dentures (upper and lower) seem not fit for eating. ... Patient very confused. Keeps running away to Ward -120 ... Asked to settle becomes aggressive.
On 7 June it was recorded: "Patient showered with minimal assistance this morning ...
patient becomes frustrated .. language barrier. It is difficult to understand him."
On 12 June 1992 it was noted that: "Daughter-in-law feels that Mr Miegoch needs to be placed in nursing home. Presently living with wife (de facto) who is finding it difficult to care for him. Patient wanders out of the house and sometimes on to street. Has been aggressive with wife? and daughter in-law, hitting and kicking them... ."
On 12 June 1992 the nursing report noted of the Deceased.
"Very independent man. Becomes verbally aggressive at times.
On 15 June 1992 it was noted "Could the social worker please contact Tassia (Mr Miegoch says that she is his ?? wife) on 798 4591.
On 15 June the nursing report notes: "Patient very aggressive towards staff this evening. Patient using abusive language towards staff. ... ."
On 16 June 1992 the social worker reports: "Patient's wife has decided to take her husband home as she is scared about what he may do if he goes to a nursing home.
Discussion with wife on ward. She is not happy with decision but feels powerless to do anything but take patient home on discharge... .

On 16 June 1992 Dr
Burley, psychiatrist, noted of the Deceased.- "82 year old Polish migrant with very poor English ability currently being examined for Huntingtons chorea. Recent verbal and physical aggression towards nursing staff after being told he would be sent to nursing home rather than home. Fortunately a friend, Mr Lucjan, was present and acted as interpreter.
Mr Miegoch denied aggression towards staff but said he wanted to go home not to nursing home. This appeared non negotiable. He did not want to have a case conference with interpreter. House is in his and his de facto wife's names. Patient suspects wife of trying to appropriate his money. "Wife" has cared for him for
O years and it appears to have been a stormy relationship ...
she has been afraid of him in the past.
Mr Lucjan said Mr Miegoch appeared his usual self. His sentences were correct and logical, He answered questions appropriately.
Mr Lucjan said Mr Miegoch had always been an anxious and demanding man.
These traits are undoubtedly exaggerated in a non Polish speaking environment and with age.
Mr Miegoch was oriented in place knew the month and year. Short term memory was good A and C good. Correct events and general knowledge good.
There is no great evidence of dementia based on this interview although dementia is apart of Huntingtons disease. ..." June 1992,
Dr Burley notes of a phone call with Tamara: .She believes patient going to Lidcombe Hospital .No change in personality but perhaps a worsening of same pre-morbid traits - argumentative especially could not tolerate disagreement; bad temper; has been physically aggressive to women only for greater than ten years.
.Poor memory - general couldn't give examples...

On 17 June 1992 Dr Burley interviewed the Deceased with the assistance of a Polish interpreter . The patient was initially co-operative and friendly and the patient gradually began to get irritable. He was oriented in place and time. The patient had a sudden outburst yelling and waving his arms aggressively and was insulted at the doctor's questions. Dr Burley then notes: "Memory - didn't remember names of doctors, social workers, recent meals, length in hospital, address, phone numbers.
Dr Burley notes: "Repeatedly asked why he was being asked stupid questions and then walked off. I tried to encourage him to return but he kept shouting and waving his fists dangerously ... Following this, interpreter, social worker and nurse spoke to him for five to ten minutes. He settled quickly and was very friendly to them kissing the hand of the interpreter (a culturally appropriate gesture I am told).

Dr Burley noted: ."In view of labile mood, frontal lobe damage may be an important factor in this man - and the verbal fluency and sequencing very poor."
On 18 June 1992 the nursing report noted: "Has confronted staff on a couple of occasions especially when he wanted something especially the use of the telephone.
When it wasn't available for use and female staff told him he became agitated thrashing arms about and shouting."
On June 1992 the nursing report notes: "... When taken down to shower area he became verbally aggressive and waving his fists around. This occurred very suddenly and without any warning. He abused me for making him shower. I told him that he did not have to shower at which stage he started to do so happily. ... He appears aggressive at times but perhaps these are language barriers and/or ill-fitting dentures (this is definitely always the case however) continues to make phone calls and is happy when assisted to do so... ."
On 24 June 1992 the hospital notes from Dr Duncan, Psychiatrist, were as follows: "A solicitor came in to get Mr Miegoch to sign a Will, as none of us knew much about his cognitive state.
 (I refer to Dr Duncan's oral evidence later.) "Dr Duncan saw Mr Miegoch with Mr Buda, a friend. Dr Duncan notes: "Told us his total assets were half a house and bank account with $36,00.00 in it.
Possible benefactors (sic) was current de facto, former wife and a nephew in Poland and was adamant there were no others.
Discussed with former wife and friends and this seems to be so.
If I can't get an interpreter,
I feel on what I established today that he probably does have testamentary capacity." 
I note that in mentioning possible "benefactors" he clearly meant beneficiaries. I also note that no mention was made of Nieves Redroff, though she was a principal beneficiary (and executor) of the 1988 Will.
So far as additional matters raised by Counsel for the Plaintiff, concerning the Defendant's transcription, they are firstly that under the date June 1992 where Dr Burley, the Psychiatrist, notes of the Deceased that he was "currently being examined for Huntingtons chorea" it appears the inferred word "examined" taken from the transcription "Wed" may actually refer to "reexamined". However, nothing much appears to hang on that.
The other matter to note is that Dr Burley on 17 June 1992, after recording as his impression "sudden explosive outbursts of verbal aggression and physical intimidation on three occasions with no appropriate precipitants' and noting "poor memory", "coarsening of personality" and "in view of labile mood, frontal lobe damage may be an important factor in this man NB verbal fluency and sequencing v. poor" then makes the suggestion which I quote below: "* Application to Guardianship Board pt. (Meaning "patient" is not, mentally ill under Mental Health Act but probably does satisfy G.B. criteria) " 
That last reference shows Dr Burley had at least reservations about the
Deceased's competence.
 .
I should also note that evidence was given in the form both of a report and orally by Dr Duncan who, when the Deceased was in Concord
Hospital, was working part-time in general psychiatry but primarily in geriatric psychiatry attached to the Geriatric Unit at Concord.
It was not in dispute that he had the qualifications of an expert in that field. He gave evidence that he saw the Deceased on two occasions, namely 19 June and 24 June 1992.
When Dr Duncan saw the Deceased on 19 June 1992 he gave evidence that he saw him very briefly then and did not have an interpreter with him so he was not able to get much from him; Transcript 30 October 1995, 5.
He refers to having discussed his condition with Dr Burley whose notes appear earlier.
Having looked at Dr Burley's notes of 17 June 1992, Dr Duncan was asked what view he formed as to the Deceased's cognitive condition at that time, that is 17 June and following. To this he answered: "Well, that he did probably have, he clearly had some mild degree of cognitive impairment, largely in the areas of judgment and personality change, but he wasn't, he wasn't markedly impaired" 
Transcript 30 October , 5 at line 50.
Dr Duncan was then asked to compare his condition at the time of Dr
Duncan's second visit on 24 June 1992.
He had gone to the ward to see another patient and was approached by a nurse who said that there was a lawyer who had come into the ward to get the Deceased to sign a will and the nurse asked Dr
Duncan if he thought this was appropriate or not. Dr Duncan gave evidence that he went over and talked briefly to the lawyer. "I said that I was a bit concerned about this because we had some doubts about his capacity and that
I'd really quite like to see him if the will was going to be signed with an interpreter to do a proper testamentary assessment." Transcript Dr Duncan 30
October 1995 at 4.
At the lawyer's insistence, Dr Duncan then saw the Deceased who was with a friend.
I now quote from Dr Duncan's contemporaneous notes, which are conveniently quoted in his report of 19 October , being DX 19 and to which
I have earlier made reference: "24.06 92 - Seen today. A solicitor came in to get Mr Miegoch to sign a will, as none of us knew much about his cognitive state, - I will try to arrange Polish interpreter but as this may take a few days I saw him with Mr W Buda, a friend
Mr Miegoch was able to talk a little English. Told me his total assets were 1/2 a house + a bank account with $36,000 in it.
Possible benefactors were current defacto, former wife and a nephew in Poland and was adamant. There were no others.
Discussed with former wife and friends and this seems to be so.

If I can't get an interpreter, I feel on what I established today that he probably does have testamentary capacity." .
In examination in chief, Dr Duncan states that the basis for his conclusion that the Deceased had testamentary capacity was that he had told Dr
Duncan that his assets were "half a house and a bank account with $36,000 in it" (Transcript 30 October 1995, 4).
Then followed the following question and answer concerning the meeting of 24 June 1992: "Q. And he told you that his benefactors were a current de facto, former wife and a nephew in Poland, and he was adamant that there were no others?
A. That's right.

Q. Why did you ask him firstly about his assets and secondly about his possible benefactors?
A. I understood that to establish that he had testamentary capacity I had to establish that he had a reasonable idea of what his assets were, not in detail, but approximately what they were and who may have possible, a possible call on those assets." Transcript 30
October 1995 at 4).
Dr Duncan had stated in his notes that "discussed with former wife and friends and this seems to be so"; see DX19. In examination in chief he then acknowledged that "I can't honestly recall establishing that the lady there was his former wife but Mr Buda and the woman that was there "agreed that those were his assets and that those were the people who might have some call on them". (Transcript 30 October 1995 at 5). The following question and answer ensued: "Q. So on the assumption that his assets were of that kind and his possible benefactors were as he said them to be, it was your view that he had testamentary capacity as you understood testamentary capacity?
A. Yes, in that when I saw him he seemed reasonably bright and happy.
He definitely was not delusional or grossly agitated"
I particularly note that the identification of possible beneficiaries made no mention of his de facto wife's daughter by a previous marriage. This was despite the fact that she was a principal beneficiary in the 1988 Will, regarded sufficiently to be his sole executor, and who had remained in continued touch with him throughout, including his last illness.
He was then asked in examination in chief his opinion as to the
Deceased's condition to make judgments in relation to calls on his estate on June 1992. It should be noted that in the interim, the Deceased left hospital to go home on June 1992, it being clear that he was agitated and aggressive about remaining in hospital. He was however re-admitted to hospital the next day (on 26 June 1992) and remained there till 29 June 1992 when the
Deceased discharged himself from hospital. It was on June 1992 when the
Deceased was once again at Granville that he signed the 1992 Will, shortly before he was again admitted as a patient, this time at Westmead Hospital on 1
July 1992. 1 should add that the clinical notes include that "He left the ward on .6.92 (Monday) against the advice from both medical and nursing staff'.
The following question and answer later appears in Dr Duncan's examination in chief. (Transcript at 6 at line 20 and following): "Q. Could I ask your opinion as to his condition to make judgments in relation to calls on his estate on 30 June?
A. Yeah. That becomes slightly more complicated in that his
Huntington's chorea and the associated cognitive impairment would not have worsened in that sir days. Huntington's disease is a very slowly progressive condition and there's no suggestion that he had a stroke or any other acute, you know, structure or brain impairment. He left Concord Hospital and then he was admitted the next day and finally left Concord on the 29th, and reading from the notes it appears that he probably was not hugely different when I'd seen him on the 24th.

Q. When you're saying, 'reading from the notes'?
A. Sorry, reading from the Discharge summary from the 29th.

Q You're referring to the discharge summary of his discharge of June 1992?
A. Yes. If he hadn't been admitted to Westmead Hospital with pneumonia on the 1st, then I'd have no hesitation in saying that on the 30th he did have testamentary capacity, but, of course, that's the problem. I didn't see him on the 30th. I know that he was sick and taken to Westmead on the next day so I can't categorically state that he had full capacity on the 30th.

Q. If I could ask your opinion as to what's more likely than not situation?
A. Well it seemed in Westmead Hospital that he got sick pretty quickly, so I think it's not unreasonable to assume that the day previously he was still well enough and not delirious and, hence, able to still have capacity.
 
Q. When you say "delirious", what do you mean by that?
A. When anyone becomes ill, through any reason, you can get an impairment of the metabolic supply to the brain so you get what one calls toxic brain syndrome, where the people's concentration is impaired or they become very confused, not because there's anything wrong with the brain specifically but the metabolic supplies, the oxygen supplies, glucose, etc going to the brain have been compromised by the illness. So people with any dementing illnesses are much more susceptible to developing deleriums than people who are physically well"; Transcript 30
October 1995 at 6 to .
He was later asked again in examination in chief: "Q. If I could just ask you one last thing about 30 June, in your Report, you did not feel his tendency to be impulsive and aggressive was relevant in considering his testamentary capacity; is that your view as it applies to his condition at June?
A. Yes 
Q. And why don't you consider his tendency to be impulsive and aggressive was relevant?
A. It would appear that that had been a pretty much base-line personality characteristic of this man and that, you know, that although there had been probably a degree of coarsening of his personality that he had always been somewhat irascible.";
Transcript 30 October 1995 at 8.
Subsequently, Dr Duncan, in cross-examination, was asked whether he was "prepared to concede that by the end of June 1990 he (the Deceased) had significant cognitive impairment"..
He answered this question "certainly";
Transcript 30 October 1995 at 13.
Dr. Duncan also confirmed that Mr Buda, the Deceased's friend, performed the interpreting role but that "there's a mix but it was definitely more through Mr Buda than me"; Transcript 30
October 1995 at 13, line 50 and at 14, line 45.
Dr Duncan readily acknowledged that he was not in a position as a psychiatrist to assess whether as of 30 June 1992 the Deceased had developed the severe pneumonia that was noted on his admission at Westmead on 1 July
He emphasised that his temperature went up dramatically in Westmead so that the pneumonia was coming on very quickly or possibly "getting worse very quickly"; Transcript 30 October 1995 at 10.
In re-examination the following question and answer ensued: "Q. Dr Duncan, you expressed the opinion at the June 1992
Mr Miegoch had a significant cognitive impairment. What in your opinion does that mean in respect of his testamentary capacity?
A. That I - in the few days after I'd seen him, I don't think they would have changed significantly unless he did have a significant pneumonia by that stage, and I cannot rule that out, unfortunately - I shouldn't say unfortunately, I can't rule that out."; Transcript 30 October 1995 at 16.

Finally, in further cross-examination (at 17), the following question and answer ensued: "Q. You conclude in your report, that is Exhibit 19, by using the introductory words 'I feel it's highly likely that he retained testamentary capacity on 30 June '?
A. Hmm 
Q. I want to put to you that notwithstanding that is your opinion, that your opinion is not correct? 
A. It's possible.
I come now to the evidence of other witnesses. I refer here first to the evidence from the witnesses for the Defendant. Leakadia Pieculewicz ("Mrs
Pieculewicz") was a long-time friend of the Deceased and also of his former wife, Janina
Miegoch. Mrs Pieculewicz had known the Deceased for about 40 years before his death and knew his former wife for about the same time.
She saw Janina Miegoch regularly.
After the Deceased was admitted to Concord Hospital she visited the
Deceased, according to her, on three or four occasions with Janina Miegoch and
Wladyslaw Buda, Mrs Pieculewicz's late de facto husband. Mrs Pieculewicz states that "during one visit to the hospital in my presence the Deceased said to Janina Miegoch words to the effect: 'I would like to make a will. I can give you $10,000 in the will. I want to make you the executor because I want to leave the rest to Janusz.'
Janina Miegoch then said to me words to the effect: 'Can you write it down, you write better than me'.

I then wrote in the Polish language what the Deceased had just said to Janina Miegoch and which I have deposed in the previous paragraph. I then read to the Deceased what I wrote. The
Deceased then said, "I'll sign it' and he signed it. The
Deceased then said better translate it in English'."; see paragraph 7 and 8 of Mrs Pieculewicz's affidavit of 17 November .
This conversation was said to have occurred in the sitting room attached to the Deceased's ward in the hospital in a conversation between the Deceased,
Janina Miegoch and Mrs Pieculewicz.
After that alleged conversation, Janina Miegoch and Mrs Pieculewicz went to see Mr Levy, a solicitor. Evidence was given that Mr Levy had done legal work for both Janina Miegoch (though it was unclear what that work consisted of) and apparently a will for Mrs Pieculewicz. He was thus not a solicitor without prior professional connection to Janina Miegoch, who stood to benefit in the amount of $10,000 under the 1992 Will. Mrs Pieculewicz gave evidence at paragraph of her affidavit, as follows: "I said to Mr Levy words to the effect: our friend Mr Miegoch, is in hospital. He wants to make a will. I have written what he wants out on a piece of paper. Can you listen to what I have written'.

I then said.- 'He wants to leave everything to his nephew Mr
Janusz Szanser, except for $10,000 to his former wife, Janina
Miegoch.
He also wants Janina to be the executor.' 
I then said 'Can you prepare a will and go to Concord Hospital so that Mr Miegoch can execute it?' 
Mr Levy said: 'Yes' 
After that conversation I threw away the piece of paper." 
The piece of paper is evidently that which had been earlier deposed to in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the affidavit which I have quoted.
Mr Levy in his affidavit of 23 November 1994 attests to having received those instructions though interestingly enough in paragraph 3 of his affidavit, while mentioning the proposed $10,000 gift to Janina Miegoch, he makes no mention of Janina Miegoch being the executor (though this was not a matter raised with him in cross-examination).
Janina Miegoch at paragraph 10 of her affidavit of 17 November 1994 states: "During one visit in the hospital the Deceased said to me words in the effect.
 'I have to do something about my will so that Janusz is not prejudiced ' 
I said. 'I know a solicitor, he may make a will for you.

The Deceased then said.
'Ask him to come'.

I said. 'I will call him and ask whether he can come'.

The Deceased then said. 'In my will I want to give you $10,000 and the rest to Janusz. I want you to be the executor. ' 
She said that she then said to Mrs Pieculewicz, 'Can you write it down'."
Janina Miegoch then telephoned Mr Levy taking the initiative herself and asked for the appointment to be made. There is no suggestion that Janina
Miegoch in any way consulted the Deceased's de facto wife Tamara Redroff.
The next event was Mr Levy's visit to the hospital on 24 June where Mrs
Pieculewicz and Janina Miegoch were present with the Deceased.
Their evidence differs as to whether the Deceased was asleep; Mr Levy said he was, whilst Mrs
Pieculewicz and Janina Miegoch said he was not. It is conceivable that he was partly asleep and partly awake. What is significant is that Mr Levy gives evidence at paragraph of his affidavit of 23 November 1994 that: "I spoke to a doctor whom I met there and asked him words to the effect: 'Do you think that Mr Miegoch is mentally capable of making a will?' 
The doctor answered words to the effect: 'I really cannot tell you. You really should speak to Dr
Duncan'.

As Mr Miegoch remained asleep I left the hospital without talking to Dr Duncan. I said to Mrs Pjeculewicz: 'Can you ring me when he is ready to sign'?
The next event was on June 1992 when Mrs Pieculewicz called Mr Levy and said words to the effect: 'Mr Miegoch is now back at home and wants to sign a will, can you come?' 
Mr Levy said: 'I made an appointment for 1.30 pm on 30 June.'; see paragraph 5 of his affidavit of 23 November 1994.
When Mr Levy arrived about half an hour later at about 2pm on 30 June, he states that Mr Miegoch was sitting at a table in the dining room. He said, "He was dressed in casual clothes and speaking normally. Also present was a woman who I understood to be Mrs Janina Miegoch,
Mrs Pieculewicz and Mr Buda."; see paragraph 6 of Mr Levy's affidavit of 23 November 1994.
I should add that it was on or about 29 June 1992 that the Deceased had discharged himself from hospital and Janina Miegoch states in her affidavit that "Tamara Redroff, the Deceased's wife, telephoned me and said words to the effect: 'Stefan has come home from the hospital to
Granville'."; see paragraph 16 of Janina Miegoch's affidavit of November .

She says at paragraph 17: "A short time later the Deceased telephoned me and said.- 'I'm now at home can you come
I want to give you some money for
Janusz'."
Significantly, the Deceased here makes no mention of signing a will or indeed giving money for his nephew via a will. However, it is clear enough that Mrs Pieculewicz and Janina Miegoch took it upon themselves to follow through with Mr Levy in finalising the will and arranging its execution, without mentioning any of this to the Deceased's de facto wife. It is true they were doing this, following the earlier events in which they participated at Concord. Nonetheless this initiative was not at the Deceased's behest after he returned home.
There is some discrepancy in the evidence as to whether
Tamara Redroff was then at Granville when Mrs Pieculewicz and Mr Buda and Janina Miegoch arrived at the Deceased's home in Granville.
According to Tamara Redroff, she was at home upon the visitor's arrival but went to the kitchen to make some tea. Whereas, Mrs Pieculewicz and Janina Miegoch say she was out shopping though came back after the Will had been signed. They both agree that the Will was signed in the absence of Tamara Redroff, either while she was out shopping or when she was in the kitchen preparing afternoon tea. The accounts are consistent in at least one respect, namely, that there was no suggestion that any warning was given to Tamara Redroff of any proposal for a will to be signed by the Deceased. Furthermore, it is clear and, I consider, significant that the will was signed in her absence, when it need not have been, if they had waited for her to return. This is more especially so, if they merely waited till she was out of the room, as that suggests active concealment.
Tamara Redroff states at paragraph 13 of her affidavit dated "31 (sic)
September 1994" that: "The Deceased was not feeling very well that day. When the visitors arrived the Deceased was sleeping at the table.

She then states: "When I returned with the tea, I saw Stefan with his head on the table, holding a pen and signing something. When I asked him what it was that he was signing he replied 'I don't know'. I then said: 'Why are you signing it' and he replied 'Because they asked me to'." 
At paragraph 15 of her affidavit she says: "I became upset and told everyone to leave. The Deceased was unable to stand and he collapsed on to the floor. I pulled the
Deceased to bed and lifted him on to it. Next day the Deceased collapsed again and when I became unable to lift him I called an ambulance."
I should add that I found Tamara Redroff an impressive witness whose principal concern was her husband's health and who was quite obviously totally surprised at the Will having been made at all.
Reverting now to Mr Levy's account of the signing, he said, at paragraph of his affidavit of 23 November 1994: "I gave the draft will to Mrs Pieculewicz who read the will to
Mr Miegoch in English I then said 'Please now read the will to
Mr Miegoch in the Polish language'.

Mrs Pieculewicz read the will in another language which I believe was Polish."
He gave as his impression that the Deceased understood the will as he was saying from time to time words to the effect 'Yes, yes, yes'.
He then states at paragraph 8: "After Mrs Pieculewicz completed translating the will I said to
Mr Miegoch: Did you understand everything?' He answered. 'Yes'.

I then said 'Do you want to sign this will?' 
He replied. 'Yes'." 
He then says at paragraph 9 of his affidavit: "I was not concerned on that day to ascertain whether Mr Miegoch had the capacity to make a will. I'd spoken to Dr Duncan at
Concord Hospital about
Mr Miegoch the day before. I observed that Mr Miegoch spoke in a strong voice."
This evidence is thus hardly an independent confirmation of any weight as to the Deceased's state of mind or testamentary capacity when he signed the
Will on 30 June 1992.
Mrs Pieculewicz and Janina Miegoch gave evidence to similar effect, namely that the Deceased first sought to arrange through
Mrs Miegoch for money to go to his nephew, Janusz Szanser, and then according to each of them,
Janina Miegoch told the Deceased that the solicitor had called and said that the will was ready and asked, "Do you want him to come so that you can sign it" (Mrs Pieculewicz' affidavit of 17 November 1994, paragraph 19). Janina
Miegoch said that the Deceased said: "Call the solicitor and ask him to come.
I want to make this will"; see affidavit of 17 November 1994, paragraph 21.
Mrs Pieculewicz at paragraph 22 of her affidavit, has the following: "Mr Levy had the will with him.? (sic) He then read the will in
English. Mr Levy then said to the Deceased.
'Do you understand? ' 
The Deceased said 'Yes'. Mr Levy then said: "I think it's better if you have it translated,.
 
Mr Levy then said to me: 'Can you translate what's written'. I said, 'Yes'.

I then translated the will from English into
Polish. After I read each sentence in Polish I said to Stefan words to the effect: 'Do you understand?' Stefan then answered on each occasion: 'Yes'." see paragraphs 22 and 23 of affidavit dated November 1994.
Interestingly, Janina Miegoch said that she did not recall whether Mr
Levy or Mrs Pieculewicz read the will in English. Thereafter she gives a virtually identical account. it will be seen that the evidence is strikingly similar which may indicate either that they both had witnessed the same events and correctly recorded them or that there was a degree of reconstruction after the event. However, that last was not put in cross-examination in any direct way though each of the witnesses were examined closely. My impression of the witnesses was that Mrs
Pieculewicz tried to answer honestly but did not have a detailed recollection of events though clearly had some very general recollection.
Her understanding was not particularly sophisticated. Janina
Miegoch was nervous and fairly defensive in her answers and her answers were inhibited by her limited English, though she understood English well enough to understand the questions.
I have earlier referred to Tamara Redroff's evidence. I am satisfied that she answered with an honest and clear recollection of events and in a way that suggested that her primary concern was her de facto husband's well-being rather than any interest in her own material welfare from the will.
There is a clear discrepancy in the evidence as to the state the Deceased was in on 30 June 1992. I prefer
Tamara Redroff's account as indicating a man seriously ill on that day and who collapsed as soon as everyone left. The
Deceased was only out of hospital from the day before, having discharged himself Next day he had to be taken by ambulance to Westmead. Once there it was clear he had a severe pneumonia. Thus the Westmead Discharge Summary states, "Admitted with fever and acute delerium" (see
PX14 and Discharge
Summary dated 14 July 1992). The same Discharge Summary states "Cognitive testing reveals significant impairment.
Insight short term memory. Continuous chloroform movement noted consistent with that of Huntington's chorea. After discussion with de facto suggest placement in Leura where they are capable to manage his aggressive behaviour".
On 14 July he then went to the Ritz Nursing Home at Leura where he came under the care of Dr MacDougall who gives a report as document G in PX14.
Dr
MacDougall was a General Practitioner who managed on average some 3045 patients at the Ritz Nursing Home. He is a highly experienced
GP who in his practising experience since 1965 had geriatric patients forming a large proportion of his practice - at least a third to forty per cent; Transcript 22
November 1995 at 1. There is in the Westmead Hospital Notes of 2 July a reference to an oxygen concentration of 56 to which Dr MacDougall's attention was directed; Transcript 22 November 1995 at 3. There followed the following: "...
Q. Dr Duncan made reference to an oxygen concentration of , the fact he was hypoxic lacking in oxygen. Do you have any comment to make on that?
A. The concentration of 56 is very low, it is normally 95-plus.
So that would mean the cause was the pneumonia, I presume, that for it to be down to 56 at that time, would mean that his whole system, his brain, would be severely depleted of oxygen, thereby sectioning well below normal. That is the situation which would come on I believe, over some time to get to there.

Q. When you say 'over some time', are we talking about hours or days?
A. I think days.
 
Q. Therefore, this recording I think was at 1655 hours and we know that a will was executed at approximately 48 hours beforehand. Would there have been some significant oxygen deficiency 48 hours before this reading?
A. I believe that is very likely and I talk from my wide experience of older people, demented or dementing people getting influenza or pneumonia and often dying from that or recovering from it and the time frame that there is usually shown is if they progress to pneumonia, it takes only days of unwellness and delirium and fever beforehand.

Q. Could this go beyond a week, up to two weeks, or would it be less than a week?
A. Oh I think three, four, five days would be the outside time, in my experience." see
Dr MacDougall's evidence, Transcript 22
November 1995 at 3.
While Dr Duncan was not able from his standpoint as a psychiatrist to indicate when the pneumonia had its first onset, I observe from the Concord
Hospital medical notes and in particular the report of the Intern Dr Chia of June 1992 that the following appears: "Imp: possible viral infection.

Need to exclude PN ( swallowing difficulties)" 
I consider "PN" can be taken to refer to pneumonia, as a reasonable surmise.
I consider that this is significant in that, although no evidence was obtained from the Intern Dr Chia, and although Dr Duncan's attention was not specifically drawn to this note, it does given independent confirmation of a real possibility that pneumonia had already set in as of 24 June
Dr
Duncan himself acknowledged, in giving his opinion as to testamentary capacity, that if the Deceased had significant pneumonia by the stage he did the will - and that he could not rule that out - that this could effect his opinion; see Transcript 30 October at 16.
Dr MacDougall in cross-examination was asked a series of questions regarding the significance of the reading of
He explained that the number meant a serious lack of oxygen in the bloodstream which could be assumed to be from pneumonia in this context and that the rate of drop to that level would be gradual (Transcript 22 November 1995 at 10). He confirmed that this was consistent with the onset of pneumonia being possibly as early as 24 June 1992 and having a deleterious effect on testamentary capacity along with the other aspects of cognitive impairment earlier mentioned.
Dr MacDougall in his report of 10 April 1994 (PX 14) concluded, though without the benefit of observation prior to 14 July 1992, that "I think it is reasonable to conclude that he did not possess the required testamentary capacity eighteen days before his death." 
The Deceased died on 18 July .
 
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
These were not in dispute. I set out below a summation of these principles. 
Onus in relation to a will's validity.
The onus of proving that a document is the intended last will of a free and capable testator lies on the party propounding it. If this onus is not satisfied, the Court is bound to pronounce against the document: Re Hodges;
Shorter v. Hodges [(1988) 14 NSWLR 698]; Bull v. Fulton [(1942) 66 CLR .] Though that legal onus remains on the party propounding the will, an evidentiary onus may fall on the party disputing the will by reason of the prima facie presumptions arising from proof of due execution of a will rational upon its face (see 3, 6, 7 and 8 below).
It is in that sense only that the onus may be said to shift. 
Testamentary capacity
It is essential that the Deceased's sound dispositive mind, memory and understanding, in the sense of testamentary capacity, be established, before a testamentary document is admitted to probate. The classic test from the nineteenth century of whether or not a person possesses such testamentary capacity is found in the judgment of Cockburn CJ in the leading case of Banks v. Goodfellow [(1870) LR 5 QB 549] at 565: "It is essential to the exercise of such a (testamentary) power that a testator shall understand the nature of the act, and its effects; shall understand the extent of the property of which he is disposing; shall be able to comprehend and appreciate the claims to which he ought to give effect; and with a view to the latter object, that no disorder of the mind shall poison his affections, pervert his sense of right, or prevent the exercise of his natural faculties - that no insane delusion shall influence his will in disposing of his property and bring about a disposal of it which, if the mind had been sound, would not have been made."
A duly executed will, rational on its face, is presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to be that of a person of competent understanding: Symes v. Green (1859) 1 Sw and Tr 401; Sutten v. Saddler <case>; [(1857) CB (NS) 87.] Thus proof that a will, rational on its face, was validly executed is prima, facie evidence of testamentary capacity. Thus, in effect, such presumption places an evidentiary onus upon the person disputing the will to adduce evidence raising doubts as to the Deceased's competency: For a striking example see Easier versus Griffiths and Ors (Santow J, Supreme Court of
NSW, 17 June 1994, unreported, affirmed
New South Wales Court of Appeal, 7
June 1995, unreported). Where the evidence as a whole is sufficient to throw doubt upon the Deceased's competency, then the Court must decide against the validity of the will unless it is satisfied affirmatively upon the evidence as a whole that the Deceased was of sound mind, memory and understanding when he or she executed it: Bull v. Fulton <case>; [(1942) 66 CLR 295] at 343.
Generally the relevant time for determining testamentary capacity is the time of execution of the purported will.
However, where instructions for a will are given on a day antecedent to its execution, the former may in appropriate circumstances be the critical date: Kenny v. Wilson <case>; [(1911) 11
SR 460]; Bailey v. Bailey (supra);
Re Crooks; Akerman v. Brown (Supreme Court of NSW, Young J, 14 December 1994,
Unreported). 
Unsoundness of mind may be occasioned by physical infirmity or advancing years. However, while extreme age or illness will call for vigilant scrutiny by the Court, neither is of itself conclusive evidence of lack of testamentary capacity. Extreme age or grave illness, or alcoholism (Timbury versus Coffee <case>; [(1941) CLR 277)], provides evidence of lack of testamentary capacity but will only displace a prima facie case of testamentary capacity if there is evidence the
Deceased's mental facilities had been so affected thereby as to make him or her unequal to the task of disposing of his or her property. That is, the decay of intelligence must have been to such an extent that the proposed testator did not appreciate the testamentary act in all its different bearings: Re Hodges at 707- Battan Singh v. Amirchand [(1948) AC 161]; Banks versus Goodfellow (supra); Public Trustee v
Farrell, Estate of Fawler (Powell J, Supreme Court of NSW, 22 March 1989, unreported).
If a testamentary instrument is to constitute the last will and testament of its maker, the Court must be satisfied that maker knew of its contents and approved of their purport at the time of execution. The onus lies on the party propounding the document to show that it was the subject of the testator's knowledge and approval. However, unless suspicion attaches to the document propounded, the testator's due execution of it is sufficient evidence of his or her knowledge and approval: Re Hodges (supra); Guardhouse v.
Blackburn
LR 1 P and D 109. 
Where facts are proved which raise a suspicion that the will does not express the intention of the Deceased, knowledge and approval will not be presumed from the fact of due execution. Rather the propounder of the win has the burden of removing the suspicion by proving affirmatively that the
Deceased knew and approved of the contents of the document.
Some only of the circumstances which may cause suspicion to attach to a document include, relevantly: 
The circumstance that the person who prepared, or procured the execution of, the document receives a benefit under it is one which should generally arouse suspicion and call for vigilant examination of the evidence as to the
Deceased's appreciation and approval of the contents of the will: Re Hodges at ; Barry v. Buthn <case>; [(1838) 12 ER 1089-], Anastasia Pates versus Diane
Craig and the Public Trustee, Estate of the late Joyce Jean Cole (Santow J, 28
August 1995, unreported).

Where the alleged testator was enfeebled, illiterate or blind when he executed the document, it must be shown by affidavit that the will was read over to the Deceased before its execution, or that the Deceased otherwise was aware of the contents of the testamentary document: Tyrrell v. Painton [(1894)
P 151] 
The exclusion of persons naturally having a claim on the testator's bounty; Banks versus Goodfellow. However, it is appropriate to record that, in the speech of Erskine J, when delivering the advice of the Judicial Committee in
Harwood versus Baker the following passage appears (3 Mod PC 282 at 291; 13 ER at ):- "... the question which their Lordships propose to decide in this case is, not whether Mr Baker knew, when he executed his will, that he was giving all his property to his wife, and excluding all his other relations from any share in it, but whether he was at that time capable of recollecting who those relations were, of understanding their respective claims upon his regard and bounty, and of deliberately forming an intelligent purpose of excluding them from any share of his property.

If he had not the capacity required, the propriety of the disposition made by the will is of no importance. If he had it, the injustice of the exclusion would not affect the validity of the disposition, though the justice or injustice of the disposition might cast down some light upon the question as to his capacity." extreme age or grave sickness; see 5 above. 
Where there is no question of fraud, the fact that a will has been read over to or by a capable testator affords a strong presumption that he or she knew and approved of its contents: Re Hodges at 705; Guardhouse v. Blackburn
LR 1 P and D 109; Fulton v. Andrew [(1875) LR 7 HL 448] 
APPLICATION OF LEGAL PRINCIPLES TO QUESTIONS RAISED UNDER "ESSENTIAL ISSUES"
The Plaintiff accepts that the 1992 Will was duly executed and rational on its face. The evidentiary onus thus shifts to the Plaintiff, as the party disputing the Will, to adduce evidence raising doubts as the Deceased's competency. Does the evidence raise sufficient doubts concerning the
Deceased's competency that the evidentiary onus reverts to Defendants, as proponents of the Will? That onus is then to satisfy the Court affirmatively, upon the evidence as a whole, that the Deceased was of sound mind, memory and understanding, knowing and approving the contents of the document.
I turn now to the factors relied upon by the Plaintiff as raising, cumulatively, sufficient doubt concerning the Deceased's competency for the evidentiary onus thus to revert. They are as follows: 
That the person who has prepared or procured the execution of the document receives a benefit under it. 
The exclusion of persons naturally having a claim on the testator's bounty. 
The extreme age or grave sickness of the testator and, in that context, the testator's mental deterioration.
I take each of these factors in turn, starting with the first factor and dealing also with the way the will's execution came about.
 
The First Factor - Person preparing or procuring Will receives benefit under it.
It is clear that the person who procured the will was Janina Miegoch. She thereby benefits, for the first time, in the amount of $10,000. She claims that it was the Deceased who initiated the process; see paragraph 10 of her affidavit of 17 November 1994 earlier quoted. However, Janina Miegoch in her own evidence said that she knew a solicitor and thus suggested Mr Levy, whom she contacted, arranging for him to visit the hospital on June 1992. Mr
Levy had done legal work for Janina Miegoch though it is unclear what the work consisted of and apparently also had done a will for Mrs Pieculewicz. While there is no suggestion of any impropriety on Mr Levy's part, he could not be described as a solicitor independent of the party who procured the execution of the 1992 Will.
Mrs Pieculewicz gave evidence that the
Deceased had said to Janina
Miegoch words to the effect: "I would like to make a will. I can give you $10,000 in the will.
I want to make you the executor because I want to leave the rest to Janusz".
The evidence goes on to describe the Deceased as having supposedly written down his intentions in that regard in Polish.
What is clear from the evidence is that Janina
Miegoch and Mrs
Pieculewicz together went to see Mr Levy to arrange the will, without telling the de facto wife.
There is no explanation for why the Deceased would have wanted to leave everything to his nephew, Mr Szanser, except for $10,000 to his former wife,
Janina Miegoch, and appoint her executor, completely omitting the de facto wife with whom he had lived since 1960 - thirty-two years compared to his earlier marriage to Janina Miegoch from 1948 to their separation in 1956 many years earlier. Nor is there any explanation for the omission of Nieves
Redroff, his former executrix and also a principal beneficiary of the 1988
Will.
The final event in the procurement of the will was on 30 June 1992 when
Mrs Pieculewicz called Mr Levy to arrange for Mr Levy to sign a will in the foregoing terms, unprompted by any request from the deceased since he had returned home.
Finally, it is significant that not only was Tamara Redroff never told of the proposal for a new will, but the will was signed in her absence, whether because she was temporarily in the kitchen, as she says, or whether she was out shopping. This is in itself a circumstances which, taken with the other circumstances, points to a suspicious secrecy in the whole process. It was one in which the person who was closest to the Deceased was kept in the dark about what was going on, and who moreover was excluded from any benefit under the Will in comparison to her position under the 1988 Will. That is relevant also to the next factor.
Mr Levy, in his affidavit of November 1994 states: "I was not concerned on that day to ascertain whether Mr Miegoch had the capacity to make a Will.
I had spoken to Dr Duncan at
Concord Hospital about Mr Miegoch the day before. I observed that Mr Miegoch spoke in a strong voice."
It should be emphasised that according to Mr Levy's evidence, when he went to the hospital on 24 June 1992 he found
Mr Miegoch asleep so he claimed no capacity from that meeting to assess his testamentary capacity. Finally, it should be noted that
Mr Levy instead of asking the Deceased what he wanted to write into the new will, or asking the kind of questions which would have demonstrated one way or the other whether the Deceased was aware of the natural objects of his bounty, or of his assets available for disposition, simply read the will in English to the Deceased. He then relied on Mrs
Pieculewicz's reading of the will in another language which he believed was
Polish. He noted in his affidavit of 23 November 1994 (paragraph 7) that: "I had the impression that he understood the will as he was saying from time to time words to the effect: "yes, yes, yes";
In the case of Anastasia
Pates versus Diane Craig and the Public Trustee,
Estate of the late Joyce Jean Cole (supra) at 38 I set out what I consider to be the appropriate course and duty for a solicitor taking instructions from an obviously enfeebled testator where capacity is potentially in doubt; that is that there is a duty to take particular care to gain reasonable assurance as to the testamentary capacity of the testator. Without criticising Mr Levy, who simply relied on Dr Duncan, I should point out that the precautions which I quote below were clearly not taken by Mr Levy on his own account. "There is an additional consideration, not dependent of the question of conflict of interest. That is, the duty of the solicitor taking instructions from an obviously enfeebled testator, where capacity is potentially in doubt, to take particular care to gain reasonable assurance as to the testamentary capacity of the testator. It is clearly undesirable to attempt to lay down precise and specific rules as to what that necessarily entails for every case. Such rules may lead to a perfunctory, mechanical check list approach. What should be done in each case will depend on the apparent state of the testator at the time and other relevant surrounding circumstances. Any suggestion that someone, potentially interested, has instigated the will, whether or not a client of the will draftsperson, should particularly place the solicitor concerned on the alert. At the least, a solicitor should ask the kind of questions designed to probe the testator's understanding of the basic matters which connote testamentary capacity, as earlier set out; Banks versus Goodfellow . For this purpose, and subject to the earlier caveat concerning check lists, the advice concerning the taking of instructions, contained in
Mason and Handier Wills Probate and Administration Service
New South Wales (Butterworths) at (10,019), is a useful guide:- '(10,019) Taking instructions - issues of testamentary capacity 
If any doubts do arise as to the testator's capacity the following procedures on the taking of instructions will assist significantly in the avoidance of potential problems for the estate as well as for the solicitor in the discharge of his duties: the solicitor who is to draw the will should attend on the testator personally and fully question the testator to determine capacity - the questions should be directed to ascertain whether the testator understands that he is making a will and its effect, the extent of the property of which he is raising and the claims to which he ought to give effect; one or more persons should be present, selected by the solicitor having regard to their calibre as witnesses if required to testy where the issue of capacity is raised.
Where possible one of the witnesses should be a medical practitioner, preferably the doctor who has been treating the testator and is familiar with him, who should in making a thorough examination of the testator's condition question him in detail and advise the solicitor as to the capacity and understanding of the testator. The presence of other persons at this time would require the testator's consent; a detailed written record should be made by the solicitor, the results of the examination recorded by the medical practitioner and notes made by those present.

If after careful consideration of all the circumstances the solicitor is not satisfied that the testator does not have testamentary capacity he should proceed and prepare the will.
It is a good general practice for the solicitor who took instructions to draw the will and be present on execution and this practice should not be departed from in these circumstances. On execution the attesting witnesses should where possible, come from those persons (including the solicitor) referred to above who were present at the time of instructions and, again as at every stage, detailed notes of the events and discussions taken.

If those questions and the answers to them, leave the solicitor in real doubt as to what should be done, other steps may be desirable. This may include obtaining a more thorough medical appraisal or, if the testator declines, considering whether the will can be properly drawn, should assurance on testamentary capacity fail to satisfy the test just quoted
I also reiterate the comments I make in Anastasia
Pates versus Diane Craig and the Public Trustee, Estate of the late Joyce Jean Cole (supra) at pages 36 to concerning the role of the solicitor acting for more than one party to the transaction where there is a likelihood of a real conflict of interest between the parties and the precautions to be taken particularly where there is reason to fear lack of capacity. The circumstances concerning
Mr Levy were different from that in Pates, in that it does not appear from the evidence that Janina
Miegoch was a regular client of Mr Levy as distinct from having done some work with him in the past and she was not a principal beneficiary. Nonetheless, and without criticising Mr Levy, the risks inherent in a situation of this kind, in not obtaining truly independent advice, should not be overlooked.
 
The Second Factor - Exclusion of natural claimants on the testator's bounty.
I now turn to the second factor relied upon as giving rise to suspicion, namely the exclusion of persons naturally having a claim on the testator's bounty.
 .
I have earlier commented on the fact that the Deceased changed executors from Tamara Redroff to Janina Miegoch. The only suggestion in the evidence for that having been done, was that money was to be given to Mr Szanser though that hardly seems a convincing reason given that Mr Szanser was also a beneficiary albeit in the smaller amount under the 1988 Will. I mention this not of course to suggest that a change of executor directly bears upon the exclusion of persons naturally having a claim on the testator's bounty, but rather as part of the factual matrix against which any suspicion that the testator was not competent should be assessed.
To this circumstances is to be added the fact that Tamara Redroff was omitted altogether from the 1992 Will, whereas in the 1988 Will she received the equivalent of $150,000 approximately. This occurs in a context where, for no apparent reason, his former wife from whom he was separated since 1956 and divorced since 1959 receives $10,000; true it was that she remained on friendly terms with the Deceased but that is hardly to suggest that she had displaced the de facto wife in the Deceased's affections.
The Defendants attempt to justify this as an explicable and indeed rational disposition. They do this by pointing out that the Deceased had given
Tamara
Redroff a half interest in their property at Granville worth approximately $82,500 plus a cash gift of $52,697.87 giving her a total of $135,197.87. Thus it is suggested that these gifts made in the Deceased's lifetime explain the likely reason for exclusion of
Tamara Redroff from the Will.
This proposition still assumes that the Deceased actually intended to treat his wife less generously in the 1992 Will than a long divorced former wife, albeit one who remained on friendly terms. It also assumes that the
Deceased intended to treat his de facto wife less generously than the nephew
Mr Szanser. It will be recalled that under the 1988
Will, Janusz Szanser received, what can be inferred to be about $28,000, whilst under the 1992 Will he receives, for no apparent reason, $124,500 approximately; that is to say, he receives four times as much. That same nephew has in the meantime received $20,100 approximately in transfers. These started in 1973 and continued until
August 1992, so that he had already received the bulk of these by the time of the 1988 Will.
There is thus no apparent reason why such a substantial increase in benefaction should be given to the nephew nor why not only is the de facto wife of 35 years omitted but also Nieves Redroff. It will be recalled that under the , Will, Nieves Redroff was not only executrix but also the beneficiary in an amount of approximately $112,000. The only explanation that is given by the Defendants is that Nieves Redroff, as the daughter-in-law of
Tamara Redroff, was not a natural testamentary object of the Deceased and that by June 1992 Nieves Redroff's husband, Tamara Redroff's son, had died; see the affidavit of Janina
Miegoch at paragraph 9 and the English translation of the letter of 17 March 1992. As against that, it should be remembered that he did not have children and the overseas nephew could hardly have a higher claim to his bounty. But in any event there is just simply no evidence that the testator did not regard Nieves Redroff as a natural object of his bounty nor any evidence that Mr Levy questioned the Deceased at the time the instructions for the 1992 Will were taken as to whether he would was at the time capable of recollecting who the persons were with claims on his bounty and his capacity "of understanding their respective claims upon his regard and bounty, and of deliberately forming an intelligent purpose of excluding them from any share of his bounty"; Harwood versus Baker (supra). Even
Dr Duncan failed to learn of
Nieves Redroff as such a claimant on his bounty.
There is thus a lack of the kind of evidence that would give reassurance that the Deceased was able to comprehend and appreciate the claims to which he ought to give effect, measuring those claims by reference not only to those obviously related to him, like his de facto wife, but also the person who had been close enough to him to be chosen as his executrix in 1988 and who clearly was very close to his de facto wife. There is furthermore no suggestion of any rupture in the relationship between Nieves Redroff and the Deceased. Indeed to the contrary, she continued to remain in contact until his death, visiting him regularly; see affidavit of Nieves Redroff of 14 September 1994. At paragraph she says, "However, the Deceased was always very good with me."
I do not disregard the evidence that in May of 1992, the
Deceased expressed an intention to Mr Szanser to leave him one-half of the house; see
Mr Szanser's affidavit of 30 November 1994, paragraph 7 and JS8 being the letter in which this is said. That may indicate that the Deceased had in fact formed an intention to increase the amount given to Mr Szanser as he did. But it is equally consistent with the Deceased having an inability properly to comprehend and appreciate the claims to which he ought to give effect.
 
The Third Factor - Extreme age or sickness.
I turn now to the concluding factor said to give rise to doubt as to testamentary capacity, namely the extreme age or sickness of the testator.
At the time these events concerning the Deceased's will took place, he was 82 and seriously ill, dying eighteen days after he had made the will, or, if the relevant date by the date instructions were given, dying some twenty-five days after the instructions were taken. Indeed the instructions were not taken by Mr Levy but by Janina Miegoch and Mrs Pieculewicz and were conveyed by Mrs
Pieculewicz to Mr Levy. Instructions thus obtained second-hand were given to Mr Levy, according to his affidavit, on or about 24
June 1992.
It appears that those instructions were within one or two days of an alleged conversation with the Deceased to that effect at Concord Hospital. I mention this because of the principle that whilst the relevant time for determining testamentary capacity is the time of execution of the purported will, where instructions for a will are given on a day antecedent to its execution the former may, in appropriate circumstances, be the critical date; see authorities cited earlier. Are these such appropriate circumstances?
Here, in the circumstances, where the interval between the time the instructions were allegedly given and the time the will was made, was a relatively short one, and bearing in mind that the instructions were not given directly by the Deceased, in my judgment it is inappropriate to take the date of the alleged instructions as being the relevant time for determining testamentary capacity.
However, even were that earlier date taken, I consider that the result may not alter.
Turning to the medical evidence, I deal first with Dr Duncan. He was a psychiatrist who gave evidence of his having seen the Deceased, principally on June 1992.
(In DX19 he states: I saw him very briefly on 19 June 1992 but he was uncooperative and I cannot comment on his testamentary capacity").
It appears that the Deceased was able to talk a little English and Mr
Buda was present, though it appears that Dr Duncan was not one hundred per cent happy about using the friend to translate; see Transcript 30 October 1995 at 4. However, I do not think the absence of an official Polish translator should, of itself, detract from Dr Duncan's assessment.
I have earlier quoted from Dr Duncan's contemporaneous notes, which appear in his report of 19 October 1993 being DXI 9. Dr Duncan relied upon the fact that the Deceased had been able to describe his assets as "half a house and a bank account with $36,000 in if, and was able to describe his "benefactors" (meaning prospective beneficiaries) as "a current de facto, former wife and a nephew in Poland"). As I have said, significantly no mention is made of a principal beneficiary of the 1988 Will, Nieves Redroff. Dr Duncan concluded "If I can't get an interpreter, I feel on what I established to-day that he probably does have testamentary capacity'.
Dr Duncan was aware of an earlier assessment done by Dr Burley on 16 and June 1994, Dr Duncan saying: "My feeling is that Dr Burley's assessment done with a trained
Polish interpreter is possibly the most objective assessment we have."
It should be noted that
Dr Burley's assessment read as follows: "Suggest - application to Guardianship Board (patient is not mentally ill under
Mental Health Act but possibly does satisfy
GB criteria), - consider sedation to control outbursts ..."
Dr Duncan having looked at the notes of Dr Burley of 17 June 1994 expressed the view (Transcript 30 October 1995 at 5) "He clearly had some mild degree of cognitive impairment, largely in the areas of judgment and personality charge, but he wasn't markedly impaired "
Dr Duncan was of the view that the Huntington's Chorea and associated cognitive impairment would not have worsened in the six days from 24 until 30
June 1992 because the disease was "a very slowly progressive condition".
However, he did acknowledge that his assessment was subject to whether "he did have a significant pneumonia by that stage, and I can't rule that out, unfortunately...";
Transcript 30 October 1995 at 16.
Dr Duncan had readily acknowledged that he was not in a position as a psychiatrist to assess whether as of 30 June 1992 the Deceased developed the severe pneumonia that was noted on his admission at Westmead on 1 July 1992.
However, Dr MacDougall, a highly experienced GP, with geriatric patients in particular, emphasised the reduced oxygen concentration of 56 which appeared in the Westmead Hospital notes of 2 July 1992. This very low figure compared to a normal 95+ was said by Dr
MacDougall as meaning "that his whole system, his brain, would be severely depleted of oxygen, thereby functioning well below normal"; see Transcript 22 November 1995 at 3.
Associated with that evidence is Dr Chia's medical notes from Concord
Hospital of 24
June 1992 to which I have earlier referred which suggests that
Concord Hospital were aware of a possible viral infection and the need to exclude pneumonia as of 24 June 1992.
It follows that even at 24 June 1992 the Deceased may have had pneumonia and it is even more likely that he would have had it by 30 June 1992, with serious potential effect on an already impaired cognitive capacity.
Dr Duncan had acknowledged that if there were significant pneumonia by the stage he did the will, then this could effect his opinion; see Transcript October 1995 at 16. Dr MacDougall in cross-examination considered that pneumonia could have had its onset as early as 24 June 1992 and would have a deleterious effect on testamentary capacity, along with other aspects of cognitive impairment earlier mentioned. Dr MacDougall concludes that he did not possess the required testamentary capacity eighteen days before his death.
Indeed Dr Duncan states (Transcript 30 October 1995 at 8): "Q. With the onset of pneumonia, what effect might that have upon the person's cognitive capacity?
A. It is definitely not going to help on the whole a man who has a compromised brain anyway, he's highly likely to become delirious. In fact, I note at the top of that page that he had an oxygen concentration of 56 and he had therefore he was hypoxic. He didn't have enough oxygen to get into his brain and he would almost definitely be delirious and, as such, he'd be much more confused than when Id seen him previously." .
In summary, Dr Duncan acknowledged that the Deceased had significant cognitive impairment and that pneumonia, which could not be ruled out, would have a further adverse effect and thus affect his opinion that the Deceased did have testamentary capacity. In taking this evidence into account and comparing it to Dr MacDougall's assessment, there is significant doubt as to the Deceased's testamentary capacity either at 24 June 1992 or 30 June 1992 when he in fact made the will. I have earlier said that I prefer the view that the relevant time for determining testamentary capacity is 30 June 1992 and in taking that date, the doubts concerning testamentary capacity are clearly accentuated. Even taking the earlier date of 24 June 1992, I consider that the medical evidence casts significant doubt on testamentary capacity at that date.
 
The Cumulative Effect of the Doubts as to Testamentary Capacity
I do not consider that Mr Levy's superficial assessment of the Deceased could in any way overcome those doubts. And indeed referring to Dr Duncan's own appraisal, it appears that at least one of the natural objects of the
Deceased's bounty, namely his de facto wife's daughter-in-law being his executor and a principal beneficiary under the 1988 Win, was not considered at all.
I do not consider the evidence of Janina Miegoch and Mrs Pieculewicz adequately allays these doubts. Their evidence suffers from not being disinterested, even assuming in their favour that they were genuinely seeking to translate the testator's wishes into a will. Whether that assumption is too favourable having regard to the way in which Tamara Redroff was kept quite out of the will-making process is open to question. But I do not need to reach any conclusive view on that matter, since my conclusion as to their evidence would not change even making the more favourable assumption.
Accordingly, I conclude that taking the evidence as a whole it is sufficient to throw such doubt upon the Deceased's competency in relation to the 1992 Will that I should decide against the validity of that will. This is unless I am satisfied affirmatively upon the evidence as a whole that the
Deceased was of sound mind, memory and understanding when he executed it. I am not so satisfied and consider that the Defendants have not satisfied the necessary evidentiary onus in that regard.
 
ORDERS
It follows from my earlier conclusions, that the 1988 Will should be admitted to probate and the 1992 Will declared to be invalid.
Ordinarily in cases of this kind, costs would be payable out of the estate, though I give leave to the parties if they wish to address me on costs.
I direct the parties within fourteen days to submit orders giving effect to this Judgment.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/68.html  
