

V Collingwood versus R Scott Re Estate of B A Thompson [1996] NSWSC 295 (24
July 1996) 
VERNON COLLINGWOOD versus RITA SCOTT RE ESTATE OF BETTY AMELIA THOMPSON /95 
WEDNESDAY 24 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Betty Amelia Thompson died on 1 February 1994 aged seventy-three years. She had been married three times. The plaintiff is the son of the testatrix's first marriage. He was born in 1943 and so is now fifty-three years of age. He is divorced and currently has no dependent children. He has two children by his first marriage, a son aged thirty who is now suffering from AIDS, and a daughter aged twenty-eight.

The defendant was a child of the second marriage of the testatrix. She was born in 1949 and so is aged forty-seven. She has been twice divorced. She has four children aged between eighteen and twenty-three and she married for a third time last year to a Mr Cooper.

The testatrix's last will was made on 24 December 1992. The plaintiff was appointed executor, or failing him the defendant. The plaintiff renounced probate and probate was granted to the defendant on 14 October 1994. In the events which have happened the will gives the testatrix's shares in the AT & T Company to the plaintiff and the balance to the defendant. The AT & T shares are valued today at $13,317. A lot of the values in the evidence are given in US dollars. I have converted them for present purposes at the rate of the US dollar being worth $A1.29.

The plaintiff filed his summons on 31 January 1995. The summons came on for hearing before me on 26 June this year. The evidence at that time was quite unsatisfactory. This is for many reasons. First, both the plaintiff and the defendant's third husband had not completed their property claims in their latest divorces. Secondly, the plaintiff had not given very much evidence at all as to his needs, though some evidence was adduced in cross-examination.
Thirdly, the executors had not disclosed fully and fairly the assets of the estate and, fourthly, it was very difficult to believe much of the defendant's evidence.

The case ran on until after four o'clock in the afternoon and was then stood over to today on the basis that the parties might file further evidence.
Further evidence has been filed, which is not contested. It would now seem that the estate had a gross value of about $209,000, the Australian assets being worth about $102,500, the US assets $87,180 and there was a loan of $23,000 to the defendant which would have been forgiven by the appointment of her as executrix. That sum includes an income that may have been derived on the capital assets between the date of death and the present day.

I have been given no details of the estate expenses.

I have assumed, however, that the legal expenses in administering the estate are about $5,000 and that there were funeral expenses of about $3,500. Of these funeral expenses it would appear that the plaintiff has paid at least $1,500, but I do not need to take that into account as he is able to claim that as a debt from the estate. Accordingly, the gross estate for present purposes should be looked at as having a value of approximately $200,000.

The divorces of both the plaintiff and the defendant's third husband have now reached the stage where there has been a property settlement so that it is possible to be more precise as to their respective net worths as compared to this time last month.

So far as the plaintiff is concerned, it would seem that he owns a unit at
Miranda which was originally bought as an investment unit in the same estate as the unit where he and his ex-wife used to cohabit as their matrimonial home. The ex-wife took the matrimonial unit, the plaintiff the so-called investment unit which appears to have a value of $140,000. The evidence of its encumbrances is rather fuzzy, but it would seem that there is $40,000 owing on it. The plaintiff has superannuation valued at $146,000, which I assume means that provided that the plaintiff survives to the period when his superannuation is payable, he will receive that lump sum. He is employed as the national supply manager for a catering company on a remuneration package of $50,000 plus a car. His principal expenses are the payment of his mortgage and moneys that he may have to pay out for his sick son.

The defendant is now married to a headmaster of a State school. She herself is a school counsellor, at a gross salary of $42,436. She presently receives $15,000 a year maintenance from her former husband, but it is questionable as to how long this payment will be made to her. She has superannuation which, based on the same supposition as the plaintiff's superannuation, is worth $126,000. She has about $1,500 in the bank and she has other assets which have a value of about $15,000, though this includes assets which will not be available for a deferred period so one may have to, in fairness, take their present value.

The defendant owns her own home worth $250,000 with a mortgage of about $14,000. She has a 1994 model car worth about $20,000 and she lives with her husband. Her husband gave up his house at Belrose to his ex-wife, but has shares which would be worth in excess of $100,000 and retirement benefits of approximately $135,000. The defendant's husband earns $62,750 gross, so that the combined income of the defendant and her present husband is about $105,000 gross per year. They have no children under eighteen years, though there are three children who are wholly or partially dependent upon the defendant. One of these is a lady who is studying at Charles Sturt University, I am not told whether Bathurst or Wagga Wagga campus, but allegedly comes home Thursday to
Monday during university term time.

The plaintiff says that he has been left without proper support in all the circumstances and that it is appropriate that provision be made for him under the [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/). Mr
Dowdy of counsel for the defendant strongly submits that the plaintiff is not entitled to any provision at all. He says that the plaintiff's financial position is clearly superior to the financial position of most people in the community: that there is little evidence that the plaintiff is entitled to a better lifestyle than he has at the moment and that the defendant, rather than the plaintiff, was the person who suffered the great burden of caring for her mother in the last years of her mother's life. He says that the testatrix's estate was not large and she was entitled to leave her property the way she did.

Mr Insall of counsel for the plaintiff put that the situation when the testatrix made her will was that the plaintiff appeared to be securely married with a house and an investment unit, but the defendant was on her own, having been divorced from her second husband, with four dependent children. He says that it was quite understandable that a wise and just testatrix would in the circumstances have left her property to the defendant. However, he says that the court must consider what the wise and just testatrix would have done at the date when the matter comes before the court. At that date, he says, the positions were reversed. Not only have the defendant's children grown older and more likely to be able to support themselves in the next three or four years, but the defendant has married well, she and her husband have a gross income of over $100,000 a year, they have a house which has only a small mortgage, a late model car and, indeed, in the present circumstances are relatively wealthy people. The plaintiff, on the other hand, has a shattered marriage, he has to look after his son and he has reduced assets as a result of his marriage break-up.

Mr Insall says that had the testatrix been aware of those circumstances she would have made more provision for the plaintiff than she otherwise did.

That scenario did not impress itself on Mr Dowdy or his client who continued to assert that the plaintiff was, relatively speaking, better off than most members of the community and that no provision should be made for him.

It is quite obvious from the evidence that there is a degree of bitterness between the brother and sister involved in this case and that that bitterness makes it almost impossible for one or the other to see the other side of the picture. The bitterness, I think, reflects itself in the way that the defendant, although doubtless advised by her solicitor that she had to be fully truthful with the court and to divulge all the assets, only did so when she was compelled to do so by cross-examination showing that her account was not credible.

However, the plaintiff's evidence as to real need is very light on. Doubtless everybody would like to live in a bigger house in a better suburb, but there is very little material to show why a wise and just testatrix would have thought that it was her duty, or why the average member of the community would have thought it was fair for provision to be made for the plaintiff for a house or unit at Ryde that he wants to buy. His employer would appear to be in the city centre. There would not appear to be any particular connection with
Ryde and there was a great paucity of evidence as to the cost of accommodation in that area. I have made comment before on the need for applicants in applications under this Act to have their homework done and provide the court with facts and figures.

Notwithstanding that, I believe that Mr Insall's main point is correct. There is about $200,000 in this estate. The plaintiff's position is far worse than it was as at the date when the testatrix made her will. She had an obligation to her daughter, but that is not as great an obligation today as it would have been at the time when she made her will. I think that a wise and just testatrix in all the circumstances, had she been alive today, would have in addition to the provision made for the plaintiff by her will, given him a legacy of $55,000.

Accordingly, the court makes that order and orders the costs of both parties be paid out of the estate on the common fund basis. The legacy is to carry interest twenty-eight days from today.

To make it quite clear, the plaintiff is thus entitled to $55,000, the AT & T shares, plus reimbursement for the funeral expenses that he paid, and his costs. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
