

Broken Hill City Council versus Tiziani and Anor [1997] NSWSC 20 (7 February )
 * Remaining Grounds of Appeal * * * 
BROKEN HILL CITY COUNCIL versus TIZIANI & Anor /94; DC 56/90 
FRIDAY 7 February 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE JA, ABADEE AJA, SANTOW AJA 
CATCHWORDS: Negligence - Design and construction of roadworks by local Council failed to avoid flooding - Trial judge preferred evidence of plaintiffs - failure of trial judge to advert to particular documentary evidence - Appeal on finding of fact - Decision on facts must be `glaringly improbable' - Not established.

Damages - Emotional distress - flooding of home sufficient to cause mental distress - Damages award not excessive.

Abalos versus Australian Postal Commission <case>; <case>; [(1992-1993) 176 CLR 344] 
Brickhill versus Cooke <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1984-85) 157 CLR 424] 
Young versus Tomlinson [[1979] 2 NZLR 441] 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
JUDGMENT 
CLARKE JA: I agree with Santow AJA.
 
ABADEE AJA: I agree with the reasons for judgment of Santow AJA.
 
SANTOW AJA: This is an appeal brought by the Defendant Broken Hill City
Council from a judgment of His Honour Judge P A Twigg, QC in the District
Court in favour of the two Plaintiffs, Guido and Lyndall Tiziani. Guido
Tiziani is the male partner in a de facto relationship with Lyndall Tiziani.
They have several children.

The Plaintiffs sought damages from Broken Hill City Council, the Defendant, for negligence in carrying out road works adjacent to the residence of the
Plaintiffs at 8 Gypsum Street, Broken Hill. The Trial Judge decided in favour of the Plaintiffs. The principal ground of appeal is that the Trial Judge failed to advert to certain documentary evidence claimed to be incontrovertible and overwhelming and thereby came to a decision which was glaringly improbable. Such basis of appeal, on well-settled principle, offers narrow scope for appellate intervention. There is also a subsidiary issue as to whether $5,000, awarded for emotional distress was excessive and in any event not capable of recovery on that basis.

The Plaintiffs claim that the Council in constructing these road-works failed to design and construct them to avoid the risk of flooding the adjacent land and buildings, with the result that their house was severely flooded in heavy rain on 8 May 1989, forcing them to vacate it for several months.

The Trial Judge concluded that the Council had been negligent and awarded damages as follows: 
A. General Damages $10,000.00 
B. Loss of Rent $4,160.00 
C. Cost of repairs $5,000.00 
D. Loss of furnishings and clothing $6,000.00 
E. Interest $5,040.00 $30,200.00 
The First Plaintiff entered into an agreement in October 1995 to purchase the leasehold title in relation to the property at 8 Gypsum Street, Broken Hill ("the Property") for $10,000, paid by deposit of $5,000 and the balance at $100 per week. Having signed a residential lease of the property on 14 October the First Plaintiff and his de facto partner (the Second Plaintiff) and their three children commenced to occupy the property in October 1985.

They put various items of furniture into the property for their own use. At the end of November 1988 a contract of sale was prepared and completion took place on 24 April 1989, so that they then became the owners of the property and were so at the time of the flood. Registration of the title into the First
Plaintiff's name (being leasehold under the Western Lands System) did not take place until later in 1989.

During their four years of occupation there had been various rains, some of them quite heavy. The Plaintiffs had no problem with flooding before 8 May .

The Trial Judge found that during the latter part of 1988 and early 1989, the
Council undertook various road reconstruction both in Gypsum Street and in an unnamed lane which goes from Gypsum Street between Mr Rendell's property, No.
 Gypsum Street and the Plaintiffs' property, number 8. The site plan, Exhibit
H (AB, 251 being a street map) and the First Plaintiff's sketch, being Exhibit
B (AB, 230 consisting of a drawing by the First Plaintiff) demonstrate the area. For the purposes of the appeal, a simple sketch was handed up by Counsel without objection which identifies the location of the various streets and lane in relation to the Plaintiffs' house. It would appear that the
Plaintiffs' house at No. 8 Gypsum Street is between Carbon Street and Gaffney
Street, with Gypsum Street running north to south towards the railway where the Defendant alleged that there was a natural creek.

The Plaintiffs' property is on the eastern side of the unnamed laneway, with their residence built on the north-west corner of the block. On the western boundary, at the rear of the property, the Plaintiff has a corrugated iron fence constituted of steel and timber frames with long corrugated iron sheets forming the fence.

Mr Rendell gave evidence for the Plaintiffs. He has occupied the adjoining property No. 6 Gypsum Street, for many years. He was accepted by the Trial
Judge as a truthful witness, as were the Plaintiffs.

During the latter part of 1988 and early 1989, the Council undertook various road reconstruction both in Gypsum Street and in the unnamed lane in front of the Plaintiffs' house.

The Plaintiffs in their statements and oral evidence supported by Mr Rendell, maintained that Council workmen with heavy road construction equipment took up the surface of Gypsum Street in front of number 6 and 8 and then further north towards Carbon Street, and also took up the surface of the unnamed lane. Over a period of time Council workmen re-surfaced with bitumen both the roadway of
Gypsum Street and the lane and put in a vehicular access dish for both number and number 8. The Council workmen re-constructed the footpath where it crossed the lane. The Council trucks were identified by the Plaintiffs and Mr
Rendell by the Council emblem on them and words indicating they were Broken
Hill Council trucks. These witnesses also identified some of the workmen and engineers engaged on the job. Mr Rendell in particular had known many of the workmen over many years.

According to the Plaintiffs' evidence, and the evidence of Mr Rendell, the road construction works described earlier were carried out by the Defendant prior to 8 May 1989, the date of the flood. The male Plaintiff said that the work had been completed "about" seven days prior to 8 May 1989. Evidence as to the length of time the work took differed as between the male Plaintiff (three weeks) and the female Plaintiff (three to four months). Mr Rendell said the work was completed a week or a fortnight before the flooding and took at least six months.

The principal ground of appeal relied on by the Appellant/Defendant is that the Trial Judge erred in finding that the Appellant carried out repair and maintenance work prior to 8 May 1989 and contends that His Honour should have found that the work had not been commenced by 8 May 1989. To support this the Appellant relies upon documentary evidence consisting of time sheets of the various workmen identified as involved in the road works. Based on those, the Appellant contends that the Trial Judge should not have accepted the evidence of the two Plaintiffs and Mr Rendell but rather should have relied upon the documentary evidence to conclude the work post-dated the flood.

His Honour, in accepting the evidence of the Plaintiffs and Mr Rendell, considered Mr Rendell totally unbiased. He noted that Mr Rendell had reason to remember the work because of his continual contact with the Council over the effects of flooding in Gypsum Street on his property in the past. His Honour concluded: "The detail of his evidence in his statement ... and his oral evidence was convincing. His credibility and clear recollection was reinforced by his oral evidence." 
His Honour also found Mrs Tiziani, the Second Plaintiff, to be an impressive and truthful witness having a clear recollection of the work being done and of the period when the Council workmen performed the work. His Honour concluded that the First Plaintiff was often unclear in some of his recollections though his evidence was truthful.

Against the evidence of these witnesses, and conducting its case on the basis that its records left no other conclusion to be drawn than that the work done in Gypsum Street was done after the flood of 8 May 1989, the Appellant tendered these time sheets from March and April 1989 of certain Council employees identified as having been included among those doing the work. The
Appellant relied on the fact that nothing in them related to Gypsum Street between Carbon Street and Gaffney Street. It also tendered time sheets covering the period 25 July 1989 to 23 November 1989 showing work done in the relevant area.

However, importantly no concession was made by the Respondent that the records relied on were complete. In fact the Defendant's records only went back to
March 1989, despite Mr Rendell's evidence that work had been carried out before that. This was pointed out at the trial to Appellant's Counsel. I return to that aspect shortly.

Nor were records tendered in relation to the first week of May 1989, presumably on the basis that Mr Tiziani said that the work had been completed "about" seven days prior to 8 May 1989. But neither Mr Rendell nor Mrs Tiziani so concluded and, as I have already noted, the reference by the First
Plaintiff was "about" seven days, not precisely seven days.

The essence of the Appellant's contention is that: the Plaintiffs plead their case that in or about April and/or May 1989 the
Defendant carried out certain earth-works adjacent to 8 Gypsum Street and thereby so altered the levels of certain parts thereof as to increase the likelihood of the flow of water therefrom onto the Plaintiffs' land and cause flooding thereon, and that the road-works carried out by the Appellant which were alleged to have so altered the levels were carried out in July, August and September , as evidenced by the time sheets.

The Defendant also relied on evidence from Mr McCauley, the engineer for the
Appellant. He gave evidence that he took leave during August and September of and could recall inspecting the work on his return. A "Public Works
Department" report prepared by him dated 2 May 1989 shows under "Works
Proposed for May, June and July 1989" the work consisting of "Kerb and Gutter Reconstruction 
Gypsum Street, northside Gaffney Street to Carbon Street -- after lowering of water-main by Board." 
Significantly, Mr McCauley also signed a "City Engineers' Department" report dated 2 May 1989. It is headed at the beginning "Works in progress for April and works proposed by May, June, July 1988". In it, under the first sub- heading "Works in Progress" are twelve items. Under item 5 under the heading "Street and Lane Construction" appears the words "Gypsum Lane/Gaffney Lane".
That suggests that the relevant road work had at least commenced by April , that is, before the flood. Under "Works proposed for May/June/July " there is a reference under "Footpaths" to "Gypsum - Nicholls" but no other reference to the area around the Respondents' house.

In his Public Works Department report of 8 June 1989 under "works in progress" appears 10 items. Of these, item 2, headed "Concrete Road - Rakow St" contains a reference to opening "half the road between Gypsum and Harvey Street for after hours traffic on June 8, 1989" and under B "works proposed for
June/July/August 1989" appears item 2 "Kerb and further reconstruction -
Gypsum Street, Gaffney to Carbon Street".

In his City Engineers' Department report of the same date Gypsum Lane/Gaffney
Lane" appear under the main heading "works in progress" immediately under the sub-heading "bitumen".

It is true that the Trial Judge did not refer specifically to the time-sheets and Annexures A and B of the abovementioned report by Mr McCauley. But he did find that "Council records" were not exhaustive in relation to the work done by Council. That latter finding, though not further elaborated, is consistent with Mr Rendell's evidence that the work went back six months, that is to say three months before March 1989; no records were produced prior to March 1989.

The First Plaintiff, Mr Tiziani, suggested the work took a shorter time, but his reference to seeing workmen "a couple of months before" (AB, 20) was not precise.

While the Second Plaintiff, Lyndall Tiziani, gave evidence of work commencing in Gypsum Street and the unnamed Gypsum Lane several weeks after March or early April 1989, she was quite clear that it pre-dated the flood on 8 May
She also agreed that more work was done in the lane after the flood.
That evidence is therefore consistent with the written records showing work done after 8 May 1989 but bears out that work was also done prior to that date. Mr Rendell's evidence was that while the work finished in the week or two before the flood, since then, workmen filled in the footpath a barrier for water at No. 8. That again bears out work being done on both sides of 8 May .

Finally, there is the possibility that other workers, not identified, were present prior to 8 May 1989 and also doing the work; see AB, 223-4, where reference is simply made to "Council workmen" being the First Plaintiff's statement. See also Lyndall Tiziani at 248 where she does not set out to identify all of the workmen and likewise Mr Rendell, though he too identified some.

The Appellant contends that as on their face the records contain descriptions of what each of the identified employees were doing on each of the days in
March/April 1989 and July to November 1989, and as the Trial Judge has not specifically adverted to it, the conclusion is inescapable that the Judge has overlooked that aspect of the case: Austral Standard Cables Pty Ltd versus Walker
Nominees Pty Limited [(1992) 26 NSWLR 524] at 435 per Clarke JA. On that basis, the Appellant contends that an error of law has occurred. The Appellant also submits that the evidence of the Plaintiffs' witnesses was inconsistent with the facts as so established by the Council's records and should not have been accepted. Accordingly, it is contended by the
Appellant that the Trial Judge's decision was palpably wrong and against the weight of evidence.

I should in this context refer to the evidence of the experts. The Trial Judge accepted the evidence of the Plaintiffs' expert, Mr Beams. He found that the work carried out under the supervision of the Council's engineer, Mr McCauley, was inadequate to control the flow of natural water that was likely to flow down the slope of Gypsum Street. His Honour found that the work of repairs was carried negligently and was the cause of water flowing from the roadway onto the Plaintiffs' property on the night of 8 May 1989 when the relevant water damage occurred.

In particular, the Plaintiffs' expert concluded that what had been done was inadequate and not in accordance with accepted engineering practice in that there was not incorporated a side entry pit or culvert system as set out in the expert's first report (AB, 279 G--M) and, after reading the Appellant's expert Kinhill, who warns the Defendant of its ongoing exposure (at AB, 365 S --U) repeats that conclusion at AB, 281 K, R and Q).

Given the further report of the Plaintiffs' expert (21 June 1994) that "the water carrying capacity of this section of roadway was and is inadequate and not in accordance with accepted engineering practice" [my emphasis] it necessarily follows that the work, if done or commenced before the flooding (as concluded by the Trial Judge) still remained inadequate after the date of the flooding. There was certainly evidence available to the Trial Judge to conclude that the work had at least commenced prior to the date of the flooding on 8 May 1989, even if further work were done after that date, though the Trial Judge observed that it "seemed to the Plaintiffs to have been completed before 8 May 1989" (AB, 426).

Cases such as Abalos versus Australian Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167] give limited scope for appellate intervention in upsetting factual conclusions reached by the Trial Judge. The grounds for doing so require that the Trial Judge palpably misused his advantage in seeing the witnesses or that the decision of the Trial Judge was inconsistent with an overwhelming body of evidence or was glaringly improbable; see, for example,
Chambers versus Jobling [(1986) 7 NSWLR 1] at 20.

In relation to the attack on the Trial Judge's findings as to the cause of the flooding, I conclude that such grounds are not made out. In particular the
Council's records do not, of themselves, amount to such an overwhelming body of evidence against the Plaintiffs as to render his findings glaringly improbable. Nor were they disregarded. To the contrary the Trial Judge concluded they were incomplete, as indeed they were. Against that evidence, it was open to the Trial Judge to prefer the evidence of Plaintiffs and an independent witness, which was essentially unshaken notwithstanding the weight normally given to contemporaneous written records.

The foregoing disposes of grounds 1 to 7 of the Grounds of Appeal. The
Appellant submits on negligence that if the Court is against the Appellant on those grounds, it follows that the Appellant does not press the ground that there has been no showing that the Appellant was negligent. It is of course well settled that a public authority is liable for damages caused in carrying out its statutory duties if, during the carrying out of those duties, it creates the danger which was not there previously; see Sutherland Shire
Council versus Heyman <case>; [(1984-85) 157 CLR 424] at 460-1 per Mason J.

Remaining Grounds of Appeal 
The remaining grounds of appeal are in relation to the Plaintiffs' claim for general damages for consequential and continuing shock, distress and anguish. The Trial Judge awarded $5,000 under this head.

The Psychologist, Dr Yellowlees, for the Plaintiffs found no psychiatric illness in either Plaintiff (AB, 432). It followed that there could be no damage for nervous shock not resulting in some recognised psychiatric illness;
Campbelltown City Council versus Mackay (1989) 15 NSWLR 511 or such an affront to the Plaintiff's mind as to cause a "recognisable psychiatric illness"; see
Jaensch versus Coffey <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 549] at 567 per Brennan J.

However, clearly both Plaintiffs suffered emotional distress, as was found by the Trial Judge. Dr Yellowlees in his report of 6 November 1990 in referring to Mrs Tiziani, states that she "did certainly not appear to be clinically depressed" though "obviously angry and bitter about what had happened". The report by Dr McMurdo in relation to Mr Tiziani concludes that he "does not have a specific psychiatric illness" though he has "an adjustment disorder with emotional difficulty in that he is exceedingly angry and this is impairing the quality of his life and almost certainly is interfering significantly in the marriage".

In recent years, courts have awarded damages for mental distress in torts protecting economic interest and in particular for the negligent performance of professional services (Mouat versus Clark Boyee [[1992] 2 NZLR 559 ).](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1992%5d%202%20NZLR%20559 "View LawCiteRecord" ) This is especially when that negligence causes defects in the Plaintiffs' home; Gabolinscy versus Hamilton City Corp [[1975] 1 NZLR 150] at 163 per
Moller J; Young versus Tomlinson [[1979] 2 NZLR 441] at 461-2 per Quilliam J; Rowlands versus Callow [1992] 1 NZLR 178 at 209 per Thomas J;
Hamlin versus Bruce Stirling Ltd [[1993] 1 NZLR 374] at 384 per
Williamson J (aff'd sub nom Invercargill City Council versus Hamlin [[1994] 3
NZLR 513 (CA))]; Clarke versus Gisborne Shire Council <case>; [[1984] VR 971] at 995-7 per Gobbo J; Brickhill versus Cooke [[1984] 3 NSWLR ]
at 400 (CA); Campbelltown City Council versus Mackay [(1989) 15 NSWLR 501 .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281989%29%2015%20NSWLR%20501 "View LawCiteRecord" ) Similarly in the context of damage for breach of contract, at least where the contract expressly or perhaps impliedly promises freedom from anxiety, the
High Court has allowed damages for distress and disappointment; Baltic
Shipping Co versus Dillon <case>; [(1992-1993) 176 CLR 344] especially Mason CJ at 359-360 and McHugh J at 395-6.

Indeed damage for mental distress has included even loss of enjoyment of a holiday: Ichard versus Frangoulis [[1977] 2 All ER 461]; Kralj v McGrath [[1986] 1 All ER 54] at 60-2 per Woolf J.

Here the Council has failed in its statutory duty by the manner in which the work was carried out and has thereby caused mental distress to the Plaintiffs, occasioned by the traumatic event of the flooding of their home. In those circumstances an award of $5,000 for emotional distress is not excessive nor contrary to principle.

It follows that the Trial Judge was not in error in awarding $5,000 for emotional distress in the circumstances.

I therefore conclude that the Appellants' appeal must fail, and would so order, with costs to the Respondent.
 * * * 
