

Centurian Constructions P/L versus Beca Developments P/L [1996] NSWSC 25 (12
February 1996) 
Centurian Constructions Pty Ltd versus Beca Developments Pty Ltd (In Liq) /95 
Monday, 12 February 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff company seeks, inter alia, an order under s.459G of the Corporations Law setting aside a statutory demand which was served on it by the defendant on 20 November 1995. The parties have agreed that a preliminary question should be determined, namely whether the requirements of s.459G have been complied with.

Section 459G provides as follows: "459G(1)A company may apply to the Court for an order setting aside a statutory demand served on the company.

An application may only be made within 21 days after the demand is so served.

An application is made in accordance with this section only if, within those 21 days: an affidavit supporting the application is filed with the Court; and a copy of the application, and a copy of the supporting affidavit, are served on the person who served the demand on the company." 
The uncontested evidence shows that the time requirements of the section have not been complied with. Although the summons by which the proceedings were commenced was filed on 11 December 1995 and thus within the 21 day period after service of the demand, neither the summons nor the supporting affidavit was served until 12 December 1995, outside that period. Accordingly, the preliminary question in the form agreed to by the parties must be answered in the negative.

However, the submission actually put for the plaintiff was that notwithstanding that service of the summons and affidavit was effected outside the 21 day period prescribed by s.459G, the validity of the application was preserved by s.467A which provides as follows: "467A An application under Part 5.4 or 5.4A must not be dismissed merely because of one or more of the following: in any case - a defect or irregularity in connection with the application; in the case of an application to be wound up in insolvency - a defect in a statutory demand; unless the Court is satisfied that substantial injustice has been caused that cannot otherwise be remedied (for example, by an adjournment or an order for costs)." 
It is convenient that I deal with this submission.

The impact of s.467A on an application for an order setting aside a statutory demand pursuant to s.459G was considered by the High Court in David Grant & Co versus Westpac <case>; [(1995) 13 ACLC 1572.] It was held in that case that neither s.1322 nor s.467A had any application to the time limits prescribed by s.459G. It has been submitted for the plaintiff that the facts of the present case are distinguishable from those in David Grant & Co in that here the application was filed within the 21 day period whereas in David Grant &
Co the application was filed outside the 21 day period. It is true that this distinction exists. Although it is attractive to find some means of escape from the harsh consequences of the construction of the legislation favoured by the High Court in David Grant & Co, I consider that the reasons for that construction advanced by Gummow J in that case (with which the other members of the Court agreed) preclude my acceptance of the plaintiff's argument, or my following the decision of Young J in Bartex Fabrics versus Phillips Fox [12 ACLC ], where s.467A was applied in similar circumstances. It is clear that Gummow J (sub silentio) rejected the explanation of the phrase "may only" in s.459G proffered by Santow J in Sydar versus K Simmonds Finance [13 ACLC 480], and took the view that the presumption of insolvency which by virtue of s.459C(2)(a) arose from a failure (as defined by s.459F) to comply with a statutory demand, read with the terms of s.459F, would not be affected by any subsequent event (eg the setting aside of the statutory demand on which the presumption was founded, if this were possible).

Gummow J also said (at 1579) with specific reference to s.467A: "If an application for an order setting aside a statutory demand has not been made within 21 days after service of the demand, there is no application under
Part 5.4 before the Court. Therefore, there is no question of such an application being dismissed because of a defect or irregularity in connection with it. In Re J & E Holdings Pty Ltd [(1995) [13 ACLC 867] at 873], Sheller JA summed the matter up as follows: `The position is quite simply that unless the Court has a power to extend the time within which the application to set aside the statutory demand can be made, the plaintiff has no right to make it.'" 
There is room for argument that this passage does not address the position where a summons is filed within the 21 day period but served outside that period, but I consider that a consequence of the construction of ss.459C, 459F and 459G earlier advanced by his Honour is that there can be no effective application under s.459G unless the requirements of subs.(2) and (3), both in relation to filing and service, are complied with. It is to be noted that his
Honour said (at 1578): "The force of the term `may only' is to define the jurisdiction of the Court by imposing a requirement as to time as an essential condition of the new right conferred by s.459G. An integer or element of the right created by s.459G is its exercise by application made within the time specified. To adapt what was said by Isaacs J in The Crown versus McNeil <case>; [31
CLR 76] at 100-101], it is a condition of the gift in subs.(1) of s.459G that subs.(2) be observed and, unless this is so, the gift can never take effect. The same is true of subs.(3)." (Emphasis supplied) 
The consequence is that a failure to comply with those requirements is not a `defect or irregularity in connection with [an] application', within the meaning of s.467A, because in those circumstances there is no effective application under Part 5.4.

JUDGMENT (No 2) 
HIS HONOUR: I have already held that the effect of s.459G of the Corporations Law as interpreted by the High Court of Australia is that the Court is in the circumstances precluded from setting aside the statutory demand in the present case. Undoubtedly the circumstances which appear on the evidence to have led to the service out of time of the relevant documents are unfortunate and it would appear from the substance of the orders which were made by the Court on 11 December 1995 that the Judge did not have in mind the fact (as now appears to be the case) that that day was the last day for complying with the requirements of s.459G. If his Honour has been apprised of that then it is unlikely that he would have made the orders which were in fact made on that date which in particular included a direction that the amended summons (which was then contemplated but which in the event turned out not to be necessary) be filed and served on the respondent by 12:00 noon on the following day.

Be that as it may, nothing that happened on 11 December 1995 was the result of anything that the defendant did or did not do, and I think that Mr Newman was correct in disclaiming any assertion that the filing of a winding up application by the defendant against the plaintiff would be an abuse of the
Court's process. I agree that it would not be an abuse of process and that leaves as the question for decision whether there is any other basis on which the Court could now restrain the making of a winding up application and if there were, whether facts have been established sufficient to cause that power to be exercised.

In my view, nothing has been shown in the circumstances of this case which would justify such a restraint being imposed on the defendant. It is difficult in the abstract to dogmatically assert that nothing but a potential abuse of process would justify such a restraint, but at the moment, I cannot think of any circumstances other than an abuse of process which would be sufficient, and the circumstances shown in evidence in the present case certainly do not provide any foundation outside the area of abuse of process for an application of that kind to succeed.

Apart from that, I think there is another reason why no injunction of the kind sought should be issued, and that is that the purpose of such an injunction, assuming there to be a proper basis otherwise for it, is to prevent irreparable injury to the company against which a winding up application may be made. In the present case I am not satisfied that the mere making of a winding up application against the plaintiff company whether it ultimately fails or succeeds would result in irreparable injury to that company, and accordingly on that ground also I would not grant the injunction sought.

If a winding up application is made against the plaintiff company by the defendant (and no doubt the circumstances revealed by the evidence will have to be considered by those advising the defendant) then no doubt the plaintiff can make application for leave under s.459S of the Corporations Law so that on the critical question of insolvency the statutory presumption may be rebutted if the evidence is sufficient for that purpose. However, that is a matter which can only be dealt with if and when a winding up application is filed.

For these reasons I think that the present summons should be dismissed.
Accordingly I order that the proceedings be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
