

Allstate Explorations Nl versus Beaconsfield Gold Nl [1996] NSWSC 392 (2
September 1996) 
Allstate Explorations NL versus Beaconsfield Gold NL /96 
Tuesday, 21 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The defendant (Beaconsfield Gold) proposes to make a takeover offer for all the issued shares and options in the plaintiff (Allstate), pursuant to a Part A statement served on Allstate on 22 April 1996, on the basis of one share in Beaconsfield Gold for each share in Allstate and one option in Beaconsfield Gold for each option in Allstate. In these proceedings Allstate seeks to restrain the despatch to shareholders and option holders in Allstate of the Part A statement and offers pursuant thereto, on the basis of alleged deficiencies in the Part A statement.

In the event that it is held that any provision of Chapter 6 of the
Corporations Law has been contravened in relation to the Part A statement,
Beaconsfield Gold, by cross-claim, seeks a validating order pursuant to s. 743 or s.1322(4) of the Law, or an order pursuant to s.739 directing Beaconsfield
Gold to supply further information to offerees.

Allstate (as to 40.18%), Beaconsfield Gold (as to 37.82%), and a third company called Golden Shamrock Mines Ltd (Golden Shamrock) (as to 18.22%) are participants in the Beaconsfield Joint Venture, formed to carry on the
Beaconsfield Gold Project involving the exploration, redevelopment and potentially the mining of a gold deposit at Beaconsfield in Tasmania.

The argument for Allstate focused on three passages in the Part A statement which are alleged to be materially misleading or to involve an absence of material information. These were as follows: 
At page 10: "If the Project proceeds to production, it is the intention of the directors of Beaconsfield Gold to have a dividend policy of paying its shareholders a substantial portion of operating cash flow, subject to requirements from time to time for exploration, replacement and major new capital works." 
In an independent accountant's report: "Based on our review, nothing has come to our attention which would indicate that the pro forma consolidated balance sheets are not drawn up in accordance with the assumptions as set out in Note 1(j) to the Financial Information, so as to present fairly the proforma financial position of the Economic Entity as at 31 December 1995 in accordance with applicable Accounting Standards." 
In Note 1(j) to the Financial Information: "(7) In terms of the acquisition accounting, the purchase consideration has been allocated to the assets and liabilities of Allstate as follows: [diamond] The directors of BGNL have estimated the fair value of Allstate's interest in the Beaconsfield Gold Project for the purposes of accounting for the acquisition of Allstate by BGNL at approximately $16.5m, equivalent to $1.25 for each Allstate share. The estimate has been derived on the basis of several criteria including a comparison with the price at which Golden
Shamrock Mines purchased its joint venture interest, a comparison of the share market values of BGNL and Allstate, a comparison with the share market for other gold companies and a net present value derived using the discounted cash flow methodology based on public information.
 [diamond] The directors of BGNL have assumed that the public announcements of
Allstate regarding all other assets and liabilities are accurate and that there are no material omissions from those statements. Therefore, the fair value of all other assets and liabilities is assumed to be equal to the book value as disclosed in the financial statements of Allstate for the year ended December 1995, except for the fact that the portion of joint venture cash calls relating to the acquisition of physical assets ($1,454,887) appears to have been capitalised by Allstate as exploration, evaluation and development expenditure carried forward. In compiling the pro forma consolidated balance sheet this expenditure has been reclassified as property, plant and equipment to align the treatment with that adopted by BGNL. There is no change to the total net assets of Allstate from this reclassification." 
At page 10: "Beaconsfield Gold intends to exercise any Allstate options which Beaconsfield
Gold acquires under its offer for Allstate options. The funds required to exercise these options will, it is expected, be obtained from the exercise of
Beaconsfield Gold options issued as consideration for the acquisition of the
Allstate options." 
I will deal separately with each of these matters.

Dividend Policy: 
The quoted passage is loosely expressed and is capable of conveying the impression that after production commences the whole of the "operating cash flow" less cash then or thereafter from time to time required for exploration, replacement and major new capital works, would be available for the declaration of dividends. In fact, for the purpose of arriving at distributable profits, there would need to be charged against the net cash gains from mining production, by way of periodic amortisation, accumulated capital development expenses incurred prior to the commencement of production, which are likely to amount to approximately $61 million. For this reason, in my opinion, the passage is materially misleading.

Acquisition Accounting: 
The value of the purchase consideration for the acquisition of the Allstate shares has been assessed at $1.25 per share, being the fair value attributed by the directors of Beaconsfield Gold to each share to be issued in
Beaconsfield Gold. There is no challenge to this assessment. What is challenged is the mode of allocation of the total purchase consideration among the underlying assets of Allstate, and in particular the allocation of an amount equal to the difference between the purchase consideration and the book value of assets and liabilities of Allstate other than its interest in the
Beaconsfield Gold Project, to "exploration, evaluation and development". It is claimed that none of the four criteria referred to in Note 1(j)(7) except the last (based on discounted cash flow methodology) is appropriate for the purpose of valuing the interest in the Beaconsfield Gold Project, and that, in relation to discounted cash flow methodology, there is no disclosure of how the methodology was applied or of the assumptions used in its application, or of the value arrived at by its application.

It is asserted that there has been a failure to comply with Accounting
Standard ASRB 1015, of which clauses .10 and .20 are as follows: ".10 In accounting for all acquisitions of assets, the assets acquired shall be recorded at the cost of acquisition, being the purchase consideration determined as at the date of acquisition plus costs incidental to the acquisition. These assets shall be brought to account and classified accordingly.
 ...
 .20 Where a company acquires an entity, or part thereof, through acquisition of the assets therein, or, in the case of an investment in a subsidiary, where the acquisition is of some, or all, of the shares of another entity, any goodwill or discount on acquisition shall be determined and brought to account in accordance with the requirements of Approved Accounting Standard ASRB 1013:
Accounting for Goodwill." 
In clause .06, "goodwill" is defined to mean "the future benefits from unidentified assets". For the purpose at least of the application of clause .20, the expression "goodwill" must have the same meaning both in Accounting
Standard ASRB 1015 and in Accounting Standard ASRB 1013. The latter Accounting
Standard also defines "goodwill" in the same terms, but adds a definition of "unidentifiable assets" as "those assets which are not capable of being both individually identified and specifically brought to account".

In this connection, three main questions arise. First, is Allstate's interest in the Beaconsfield Joint Venture an asset which is capable of being both individually identified and specifically brought to account? As to this, I am not satisfied that it is not such an asset. (A subsidiary point was sought to be made in respect of the management rights which accrue to Allstate under the joint venture agreement as the participant holding the largest interest, but I am not satisfied that in the circumstances the benefit of such rights would require separate and specific treatment in the accounts.) 
The second question is whether it is contrary to the Accounting Standards or otherwise improper as the value of Allstate's interest in the Beaconsfield
Joint Venture a figure which is in effect a balancing figure representing the difference between the purchase consideration and the net book value of
Allstate's other assets and liabilities. As to this, I am not satisfied that such a procedure is either contrary to the Accounting Standards or otherwise improper, unless it were to be shown that the purchase consideration is either an overpayment or an underpayment for the assets acquired, producing a discrepancy between the fair value of what is acquired and the fair value of the purchase consideration. In accordance with the views I recently expressed in Solomon Pacific Resources versus Acacia Resources (No 2) [14 ACLC 637] at 644, in the case of an honest arms-length commercial transaction of this nature, it is generally to be presumed that no such discrepancy of that kind exists, and for accounting purposes the equivalence in value recognised in good faith by the parties in the agreement they make should be given effect as representing the commercial reality.
 
The third question is whether more detailed disclosure is required in respect of the four comparative criteria identified in Note 1(j)(7). In my opinion, no more detailed disclosure is required. There is, in my view, nothing misleading or inappropriate in the general reference to these criteria made in the context in which it occurs, and no further information in relation to those matters is required by any provision of the Law.

Exercise of Options: 
There are 5,450,795 options in Allstate which Beaconsfield Gold proposes to offer to acquire. The date of expiry of these options is 2 September 1996. The effect of s.615 of the Law is that if pursuant to the proposed takeover
Beaconsfield Gold acquires 20% or more (but less than 90%) of the issued shares of Allstate, it may not in certain circumstances be lawful for
Beaconsfield Gold to exercise any of the options it acquires. This is not disputed by Beaconsfield Gold. However, it has been submitted on its behalf that there are other ways in which Beaconsfield Gold may deal with the options in Allstate which it acquires and provide the development funds which would otherwise have been provided upon exercise of the options by Beaconsfield
Gold. Be this is it may, the passage in question is clearly misleading and materially so, in that it implies that Beaconsfield Gold may lawfully exercise the acquired options without qualification.

If Beaconsfield Gold contemplates dealing with the options, and raising developmental funds in some other way or ways, that information would be material and should be disclosed.

In the result I have upheld the complaints made concerning the first and third of the three passages in the Part A statement already referred to. If the only legitimate matter of complaint had been the first of these passages, I would have regarded the ability of Allstate to deal with it in its Part B statement as sufficient remedy. However, the third passage cannot adequately be dealt with in that way, and some order of the Court is required in relation to that.
This being so, the Court by the same order deal should with the first passage as well.

I regard each of the two matters as capable of being sufficiently remedied by an order under s.739 of the Law. So far as the first matter is concerned, an order that the relevant passage be omitted from any Part A statement despatched to offerees would I think suffice. Alternatively, I would be prepared to make an order requiring an appropriate correcting statement to accompany the Part A statement when despatched to offerees. So far as the third passage is concerned, I would also be prepared to make an order requiring an appropriate correcting statement to accompany the Part A statement. However, the proposed correcting statement annexed to the cross- claim is I think quite inadequate in relation to each of these matters.

I will adjourn the proceedings for a short period to give the parties an opportunity to produce further draft correcting statements to deal with both the first and third passages, or the third passage only, as the case may be, and postpone making final orders until then.
 * * * 
