

Mann versus Bryant Matter No 2219/97 [1997] NSWSC 209 (21 May 1997) ` 
John Howard Mann versus Joseph Richard Bryant` /97 May 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 - JOHN HOWARD MANN versus JOSEPH RICHARD BRYANT 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application under Pt 40 r 9 of the Supreme Court Rules to set aside a judgment, which was obtained in the absence of the defendant. 
The plaintiff is the Trustee in Bankruptcy of the defendant. The plaintiff is very keen to get his hands on the Certificates of Title, which are registered in the bankrupt's name, over land in Sofala. He issued a notice under the [Bankruptcy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) to obtain these documents. Mr Thorley for the bankrupt, says that it was issued under the wrong section. That may be right, but on the other hand, it may not be. I do not need to deal with it. The Certificates of Title were not produced. Indeed, Mr Bryant said in the witness box he does not know where they are.

The summons was served at 6/37 Reynolds Street, Balmain. This was an address which was obtained from a transcript of an examination of the bankrupt in the
Federal Court. Unfortunately, for everyone, the real address is 6/23 Reynolds
Street, Balmain, so that even if it had been competent to serve the summons at the address given to the Federal Court, it would still have gone to the wrong address.

It seems to me quite clear that either the summons was not properly served as an originating process in accordance with the rules because it had to be served personally and was not or because it was served at the wrong address.

That being so, the court is, in the interests of justice, virtually obliged to set aside the judgment because it is a cardinal principle of our law that everyone should be heard in his own defence before orders are made.

Mr Hogg for the plaintiff, vigorously cross-examined Mr Bryant to the effect that the defence that he was raising was a sham. The defence is essentially that the bankrupt is not the beneficial owner of the property but, in fact, holds it as trustee for the Bryant Family Trust No 2, a discretionary trust, of which a company, Listaway Pty Ltd, was the trustee, at least, until 29
March 1995. The defence is, accordingly, that the beneficial interest in the property was not the property of the bankrupt and that the trustee is not entitled to the title deeds or to become registered as proprietor.

Mr Hogg put to Mr Bryant that the trust deed and a declaration of trust, which he also made and which is in evidence, were not made on 16 September 1987 but at a later date. Despite Mr Hogg's cross-examination, there is no obvious sham. There are some weaknesses in the defendant's case, but not such as would compel a court to decline to give him the opportunity of having a proper hearing.

Accordingly, the court sets aside the orders that were made by Santow J on 2
May 1997 and will shortly give some directions as to the ongoing conduct of the matter. I think, in the circumstances, that the costs should be the defendant's costs in the cause.

I give leave to the plaintiff to amend the summons generally. Plaintiff's affidavit evidence to be filed and served by 4 June 1997. Defendant's evidence to be filed and served by 18 June 1997. The matter is stood over to the
Registrar's List on 20 June 1997 at 9.30am. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
