

NSW Insurance Ministerial Corporation (formerly Gio) versus Willis and Anor
Nos. Ca 40136/92 and Dc 142/90 Motor Accident - Interest [1995] NSWSC 22 (1
September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
MEAGHER(1), SHELLER(2) JJA AND GROVE(3) AJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 2 September #DATE 23:2:1995 #ADD 1:9:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:      AJ Leslie QC/DJ Russell 
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Peter Jessep 
Counsel for the Respondent:     JP Curtis/GM Watson 
Solicitor for the Respondent:    Adam Leyland
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
MEAGHER JA: This is an appeal brought from an order made by Kirkham DCJ in an action under Lord Campbell's Act brought against the appellant by the respondents on behalf of three infant children. Their mother, Mrs
Helen
Pietsch, whose maiden surname was Thomas, was killed on 3 May 1985 by the driver of a motor vehicle for whose negligence the appellant is liable.
Liability is not in issue. Mrs Pietsch was aged 33 when she was killed. The respondents, the legal personal representatives of the three children, were a
Mr. Brian William Willis, who might be described as one of her ex-"partners", and Cohn
John Thomas, who was one of her brothers.
She was married for many years to Mr Kerry Victor Pietsch. By that union she had two children, a daughter Nicole born on 17 November 1975 and a son
Shane born 26 January 1978. Mr and Mrs Pietsch separated and then divorced, the date of each event not being disclosed in the evidence. At some stage, presumably after her separation from Mr Pietsch she commenced a liaison with
Mr. Willis, and of that liaison his Honour found there was issue, a daughter namely, Gelinda, born 30
March 1982. An annotation to Gelinda's birth certificate indicates that her surname is Thomas not Pietsch. Mr Willis's liaison with
Mrs Pietsch ceased at some time before her death. He had previously been married. He has since remarried. Mr Pietsch has also remarried.
At the time of the fatal accident Mr Willis was living on a country property called "Codrington" at Yerong Creek and Mr Pietsch was living on his country property called "Warrangong" at Lockhart with his second wife.
The respondents brought these proceedings on behalf of the three children.
His Honour the trial judge brought in a verdict in favour of the respondents in the sum of $458,244.62.
That is the verdict against which the appellant appeals.
Mrs Pietsch had a sister, Miss G.M. Thomas who was a registered nurse in
Melbourne. As soon as she heard of her sister's death she resigned her
Melbourne job and moved into her deceased sister's house in Albury. The two elder children moved away to live with Mr Pietsch. It should be noted that there is no evidence of Mr Pietsch inviting the third child, Gelinda, to join them. Miss Thomas at first lived in her sister's house with Gelinda. She did not take any employment for about a year and a half, but devoted herself to looking after her niece. Her mother happened to live at Biada
Street, North
Albury, and after a period of one and a half years Miss Thomas bought a house next door to her mother's. When this happened Miss Thomas took employment at an Albury hospital. Never from that day to the date of trial was Gelinda left unattended by either her grandmother or her aunt. Between them they provided her with all the services which a mother could.
Of the total sum of $458,244.62, the sum of $3,640.00 represents medical and funeral expenses. The balance was computed as follows: 
Past      Future     Past     Future
Services    Services    Support    Support
Gelinda $118,580.40  $106,488.10  $19,560.00  $26,438.40 plus interest  $69,989.30          $10,540.68
Nicole and
Shane     $45,197.00  $31,404.10     $0       $0 plus interest  $20,496.35
Mr Leslie QC, senior counsel for the appellant, made a vigorous assault on the verdict. He did not attack the minutiae of the various items, but rather concentrated on more fundamental questions of principle.
His first submission was that his Honour was in error in acting on the basis that
Gelinda's father was Mr Willis rather than Mr Pietsch. He referred us to the well known cases which stress the strength of the presumption of legitimacy, and the corresponding difficulty of proving illegitimacy. However, this seems to me to be beside the point. They would be relevant if his Honour were dealing with a contested paternity suit, but he was not. Both parties at trial accepted that Mr Pietsch was the father of the elder two children and Mr
Willis the father of the third, and there is evidence which is consistent with his state of affairs. In these circumstances I cannot imagine why his Honour should have departed from the facts accepted by the parties, or why we should do so on appeal.
Mr Leslie's second submission was more formidable. I shall quote from his written submissions: "The extent of the loss of the family as a whole must be assessed without attempting to determine, as against the defendant, the extent of the loss of individual members. To assess each separately could lead to error, because of duplication where some part of the loss is common to some or all, for example, the loss of services of a mother."
He dwelt lovingly on every High Court denunciation of double counting. He submitted that the children had not lost two or three mothers, but only one mother, and they should not be compensated as if they had lost more than one mother. He was emboldened by his indignation to submit that the loss of a mother was worth at most $400 per week, which sum should be divided between the children, however numerous and wherever situate - a submission on the face of it as irrational as it is arbitrary.
In order to evaluate this submission one must appreciate that the separation of Mrs Pietsch's family after her death was, as his Honour found, entirely reasonable; and also in law foreseeable by the tortfeasor. It was also the direct result of the tortfeasor's negligence. In these circumstances one is inevitably in the area where there is a double set of damages; and a double set of damages is not the same thing as duplication of damages.
Services and support were required in respect of Nicole and Shane at one place, and further services and support were required in respect of Gelinda at another place. Both sets were reasonably required, and both were in fact supplied. The Act requires each individual to be compensated for whatever needs he has to be reasonably replaced. In a special case such as the present the killing of one mother is compensated for the provision of the services of two mothers.
The learned trial judge pointed out that it is simple convenience and not a rule of law that results usually in cases under Lord Campbell's Act proceeding by awarding a lump sum which is then divided amongst the applicants. As Hutley JA said in McIntosh versus Williams [(1979) 2 NSWLR 543:] "Though only one action can be brought, and it is for the benefit of all diverse claimants, these claimants have individual rights, and there may be occasions in which these individual rights would have to be vindicated. Instances in which the courts have had to treat rights as individual are to be found in Meade versus Clark
Chapman and Co Ltd [(1956) 1 WLR 76] and Mulholland versus McCrere (1061)
N.I. 135. As stated in McGregor on damages (13th Edition), para.
, p. 801: and the fact that only one action may be brought is however only designed to promote ease of administration, and the action is given to the dependents as individuals and not as a class, so that each dependant is entitled to compensation for the loss resulting to him personally." (Italics supplied).
The next submission is that the trial judge did not take sufficiently into account the duty of Mr Willis, if indeed he was Gelinda's father, to support his child. The sad fact is that both before and after the fatal accident he was disinclined to perform that duty. The cost of replacing the services which the mother provided during her lifetime without the help of a father cannot be diminished by the fact that the father owes a legal duty to which he is still unsympathetic.
Mr Leslie's final submission concerned the award of interest. It was once thought that a plaintiff was not entitled to interest on damages awarded for loss of domestic services, unless he had actually paid for substituted services: Settree versus Roberts [(1989) 1 NSWLR 649.] The falsity of that proposition was then demonstrated by this Court in Marsland versus Andjelic (No. 2) [(1993) 32 NSWLR 649.] The legislature retaliated by enacting the Motor
Accidents (Amendment) Act 1994. Mr Leslie submits that this legislation prevented
Kirkham DCJ from awarding interest in the present case.
The amending Act made two alterations to [Part 3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/index.html#p3a) of the [Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act, 1942](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/) ("the Act"). The amending Act altered s.35D by inserting a provision denying interest on any claim made under s.35C. The amendment purports to operate retrospectively. The real issue is the nature of the claims made under s.35C. In terms, s.35C is designed to provide a maximum amount of damages for the provision of certain services. Those "services" specified by s.35C may be paraphrased to be: services of a domestic nature or services relating to nursing and attendance; which have been or are to be provided by another person to the person in whose favour the award is made; and for which the person in whose favour the award is made has not paid and is not liable.
The elements of a claim under s.35C are the same as those applicable to a
Griffiths versus Kerkmeyer <case>; [(1977) 139 CLR 161] claim. The submissions advanced for the respondent in the principal part of the appeal emphasised the difference between a claim made pursuant to Griffiths versus Kerkmeyer (supra), from a claim under Lord Campbell's Act. The majority in Nguyen versus Nguyen <case>; [(1989) 169 CLR 245] describe the difference as follows: "The claim in Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer was, as we have said, a claim for damages for personal injuries. It was of a different nature from a claim under Lord Campbell's Act, which is a claim for the loss of a material benefit. The plaintiff's loss in Griffiths v
Kerkmeyer was caused by his physical disability. It was in accordance with accepted principle to assess part of that loss by reference to the cost of the services which were required to satisfy the need to which the disability gave rise. What was novel about the decision was the application of that principle even though the plaintiff had not borne and would not bear the cost of the services. The novelty was not in valuing the necessary services, both retrospectively and prospectively; there was nothing new in that. The novelty lay in giving the plaintiff the cost of those services even though he had not paid, and would not pay, for them, in order that he, and not the defendant. should reap the benefit.
 
By way of contrast, a claim for damages under Lord Campbell's Act is a claim for recompense for some tangible advantage which has been lost by reason of the death of the deceased. As Gibbs J observed in Ruby versus Marsh, in relation to a claim for damages sustained through the death of a husband and father, the loss occurred "at the moment of death" and: "The expectation of future benefit was destroyed by the death and no subsequent event can increase or diminish the extent of the pecuniary loss then suffered, although it is true that subsequent events may be relevant to the assessment of damages in so far as they render it unnecessary for the court to speculate about possibilities that may have existed at the date of death when the facts themselves have become known." 
In this type of claim the loss can be identified directly and it is unnecessary to point to some need by which it is represented."
Section 35C is clearly intended to apply to circumstances where the services have been or are to be provided by another person. That is the basis for the entitlement arising under Griffiths versus Kerkmeyer (supra), but it has nothing to do with a claim under Lord Campbell's Act. A claim under Lord
Campbell's Act for damages for the loss of domestic services is not related to need; it is recompense for the value of the loss which is suffered and the plaintiff is entitled to recover for such loss whether the plaintiff intends to use the damages to replace the services or not: see Nguyen versus Nguyen . Hence, such damages are recoverable as damages under Lord Campbell's
Act even though the actual loss of services has been met from another source: see Budget Rent-a-Car Limited versus Van Der Kemp [(1984) 3 NSWLR 303.]
It is clear that s.35C was designed to deal with interest on Griffiths v
Kerkmeyer (supra) claims, but it does not deal with the manner in which compensation is given in Lord Campbell's Act claims. This is sufficient to defeat the Appellant's argument, but in addition, the proscription on the availability of interest under Part 3A is retrospective. Whichever rules of construction are to apply, the retrospective removal of the common law entitlement to interest requires clear words. The words of ss.35C and 35D simply do not accommodate the nature of the claim brought under Lord
Campbell's Act.
In my view, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE2
INTRODUCTION
SHELLER JA:  This appeal concerns the quantification of the damages payable under the [Compensation to Relatives Act 1897](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/) (the Act) to the three children of the late Mrs Helen Pietsch who was killed in a motor vehicle accident on 3
May 1985. Two of the children, Nicole, who was born on 17 November 1975 and aged 9 at the time of her mother's death and Shane, who was born on 26 January and aged 7 at the time of his mother's death, were Mrs Pietsch's children by her husband, Kerry Victor Pietsch from whom she was separated and then divorced before her death. Her third child, Gelinda, who was born on 30 March and aged 3 at the time of her mother's death, was not a child of the marriage. Her father was the respondent, Brian William Willis, whose relationship with
Mrs Pietsch had ended before her death.
The proceedings, which were commenced by statement of claim dated 12 May and heard by Kirkham DCJ at Albury in May and November 1991, were brought on behalf of the three children against the appellant, Government
Insurance
Office of New South Wales (GIO), now NSW Insurance Ministerial Corporation, [(s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/s14.html) of the [Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act 1942](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/)) by the respondents,
Mr Willis and Colin John Thomas, the brother of the deceased, who were the executors of the estate of Mrs Pietsch.
Liability was admitted. GIO consented to unlimited jurisdiction pursuant to s51 of the District Court Act.
 
THE JUDGMENT BELOW .
At the date of Mrs Pietsch's death her three children were living with her. After her death Mr Pietsch took back his two children,
Nicole and Shane, and with his second wife, cared for them at his farm. Gelinda was not accepted by him but cared for by Mrs Pietsch's sister, Gail Marie Thomas. Kirkham DCJ said that in light of the family circumstances there was a strong probability that this would follow if Mrs Pietsch died while her children were young. He described the case as exceptional. The children had gone to two different homes against a background of obvious and predictable bitterness. His Honour considered that the proper approach was thus to consider the case of each of the children separately. He dealt with damages under the following heads; loss of past and future services, loss of past and future support, common losses and interest. He calculated Gelinda's loss of past services in an amount of $118,580.40 on which he allowed interest in an amount of $69,989.30 (on half of $118.500.40 (sic) at 17.5 percent for 6.75 years); Nicole and
Shane's loss of past services in an amount of $45,197 on which he allowed interest in an amount of $26,496.75 (on half of $45.197 at 17.5 percent for 6.75 years);
Gelinda's loss of future services at $106,488; Nicole and Shane's loss of future services at $31,404.10.
He awarded an amount of $19,560 to Gelinda for loss of past support, on which he allowed interest in an amount of $10,450.68 (On $3,240 at 17.5 percent for 6.67 years June 1987 - February 1992, $3,781.90; and on 50 percent of $16,320 at 17.5 percent for 4.67 years from
June 1987 - February 1992 $6,668.76), and $26,438.40 for loss of future support. He awarded Nicole and Shane nothing for loss of support. He awarded a total amount of $3,640 for medical and funeral expenses and interest on loss of past services and past support. The result was a verdict and judgment in favour of the plaintiffs in the amount of $458,244.62 including interest.
After payment of the amount of $3,640 for medical and funeral expenses, his
Honour ordered the balance to be paid into Court and thereout to the Public
Trustee in trust for the children in the following amounts in accordance with the [Damages (Infants and Persons of Unsound Mind) Act 1929](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/dapouma1929411/) as amended:
Nicole $51,548.92
Shane $51,548.92
Gelinda $351,506.78 
APPEAL
GIO appealed from Kirkham DCJ's decision.
The grounds of appeal argued can be grouped under the following heads: 
The assumption of disparate parentage was, on the evidence, unwarranted.
His Honour erred in law in dealing separately with the assessment of damages for the two older children and the younger child.
The amount awarded was excessive.
Interest on the loss of past services and support for each of the three children should not have been allowed.
 
DAMAGES RECOVERABLE UNDER THE ACT
Section 4 (1) provides that the action maintainable under the Act against the person causing death by a wrongful act, neglect or default shall be for the benefit "of the wife, husband, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, parent, and child of the person whose death has been so caused, and shall be brought by and in the name of the executor or administrator of the person deceased, and in every such action the jury may give such damages as they think proportioned to the injury resulting from such death to the parties respectively for whom and for whose benefit such action is brought, and the amount so recovered, after deducting the costs not recovered from the defendant, shall be divided amongst the beforementioned parties in such shares as the jury by their verdict fund and direct."
The "injury" resulting from such death to the claimant in respect of which damages are recoverable under the Act has been judicially confined to the pecuniary loss sustained. That is a net amount measured by calculating the loss of material benefits or of the reasonable prospect of material benefits which depended on the continuance of the life of the deceased and deducting therefrom the material gains, arising on the deceased's death, to which the claimant had a reasonable expectation, whether as of right or otherwise;
Public Trustee versus Zoanetti <case>; [(1945) 70 CLR 266] at 254 Deane J after quoting from
Dixon J's judgment said: "It has long been recognised that the loss of gratuitous domestic services, which are replaced or will be replaced at pecuniary cost, may provide a basis for compensation under Lord Campbell's Act if the circumstances are such that 'there was a reasonable prospect of (the services) being rendered freely in the future but for the death'." That case decided that a claimant might recover compensation under the Act for lost domestic services even though these were not replaced at pecuniary cost.
Each person mentioned in the section is entitled to compensation for the loss resulting to him or her personally but, for what have been described as administrative reasons, the extent of the loss of the family as a whole is usually assessed, without attempting to determine, as against the defendant, the extent of the loss of the individual members. In Gullifer versus Pohto 
NSWLR 353 this Court said at 363: "To assess each separately could lead to error, because of duplication where some part of the loss is common to some or all, eg the loss of services of a mother. The assessment of the family loss, in most cases, will provide the proper award of compensation to the respective claimants and avoid error due to duplication.
However, there are exceptional cases where it is not practicable properly to assess the loss provided for by s4, except by some examination of the losses suffered by individuals."
In McIntosh versus Williams [(1979) 2 NSWLR 543] at 560-1 Hutley JA said: "Though only one action can be brought, and it is for the benefit of all diverse claimants, these claimants have individual rights, and there may be occasion in which these individual rights would have to be vindicated."
As was said in the joint judgment of Dawson, Toohey and McHugh JJ in
Nguyen at 263, commonly the claim under the Act is based upon the loss of the financial contribution made by the deceased to the household and is referred to as a claim for the loss of a breadwinner. It is a claim for the loss of a material benefit. At 262 their Honours distinguished such a claim from the claim for damages for personal injuries leading to a disability which give rise to a need for services of the nature discussed in Griffiths v Kerkemeyer <case>; [(1977) 139 CLR 161.] Even so, as Brennan J pointed out in Nguyen at 248, the loss of services or the reasonable prospect of services rendered by the deceased may produce a need for services of a like kind. "In both contexts, 'need' connotes a requirement the satisfaction of which alleviates or eliminates the loss or its sequelae." His Honour went on to say at 249 that even though it is as erroneous in principle as it is false in fact to treat the commercial cost of providing substitutionary services for the services lost as the invariable yardstick of the assessment" ... the tender ages of children, conditions of health or the demands of an outside occupation, or some other factor may make it reasonably necessary to bring in outside assistance even at commercial rates to provide services in substitution for all or some of the domestic services lost." Against the argument advanced in the present case by the appellant it is useful to refer to the three ways in which a personal injury may give rise to damage, identified by Windeyer J in
Teubner versus Humble <case>; [(1963) 108 CLR 491] at 505. One was to create needs that would not otherwise exist. This is also true of the injury to a child caused by the death of a parent. For example where a single parent cared for several children of whom one suffers a disability, the death of that parent may create a need for the disabled child to be cared for separately in a special home or hospital. In my opinion, the Act enables an award of damages to be made to compensate that child for the need the parent's death has created. In the present case Mrs Peitsch's death created a need for Gelinda to be cared for separately from the other two children. Kirkham DCJ found that in the light of family circumstances there was a strong probability that this would happen if
Mrs Peitsch died while her children were young.
 
DISPOSAL
OF THE APPEAL ON DAMAGES
I have had the benefit of reading the judgments prepared by Meagher JA and Grove AJA. For the reasons given by Meagher JA I agree that Kirkham DCJ was right to proceed on the basis that Gelinda's father was Mr Willis. For reasons which
I have sought to explain his Honour was correct to assess separately the damages for loss of past and future services and support recoverable by Gelinda and recoverable by Nicole and Shane.
The appellant's argument that the amount awarded was excessive depended upon the contention that there was duplication arising out of the separate awards to Gelinda and to Nicole and Shane. It was said that in calculating the loss of past services to Gelinda for the 1987 year the trial judge assumed that 95 percent of the value of domestic services would have been supplied to her by her mother had she not been killed and that when assessing the damages for past domestic services in the same year for Nicole and Shane the trial judge was of the view that 25 percent of services would have been supplied to
Nicole and Shane by the deceased had she not been killed making a total of 120 percent for the three children.
This argument depends upon the supposition that the total claim could not exceed the loss of the financial contribution made by Mrs
Pietsch to the household before her death. However as I have indicated I do not think that the damages awarded are so limited. In my opinion the Act enables the Court to compensate children for the needs created by the death of their parent.
As Meagher
JA points out an argument was run on behalf of the appellant that the trial judge did not sufficiently take into account the duty of Mr
Willis to support his child. In the present case this was not a relevant consideration. Until the time of her death Mrs Pietsch supported Gelinda. By the death of her mother she lost that support. It could not be said that on her mother's death, she had a reasonable expectation of material gain which could be measured by reference to support to be provided by her father. The evidence accepted by his Honour was that her need for support was only likely to be provided by others and he compensated her accordingly. He was entirely justified in doing so.
 
INTEREST
The appellant contended that the award of damages should be reduced by not allowing any amount for interest on past services or support and relied upon [s35D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/s35d.html) (1) of the [Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act 1942](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/). [Part 3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/index.html#p3a) of that Act was inserted in 1984. Relevantly the Part applied to and in respect of an award of damages (a) which related to the death of a person caused by or arising out of the use of a motor vehicle and (b) which was payable out of the Transport Accidents Compensation
Fund; s35A. In those respects it applied to the award of damages in this case. Section 35C imposed a maximum amount of compensation in respect of an award of damages to which
Part 3A applied "for the value of services of a domestic nature or services relating to nursing and attendance". I acknowledge the distinction drawn in the joint judgment in Nguyen between a claim for damages for personal injuries which includes damages assessed by reference to the cost of services which were required to satisfy a need to which the plaintiff's disability gave rise, and a claim under the Act. But clearly in the present case part of the respondents' claim consists of damages or a loss of services of a domestic nature provided by their mother. Whether Part 3A in its original or amended form was intended to apply to claims under the Act it seems to me that its language is plain.
Section 35D (1) as amended by the Motor
Accidents (Amendment) Act 1994
Schedule 1, which commenced on 17 June 1994, provided as follows: "(1) A court shall not, in relation to an award of damages to which this Part applies, order the payment of interest, and no interest shall be payable, on an amount of general damages, or damages under section 35C, in respect of the period from the date of the death of or injury to the person in respect of whom the award is made to the date of the award.

Except as provided by this section, nothing in this section affects any other law relating to the payment of interest on an amount of general damages.

Subsection , as amended by the Motor Accidents (Amendment)
Act 1994, applies to claims for damages arising from the death of or bodily injury to a person caused by or arising out of the use, between 1 July 1984 and 30 June 1987 (both dates inclusive), of a motor vehicle that were not settled or finally determined as at the date of commencement of the amendment made by that Act to that subsection."
As Meagher JA says in his judgment s35D was amended in 1994 to deny to a plaintiff interest on damages recovered for services of the sort described in
Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer; see the Second Reading Speech, Hansard 4 May 1994 at p .
The damages recoverable relate to Mrs Peitsch's death caused by or arising out of the use between 1 July 1984 and 30 June of a motor vehicle. The appellant submitted that the claims on behalf of the three children "were not settled or finally determined as at" 17 June 1994. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s81.html) of the [District Court Act 1973](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) provides: "Subject to this or any other Act, a judgment in an action shall, unless set aside in accordance with this Act, be final and conclusive between the parties to the action."
It was put that s35D (3) speaks not of final judgments but rather of claims for damages that were not settled or finally determined as at the date of commencement of the legislation.
 .
A final judgment is one which finally determines and disposes of the rights of the parties; Licul versus Corney <case>; [(1976) 180 CLR 213] at 248, 253-4. In my opinion, in the language of s35D (3), a judgment in an action in the
District Court finally determines a plaintiff's claim for damages even though there is a right of appeal which a party has exercised. Accordingly in the present proceedings the respondents' claims for damages were finally determined by Judge Kirkham's judgment and orders. Only if and when his
Honour's judgment and orders in respect of the claim for damages are set aside or varied on appeal could it be said that the claims were not settled or finally determined by him. Accordingly, in my opinion, s35D (1) does not apply to the award of damages made in this case and this ground of appeal also fails.
 
ORDERS
I agree with Meagher JA that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
GROVE AJA:
I have had the advantage of reading the judgment of Meagher JA in draft form and I do not need to repeat the facts which he has summarized.
I agree with his Honour's conclusions other than on the question of interest and except on that issue I wish only to state shortly my reasons for rejecting the principal thrust of the appellant's argument.
The foundation of that argument lay in the statutory prohibition against multiple actions: [Compensation to Relatives Act 1897](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/) [s 5.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/s5.html) As all beneficiaries must share in the proceeds of the single action it was put that the totality of their derivative losses must be assessed by evaluating the financial support and services previously provided to them by the deceased and then apportioning the resultant sum among them. This is the conventional approach and would be appropriate in most cases. The statutory prescription however facilitates the award of damages "proportioned to the injury resulting from such death to the parties respectively for whom and for whose benefit such action is brought": [Compensation to Relatives Act 1897](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/) [s 4.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/s4.html)
Although conventional assessment is done in the fashion contended by the appellant there may be cases where it is not practicable properly to assess such losses except by examination of those suffered by the individuals:
Gullifer versus Pohto 1978 2 NSWLR 353. Those situations were in that case described as exceptional which I take in context to mean that the requirements of fair and just assessment cannot be met by a single lump sum approach.
A tortfeasor ought be taken to foresee that the victim may have children of different paternity and that, upon death, benefits which were formerly provided from a single source may be replaced by the like emanating from separate sources. Each potential recipient has an expectation of future benefit which is destroyed by the death. The division of source is not a subsequent event increasing the extent of pecuniary loss any more than is the change which would occur if a single source was replaced by only one other.
That perspective is not inconsistent with anything said in Ruby versus Marsh <case>; [1975 CLR 642]
Mr Leslie QC for the appellant contended that the available damages could never exceed the evaluation (at commercial rates) of the support and services rendered by the individual deceased or, as he somewhat colourfully pressed his proposition, a defendant may not be made to supply two mothers to replace one.
The contention is flawed by its restriction to evaluating the services and support emanating from the deceased rather than - as the statute authorizes evaluation proportioned to the injury resulting from the death to the entitled parties respectively. In relatively unconventional circumstances the result of calculation may see the latter exceed the former. This is such a case and although it may be unusual there is no principle of assessment of damages which prevents an award exceeding evaluation of the total benefit provided in the way the deceased did it in fact, if reasonable replacement in the way it comes to be done after the death costs more.
I turn to the issue of interest. Kirkham DCJ considered the losses of
Nicole and Shane (who together returned to their father after the death) in combination and the losses of Gelinda alone. In each case his Honour made separate assessments of what he termed for convenience loss of services and loss of support. He awarded no damages to Nicole and Shane for loss of support but awarded $19,560 to Gelinda for loss accruing until the date of trial on the basis of findings as to the likely employment situation of the deceased.
Those findings are not now the subject of challenge. $19,560 represents the sum by which his Honour estimated Gelinda would have benefited during the period and she has accordingly suffered the detriment of being kept out of that sum and I see no reason why interest would not in principle be payable: cf Batchelor versus Burke <case>; [1981 148 CLR 448.]
Kirkham DCJ found that prior to her death the deceased was providing various services concurrently to her three children. He detailed these and I will - as he did - refer to them compendiously as loss of services and, as I need only on the issue of interest deal with the period from death to judgment to past loss of services.
Nicole and Shane's losses of past services were replaced by their father and for a time in part by his second wife. That marriage has apparently not endured. These replacement services were evaluated at $47,197 and enhanced by $26,496.75 being interest at 17.5 percent for 6.7 years. The resultant interest component was halved in order to allow for the gradual accrual of loss during the period. Gelinda's past loss of services were replaced by her aunt and her grandmother. The replacement by them was evaluated at $118,500.40 and enhanced by $69,989.30 after a similar interest component calculation.
The issue is whether jurisdiction to make those awards of interest has been extinguished by statute.
Meagher JA has referred to the curial history revealed by Setree versus Roberts [1989 1 NSWLR 649]
The subject accident occurred on 3 May 1985. It was common ground at the hearing of the appeal - insofar as date was concerned - that [Part 3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/index.html#p3a) of the [Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act 1942](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/) applied. Including addition which has been effected by the Motor Accidents (Amendment) Act 1994 relevant provisions are: "35A.
This Part applies to and in respect of an award of damages: which relates to the death of or bodily injury to a person caused by or arising out of the use of a motor vehicle; and which is payable out of the Transport Accidents Compensation
Fund, ...
...
C(1) Where an award of damages to which this Part applies is to include compensation for the value of services of a domestic nature or services relating to nursing and attendance: which have been or are to be provided by another person to the person in whose favour the award is made; and for which the person in whose favour the award is made has not paid and is not liable to pay, the amount of the compensation shall not exceed: where the services provided or to be provided are not less than 40 hours per week: the amount per week comprising the amount estimated by the
Australian Statistician as the average weekly total earnings of all employees in New South Wales for: in respect of the whole of any part of a quarter occurring between the date of the injury in relation to which the award is made and the date of the award, being a quarter for which such an amount has been estimated by the Australian Statistician and is, at the date of the award, available to the court making the award - that quarter; or in respect of the whole or any part of any other quarter - the most recent quarter occurring before the date of the award for which such an amount has been estimated by the Australian
Statistician and is, at that date, available to the court making the award; or where the Australian Statistician fails or ceases to estimate the amount referred to in subparagraph (i), the prescribed amount or the amount determined in such manner or by reference to such matters, or both, as may be prescribed; or where the services provided or to be provided are less than 40 hours per week - the amount calculated at an hourly rate of one-fortieth of the amount determined in accordance with paragraph (i) or (ii), as the case may be.
Except as provided by this section, nothing in this section affects any other law relating to the value of services of the kind referred to in subsection .
D(1) A court shall not, in relation to an award of damages to which this Part applies, order the payment of interest, and no interest shall be payable, on an amount of general damages in respect of the period from the date of the death of or injury to the person in respect of whom the award is made to the date of the award.
Except as provided by this section, nothing in this section affects any other law relating to the payment of interest on an amount of general damages.
Subsection (1), as amended by the Motor Accidents (Amendment)
Act 1994, applies to claims for damages arising from the death of or bodily injury to a person caused by or arising out of the use, between 1 July 1984 and 30 June 1987 (both dates inclusive), of a motor vehicle that were not settled or finally determined as at the date of commencement of the amendment made by that Act to that subsections."
Section 35A (a) and section 35D(3) evince legislative intention that claims made under the [Compensation to Relatives Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/) be comprehended within the frame of operation of [Part 3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/index.html#p3a) by the specific mention of awards relating to or arising from death. I recognize a difficulty in application of that part of the expression in Section 35D(1) as refers to general damages - which has no special definition in the statute - in respect of the period from date of death when that species of cause of action vests no right to damages of that category, however I consider it applies otherwise. Section 35C does no more than impose a ceiling upon the amount of damages of the class with which it deals. No submission was made that the components relating to loss of services exceeded an amount calculated by reference to Section 35C(1)(c) or (d).
I consider that the services detailed by Kirkham DCJ are inevitably comprehended within the scope of the expression "services of a domestic nature" where it appears in Section 35C(1). With respect to the different view, I do not think that the operation of Section
C can be confined in its operation to domestic services rendered to a living litigant in accordance with the principles discussed in Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer <case>; [1977 139 CLR 161.] In the instances of
Nicole and Shane and of Gelinda they are being compensated for the services of a domestic nature which have been provided by persons other than themselves and for which they have not paid nor are they liable to pay. I am fortified in my view by the use of the expression "person in whose favour the award is made" which would extend to a beneficiary entitled under a claim for tort caused death rather than a noun such as claimant, plaintiff or the like.
The accident had occurred on 3 May 1985.
In accordance with the terms of s 35D(3) a bar against the award of interest will apply if the claim was not settled or finally determined as at the commencement date of the statute mentioned in the subsection which was 17 June 1994. Kirkham DCJ had given judgment on February 1992. Section 81 of the District Courts Act 1973 declares his judgment final and conclusive between the parties subject to that and any other Act.
If the language chosen by Parliament constituting <case> had been couched in terms of final judgment
I would have little difficulty in concluding that the instant case was exempted from the prohibition against award of interest. Authority in that regard is abundant for example: Licul and
Ors versus Corney <case>; [(1976) 180 CLR 213]; Southern Cross Exploration versus Fire and All Risks
Insurance [1990 21 NSWLR 200] and the cases referred to in the judgments therein. The focus in the authorities has been upon the dichotomy between final and interlocutory judgment.
The different expression "finally determined" which appears in the legislation under examination conveys the notion of absence of pendency. At 17
June 1994 appeal was pending in this Court. The lodgment of that appeal does not of itself operate as a stay of proceedings but the giving of security to the satisfaction of the Registrar of the District Court would have done so: [District Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) <case>. No information on this topic was provided by the parties but whilst, as I have said, the judgment of 28 February 1992 was indisputably final as distinguished from interlocutory, if it was stayed from execution then its status would in my opinion fulfil the legislative prescription of a claim not "finally determined". If no stay was operative and the parties nevertheless treated the litigation as pending, I do not consider any different result should follow. At the hearing of the appeal senior counsel for the appellant expressly submitted that "a case which is under challenge on appeal cannot be said to be finally determined within the meaning of that <case>) section". In response counsel for the respondent included the following in submissions ".......the proscription on the availability of 'interest under [Part 3A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/index.html#p3a) is retrospective. Whichever rules of construction are to apply, the retrospective removal of the common law entitlement to interest requires clear words. The words of ss.35C and 35D simply do not accommodate the nature of the claim brought under Lord Campbell's
Act." Submissions contrary to the apparent concession were not received from the respondent until the matter was raised by the Court.
It is not now necessary to detail those circumstances.
In my opinion the appeal should be allowed and judgment in the amount of $361,758.57 substituted for $458,244.62. Such would reflect the removal of the ingredients of interest earlier identified. As mine is a minority view I need not formulate formal orders. I would in any event order the appellant to pay the respondent's costs of appeal having regard to the extent of the success which I consider it should have being dependent upon legislation passed after the hearing in the District Court. I would exclude from that order the additional costs of the appellant referrable to the supplementary submissions on the issue of the retrospective operation of <case> which should be paid by the respondent.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/22.html  
