

G N Simmonds versus M C Spooner [1996] NSWSC 192 (13 June 1996) 
GREGORY NOEL SIMMONDS versus MARK CHARLES SPOONER /86 
Thursday 13 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff sues the defendant for damages for personal injuries allegedly suffered by him on 17 June 1984 when the motor vehicle which he was driving and which was at the time stationary at traffic lights, was struck in the rear by another vehicle driven by the defendant. Liability has been admitted and the matter has proceeded for assessment of damages only. The major issue in the case has been whether the plaintiff's serious injury to his lumbar spine, which I shall detail shortly, was caused or contributed to by the subject motor vehicle accident.

The plaintiff was born on 30 December 1954 and left school about age 14 when in second year to work as an off-sider on his father's truck. He said he was not very good at school and can hardly read and write.

After leaving his father's employ he had a number of factory jobs and also worked as a bouncer at the Adriatico Restaurant Nightclub in Fairfield. He married on 2 November 1974 but he and his wife separated some years later after having two children, one of whom died.

He was always keen on fitness and had started training with weights when young, and at the time of the subject accident he was going to the gymnasium 7 days a week for up to 2 to 4 hours a day and, in addition, often used to run a couple of kilometres before going to work.

In his late twenties he did a Fibrous Plastering course and obtained work as a plasterer; it was work he enjoyed, he was earning a better income than previously, and some months before the accident he went into partnership with
Garry Stephenson in the plastering and gyprocking business. This was heavy work and involved climbing ladders and scaffolding, lifting and fixing sheets of plaster etc, a lot of the work being overhead.

The plaintiff said that at the time of the accident he had a seat belt on, heard the screech of brakes behind him, the other car ran into the back of his vehicle and pushed him into another stationary vehicle in front of him. He described it as a pretty heavy impact and said he was thrown forward, back again and, he thinks, forward again (at a later stage of his evidence he also described some sideways movement). He was dazed and stunned and, as he tried to get out of the car and stand up, he collapsed. He was helped to his feet, felt abnormal but cannot remember if he felt pain at that time. Ambulance officers attended and he complained to them of his neck hurting and of dizziness. He was taken to Westmead Hospital but got sick of waiting so he left and got a taxi home still feeling pretty shaken up, numb and groggy. His then fiancee and her mother came over and took him to their place as they wanted to take him to their doctor. He went to their place but not to their doctor, and cannot remember why he did not go. At this time his head was aching a bit, he felt cold and tired, and just wanted to rest.

Although the plaintiff in his evidence described the impact as "pretty heavy", the ambulance report described it as low impact. The information is likely to have come from the plaintiff at the time.

The next morning his partner Garry Stephenson picked him up to take him to work and they were involved in another accident, which is not the subject of these or any other proceedings, when another car hit the front passenger side of their car, ie where the plaintiff was sitting. He could not remember the severity of the impact but both vehicles had to be taken away. He cannot remember whether he was hurt in that accident, but continued on to work for the day, did not feel comfortable and kept getting little dizzy spells and blackouts. He did not seek any medical help at this stage.

A while after the accident, which he thinks was a few months, during which time he continued working as a plasterer, he developed pain in the lower part of his back which he indicated as being one to two inches above the belt line and which felt like a knife was being stuck in his back. At the time he and his partner were lifting a plaster sheet into a ceiling position above their heads and he was standing on tip toes. This was the first time he had felt pain in his low back and he also was aware (for the first time) of altered sensation and pain in his legs. Following this he sought medical help for the first time, seeing a female Indian doctor at Guildford, a chiropractor and a physiotherapist, none of whom he can name or identify, except for a physiotherapist, Kate Noble at Merrylands. He was told the back pain was due to muscle spasm and possibly tension, but Miss Noble also advised him to get x-rays done. By this time, which was about 8 to 12 months after the accident, he could not walk properly and had ceased work, but continued going to the gymnasium for spas, saunas and such like to kill the tension.

On 15 August 1985 (approximately 14 months after the accident) he went to
Westmead Hospital complaining of back pain from lifting weights. He said in evidence that he had difficulty lifting weights from about a few months after the accident, and a few days previously he was doing his bench presses (30 pounds each arm) when he felt pain in the back and knew something was wrong; he spoke to the person who ran the gymnasium who said he ought to stop doing the bench presses. When he went to the hospital he says he told them that pain had come on when lifting weights the previous evening, and that when he woke up in the morning the back was hurting. This incident was after he had given up work. According to the Westmead Hospital notes, he complained of low back pain while weight lifting (300 pounds plus) 3 nights earlier at the gym - the pain persisted and was getting worse, more so with neck flexion and he had had no previous episodes.

The plaintiff denied that he had ever lifted 300 pounds weight, or told anyone so.

Then in October 1985, after he had seen Doctor di Francesco at his surgery, he collapsed at the home of a friend, Michael Palomari (since deceased), and was taken to Fairfield District Hospital, and thence to Guildford Heights Private
Hospital where he had traction, and a Myelogram on 27 November 1985 showed "L4-L5 posterior lateral disc herniation with compression and compaction of the L5 nerve roots bilaterally". A laminectomy was performed on 29 November by Dr Caspary and a very large disc prolapse excised.

He was better after the operation, but still had a lot of pain in his back and legs. He asked for another operation to relieve the pain, but could not have it until he paid Guildford Heights Hospital. He complains of continuing back pain and pain in his legs, with headaches, and a loss of concentration.

There are a number of inconsistencies in the various histories given and discrepancies between the evidence given by the plaintiff in this trial and in an earlier trial of the same matter in 1990, the judgment in which was subsequently set aside by the Court of Appeal, but from which the transcripts of the evidence of the plaintiff and Mrs Stade were admitted as evidence in this trial. In particular, the plaintiff made no reference to his second motor vehicle accident at any stage in his evidence in the first trial nor in any history given to any doctor until he told Doctors Wilcox, Revai and Henke (all doctors retained by the defendant) in October 1995.

Although in his evidence the earlier trial he said he felt low back pain on the day of the accident and he told Dr Mahony in 1986 that he suffered an injury to the back (without specifying whether he then felt pain) and told Dr
Middleton in 1990 that at the time of the impact he noted sore head, sore neck, sore back and painful left hand, he gave no evidence in this trial of feeling low back pain on the day of the first accident and on more than one occasion said he first felt pain in his low back or any pain or altered sensation in his legs "a few months" after the accident whilst lifting the plaster sheet above his head in the course of his work as a plasterer whilst fixing a ceiling. He said it was after this incident that he went to see the
Indian doctor and other doctors - and he never told any of the doctors in that period about the two motor vehicle accidents (or so he says).

He told Dr di Silva in 1987 that he experienced some headaches, neckaches with funny feeling in his right leg, and pins and needles in the left leg on the evening of the accident, and then had two weeks off work (which is inconsistent with returning to work the following day and having another accident on the way to work). He told Dr Hugh Barry in June 1989 that after the accident he had pain in the low part of his back and x-rays were taken, and told Assistant Professor Jones of neck pain and shock, and having x-rays taken at Westmead, but made no reference to back pain.

There is no record of any complaint by the plaintiff of low back pain on the night of the accident in either the ambulance notes or the Westmead Hospital notes.

Then in October 1995 he told Dr Wilcox that by the time he got home on the evening of the accident he had some low back pain and a headache, and that for a few months following that, whilst continuing to work as a plasterer, he was free of any pain or incapacitating symptoms, but the low back pain came on slowly and gradually over a period of weeks and months. He told Dr Revai that he had back problems and headaches after the accident and developed back pain some months after the accident but he had no idea how long, and also told Dr
Henke he had back pain after the accident.

He claims he omitted reference to the second accident in the earlier trial on the advice of his then solicitors (an explanation in respect of which I have considerable reservations); and there are a number of inconsistencies and a total lack of corroboration by way of contemporary medical records in respect of a number of essential features of the plaintiff's claim. He is a poor historian, and while this may be due to his limited education and intellectual capacity as described in some of the reports (eg Dr Weiner), a possible explanation for discrepancies does not supply positive evidence to the contrary, and it is necessary to consider closely the evidence in the trial.

Although there are a number of self serving statements to doctors that he had low back pain on the day of the accident and his evidence in earlier trial was to the same effect, there is no corroboration of that matter and his evidence in this trial has constantly been that he first felt back pain a few months later when lifting gyprock sheets above his head at work.

Some of the plaintiff's answers were incredible and contradictory, like his reference to his involvement with John Marsden (his former solicitor) his explanation for his involvement with Bill Bayeh, claims of lifting weights to help him go to sleep, the so-called "ambush" at a Sans Souci restaurant and his evidence about kicking in the doors of brothels.

All these inconsistencies suggest that he is an unreliable (although not necessarily intentionally dishonest) witness, and this is compounded by the large number of matters which he cannot remember.

He said his records were all stolen from Michael Palomari's house whilst he was in hospital at Guildford Heights but this is inconsistent with the tender of Exhibit 7, (which had been produced by the plaintiff and pre-dated that period).

He has a criminal record both before and after the accident, mainly for break, enter and steal, stealing, and assault. In particular, there is an arrest for assault occasioning actual bodily harm on 26 July 1984, which on the plaintiff's version related to him knocking out a tow truck driver. There was another occasion (also post the subject accident) when he chased a private investigator and assaulted him with a baseball bat, hardly the act of a person seriously affected by lumbar pain. There was an air of unreality about the plaintiff at times, for example renting a car for $400 per week when he had no income other than the pension because he liked nice cars. This evidence was confirmed by Mr Raisa.

A video taken of the plaintiff shows him sweeping the backyard without apparent difficulty, bending over to wash the dog, and generally moving his neck and back without any apparent discomfort.

He underwent a Functional Capacity Assessment by ORS Rehabilitation Services
Pty Limited on 28 November 1989 and results indicated no limitations on his physical capabilities. The consultant physiotherapist (Pamela Johnston) reported: "Results of weighted activities have shown Mr Simmonds to be capable of all lift and carry tasks that would be required of him in his pre-injury occupation of a plasterer..... Throughout the entire assessment he exhibited good body mechanics and manual handling techniques. His general body appearance was not in my experience, one of a person who is forced to limit his physical activities due to his level of pain." 
At examination on 31 December 1989, Dr Garvan found that he had a normal range of neck movements, and of all movements of the lumbo sacral spine without complaint of pain, that flexion, abduction and external rotation of his hips was of full range and pain free, that he was able to squat on his haunches and rise with ease, and that clinically he appeared to be a strong, fit, agile man physically capable of any form of manual labour.

Mr Stephenson said that he knew the plaintiff when they worked as partners doing subcontract plastering for Gridcom Pty Ltd in 1984, having commenced work in that capacity on 16 May 1984; and that the plaintiff was initially a good, keen worker but that, at some time after the plaintiff's motor vehicle accident, a change developed progressively in his attitude to work and his capacity for work, and eventually the plaintiff stopped working with him for
Gridcom.

He said that after the motor vehicle accident the plaintiff complained of neck pain and he recalled an occasion (after the accident, although he could not recall how long after) whilst they were working at Enfield and were lifting gyprock sheets above their heads on a ceiling job when the plaintiff had great difficulty lifting because of back pain. He could not say if that was the first occasion on which the plaintiff had complained of back pain.

He also gave evidence of the "second accident" the day following the first, but gave a somewhat different description of it; in particular he said it was the driver's side of their vehicle which was struck by the other vehicle.

Dr Caspary, who had performed the laminectomy in November 1985 said that it was quite common after car accidents for there to be generalised aches and pains which crystallised to a particular area within a few months; and that both motor vehicle accidents, the second of which he understood to have been trivial, followed by the gyprock lifting incident and the August 1985, the gymnasium lifting incident were all consistent with the first motor vehicle accident being a major cause of the disc protrusion. Although he considered two months not an unreasonable delay following the accident for the development of low back pain, he considered three months to be the outside limit that if there was absolutely no complaint of low back pain at all between the car accident and the lifting incidents, one would have to attribute the subsequent disc lesion to one of the lifting incidents, either the gyprock or in the gymnasium, or to both.

Dr Wilcox on the other hand was of the opinion that the mechanics of a rear end collision, which results in an extension movement of the spine, could not cause the posterior extrusion of a disc, and that the absence of complaint of lower back pain, continuation at work as a plasterer and continuation at the gymnasium until the gyprock lifting incident excluded each motor vehicle accident as a possible cause of the disc lesion. Dr Henke also considered it unlikely that a rear end collision could cause a lumbar disc protrusion particularly if the plaintiff was (as he claims) wearing a seat belt at the time.

Mr Ingram submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that I should have regard to a letter from Gridcon Pty Ltd dated 13 October 1985 (Exhibit M) and, although the statements in items 2 and 3 to the effect that the plaintiff only commenced work with that company on 19 July 1984 (after the accident on 17
June 1984) are inconsistent with the evidence of the plaintiff and Mr
Stephenson, and with the "prescribed payments" records (Exhibit D) and, in his submission, clearly wrong, I should nevertheless accept the other statement in item 2 to the effect that he resigned from that company on 16 August 1984. I should, he further submitted, then infer from Mr Stephenson's evidence that if mid August was when the plaintiff ceased working with him for Gridcom, the overhead plaster lifting incident must have been at least a couple of weeks earlier, say at the end of July, and this means that the plaintiff had low back and referred leg pain within about six weeks of the accident, well within the outer limit of three months indicated by Dr Caspary, and so I should find the first motor vehicle accident to be a cause of his subsequent back condition. This scenario would appear to fit in with Mr Stephenson's recollection that the gyprock lifting incident took place at Enfield (which is where it seems they were working at the time of the motor vehicle accidents).

The argument does great credit to Mr Ingram's effort and ingenuity, and has some superficial attractiveness, but it involves accepting snippets of evidence which fit it and rejecting vast quantities of evidence which are inconsistent with it, for no apparent reason other than they do not fit into the argument. It is not consistent with the plaintiff's evidence that the gyprock lifting incident with the first back pain occurred "a few months" after the motor vehicle accidents; and whilst I acknowledge that "a few months" is itself a vague measure of time, it does not fit easily with six weeks, and the plaintiff said that he thought it eight to ten months after the car accidents that he stopped work and that in the meantime he had been doing a reduced programme at the gymnasium; but it was fourteen months after the accident that he went to Westmead Hospital following an incident at the gymnasium. Although I acknowledge that busy resident medical officers do not always correctly understand or record the histories they are given by patients, I believe it likely that the plaintiff (for whatever reason) made some reference to lifting 300 pounds. He may not have understood the meaning of "previous episodes" and however the question was framed, he may have thought it referred only to previous incidents at the gymnasium, but it is surprising that he did not make some reference to previously hurting his back in a motor vehicle accident or lifting plaster sheets if, because of such pain, he was only doing a modified workout at the time.

Most importantly however, Mr Ingram's submission overlooks what appears crucial to Dr Caspary's opinion. A number of questions were put to the doctor on the basis that the gyprock lifting incident occurred about a few months after the accident and that a "few months" meant three months; and he said that three months was the outer limit and if there had been no complaint of pain for three months that tended to exclude the motor vehicle accident as the probable cause of the plaintiff's later condition. Mr Ingram seized on this piece of evidence and submitted that if the lifting incident with complaint of back pain came within six weeks of the first motor vehicle accident, that on
Dr Caspary's opinion implicated that accident as a cause of the plaintiff's condition. But the doctor's final word as I understand it was that if there was absolutely no complaint of any low back pain at all between the car accident and the lifting incidents, one would have to attribute the subsequent disc lesion to one of the lifting incidents, the gyprock or the 300 pounds (pp , 207, 208), and there was no evidence of any such complaint during that period.

In particular, Mr Stephenson whose evidence is essential to acceptance of Mr
Ingram's submission and who gave evidence of the plaintiff's complaints of low back pain and deterioration of his work performance, could not say how long after the motor vehicle accident these matters occurred. He recalled the lifting incident at work but could not say how long after the motor vehicle accidents this was and could not say whether the plaintiff had complained of low back and leg pain prior to that incident, although he said it was around that time.

Certain basic propositions must in my view be accepted. The plaintiff (on the evidence in this case although contrary to histories given previously) made no complaint of low back pain and saw no doctor or other health professional until after the gyprock lifting accident; after that incident he complained of low back pain, ceased work and sought medical help, although one wonders at the level of pain as he continued attending the gymnasium until an incident there in August 1985 when he was probably (and unwisely) attempting to lift pounds or close to it.

The case is difficult because the plaintiff certainly developed a painful disc protrusion which required surgery, and has been left with some degree of continuing disability, although there is some dispute as to the extent of that disability. It may be that the shaking up he received in the motor vehicle accident along with a further shaking up in the further accident the following day, his heavy work as a plasterer and in the gymnasium, and the natural ageing process all combined rendered him more susceptible to a disc protrusion in the subsequent gyprock lifting and gymnasium lifting incidents, but on the whole of the evidence with all its gaps and inconsistencies, I cannot be satisfied that the subject motor accident probably caused or contributed to the disc protrusion, and I must accordingly find against the plaintiff on that issue.

He did however suffer some injuries in the motor vehicle accident of 17 June including headache, dizziness and probably a musculo-ligamentous injury to the cervical spine, all of which caused him to feel what he described as numb and groggy, and the effects seemed to have continued in varying degrees for about two years by which time they were overtaken by the low back pain following the gyprock lifting incident.

On this basis I assess the plaintiff's general damages at $16,000 and attribute this all to the period within two years of the accident. By what I understand to be the appropriate application of M B P (SA) Pty Ltd versus Gogic <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 657] at 666 in respect of a closed period, I allow interest on this amount at 4% for 10 years, namely $6,400, a total of $22,400.

None of the out of pocket expenses (agreed as to amounts only) relate to these conditions and no relevant loss of income has been proved.

I therefore direct the entry of judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $22,400.

GREGORY NOEL SIMMONDS versus MARK CHARLES SPOONER /86 
THURSDAY 13 JUNE 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $22,400. (Counsel addressed on the question of costs) 
Following the handing down of my judgment the defendant has made an application pursuant to the Supreme Court Rules, Part 52 rule 17(5) for an order that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs from 22 May 1990 following the making of an offer of compromise in excess of the amount recovered by the plaintiff.

The plaintiff on the other hand has made an application pursuant to Part 52 rule 24(4) for an order that he be allowed the whole of his costs notwithstanding the provisions of subrule (3)(d) of that rule.

The amount recovered by the plaintiff is small. It would be unfortunate if the whole of this amount was eaten up in paying the costs of the defendant. On the other hand in my view it is a case which if properly assessed by the plaintiff, and I emphasise the plaintiff rather than his legal advisers, would not have been brought in this court but in the District Court. Accordingly I decline to make any special orders as to costs and the only order I make is the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
