

Trimmer versus Lax Matter No 112358/94 [1997] NSWSC 189 (9 May 1997) 
Trimmer versus Lax - Estate Mary Audrey Fresen /94 May 1997 
Hodgson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Probate Division 
NO 112358 OF 1994 TRIMMER V LAX 
ESTATE MARY AUDREY FRESEN 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The late Mary Audrey Fresen died on 9th June 1991, aged 89. In these proceedings, Stanley Trimmer, one of the executors named in a testamentary document dated 29th April 1988, seeks probate of that document.
William Mitchell, the other executor named in that document, pre-deceased the testator; and by her Amended Cross-Claim, Nieves Lax, the widow of that other executor, seeks rectification of the testamentary document dated 29th April in such a way as to provide that she should take the gift that her late husband would have taken under that testamentary document.

The evidence indicates that the deceased married once, was divorced in about , and had no children. Her father died in England in 1955, aged 86; and her mother died in England in 1957, aged 85. Her only sibling was a brother, who died in Canada on 10th July 1989, and had no children. The evidence does not expressly deal with this, but it seems unlikely in the extreme that the deceased was survived by any grandparent or uncle or aunt. In any event, it would appear that there is no reasonable possibility of such a person being located. It seems clear therefore that the Court can proceed on the basis that the deceased left no next-of-kin; and that any assets as to which there was an intestacy would go to the Crown as bona vacantia. The Crown Solicitor was notified of these proceedings, and has indicated no wish to take part in them.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
The deceased left an estate comprising a house property at Kurnell, said to be worth around $120,000.00, some furniture and effects, and about $20,000.00 in various accounts.

Mr. Trimmer and his wife lived in Kurnell, and were friends of the deceased for about 30 years. Mr. Mitchell and his wife (now Mrs. Lax) met the deceased in 1973, when they moved to a house in Kurnell just three houses away from that of the deceased; and they also had a close relationship with the deceased.

The earliest testamentary document which is in evidence is a duly executed will, drawn up by Morgan Ryan & Brock, Solicitors, dated 1st March 1979.
By that will, the deceased appointed Mr. Mitchell executor, made a number of small gifts to friends, gave her house "to my friends William Bernard Mitchell and his wife Nievis (sic) Mitchell to be taken by them as joint tenants or tenants in common as they desire", and gave the residue of the estate to her brother. After the death of the deceased, this document was found in the safe of Brock Partners, who succeeded to the practice of Morgan Ryan & Brock.

The next document in evidence is a handwritten letter dated 12th January 1987, apparently written to her solicitor, stating inter alia: "In reference to my last will, will you please cancel it" and "Will let you have the new will as soon as possible". This document was also found in the safe of Brock Partners.

There is a further handwritten letter dated 14th January 1987, again apparently written to the deceased's solicitor, in the following terms: 
In regard to Mr. Wm. Mitchell as Executor of My Estate in case anything should happen to him because of Cancer Trouble I have appointed Mr. Stanley Trimmer 36 Torres Street, Kurnell. He is willing to do it for me.

Thanking you 
Mrs. M.A. Fresen Balboa Street, Kurnell, N.S.W.

Mr. Stan Trimmer to have house and property same as Mr. Mitchell would have done. Mrs. M.A. Fresen.

The evidence does not establish how this document was discovered.

The next relevant document is the testamentary document dated 29th April 1988.
This is written out in the deceased's handwriting on a will form, signed by the deceased and witnessed by two persons. It is not a duly executed will, because it appears that the witnesses did not see the deceased sign the document. However, it seems clear that this document would satisfy all the requirements of s.18A of the Wills Probate & Administration Act.
Relevantly, this will included the following provisions: 
I appoint Mr. Wm. Mitchell, 14 Balboa Street, Kurnell and Mr. Stanley Trimmer, 36 Torres Street, Kurnell of Kurnell to be executors and trustee of this my will. 
I give devise and bequeath house and property (but not contents) to Mr. Wm. Mitchell, 14 Balboa Street, Kurnell and to Mr. Stanley Trimmer, 38 (sic) Torres Street, Kurnell free of all duties whatsoever.

The evidence shows that Mr. Mitchell was, to the knowledge of the deceased, extremely ill at the time this document was made; and he died less than two months later, on 23rd June 1988. This document was found in the safe of Brock
Partners.

Following the death of the deceased, three further documents were found in the deceased's house.

The first is a handwritten letter dated 7th February 1989 and headed "To my lawyer". The letter began: 
Recently I have lost my friend Mr. Wm. Mitchell who I appointed as executor of this estate in this I also appointed Mr. Stanley Trimmer because we knew sadly Mr. Mitchell was passing with cancer.

The letter went on to refer to the deceased coming home from a holiday in
Canada to hear that her brother had passed away, and it then continued: 
In regard to my will I think it would be best if anything happened to me I am 86 to sell this home and put money with money I left my brother then equally given farely (sic) to my friends plus Crippled Children Hospital and Spastic Hospital in Sydney.

On the top of a page is a PS "Could you send me a copy of will you have at office. Thanks".

The next document is a document written by the deceased on a will form, dated
October 1989, and signed by the deceased but not witnessed. The body of the will is written partly in a blue biro (the same as the signature) and partly in a black biro, with the black biro entries completing some blanks in the blue biro entries, crossing out some blue biro entries, crossing out some black biro entries, and also adding new material. This document purported to appoint Mr. Trimmer executor, and then went on "I give devise and bequeath free of all duties whatsoever the house and property to be sold and money equally divided between my friends Mr. & Mrs. Stan Trimmer and Mrs. Nieves
Lax (has re-married) 14 Balboa Street, Kurnell". The word "sold" has black brackets around it, and the word "Lax" is written in black biro into a blank left in the blue biro writing. This document has the word "cancelled" written in blue biro on the outside, apparently by the deceased.

The last of the relevant documents of the deceased is a document dated "June ". It begins "Dear Sir", and continues: 
In regard to my will I had to make a new one because of various deaths for instance Mr. William Mitchell by executor passed away with cancer then my brother Mr. Stanford Hopson also passed away in Canada, so I have decided after much thought to make a New Will then send it on to you for safe-keeping I am now the only living person in our family and I am 87 years old so feel something should be done. I have elected Mr. Stanley Trimmer instead as executor.

The document is then signed by the deceased.

ISSUES 
The first issue which was argued was whether the October 1989 document was a testamentary document satisfying the requirements of s.18A; so that it either operated as a will, or alternatively, if it had been revoked by the word "cancelled", was effective to revoke all earlier wills giving rise to a complete intestacy.

The second issue, assuming a decision against the October 1989, was whether the document of 29th April 1988 was the will of the deceased.

The next issue, assuming the 29th April 1988 document was found to be the will of the deceased, was whether that document should be rectified. This involved two questions, first whether an extension of time should be granted for applying for rectification; and second, whether rectification should actually be granted.

OCTOBER 1989 DOCUMENT 
Both of the parties who appeared before me submitted that this document never satisfied the requirements of s.18A.

There are some factors which suggest that the document was intended by the deceased to be her will: in particular, the use of a will form, the signature to the document, and the subsequent notation on the document of the word "cancelled". There is also evidence that the deceased, in late 1989, said to
Mrs. Lax "I have changed my will". However, there are substantial factors pointing the other way. Firstly, there are the extensive alterations to the document, which raise a real question as to whether the document ever was in a form which the deceased regarded as a final and satisfactory form of the document. Next, there is the circumstance that, unlike the earlier informal document of April 1988, the deceased did not have anyone witness her signature. Thirdly, there is the letter of June 1990 (as I infer) which is very indefinite as to whether the deceased did or did not consider that she had already made a new will; and also suggestive of the position that, if and when the deceased was satisfied with a new will, she would send it on to her solicitor for safe-keeping. Finally, there is the fact that, unlike earlier documents, this document was not sent to her solicitor.

Having regard to the latter four considerations, on the whole I am not satisfied that the deceased intended the document of October 1989 to be her will. The writing of the word "cancelled" on it could be taken as simply confirming that the document was not to operate as a will, rather than as being a revocation of an effective will.

TH APRIL 1988 DOCUMENT 
Both parties submitted that this was a document satisfying s.18A. For the reasons given earlier, I am satisfied that this document was intended by the deceased to be her will, and that the requirements of s.18A are satisfied.

RECTIFICATION 
Extension of Time 
Mrs. Lax gave evidence to the effect that she did not until recently understand that she could apply for rectification of this will. In circumstances where no prejudice is suggested arising from the late application, in my view it is appropriate to extend the time for the bringing of the rectification application.

Evidence 
The evidence relied on by Mrs. Lax in support of her claim for rectification, in addition to the circumstances I have already outlined, is contained in her affidavit of 14th March 1997. I will summarise the most relevant parts.

According to Mrs. Lax, the relationship between the deceased and Mrs. Lax and her husband, over a period of 18 years, was very close. Mr. Mitchell carried out property maintenance and provided transport for the deceased. The deceased was treated as a member of the family, and dealt with Mr. and Mrs. Mitchell as if they were her own children. The deceased lived with Mr. and Mrs. Mitchell in their home for about two months prior to her divorce. In about April 1987,
Mrs. Lax told the deceased that her husband had left everything to her, and the deceased said words to the effect "Whatever Bill has is yours. I know that dear". From late 1987, Mr. Mitchell's health made it impossible for him to help the deceased as he had before. At about this time, the deceased said words to the effect "Because of Bill's cancer troubles I will appoint Mr.
Trimmer as an executor too". This was repeated in about March or April 1988, and also around this time the deceased said words to the effect "This property is still to go to Stan Trimmer and Bill. Half of this property is to go to you and Bill".

In September 1989, Mrs. Lax re-married. Shortly after this, the deceased said words to the effect "With Bill gone, I'll update my will for you". A little later the deceased said "I have changed my will dear. But you will still get your half of this property".

Mr. and Mrs. Trimmer gave evidence of a very close relationship of 30 years with the deceased. According to Mr. Trimmer, he helped her over the years, and, after Mr. Mitchell became ill, then did most things for the deceased.
Both Mr. and Mrs. Trimmer gave evidence to the effect that, shortly before Mr.
Mitchell died, the deceased said words to the effect that she was angry with
Mr. Mitchell because he was trying to hurry her up making a new will.

Submissions 
Mr. Hughes for Mrs. Lax submitted that the evidence demonstrated that it was the deceased's intention, by her April 1988 document, to give one-half of the house to Mrs. Mitchell if Mr. Mitchell should pre-decease her. He referred to the closeness of the relationship of the deceased to both Mr. and Mrs.
Mitchell, to the extent that the deceased was in substance part of the family.
He pointed to the assistance given by Mr. Mitchell with domestic tasks. He submitted that the document was made only two months before Mr. Mitchell died, and the awareness of Mr. Mitchell's impending death was demonstrated by the provision for an additional executor. It could not have been her intention that there be an intestacy, with the result that one half the house go to the
Crown as bona vacantia. Both her earlier intention (in the 1979 will) and her later intention (in the proposed 1989 will) were that Mrs. Lax should receive one half of the house. This was confirmed by the deceased's statement, made about the time of the April 1988 document, that the house was to go to "you and Bill"; and by the subsequent statement that "You will still get your half of this property". Mr. Hughes referred me to the case of Commissioner of
Stamp Duties v. Carlenka (1995) 95 ATC 4620.

Mr. Boulton for Mr. Trimmer submitted that the evidence did not justify a finding that the deceased intended to benefit Mrs. Lax in the 1988 document.
The 1979 will showed that, when the deceased intended to benefit Mrs. Lax, she clearly said so. The same comment applied to the 1989 document. The 1989 document also confirmed, with its reference to Mr. and Mrs. Trimmer, that the deceased did not treat husband and wife as identical, but referred to both husband and wife when she wished to do so. He submitted that the interest proposed for Mrs. Lax under the 1989 document was, in any event, only a one- third interest. Mr. Boulton also relied on the note in the 14th January 1987 document to the effect that Mr. Trimmer was to have the property as Mr.
Mitchell would have done. He relied on the evidence that the deceased was unhappy with Mr. Mitchell around the time when she made the 1988 document:
Mrs. Lax was seeking to benefit through the gift to Mr. Mitchell, and so the deceased's unhappiness with Mr. Mitchell affected the strength of Mrs. Lax's claim to be an intended beneficiary. As regards the conversations, Mr. Boulton questioned whether I could be satisfied as to the precise words used; and submitted that, in any event, such words may not indicate testamentary intention. Mr. Boulton referred me to the case of Mortensen v. State of New
South Wales, unreported, Court of Appeal, 12th December 1991.

Decision 
It is appropriate first to decide the effect I should give to the evidence from Mrs. Lax as to statements by the deceased. The most pertinent statements are the statements alleged to have been made in about Easter 1988 to the effect that half the property was to go to "you and Bill"; and the statement alleged to have been made in about October 1989 to the effect that "You will still get your half of this property".

Mr. Boulton's submissions to the effect that the deceased expressly referred in documents to husband and wife when her intention was to benefit husband and wife, and that the October 1989 document provided only for a one-third share to go to Mrs. Lax, are relevant to the probabilities here. However, I do not think there is great weight in the former submission, because I do not consider that the deceased was particularly consistent or precise in her use of language. As regards the latter submission, it may possibly be that, if I had to construe the October 1989 document in isolation, I would hold that it gave a one-third interest to Mrs. Lax; but I do not think that the document expresses this at all clearly, and the use of the ampersand symbol between "Mr." and "Mrs." and the reversion to the use of the word "and" prior to the reference to Mrs. Lax, suggests that the deceased's intention may perhaps have been to give a one-half share to Mrs. Lax. On the whole, taking into account the history of the relationship between the deceased and Mrs. Lax, I think the overall circumstances are generally supportive of Mrs. Lax's evidence rather than contrary to it; and I am satisfied that words to the effect of those evidenced by Mrs. Lax were spoken to her by the deceased.

It is clear that it is insufficient for rectification that I can infer that the deceased would not have wished for an intestacy, with the effect that some of her estate would go to the Crown as bona vacantia. This is made clear by the case of Mortensen v. State of New South Wales, N.S.W Court of Appeal, th December 1991. In that case, as in this, a testatrix died leaving no next-of-kin. There was a close attachment between the testatrix and three children of a neighbour; and by her will, she left the whole of her estate to these three children in equal shares. One of them pre-deceased the testatrix, with the effect that there was an intestacy as to his share. The Court of
Appeal considered that, although it was not the deceased's intention that any part of her estate go to the Crown, the evidence did not show what her intention was in the event of a failure of the gift to any one of the beneficiaries.

For rectification in the present case, it is necessary that the Court be satisfied, with appropriate clarity, that the deceased did have an intention as to what should happen in the event that Mr. Mitchell pre-deceased her, and what that intention was. It is not enough for the Court to have the opinion that, if the deceased had considered the possibility, she probably would have provided in favour of Mrs. Lax. What is required is an actual intention, which has miscarried: see Commissioner of Stamp Duties v. Carlenka 95 ATC 4620 at .

In this case, there is material to suggest a continuity of intention from 1979 to 1989 and beyond, that Mrs. Lax received one half of the property, either in her own right or by virtue of her relationship with Mr. Mitchell. As mentioned earlier, I do not think great weight should be given to variations in the way that intention is expressed from time to time. So far as the document of 14th
January 1987 is concerned, the wording of that document is equivocal as to whether Mr. Trimmer should take just Mr. Mitchell's one half share, or the whole of the property. Furthermore, in the absence of evidence as to how that document was found, it is difficult to know what weight to give to it. On the whole, I am satisfied that, at the time that she made the April 1988 document, the deceased did intend that, if Mr. Mitchell should pre-decease her, Mr.
Mitchell's half share of the property should go to Mrs. Lax.

In coming to this view, I do take into account the need for clear and convincing proof in cases of rectification. As I understand that requirement, it means that the Court should not act unless it is satisfied that the party seeking rectification has used reasonable diligence in presenting to the Court all evidence going to the question of intention, and that the Court must take into account that what is sought is to alter a document which the deceased has taken the trouble to write out and sign and have witnessed. It is also necessary to show an actual intention, not merely what the deceased would have intended had she thought about the matter. But, as I understand it, the requirement for clear and convincing proof does not mean that the standard of proof is other than the balance of probabilities, having regard to the considerations I have mentioned.

For those reasons, in my opinion, there should be rectification of the testamentary document dated 29th April 1988 in such a way as to provide that
Mrs. Lax should take the gift that her late husband would have taken under that testamentary document.
 * * * 
