

Bridge Wholesale Acceptance Corporation (Australia) Limited versus Graham
Matter No 3102/92 [1998] NSWSC 236 (27 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 `BRIDGE WHOLESALE ACCEPTANCE CORPORATION (AUSTRALIA) LTD` `v JOHN CHARLES GRAHAM` `3102/92` `27 May 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application to adjourn the hearing which has been fixed before me for next Monday and Tuesday. 
The proceedings were commenced in 1992. The matter was put into the general list on 22 August 1997, after it had remained dormant for about five years. At that time the learned Registrar was informed that all of the evidence on which the plaintiff wished to rely had been filed.

The matter was taken out of the general list by me earlier this year, when I was endeavouring to deal with all matters that had been commenced prior to the end of 1993, and came on for special call over on 9 April 1998 when by consent it was fixed for next Monday and Tuesday. At that stage there was only one affidavit from the plaintiff and one from the defendant. Another affidavit by a witness for the defendant, which was sworn in December 1992, has since been filed.

Monday this week the plaintiff filed two further affidavits, one a formal affidavit which causes no particular problem because it merely substitutes for an earlier affidavit which says the same thing, but, secondly, an affidavit from a Mr Sadeik, whose evidence is totally inconsistent with the evidence given by the witnesses for the defendant.

When asked why it was that this affidavit arrived so late after the previous assurances I was told from the Bar table, and I accept, that the witness had been an independent contractor, he had gone missing and it was only this month that inquiry agents had found him, and he only made an affidavit after he was threatened with a subpoena to give oral evidence.

Whilst accepting that, it would seem to me that the probabilities are that had the private inquiry agent been put on the job much earlier the same result would have happened much earlier, and at the very least I should have been told at the call over on the 9th that there was the possibility that there would be this extra witness.

This morning when the matter was brought to my attention I indicated that I did not think that what was said to me was sufficient reason under P 37 r 8 of the Supreme Court Rules for allowing an affidavit of this nature, served about a week before the hearing, to be used on the hearing. Affidavits have to be served a reasonable time before the hearing and when one is assessing a reasonable time one takes into account the history of the matter, the assertion already given, as well as the time taken by solicitors of ordinary competence to prepare a case in reply.

On hearing that provisional ruling, counsel for the plaintiff applied for an adjournment. This was resisted by the defendant on the basis that he was 79 years of age, had been extremely worried about this case, which might involve the loss of his home, and he was in ill health and wondering very much whether he could live with the stress and anxiety of the litigation for another six months.

I need to balance the interests of the parties. There is a general principle that a person should not, no matter how delinquent, be denied the opportunity of presenting evidence before the court, unless the prejudice caused by allowing him or her to do so cannot be adequately compensated in costs.

The court would be ready to hear the case in July or early August, unless the defendant wanted to take other steps, which he may take, to involve other parties. Accordingly, we are not really looking at a six month delay, as mentioned in the defendant's affidavit. Moreover, this matter has been in the court list for six years, the first five of which did not seem to cause any concern to anybody or the case would have been heard long before this.

In my view, the prejudice in not allowing the material to be put forward outweighs the prejudice suffered by the defendant.

Accordingly, the matter will stand out of the list for next Monday and
Tuesday. The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs of and occasioned by the adjournment on the indemnity basis. Those costs may be assessed and paid forthwith.

The defendant wishes to examine his position and accordingly, I will put the matter into the list on Friday 5 June 1998 at 10.15 to reassess the situation.
 * * * 
