

Sino Synergy Investment Company Limited versus Maygood Australia Pty Limited;
Limei Wang Lee versus Yehan Koo; Yi-Fawn Lee versus Yehan Koo [2012] NSWSC 92 (20
February 2012) 
Last Updated: 24 May 2012 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Sino Synergy Investment Company Limited versus Maygood Australia Pty Limited; Limei
Wang Lee versus Yehan Koo; Yi-Fawn Lee versus Yehan Koo  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): , 22, 23, 25, 28 February 2011, 1 & 2 March 2011.  
Decision Date: February 2012  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
Slattery J  
Decision: 
Amount of $1,000,000 advanced to the defendant, Maygood Australia, is a loan.
$300,000 advanced to Maygood Australia and other defendants is not a loan.
Directions made for submissions on issues of costs.  
Catchwords: 
CONTRACT - advance of $1.3 million in two amounts of $1,000,000 (in December ) and $300,000 (in July 2007) - whether gift or loan - TRADE PRACTICES - whether misleading or deceptive conduct at the time of alleged loan transactions - CROSS-CLAIMS - whether miscellaneous sums claimed by the defendant/cross-claimant were applied for the benefit of the plaintiff/cross- defendant or otherwise.  
JUDGMENT  
Mr Yehan Koo and Ms Yi-Fawn Lee lived together as husband and wife between April 2005 and July 2008. They have one child Ang-Ya born in July 2007. Mr Koo and Ms Lee separated in July 2008 and were divorced in September 2009. During their marriage, members of the Lee family, mainly through a family company, transferred $1.3 million mainly to a Koo family company or members of the Koo family in three tranches, (1) $1,000,000 in December 2006, (2) $100,000 in July 2007, and (3) $200,000 in July 2007. The Lee family say these funds transfers were a loan and they seek its recovery in this action. The Koo family say that the $1.3 million was not advanced as a loan but was in part either (1) a gift or (2) constituted the reimbursement of money that Mr Yehan Koo already owned or (3) constituted the repatriation of Yehan and Yi-Fawn's own joint money and their engagement gifts. Deciding whether the Lee family interests have established on the balance of probabilities that the advances were a loan as pleaded requires analysis of some subtle family relationships. 
There are three sets of proceedings before the court. The plaintiffs in all proceedings are members of the Lee family and the Lee family company, Sino Synergy Investment Company Limited ("Sino"). The defendants in all proceedings are members of the Koo family and their family company, Maygood Australia Pty Limited ("Maygood Australia"). 
Ms Yi-Fawn Lee's parents, her father, Mr Tsung-Te Lee ("Tsung-Te") and her mother, Mrs Limei Wang Lee ("Limei") are the directors of and control Sino, a company registered in Mauritius in October 2001. Mr Yehan Koo and his parents, Mr Hock Yeow Koo ("Harry") and Mrs Ngai Geen Koo ("Geen") each hold one of the three issued shares in Maygood Australia and are its directors. Maygood Australia was registered in Australia in May 2005. 
The three sets of proceedings were started at different times. Two proceedings were commenced in the District Court of NSW on 25 September 2008 and the other one in this Court on 16 March 2009. The parties have conveniently labelled the two District Court proceedings by the first names of their respective plaintiffs, Ms Yi-Fawn Lee and her mother, Mrs Limei Wang Lee. One set of District Court proceedings were commenced by Ms Yi-Fawn Lee ("the Yi-Fawn proceedings") and were brought for the recovery of $100,000 that Ms Yi-Fawn Lee alleged she loaned in July 2007 to Maygood Australia and members of the Koo family. Mrs Limei Wang Lee brought the other District Court proceedings ("the Limei proceedings") claiming $200,000 she alleges she loaned to Maygood Australia and members of the Koo family in July 2007. 
Sino commenced proceedings ("the Sino proceedings") in this Court on 16 March 2009, alleging that Sino had loaned $1,000,000 to Maygood Australia in December 2006. The plaintiffs allege in all proceedings that the sums advanced have not been repaid. 
The District Court proceedings were transferred to the Supreme Court on 24 February 2010. Since then all proceedings have travelled together in directions hearings, duty lists, and in interlocutory applications. In March 2010 the plaintiffs applied to have all the proceedings transferred to the commercial list of this Court but that application failed. Costs were reserved. The plaintiffs also sought further discovery against the defendants and in April 2010 Biscoe AJ ordered further discovery and costs against the defendants. On 2 February 2011, this Court ordered that all proceedings be heard together, and for evidence in one to be evidence in the other. 
Analysis of the Three Proceedings  
The action in the three proceedings takes place in two main time periods: in the Sino proceedings the transfer of the contentious $1 million occurs in December 2006 and the conversations that precede it occur from October to December 2006; and, in the Yi-Fawn and Limei proceedings the transfers totalling $300,000 occur in July 2007. It is convenient in these reasons to analyse both the history of the parties' dealings and their pleaded causes of action with special focus on these two main time periods. But first a wider overview of the parties' dealings is needed. This is followed by more detailed findings about each of the time periods that are important for the Sino proceedings and the Yi-Fawn and Limei proceedings. Finally, these reasons also consider certain cross-claims the Koo family bring in both the Yi-Fawn and Limei proceedings. 
Overview of the Proceedings  
The Sino Proceedings - Events of October - December 2006  
Sino and the Lee family allege in the Sino proceedings that in several conversations between Mr Tsung-Te Lee and Mr Yehan Koo during October, November and December 2006 that Sino orally agreed to lend $1 million to the Koo family company, Maygood Australia, on the following terms. These terms were: (1) Sino would lend Maygood Australia $1 million; (2) Maygood Australia would only use the advance to purchase and develop certain properties in Devonshire Street, Chatswood ("the Chatswood properties") and for no other purpose; (3) Maygood Australia would pay interest at 10 per cent calculated on an annual compounding basis and capitalised for the life of the loan; (4) the principal sum and interest accrued would be paid on the happening of the earliest of several events, (if Maygood Australia chose not to purchase the Chatswood properties, on completion of the development of the Chatswood properties or on Maygood Australia's sale of the Chatswood properties) and within two years if Maygood Australia did not commence building, but certainly within 5 years of the advance; (5) Maygood Australia would provide Sino with quarterly statements in respect of the advance; (6) the Chatswood properties would not be used as security for any of Maygood Australia's borrowings other than for the acquisition of the Chatswood properties and for their development; and (7) that the parties would reduce their oral agreement to writing. 
Sino transferred $1 million to Maygood Australia in December 2006, in two tranches that were paid into Maygood Australia's account with St George Bank: $700,000 on 13 December 2006 and $300,000 on 18 December 2006. 
The parties did not dispute that in December 2006 Mr Yehan Koo created a form of written agreement entitled, "Loan Agreement between Sino Synergy Investment Co Ltd and Maygood Australia Pty Limited" (which document will be referred to in these reasons as "the Loan Agreement"), which both he and Mr Tsung-Te Lee executed in Shanghai on 20 December 2006, shortly after Sino had paid the second of the two tranches to Maygood Australia. 
Sino contends that this Loan Agreement confirms its case that the $1 million advance was a loan. But there was a strong contest between Mr Yehan Koo and Mr Tsung-Te Lee about what was said at the time the Loan Agreement was executed on 20 December 2006. Mr Yehan Koo and Maygood Australia contend that these conversations show that the Loan Agreement did not have effect according to its terms. Sino denies that contention. That contest is resolved later in these reasons. 
After 20 December 2006 within both the Lee family and the Koo family, actions were initiated which, according to the plaintiffs at least were consistent with the making of the Loan Agreement on 20 December 2006, Mr Yehan Koo created two loan statements in 2007 and both parties finalised financial corporate statements, Sino recording the loan as an asset and Maygood Australia recording it as a liability. But the circumstances in which even these actions occurred were also the subject of contest. 
In March 2007 Mr Yehan Koo prepared a document entitled, "Loan Account" and which calculated interest for a three-month period up to 20 March 2007. He created a second "Loan Account" document in December 2007, calculating interest for a twelve-month period on a similar basis. Mr Yehan Koo's version of events was that these were fictitious documents that he created to appease his wife, Yi-Fawn, and that they did not reflect any action under the Loan Agreement. 
The Lee family also rely on both Sino and Maygood Australia's accounts to support their case. Maygood Australia's financial statements show a liability to Sino of $1 million in the 2006-2007 financial year and again in the 2007-2008 financial year. Interest was also accrued on the loan in the second of these statements. The loan was also recorded as an asset in the accounts of Sino for the years 2006-2007, 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 financial years. 
At the time of $1 million advance in December 2006 Yehan Koo and Yi-Fawn Lee's marital relationship was harmonious but in July 2008 about 12 months after the birth of Ang-Ya, Yi-Fawn left Australia to work permanently in Hong Kong, leaving Ang-Ya behind. On 13 August 2008 Mr Yehan Koo commenced custody proceedings for Ang-Ya in the Family Court of Australia and was awarded custody. The first request for payment of the $1 million December 2006 advance (and indeed the first request for the other advances) was a Holman Webb Lawyers letter of demand dated 22 August 2008, sent when the parties had just separated and Mr Yehan Koo's custody proceedings were already on foot. 
Sino puts its claim for recovery of the December 2006 advance several ways: in contract; under the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) and the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) ; in mistake; and in estoppel. Sino's contract case is based on both the alleged oral contract and on the Loan Agreement of 20 December 2006. Sino says an oral agreement made in the conversations between Mr Yehan Koo and Mr Tsung-Te Lee constituted in itself a complete agreement to loan the December 2006 advance, although the parties contemplated that the agreement would be reduced to writing: an agreement falling within the first class in Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353.]
Alternatively, Sino alleges that the written Loan Agreement is binding between Sino and Maygood Australia. Sino contends there are only minor differences between the alleged oral agreement and the Loan Agreement. Sino claims recovery in contract on several bases: the oral agreement includes a term that the advance is repayable within two years if Maygood Australia did not commence building on the Chatswood properties ("the Chatswood development") within that time and it is common ground that Maygood Australia did not commence building within that time. Moreover, Sino asserts that Maygood Australia has repudiated the oral agreement and the written agreement by denying their existence from 18 June 2009 when defences were filed in these proceedings. Sino purported to accept that repudiation on 22 June 2010 by letter and terminated the loan contract; it now claims damages for that repudiation. 
But Sino also puts its case other ways. It further alleges that in the course of the October - December 2006 conversations, Mr Yehan Koo made representations about how the $1 million transferred by Sino would be expended. It is said that the moneys were actually applied for other purposes, which indicate Yehan Koo's and Maygood Australia's indifference at the time of the representations to the purposes for which the money would be applied, making the representations misleading and deceptive when they were made and that as a result, Maygood Australia has contravened [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [s 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and Mr Yehan Koo has contravened [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), [s 42.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html)
Furthermore to the extent that the written Loan Agreement does not fully reflect the terms of the oral agreement, Sino alleges under doctrines of unilateral mistake and estoppel that, it is entitled to rescission of the written agreement and the return of its money, and that Maygood Australia is estopped from denying that the written Loan Agreement conforms to the oral agreement. 
The Yi-Fawn and Limei Proceedings - Events of July 2007  
Yi-Fawn Lee alleges in the proceedings bearing her name that on about 3 July 2007 her husband asked her to lend him and his parents $100,000 for one or two months to address a temporary cash shortage. Yi-Fawn Lee alleges that the Koo family were indeed suffering a temporary cash shortage at this time, an allegation, which is strongly contested by the Koo interests. It is not in contest that Ms Lee paid a cheque for $10,000 to Yehan on 6 July 2007. Nor is it in contest that Yi-Fawn drew a further for $90,000, which was deposited into Maygood Australia's account on or about 18 July 2007. 
Limei Lee alleges in the proceedings which bear her name that on about 21 July 2007, her son-in-law asked her to lend him and Mr and Mrs Koo $200,000 for one or two months, also to address a temporary cash shortage. It is not contested that on 25 July 2007 Mrs Lee did transfer $200,000 from her account to an account that Maygood Australia maintained with St George Bank. 
Both of these payments from Yi-Fawn Lee and from her mother, Limei Lee, are recorded as loans in the December 2007 Loan Account document Mr Yehan Koo gave to Mr Lee. 
The Koo's case is that the payment of this $300,000 was a response by Yi-Fawn and other members of the Lee family to a proposal by Yehan Koo to raise funds by selling some shares that he owned in Lehman Brothers, an investment bank where he had once worked. The Koo's case is: that the Lee's did not want Yehan to sell these shares, which were then thought by Mr Lee to be a good long-term investment; that the $300,000 the Lees transferred were sourced from other offshore funds that could be used instead of selling the Lehman shares, being monies which already belonged to Yehan or the couple and were then being repatriated to Australia; and that no arrangements were made in July 2007 for Yi-Fawn or Limei Lee to lend $300,000 to the Koo's. The essential contest in these two proceedings is whether there was a loan and the funds are repayable or whether transaction is consistent with Yehan and Yi-Fawn managing their own funds. 
Yi-Fawn, Yehan and the Two Families  
The events of these proceedings take place within wider family relationships and dealings that must be recounted to give context to the contested facts. 
Yi-Fawn and Yehan  
Yi-Fawn Lee and Yehan Koo met in Hong Kong in 2001. She was then studying for an MBA at Fudan University in Shanghai, China. They commenced a relationship in March 2004, when they were both living in Shanghai. Yehan had recently left employment in Hong Kong with Lehman Brothers, an investment bank. He lived in an apartment that he owned in Shanghai. Yi-Fawn also lived in a Shanghai apartment owned by her father. Once their relationship commenced, Yehan moved into the apartment Yi-Fawn occupied and his apartment was rented out. Shortly afterwards Yehan proposed marriage to Yi-Fawn. 
Yi-Fawn and her father, Tsung-Te Lee met Yehan's parents in April 2004 when they came to Shanghai. Engagement and marriage plans were discussed. It was agreed that there would be an engagement party in Taiwan in October 2004, paid for by the Lee family, and a wedding ceremony in Australia in April 2005, paid for by the Koo family. Subject to some residual disputes about the level of expenses borne by each family for the engagement and the wedding, which the court does not have to resolve, this is largely what happened. 
On 30 October 2004 the couple celebrated their engagement with a ceremony and reception in the Lee's home city of Taichung, which is situated on the west coast of Taiwan. The engagement ceremony was elaborate. Both sides agree that the principal engagement ceremony, generally conformed with the traditions of a Chinese tea ceremony appropriate for nuptials. Aspects of this ceremony are a matter of dispute in relation to cross-claims in the Limei and Yi-Fawn proceedings. Members of the Lee family and their friends together with a small contingent of Koo family members from Sydney attended the engagement. 
The couple were married in Sydney in two ceremonies on 13 and 16 April 2005. The first ceremony for close family and friends took place at the Koo's home at Berowra Waters. The second ceremony for a wider group of acquaintances was held at Vaucluse House followed by a reception. 
After the wedding on 6 May 2005 Yi-Fawn Lee returned to Shanghai to finish her MBA degree. Yehan remained in Sydney to look for property development opportunities after which he joined Yi-Fawn in Shanghai. They both moved back to Sydney on 30 June 2005 and commenced to reside in an independent wing of the residents of Mr Harry and Mrs Geen Koo in St Ives, Sydney. 
From the very earliest conversations to which both Yi-Fawn and Yehan depose, it is evident that each preferred to live after marriage in the long term in the country of his or her birth. This ambivalence was reflected from the beginning of their married life. It was an issue that was never resolved between them. Although the couple lived in St Ives from June 2005 until July 2008, Yi-Fawn regularly expressed unhappiness about being so far away from her parents and increasingly so in late 2007 in early 2008. Both before and after the birth of the couple's daughter in July 2007, Yi-Fawn travelled often, to Taiwan, Hong Kong, Hawaii and especially Shanghai. 
During their marriage Yehan and Yi-Fawn travelled together to Shanghai or Taichung, where Mr Tsung-Te Lee continued to maintain an apartment, for a family visit each Christmas vacation. They visited Shanghai in December 2006 - January 2007 and Taichung in December 2007 - January 2008. Yi-Fawn also visited Taiwan or Shanghai in August 2005, October 2005, April 2006 (with Yehan), July 2006, September 2007 and April and May 2008 (both via Hong Kong). 
Mr and Mrs Lee travelled to Australia at the time of Ang-Ya's birth, when they stayed with the Koo's in St Ives. Mr or Mrs Lee also visited Sydney in August 2006 and in March 2007. 
Despite these visits, by December 2007 Yi-Fawn was expressing dissatisfaction with the restrictions of life looking after a child in Australia so far away from her parents. By March 2008 a publishing firm in Hong Kong had offered her employment. Her publicly expressed intention to take this position in Hong Kong, leaving Yehan and Ang-Ya behind in Australia, caused predictable friction within the marriage. 
Yi-Fawn and Yehan separated on 6 July 2008, when Yi-Fawn finally left Australia to take up the Hong Kong publishing position that had been offered to her. There was an immediate contest over the custody of Ang-Ya. On 13 August 2008 Yehan commenced custody proceedings in the Family Court of Australia, among other things to prevent Ang-Ya being taken to Taiwan. Yi-Fawn and Limei arrived in Sydney on 20 August 2008 to contest the custody proceedings and to have some access to Ang-Ya. 
On 22 August 2008, in the middle of the contest about the custody of Ang -Ya, the plaintiff's then solicitors, Mssrs Holman Webb, sent a letter demanding the $300,000 the subject of the Yi - Fawn and Limei proceedings. Holman Webb did not issue a demand for the $1 million claimed in the Sino proceedings until 22 December 2008. 
On 26 September 2008 Yehan the Family Court of Australia granted interim custody of Ang-Ya to Yehan. The Family Court appointed the final custody hearing on 27 March 2009, but Yi-Fawn did not appear to contest the orders sought. Ang-Ya has resided with Yehan since then. 
The Koo and Lee Families  
The background and business experience of each of the Koo and Lee families has been a relevant factor in determining the contests of fact in these proceedings. Both Mr and Mrs Lee and Mr and Mrs Koo are commercially astute and are interested in business and investment matters. 
The wealth of both the Koo and Lee families was the subject of cross-examination and was described on both sides of the litigation with accomplished modesty. Koo family assets and liabilities are examined later in these reasons. The Koo family balance sheet and cash flow in 2007 are relevant to the probability or otherwise of the making of the loans alleged. The fate of the approximately $1.3 million in issue in these proceedings, though clearly important to the parties, did not appear to the Court to cause either Mr Lee or Mr Koo any greater anxiety than the potential public dishonour of being disbelieved about these transactions. 
Mr and Mrs Lee. The Lee's family company, Sino, is the corporate entity through which Mr and Mrs Lee carried out investment activities outside Taiwan since shortly after it was incorporated in October 2001. Sino's business activities principally relate to making financial investments on behalf of the Lee family including investments in real estate and on the stock market. 
Mr Tsung-Te Lee's native tongue is Mandarin. It became evident in part from the specialist Mandarin interpreters required in the proceedings that the dialect of Mandarin that Mr and Mrs Lee speak, and which is commonly spoken in Taiwan, is the Hokkien dialect. I accept Mr Lee's evidence that he can recognise some English words but has difficulty in conducting a full conversation in English. 
Mrs Limei Lee has been co-director of Sino with her husband since it was incorporated in 2001. Her native tongue is also the Hokkien dialect of Mandarin. I accept that she cannot conduct conversations in English other than for basic ordering in restaurants or shopping. She says and I accept that all dialogues held between herself and her family and with Yehan Koo were conducted in Mandarin. I accept her evidence that in her opinion Yehan Koo can speak reasonable Mandarin. His capacity to speak the Hokkien dialect with Mr Lee was one of the issues in the proceedings. Mrs Lee was generally a credible witness, except with respect to some of the conversations she alleges that she had with Yehan Koo in July 2007. I accept her assessment of her then son-in-law's capacity to communicate in Mandarin with her and her husband throughout 2004-2008. 
Mr and Mrs Koo . Both Mr Harry and Mrs Geen Koo are fluent in Mandarin and Cantonese. Mr Koo qualified as an architect in 1964 and applied his architectural skills to further his interests in a family construction business that he and his wife commenced in 1975. From that time he and Geen took on property development projects of increasing complexity through a family company Maygood Australia Pty Ltd ("Maygood"), in which they had a joint shareholding. Their joint enterprise culminated in the completion in about 2001 of a large residential and retail development in Penshurst Street, Willoughby. 
Mrs Geen Koo partnered her husband in his property development business. She graduated in economics in 1966 with an accounting major. After working as a chartered accountant at Peat Marwick Mitchell, then a major accounting practice, she decided to join her husband in the family construction business in 1975. Together they established Maygood Australia in 1980. 
Mr and Mrs Koo had effectively retired from property development activity after the completion of the Penshurst Street project in about 2001. But Maygood Australia Pty Ltd continued to act as an investment vehicle holding much of the property that they had acquired or developed over the years. After Yehan was married and he and Yi-Fawn returned to Australia in mid 2005, Mr and Mrs Koo renewed their interest in property development to assist their son and his new wife. With this idea in mind they incorporated Maygood Australia on 31 May 2005. Harry and Geen Koo became the two directors of Maygood Australia and Harry, Geen and Yehan each held one of its three issued shares. All their continuing involvement in property development in the 2005 - 2009 period with their son Yehan was conducted through Maygood Australia, rather than Maygood Australia. 
Although the Koo and Lee families' business experience was acquired in different countries and in different fields of investment, it is not contested that a common topic of discussion between the two families, especially when the Lee's were in Australia, was property development and investment. 
Koo Family Developments 2005-2008  
Between 2005 and 2008 Maygood Australia became involved in two major property development projects in suburban Sydney, one in Liverpool Street, Darlinghurst ("the Darlinghurst property") and the other in Devonshire Street, Chatswood ("the Chatswood properties"). Sino and the Lee's claim that the commercial requirements of these two projects and the financial stresses that they placed upon the Koo family largely account for the Koo's request for, and acceptance of, the alleged loans in December 2006 in July 2007. The Koo's strongly contest this contention. This section of these reasons contains a short outline of the important milestones in those two developments in Darlinghurst and in Chatswood. 
The Darlinghurst Property. The Koo family's investigation of the Darlinghurst property as the site of a possible development project was well advanced by the time Yi-Fawn and Yehan Koo settled down in Sydney in late June 2005. Maygood Australia submitted a tender bid for the Darlinghurst property in June 2005. By 5 August 2005 Maygood was informed that its bid was successful. The Darlinghurst property was then acquired with an existing development application approval for $6,450,000 million. On 2 August 2005, St George Bank offered to lend Maygood Australia $8,245,000 to assist with the acquisition of the Darlinghurst property. But Mr Harry Koo thought he could increase Maygood Australia's site yield (the number of apartments to be constructed on the site) by putting in an amended development application. In fact, it took over 2 and three quarter years from 5 August 2005 until 12 March 2008, during which period the Koo's lodged three amended DA's and conducted proceedings before the Land and Environment Court and the Court of Appeal, before a final DA acceptable to them was approved. Each of their amended DA's was an attempt to make the development of the Darlinghurst property more profitable. But the Koo's say, and I accept, that they always believed in a worst case scenario they could fall back on the existing approved DA that applied to the purchased Darlinghurst property. In early August 2005 Maygood Australia applied for and was granted financial accommodation for the Darlinghurst development from St George Bank. The details of its various applications are considered later in these reasons. 
Maygood Australia lodged three class one applications under the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) to re-design the existing Darlinghurst DA to add additional apartments to the development. Maygood Australia lodged its first amended DA with the City of Sydney Council on 5 August 2005, the day it settled its purchase of the Darlinghurst property. The pursuit of this first amended DA occupied most of the 2005-2006 financial year. The Land and Environment Court heard Maygood Australia's appeal against the Council's refusal of this DA in the first week of July 2006 and dismissed that appeal on 14 July 2006. 
By 30 August 2006 Maygood Australia lodged a second amended DA with the Council for the further development of the Darlinghurst property. As will be explained below whilst that second amended DA was awaiting determination by Council, the Chatswood properties first came to Yehan Koo's attention and were then rapidly acquired in addition to the Darlinghurst development. 
The second amended DA took much of the 2006 - 2007 financial year to finalise. The DA for the Darlinghurst property was not granted and was deemed refused, from which Maygood Australia appealed to the Land and Environment Court, where an appeal was heard on 19 and 20 February 2007 and dismissed on 29 March 2007. Maygood Australia then lodged an appeal under the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) , <case> which was in turn dismissed on 27 June 2007. 
Maygood Australia spent much of the 2007-2008 financial year dealing with the third amended DA, which was ultimately approved by the Land and Environment Court on 10 April 2008. Maygood Australia lodged its further amended DA in the second half of 2007 which was then deemed refused. Maygood Australia appealed to the Land and Environment Court, where it was heard on 18 and 19 February 2008 and approved on 10 April 2008. This brought to an end Maygood Australia's various attempts to obtain more favourable development ratios for the Darlinghurst site. 
The Chatswood properties. Maygood Australia's acquisition and development decisions about the Chatswood properties occurred within a much shorter time frame than the Darlinghurst project, only spanning the period October 2006 to March 2007. 
Mr Yehan Koo's encounter with the Chatswood properties almost precisely coincides with the commencement of the time period during which it is alleged he and Mr Tsung-Te Lee discussed the $1 million loan ultimately made in December 2006. Mr Yehan Koo made enquiries with the agent selling the Chatswood property on 13 October 2006. Mr Yehan Koo discovered the property himself and in my view was keen to advance its development himself as it was one for which he could claim responsibility and credit for his success. On 1 November 2006 Maygood Australia submitted an offer for $6,133,000 to the purchase of the Chatswood properties, revised its tender price to $1,900,000 on November 2006. On 13 November 2006 St George Bank offered a loan facility to Maygood Australia to pay the 10 per cent deposit on the Chatswood properties. In the second half of November 2006 Yehan Koo was informed that Maygood Australia's prospects of winning the tender for the Chatswood properties would increase if it included an offer to purchase an adjoining property in Claude Street, Chatswood, adjoining the Devonshire Street properties, which Maygood Australia agreed to do, offering $1.3 million for this property on 23 November 2006. 
On 28 November 2006 the Willoughby City Council resolved to sell all the Chatswood properties, the Devonshire Street properties and the Claude Street property to Maygood Australia and on 12 December 2006 Maygood Australia was advised it was the successful bidder for the combined Chatswood properties. 
Sino paid the $700,000 to Maygood Australia's St George account on 13 December 2006 and the balance of $300,000 into the same account on 19 December 2006. After Yehan and Yi-Fawn left Sydney for Shanghai on 19 December 2006, on 20 December 2006, Maygood Australia exchanged contracts for the Devonshire Street property for the Chatswood properties. On 8 March 2007 St George Bank provided details of a facility offer for the acquisition of the Chatswood properties. On 19 March 2007, Maygood Australia settled on the purchase of the Chatswood properties and entered into an option to purchase the adjoining Claude Street property. Yehan Koo set in train preparation of plans for the development of the Chatswood properties. These were in a sufficiently complete state that I accept that Yehan and Yi-Fawn were able to show them to Mr Lee during the couple's visit to Tai Chung in December 2007 - January 2008. 
Other Matters  
Both sides contended this was a case where the credibility of witnesses was of decisive importance. I have made sufficient findings about the credit of individual witnesses in the course of deciding the contested issues, so it is not necessary to set out general credibility observations about them. 
The parties put in contest a very substantial number of conversations and facts. In order to decide the essential facts in issue and to determine the pleaded causes of action within a judgment of reasonable length, it has been neither necessary nor desirable for the court to determine all of these factual contests. 
Mr A Spencer of counsel represented the plaintiffs/cross-defendants in these proceedings. Mr Aldridge SC and Ms F Sinclair represented the defendants/cross-claimants. Neither side was wholly successful in the allegations made. But that was not for want of diligence on the part of any legal representatives, in what was a very well prepared and presented case on both sides. 
A number of the corporate documents tendered on the Lee side of the proceedings were dated in accordance with the Taiwanese (Minguo) calendar, which operates with a different structure to the conventional Western (or Gregorian) calendar. For easier reference I have reproduced dates that appear in accordance with the Taiwanese calendar, so that they conform in this judgment to the conventional Western calendar. The difference may be shortly explained. The Taiwanese calendar only commences in 1912 after the end of the Qing Dynasty and upon the election of Dr Sun Yat Sen in the first year of the Republic of China. Thus, to obtain the Minguo year, one subtracts 1911 from the Gregorian year. So 2012 is the 101 st year of the Republic of China (2012 minus 1911) in the Minguo calendar. 
The Sino Proceedings - The $1,000,000 Transfer  
In relation to the Sino proceedings it is necessary to make findings about the conversations that took place between the parties during October to December 2006, about the signing of the written Loan Agreement in Shanghai on 20 December 2006, about Maygood Australia and Sino's financial accounts after December 2006 and finally about loan statements Mr Yehan Koo gave to Mr Tsung-Te Le in 2007. This section then deals with the effect of those findings on the causes of action which Sino has pleaded. 
The October 2006 Conversations  
Sino's contention is that conversations between members of the Koo family and the Lee family in October to December 2006 resulted in an agreement to make a loan advance of $1 million to Maygood Australia. But assessing the merits of Sino's contention is complicated by the fact that there are actually three streams of conversations to be assessed in this period. First there are conversations between Yehan Koo and Mr Tsung-Te Lee that Sino says constitute a binding oral agreement for the loan advance. There is strong conflict between these two versions. Next there are conversations between Mr Harry and Mrs Geen Koo and their son Yehan. This stream essentially supports the Koo family's version of events. The Court's findings in this section are that this stream of conversations may be partly accurate but they are impossible to reconcile with the Koo family's conduct with respect to Maygood's accounts and for that reason I discount them. Finally there is a stream of conversations between Yehan Koo and Yi-Fawn Lee. It is necessary to make some credit findings in respect of all of these conversations to make sense of what happened during this period. 
The Yehan Koo - Tsung-Te Lee Conversations  
The first key issue in the Sino proceedings are conversations between Mr Tsung-Te Lee and Mr Yehan Koo in October 2006. Mr Lee and Mr Koo recall these conversations very differently. Mr Lee's version supports an oral loan agreement between Sino and Maygood Australia. Mr Koo's version suggests the making of preparations for a $1,000,000 gift in December 2006 to the couple. Whilst there are problems with both versions I prefer Mr Lee's version. 
Mr Lee says that he had the following conversations with Mr Koo:- "Further Conversation with Yehan  
A few days after the telephone conversation I have spoken out above, I was telephoned again by Yehan from Sydney. We had the following conversation:  
Yehan: 'There is now an investment opportunity in Chatswood. A Council Car park and the house next door to it are up for sale. It is on Devonshire
Street, Chatswood. We would like to buy it and build multi-storey apartments on the land. Chinese people like to live in apartments. The government is expanding this area, and the area also needs more apartments. They are building a new train station and train line nearby. The apartments we want to build are very close to the train station. It is only a few minutes walking distance away. Living in these apartments we are going to build here will be very convenient.'  
Me: 'This sounds like a good project'.  
Yehan: 'Would you be interested in this project? My company would like to borrow money from you to buy the land'.  
Me: 'How much is the land for sale? How much do you need to borrow?'  
Yehan: 'There is no sale price, it out to tender. But we think it will cost over $6 million. I only need to borrow about one million dollars. My father and mother will put up the rest.'  
Me: 'That is a lot of money. When will you repay it?'  
Yehan: 'The longest it will be is 5 years but I think we can finish building very quickly. Once it is built, I will return you the money straight away. If we don't build within 5 years or sell the land, I will also return you the money'.  
Me: 'One million dollars is a lot of money. How will your father and mother put up the rest of the money?'  
Yehan: 'We will use this land as security for the loan from a bank. My father and mother also have their own property, they can use as extra security.'  
Me: 'Let me think about it'.  
Further Conversation with Yehan  
A few days after this telephone conversation in mid October 2006, I was telephoned again by Yehan from Sydney. We had the following conversation:  
Yehan: 'Have you considered lending me money to buy the land'.  
Me: 'Yes. I have thought about it. I think 5 years is too long.'  
Yehan: 'I think we can finish building the apartments and sell them within 2 years. If we end up not buying the land at Chatswood, I will return the money to you.'  
Me: 'Are you sure it will be that quick? What happens if you run into problems and don't start construction?'  
Yehan: 'How about if we don't start construction within two years, I will return the money to you with interest'  
Me: 'How will you fund the construction?'  
Yehan: 'We will sell these apartments off-the-plan and use the proceeds to fund the construction'.  
Me: 'What about security, can you give me any security for the loan?'  
Yehan: 'I don't have anything to give you to secure the loan. You have to trust me. My father and mother are helping me, and they have a lot of property. There won't be a problem. Maygood Australia Australian is only me and my parents. Also, I will pay you 10% interest a year.'  
Me: 'Give me a few more days to think about it'.  
Further Conversation with Yehan  
A few days after the conversation set out above, I was telephoned again by
Yehan from Sydney. We had the following conversation:  
Yehan: 'Will you be lending us money to buy the land in Chatswood? It is a very good opportunity for us, and I will pay you 10% annual interest, this is a good investment for you too.'  
Me: 'Ok, I will help you. I will lend you the money for two years. The annual interest is 10%. After that, unless we agree to an extension you must repay me. The loan is unsecured and is very risky for me. I am helping you only because my daughter has married you and you have said you are doing the project with your father and mother.'  
Me: 'I want you to pay me interest monthly. It is necessary for young people to realise the importance of money and have the pressure to perform.'  
Yehan: 'Money will be tight. I cannot afford to pay you interest monthly. The loans we have had here in the past have had interest capitalised by the banks.'  
Me: 'You should really pay me interest monthly'.  
Yehan: 'This is a very good opportunity for me. My father and mother have been in property development for a long time. They are doing this project with me'.  
Me: 'If you are not giving me security, this land cannot be used to secure any other debt'.  
Yehan: 'Yes, it will not be'.  
Me: 'I will lend to you through Sino Synergy Synergy. You don't need to pay me monthly interest. You can pay me all of the interest together with the one million dollars but you will need to provide the company quarterly statements of the outstanding balance. If Maygood Australia doesn't buy the land or it doesn't start construction within two years it has to pay the money straight back'.  
Yehan: 'Thank you, I will work hard. Please don't worry; the money can be repayable earlier upon either one's request. I will write this in a contract.
I will be seeing you in a few days in Shaghai over Christmas and will put everything we discussed and agreed to into a contract for you to sign then.
But can you transfer at least $700,000 to me as soon as possible? I am taking a long time off over Christmas and would like to have the money in place first before I leave'.  
Me: 'Okay. I will transfer $700,000 as soon as I can. Make sure all of the conditions we have agreed are in the contract'." 
Yehan Koo's account of this period is quite different from that of his father-in-law. According to him there is no direct telephone or other contact between the two on the subject of the $1 million advance until 12 December 2006, the day that Laing & Simmons, real estate agents advised Maygood Australia that it was the preferred tenderer for the Chatswood properties. According to Yehan, Yi-Fawn told him in mid October 2006 of her parents' interest in the Chatswood property after she had told them about it. He says that Yi-Fawn made clear that the money would be gifted to them as a couple. These conversations between Yi-Fawn and Yehan are set out later in these reasons. According to Yehan, apart from further conversations he had with his parents and Yi-Fawn about the subject, he did not have any communication whatsoever with Mr Tsung-Te Lee about this subject until 12 December 2006, the date that Laing & Simmons told Maygood Australia that it was the preferred tenderer for the Chatswood properties. 
Throughout his evidence Yehan maintained his denial of any communication about this subject with his father-in-law until 12 December 2006. According to Yehan all the communications between himself and Mr Lee preceding the funds transfer occur on that day and the following day. A condensed version of his evidence about the events of 12 and 13 December 2006 follows in this and the next two paragraphs. When Yehan tells Yi-Fawn of the successful tender she volunteers "I will call my father and have him send over the money he promised us" to which he again insists "we don't need the money and if we are going to use it for Chatswood we don't need it until settlement", but Yi-Fawn persists. The next day Yi-Fawn says to him, as they are planning to go to Shanghai, "my father wants to transfer the money to us now before we go away". She expresses concern about such a large amount going to their joint account as a couple, and about "tax issues" and says "it would be better if I had the money transferred straight into your company account". Yehan discusses this altered proposal with his mother who again expresses resistance to the idea but ultimately acquiesces and gives Yehan the account details, which he passes on to Yi-Fawn, which she subsequently then sends on to her father. 
There is no doubt that Maygood Australia's bank account details were communicated to Sino on 13 December. Yi-Fawn sends a somewhat terse email that morning to Yehan suggesting he turn on the family printer to print out these details, no doubt so they could be sent to Sino. About 3 pm on 13 December Yehan is informed by facsimile from Taiwan that $700,000 had been transferred from Sino to Maygood Australia. Mrs Koo inquires of Yehan later that day who the "Sino something" is, from whom Maygood Australia has just received the $700,000, to which Yehan responds, "I don't know. That probably is the money Yi-Fawn's parents are giving us. I will check with Yi-Fawn". His wife indeed confirms later that evening that it is the money Sino had sent and she then suggests that Yehan had "better thank my parents for it". She organises Yehan to call her parents with her on Skype saying to him, to anticipate his poor Mandarin, "Do you need me to tell you how to say it in Mandarin?" The Skype call then takes place. Yehan Koo said to his father-in-law over Skype, "Ba, thank you, thank you". Then Mr Tsung-Te Lee says: "Eh, congratulations to you. This opportunity is a good one for you guys. This place at Chatswood is a good one. Next year will be a good one for you with the little one coming, approval on Darlinghurst and this one as well " . The conversation then moves to Mrs Lee, who Yehan thanks. Then Mrs Lee says:- "Don't say that. If we can't help our daughter and son-in-law, who are we going to help? I have friends who gave their son-in-law some money to do business and the son-in-law made a lot of money out of it for his family. We might as well give it to you guys since it is not getting much in terms of interest in Hong Kong. We hope that you make use of the money and earn plenty of money for your family, now that the baby is coming." 
The conversation then concludes. Yehan was insistent that there was no mention of the money being loaned at any stage during this meeting and that there were no conditions attached to the transfer of the monies and no requirement that the money be repaid. 
A number of aspects of Yehan Koo's account are inherently improbable. Yehan Koo's version includes Yi-Fawn's statement "I am a bit worried about a large amount coming into our account and any potential tax issues", apparently to explain why the money was transferred to Maygood Australia, when it had originally been, destined for him and Yi-Fawn. This is improbable. Yi-Fawn did not appear to the Court to be a person who would: (1) too readily put money her parents were giving to her and her husband into the name of Maygood Australia; or (2) be worried about receiving a large sum of money into her and Yehan's bank account. She denied any such conversation with Yehan and I accept her evidence as to this. Moreover, Yehan was unable to articulate what these "tax issues" were that his wife had in mind. 
But it is also improbable that for a period of two months, from mid October to mid December 2006, Yi-Fawn would have been the sole line of communication to her father about the Chatswood project and yet be able to convey sufficient information of material interest to him that her father was prepared to decide to advance the precise sum of $1 million to the couple for the project without further consultation with his son-in-law. Just how and why Mr Lee came up with that precise sum on Yehan Koo's version is unexplained. Yehan knew considerably more about the project than his wife. He was negotiating with all the project stakeholders. Mr Lee seemed to be a prudent man. Despite his affection for his daughter I find it unlikely that he would have decided to make a gift of such a sum which would complement a larger investment that was so obviously controlled by his son-in-law's family, without first having some very clear conversations with his son-in-law. I accept Mr Lee's evidence. He did not simply invent the conversations he says that he had with his son-in-law about what he was proposing. The conversations of which he gives an account are entirely within character and just what would be expected of him. 
The Attack on Mr Lee's Version . Mr Aldridge SC and Ms Sinclair, counsel for Mr Koo, attacked Mr Lee's version on the basis of what was said to be its improbable aspects. There were indeed several but despite these criticisms I accept Mr Lee's version as recorded above. 
First, on Mr Lee's version, as Mr Aldridge SC pointed out, there was no discussion of the earlier Darlinghurst development. It was suggested to Mr Lee that this was absurd. It was said, that if Mr Lee was interested in investing in the Chatswood development he would have wished to know how the previous Darlinghurst development had progressed under the control of the Koo interests. But Mr Lee answered the point directly and without shifting position in evidence which I accept. He maintained the position set out in his affidavit that, there was no discussion about the Darlinghurst development. To the cynical observer Mr Lee's explanation for this, "because at that time Yehan Koo ask for $1 million just for Chatswood project, so that is why I didn't ask him other projects" might seem simplistic. But Mr Lee was quite insistent that he did not ask Mr Koo about other projects. Mr Lee was further confronted with the lack of commercial wisdom of not inquiring about the previous development and it was put to him that there was a risk that Yehan Koo was "a very bad property developer and he had lost millions at Darlinghurst". But Mr Lee replied to his questioner, "so there is a term, was a condition in the loan agreement that once they use the $1 million to purchase the Chatswood land they can't use this land as the security for other lands purchased and also they have to pay me 10% as the interest". I accept that this was Mr Lee's genuine reason for not inquiring further about the Darlinghurst development. Mr Lee smiled when Mr Aldridge SC asked him whether he liked to "lose money". He agreed that he did not. He also agreed that he did not like "to take unnecessary risks of losing money". But despite this admission he was adamant that he did not see the need to ask about the Darlinghurst development because, as he explained: "$1 million would be just for the Chatswood project"; and Mr Koo "would not use this amount of money as a security for other loans". I accept that he did not ask about the Darlinghurst project and these were his genuine reasons for doing so. 
Secondly, Mr Lee was challenged as to why if he was making a genuine commercial investment, he was not interested in the budgets or plans for the Chatswood development. But in my view, Mr Lee's desire to receive only limited information about the Chatswood development is not entirely surprising for both commercial and family reasons. Mr Lee had what he regarded as sufficient background information. He had a general idea of the location of the Chatswood development north of the Sydney CBD. He was aware at that time that Chatswood was an expanding transport hub and that many people of Chinese descent already lived in the area. He had recently stayed himself in a serviced apartment in Chatswood. Next, Mr Lee knew from Yehan Koo that the rest of the $5 million in capital to be invested in the $6 million Chatswood development was coming from the Koo family. He was content with the assurances that he had received from Mr Yehan Koo that his risk on the project was limited, in part because his interest was only one sixth of the total. The Koo interests were at greater risk of capital loss on the project than he was and therefore had a greater incentive to avoid a loss. In addition, Mr Lee's risk was also contained because he accepted Mr Yehan Koo's assurance that the Koo's could not use the property as security for any other project. I will return to this reason shortly. Finally, to the extent there was any residual risk for Mr Lee, he thought he would be compensated for that risk by a premium interest rate of 10%. The best interest rate he could derive on his capital in Taiwan was 3%-4% and up to perhaps 5%, if the investment was made in Australian dollars. Mr Lee gave every indication of prudent commercial habits and in my view his failure to inquire about these other details was not accidental. 
Thirdly, Mr Lee was crititcised for discussing the advance of and then advancing the $1,000,000 with inadequate security, indeed he only had the written Loan Agreement, which was never checked by lawyers. Mr Lee dealt with this issue of security with a calculated indirectness that, to the Court's observation, penetrated clearly through the translation of his Mandarin dialect into English. Mr Lee explained "At the beginning I ask for the - at the beginning I ask Yehan Koo to give me something like securities because this land has been sold by a kind of auction, but tender auction" [emphasis added]. His answer revealed that part of his security for the loan advance was knowing that the value of the property being developed had resulted from a public tender process. But Mr Lee asked Mr Koo for what he, Mr Lee, described as "something like" a formal security. This glancing reference to formal security is what would be expected in this family situation. His relationship with the Koo family was still developing. Ensuring a steady pace of development of family trust was an understandable objective. But Mr Lee's natural caution prompted the idea that a formal token of security should be given. Thus, the written Loan Agreement came into existence. This background explains some of the unusual characteristics of the written loan agreement, which did not conform perfectly with the oral Loan Agreement, an issue to which the Court will return. But this attitude also reveals more about Mr Lee's wider outlook on these discussions with his son-in-law. 
Mr Lee's Outlook on these Negotiations . This investment went beyond the purely commercial for Mr Lee, who faced diplomatic limits on what he could ask in an investment within the family. He did want to show commitment to the young couple's future by making the investment when he was asked. But an important part of his outlook was that he could not ask for too much formal security, or do anything that would have tended to indicate a loss of trust in his son-in-law. But he still wanted some protection. That is why in my view he asked for a written Loan Agreement and took part in the arrangements for its execution. Mr Lee struck the Court as a man of honour who felt it was important to comply with the request that his son-in-law had made despite the risk involved. The situation created subtle tension between honour and risk for him. Mr Lee chose the honourable if slightly risky course and decided to advance the money with a not very adequate loan agreement. So he obtained a commitment that the money would only be used on the Chatswood project. Obtaining this commitment from Mr Koo was his way of reducing risk. 
Mr Lee's neglect in October 2006 of the detail of the oral loan agreement (and later the written Loan Agreement) was in my view quite deliberate and was part of this outlook. It was not inconsistent with Mr Lee's version that he had made a genuine loan agreement. This finding also blunts counsel's other attacks on Mr Lee's approach to the Loan Agreement. For example, Mr Lee said that he was told that Mr Koo's "parents will sort it out" in relation to the other $5 million. Mr Aldridge SC and Ms Sinclair made what would otherwise be quite telling points about this statement. Were the Koo's to put in their own capital without giving a mortgage over the property to a financial institution? Were they to arrange borrowings from a bank, which would take security over the property? Mr Lee did not seem to know. Either way he saw his capital as fairly safe; safe enough to accept the slight risk of its loss as the price of not disturbing the growing rapprochement with the Koo family. 
Mr Lee's general outlook on these negotiations also explains why he did not ask for budgets, floor plans, or photographs of the proposed development. Mr Lee's direct experience of the Chatswood area was enough to guide his commercial instincts. He explained that he did some research and said "In order to know more about the land I used the Google map to research through the internet and also I used to live in the serviced apartment in Chatswood and I was told his was next to". In my view he gained a general appreciation of the property from this level of research, which was sufficient for his purposes. 
Mr Lee's outlook also explains his naive sounding assumptions about what would happen if the land were to drop in value. "Q. If, unfortunately, the land dropped in value, what was going to happen if
Mr Koo's parents advanced 5 million and you advanced 1 million and there wasn't enough money to pay everyone back, who was going to get paid first? 
A. INTERPRETER: I think they should pay me first.  
Q. Did you just assume that that's what would happen, or was that discussed, or what? 
A. INTERPRETER: Because this is kind of business behaviour, so we need, we do have a loan agreement between us. That's why I am sitting here today." 
These answers really indicate, in my view, that Mr Lee just did not know how the loss would be shared, if the land dropped in value. He only had a general expectation that the Koo's would bear the loss in value but that the loan agreement would nevertheless be honoured. 
Mr Lee's outlook further explains why he did not ask how much the Chatswood development would cost to build. It was suggested to him that the reason he did not ask was that he knew the advances were a gift. But in my view, from his limited inquiries, he expected the development to be profitable. Not inquiring about such detail was indirectly an expression of his confidence in his son-in-law and the Koo family. 
The Ngai Geen Koo - Yehan Koo Conversations  
Mr Yehan Koo's account of the conversations he says he had with his mother and father were different in tone and content to those that Mr Lee says that Yehan Koo held with him. The conversational narrative between Mr Yehan Koo and his parents on the subject of money from the Lee family for developing the Chatswood properties starts in mid October 2006. The early part of this narrative can in my view be accepted. But the closer events come to December 2006 the more distorted Yehan's version becomes. 
Mr Yehan Koo gives an account of his father being interested in the Chatswood properties as a development site but that Mrs Koo was colder on the idea. Mr Yehan Koo was also keen he says. Mr Harry Koo had looked at the site, applied his architectural and building skills and worked out a way to increase the development density of the site. According to Mrs Geen Koo both Yehan and Yi-Fawn approached the question of funding with the Koo's one evening at the dinner table, in a conversation that I accept took place:- "Yehan: 'Mum since Dad can see the potential of this site, can you arrange for us to meet with Llew (Llew Leeming our Bank Manager at St George) and also
Tony ( Tony Mizzi our former St George Bank Manager who now works for Capital
Finance) so that we can discuss finance for the site if we decide to bid.'  
Yi-Fawn: 'Yehan is very keen to get another project. With the baby coming
Yehan is willing to work hard for us. He does not have much to do lately, just waiting for approval for the Darlinghurst DA.'  
Harry: This is not a bad site. I think I can increase the FSR over the 1.5 to close to 2.  
Geen Koo: 'Since everyone is so keen what can I say? We can contact Llew and
Tony to-morrow'."  
Much of this in my view can be accepted. 
The next day Yi-Fawn discussed the development with her mother-in-law, according to Mrs Geen Koo. Mrs Koo says that her conversation with Yi- Fawn Lee was in the following terms:- "Geen Koo: 'Yes, you are right. I really don't want to put in a bid.'  
Yi-Fawn: 'Why?'  
Geen Koo: 'I think the timing is wrong. Darlinghurst is not approved yet. You and Yehan are still young, you have plenty of time to find a good site.
Besides with the baby coming, I want to spend more time with the grandchild.'  
Yi-Fawn: 'Yehan is very enthusiastic about it and it sounds like a good opportunity. He wants to work hard now that the baby is coming.'  
Geen Koo: 'Let's give it more thought'."  
This conversation can also be accepted as taking place, in my view. 
There the matter rested for approximately a week, when according to Mrs Geen Koo, her son revealed for the first time that Mr and Mrs Lee were proposing to advance money to help fund the Chatswood project. Mrs Koo explains, on her version, which in my view can be accepted, that her son, Yehan then described the Lees' proposal to his parents and he received their clear reaction to the idea:- "Yehan: 'I have not mentioned this before, Yi-Fawn's parents are keen to give us about a million dollars to put into Chatswood.'  
Geen Koo: 'We already have the finance from St George and Tony is also keen to give us the money. We are OK with the funding. We don't need the Lees' to put in money. It could become complicated because we are in-laws and we don't want any relationship foul-up. With the bank we know where we stand. I would rather not do the project than have the Lees put money in.'  
Harry: 'You are right, remember the time we had some equity partners? It was so complicated that we ended up in court. We don't ever want equity partners again.'  
Yehan: 'No, Yi-Fawn's parents are keen to give Yi-Fawn and I the money since the baby is coming. We will be the ones putting the money into the project.'  
Geen Koo:- 'It is up to you but best for you to think about it since we don't need the money and we don't need equity partners.'" 
But this version is very different from the loan, which I have found Yehan and Mr Lee were discussing. How is this difference to be reconciled? Yehan Koo knew how his parents would react to this idea. But he softened it and presented it in more general terms as a gift. Perhaps he thought it might make the idea more palatable to his parents. I do not think he was misleading his parents because at this point the idea between he and Mr Lee was still inchoate. 
According to Mrs Geen Koo, at this stage neither she nor her husband committed one way or the other to putting money into the Chatswood project. Moreover they, like Yehan, say there was no further conversation on the topic of the Lee family supplying funds to the Chatswood project, until after the bid was accepted on 12 December 2006. 
But before 12 December there was discussion between Harry and Geen Koo about what they thought Yehan and Yi-Fawn were proposing. Mr Harry Koo expressed doubts about whether the money would be coming at all. Mrs Geen Koo expressed reservations about whether the Lees' money should even be accepted as a gift for Yi-Fawn and Yehan because "it could become complicated". Mrs Geen Koo says that her husband overcame her reservations by reminding her about the Lees' perspective on the relationship of the young couple. She recalls her husband saying to her the following:- "Harry: Do you think what Yehan said about the money  coming from Yi-Fawn's family is true?'  
Me: 'How do I know. We don't need the money - Llew and Tony have both agreed to finance Chatswood even though Darlinghurst is yet to be developed. We would not proceed to tender unless we had an agreement from the bank to finance the whole purchase price. I do not want the Lee's money even if it is a gift for
Yi-Fawn and Yehan. It could become complicated'.  
Harry: 'The Lees always like to impress on us that they are very wealthy. We know they love Yi-Fawn very much and now with the baby coming they may want to do something for the young couple to help in their future'.  
Me: 'Still getting this money can be troublesome.'  
Harry: 'I think they really like Chatswood and may want to have an apartment to live there when they come to Sydney. We have to give them face. You know people from Asia, face is very important. We have done so much for Yehan and
Yi-Fawn paying for everything and they have not done anything so far. Every time we saw them they kept telling us about their friend who helped their son- in-law with some money and it is better to give to the next generation while they are still alive.'" 
Mr Harry Koo's advocacy seems to have persuaded his wife at least to be open to the idea that money from the Lees should be accepted in some form. When it finally emerged that the money was about to be received Mrs Geen Koo did not seem to resist its receipt as she had before. But by then Yehan had committed herself to a loan transaction with Mr Lee. 
Thus, if these two versions are each to be accepted, within two parental households, the Lee's in Taiwan and the Koo's in Sydney, very different views had developed about the $1 million advance. In Taiwan the Lees thought that they were lending money for a development conducted by the young couple. In Sydney the Koos thought that the Lees were giving the money to the young couple for them to use at their discretion in the Chatswood project. Neither Mr Harry Koo or Mrs Geen Koo appeared to the Court to be consciously distorting their evidence to this point as to what Yehan and Yi-Fawn said. But their version is inconsistent with the Maygood Australia's financial accounts for subsequent years, which show the $1 million as a liability to Sino. Moreover, subsequent aspects of Yehan's conversations with his parents, on both his version and their versions, seem inherently improbable. 
There is surprisingly little said in the evidence of Mrs Geen Koo and Mr Yehan Koo about their exchanges in November and December 2006 concerning the money from the Lee family. Mr Harry Koo adds almost nothing. What they do say about this period is unsatisfactory. According to Yehan Koo the subject comes up again between himself and his mother the day that the money comes in from Sino, 13 December 2006. He says that he asks his mother for Maygood Australia's account details because, "Yi-Fawn's parents want to transfer the money they are giving us and we think it best the money goes direct to the company account". His mother is said to protest that there is "no need for the money" because there are bank funds and "if you both want the money in that account why so early? It will be a long time until settlement". Mrs Koo apparently then acquiesces in her son's explanation, "Yi-Fawn wants it done now before we go away". Mrs Geen Koo's version is very similar. 
I do not accept this is what happened. It does not make sense at several levels. I do not accept that in this family that Mrs Geen Koo would have simply given way to what Yi-Fawn wanted, in spite of her doubts. Mrs Koo did not strike the Court as someone who would comply with her daughter-in-law's demands for instant action. Geen Koo was a commercially astute independent minded person. In my view, about this time Yehan Koo did explain to his parents that the funds were coming from the Lee family, were being loaned on fairly favourable terms, and that Mr and Mrs Koo did acquiesce in that because it was commercially advantageous and because Yi-Fawn and the Lee family were keen to offer it. 
Mrs Koo says that later that day, when Sino communicates the $700,000 as being sent to Maygood Australia, she says to her son, "who is Sino?" to which he replies, "I don't know. No idea. This must be the money that Yi-Fawn's parents are giving us to put into the Chatswood project". I do not accept that Yehan Koo said this or that Mrs Koo recollected that he did. By then Yehan Koo knew exactly what Sino was. Yehan was proud of his entrepreneurial skills. In my view would not have given such a clueless and disorganised response to his mother. Even on his own version he had communicated the Maygood Australia account details to Sino and would have been sure that this was the amount. Moreover, Yehan does not give an account of how he later confirmed with his mother that the money was indeed from Sino. If their version is correct there must have been further conversations showing how they verified that the sum was what was anticipated. No adequate account of these other conversations is given. 
Finally, Mrs Koo says that on 18 December 2006, just before Yehan and Yi-Fawn left to go to Shanghai, the balance of the funds came in and Yehan said to her, "since the money has arrived from Yi-Fawn's parents, just use it for the deposit for Chatswood. It is a gift from Yi-Fawn's parents and we would like to use it for Chatswood". Mrs Koo does not record a response to this. This is extraordinary given that the amount of $1 million by then received, which her son was asking her to apply to the deposit to the Chatswood project, represented a conflict with all her principles about going into investments with partners. According to her, the matter had really been left up to Yehan. All Yehan now said to her was "we would like to use it for Chatswood". This statement suggests that the couple would be lending it to the project. Mrs Koo does not seem to enquire any further. I do not accept that is what happened. In my view, Geen Koo was reluctant to take on partners in the Chatswood development. Further I find at about this time Yehan Koo did give to his parents an explanation of the real nature of the transaction. The terms of that explanation are not entirely clear because both sides deny that the conversation occurred. That such a communication occurred is the probable explanation for Maygood Australia's subsequent accounts recording a loan from Sino as a liability. 
The last stream of conversations that need to be examined in this period are those between Yehan and Yi-Fawn. 
Conversations between Husband and Wife  
The versions advanced by Yi-Fawn Lee and Yehan Koo are as different from one another as those of their respective families. Perhaps this is to be expected after a bitter separation and divorce. I mostly prefer Yi-Fawn's version of what passed between them. 
Yehan's account is that he became aware of the Chatswood development site and discussed it with Yi-Fawn. His first discussion with his spouse revealed several recurrent themes that appeared throughout the conversations between them: the Lees wanted to advance a $1 million to support the young couple and were pressing the money on them; Yehan Koo was reluctant for the Lees to put money into the project because he knows of his parents' reservations; and, Yi-Fawn reassures him that the money will be given to them both and they will be the ones who will invest it rather than the Lees. The first conversation was said to have taken place on 14 and 15 October 2006 and was to the following effect:- "Yehan:" 'I think that the site at Chatswood is a good opportunity but I am unsure whether we should proceed. It is very close to the centre of Chatswood and the train and bus interchange'.  
Yi-Fawn: 'If you like it, you should bid on it'.  
Yehan: 'The site is good but we still need to finalise the Darlinghurst DA. I am also hesitant because while we can afford it, it is not really fair on my parents to increase their support professionally, financially and time-wise.
They came out of retirement to support and teach me about property development. Remember, they were already retired before we came back to
Sydney.  
Yi-Fawn: 'My parents also want to help us - they have converted money and have one million Australian dollars ready to give us for our future. The money is sitting in term deposits in Hong Kong earning hardly any interest, less than 3 per cent. Your parents have already done a lot. I told my father about the
Chatswood site and he really likes the area and thinks it has good potential.
This is exactly the sort of thing that my parents have been wanting to help us with. They have told me that the money will be ours whenever we want. Anyway, better that we get it from them now rather than having to wait for it to come as inheritance. I will ask them for the money and then we can put it into the project'.  
Yehan: 'I don't think that I want your parents putting any money in'.  
Yi-Fawn: Don't worry, the money is ours so we will put it in".' 
Yehan Koo then gives an account of the conversations he says he held with his father and mother. The tenor of these conversations as Yehan recounts them is consistent with Harry and Geen Koo's versions. On Yehan's account he presses upon his parents his continuing interest in the Chatswood project but they express repeated reluctance to come out of retirement and take on another project. 
Yehan Koo says that he then took his parents' doubts back to his wife and they confront together the problem of the Lees wishing to advance money to the couple. He recalls a conversation taking place with Yi-Fawn on 18 October 2006 to the following effect:- "Yi-Fawn: 'How did you go with the property at Chatswood and talking to your parents?'  
Yehan: 'My parents are not that keen on bidding on the property at Chatswood.
They are concerned that Darlinghurst has not yet been approved.'  
Yi-Fawn: 'Your research and work has shown that it is a good opportunity. Did you tell them about the money that we will put in? My parents are keen to support us, They want to help us as they have seen all that your parents have done. They are so excited that the baby is on its way.'  
Yehan: 'I haven't yet told my parents about the money but they don't want or need any money. They have had issues with equity partners before. They don't want anyone having any say in their projects'.  
Yi-Fawn: 'Sure, whatever. The money is being given to us anyway, and we will be the ones putting it in, not my parents. I want to encourage you to work hard for our family, especially because we will have a little baby soon. Isn't this exciting? You need to go and make a lot of money for me and the baby!'  
Yehan: 'OK, let me do some more work on the feasibility and talk to my parents further. Let's not get too excited, ok? Let's see if I can get a bid in'." 
By 24 October 2006 Yehan Koo and the Koo family appeared to have in principle support from St George Bank, for proceeding on the development. It was then, 25 October 2006, Yehan recalls another conversation with his wife in which he explained to her that he has spoken to his mother. He recollects Yi-Fawn saying "my parents are still keen to give us the money so I will get the money over. Even if the bid is not successful there will be other good sites". Yehan says that he re-iterated that the money from the Lees is not needed because the financing is available for the Chatswood project. 
It is evident from Yehan's version of the conversation with his wife on 18 October 2006 he had not yet told his parents about the monies the Lees were offering. On his own version he was reluctant to do this. Consistently with his parents' account he says that he first raised the matter with his parents on 25 October 2006 when the following conversation took place:- "Yehan: 'Yi-Fawn's parents want to give Yi-Fawn and I some money to put into the Chatswood project. I think that it will be about one million Aussie dollars'.  
Geen Koo: 'We don't need it. You know I am against making the bid abut since you put the 'I would be an investment banking MD now' argument to me, I will support you. We have had partners in the past and it has always ended badly.
We don't want any future problems with the in-laws. I would rather not do the project than have them put money in'.  
Harry: 'We have had problems with partners in the past and don't want any partners in future projects. We also don't want to borrow from Yi-Fawn's parents. That could be troublesome.'  
Yehan: 'No, the money will be given to Yi-Fawn and I and we will put it into the project.'  
Geen Koo: 'It is up to you but we don't want any partners and we don't need the money'." 
The end of this conversation was, in my view, an important turning point. According to Yehan Koo once he represented to his parents that the money would be given to Yi-Fawn and to him, for them to decide to put into the project as their own funds, Mrs Geen Koo then left it up to Yehan to decide what to do; as she said to her son "It is up to you". But she gave him the general admonition that he should remember that "we don't want any partners" and that the Koo family did not need the money; and, that borrowings could be "troublesome". This far, in my view, Yehan Koo's evidence can be accepted as to what he and Yi-Fawn discussed. But once the narrative gets to November and December 2006, Yi-Fawn's account makes more sense. 
Yi-Fawn's version also had its problems. She says that once the Chatswood project came to her attention in October 2006, that her husband raised with her the possibility of Mr Lee lending Maygood Australia about $1 million. She says that she was reluctant for this to happen but invited him to speak to her father. I do not think she was as reluctant as she says. In my view, she regarded her father as a man of substantial wealth and she welcomed a contribution from her family to the couple's expected material success. But on her account, which in my view is in this respect correct, Yehan does take up the invitation to speak to her father. I accept her version that by about late October Yehan reported to her that her father had agreed to lend Maygood Australia $1 million. This is a course that she encouraged in my view, although she denies that. But Yehan remembers none of the conversations that Yi-Fawn says took place about the transferring of the funds in December. On that I accept her evidence. 
The clear impression gained from Yehan Koo's version of these conversations is that as between him and his wife and between him and his parents it was clear that the Lee family was giving the $1 million to the couple and that the couple were advancing it to Maygood Australia. It was only being transferred direct into Maygood Australia's account as a matter of convenience and to overcome Yi-Fawn's fears about tax issues. 
Yi-Fawn's version of these conversations is to be preferred for a number of reasons. On Yehan's version transferring the money into Maygood Australia's account was a temporary fix that Yi-Fawn proposed to avoid taxation issues with the receipt. If Yi-Fawn did have those concerns one would expect her to have regularised the position not long after the couple returned from Shanghai. The transfer from Sino direct to Maygood Australia on Yehan's version was only ever a temporary convenience. Yi-Fawn was commercially sophisticated enough to have sought to set the financial record straight when she returned to Australia. On Yehan's version Maygood Australia still owed the money to him and to Yi-Fawn. If his version is right, one would have expected Yi-Fawn to raise with him and his mother the creation of some documentation that would record an advance from the couple to Maygood Australia. There would have been no obvious obstacle to this if Yehan is to be accepted. But that did not happen, because Yehan's version is wrong. Moreover, Yi-Fawn's lack of understanding of the so called tax reasons for Sino transferring the funds direct to Maygood Australia rather than to her and her husband did not seem to the Court to be feigned. 
Before Yehan Koo and Tsung-Te Lee met to sign the written Loan Agreement Sino's corporate minutes record that it held a Board Meeting to approve the lending of the money to Maygood Australia, a meeting that Maygood Australia and the Koo's said did not take place. 
The December 2006 Sino Board Meeting  
Mr Lee waited until 12 December 2006 to call a board meeting to authorise Sino to send the money. Mr Lee was challenged that the remission of the $700,000 on 13 December 2006, was a long time after the conversation with Mr Koo in late October, discussing the proposal to remit the money to Mr Koo. But in my view the delay is not unusual in circumstances where Mr Yehan Koo was not coming to Shanghai until December 2006. Mr Lee said that he did not think it was necessary to call a board meeting in late October, even though he had agreed to send the money "as soon as possible". There was no difficulty in Mr and Mrs Lee, the Sino directors, calling a board meeting to authorise the transfer before 13 December. But they did not. I accept Mr Lee's explanation that he thought that the money needed to be paid before the family met together on about 20 December for a family holiday. I find that although Mr Lee felt bound by his word and the loan agreement to transfer the $1 million in funds, he was not especially anxious to make the transfer. It was an investment in part prompted by a family duty. 
The idea was the money would be transferred, "Because Yehan asked for money, he needed money", irrespective of whether the Chatswood development deal went through. I accept that Mr Lee was told that he would get the money back if the deal did not proceed. 
The loan was minuted by Sino on 12 December 2006 in the western calendar. Not all the terms of the loan discussed between Yehan Koo and Tsing-Te Lee are recorded in the 12 December 2006 minutes. Mr Aldridge SC and Ms Sinclair suggested for the Koo interests that this meant that there were no more terms that had been discussed by then than are recorded in these minutes. But I do not accept that this follows from their omission in the minutes, which appear below:- " Sino Synergy Synergy Investment Co Ltd  December 2006  Min Chuan Road 6F, Taichung, Taiwan  
BOARD MEETING RESOLUTION  
The board of the company has made the following resolutions:  
Lending money to Maygood Australia Australia in the amount of one million
Australian dollars even. The annual compound interest rate if 10%.  
The borrower is restricted to using the money from the loan to purchase the properties located at Devonshire Street, Chatswood and Claude Street,
Chatswood (the Council Car Park and the adjacent house) in Sydney Australia.  
Term of the loan: 
In the event the borrower Maygood Australia Australia is in breach of the condition set out in (2), the company shall demand the borrower to repay the money immediately. 
The term of the loan is set to be two years. In the event of longer than two years, the words 'early repayment' shall be added. The borrower shall be reminded of the condition (a) verbally or the borrower shall repay the loan earlier on demand made by the lender. Otherwise claims shall be made by way of litigation. Early repayment by the borrower will also be accepted.  
Authorisation: the company director Mr Tsung-Te Lee is fully authorised to deal with this case and sign all the relevant documents on behalf of the company. In relation to any other matters which are not discussed herein, the company director Mr Tsung-Tee Lee is also fully authorised to deal with them and sign all the relevant documents on behalf of the company.  
Further authorisation: the company director Mr Tsung-Te Lee is fully authorised to deal with and sign all the relevant documents according to the company's Memorandum of Association.  
Members of the board: 
Lee Tsung-Te  (Signature of Lee Tsung-Te affixed) 
Lee Wang Li-Mei  (Signature of Lee Wang Li-Mei affixed)" 
If Mr Koo's case were correct the 12 December 2006 minutes recording the lending of the money to Maygood Australia were wholly artificial. The Koo's contention that the advance was a gift meant that there would not have been a meeting to approve a loan at all. But rather the minutes must have been manufactured to accommodate Sino's contentions in the proceedings. Mr Aldridge SC put this to both Mr Lee and Mrs Lee in cross-examination. Their reaction to the allegation was instructive. 
Using an interpreter in court proceedings can add difficulty to assessing credit. But it can make the process easier. When Mr Aldridge SC suggested the manufacture of false Board Minutes to Mr and Mrs Lee, I was able to study their reactions to the allegation, as it was translated into Mandarin. They both seemed genuinely shocked that it would be suggested that they would be involved in the construction of fictitious Minutes. They both denied doing such a thing. I accept their denials. In response to the suggestions: that there was no such Board Meeting on 12 December 2006; that the Minutes had been prepared solely for the purpose of the proceedings; and, that they were not genuine Mr Lee said "actually we did have the board meeting on that day and not just for the case. Because we have to transfers $1 million Australia dollars". Mrs Lee's reaction was similar. She said "that is not true. There was a board meeting, not for this case". Her denials were sufficiently emphatic to penetrate directly from her Taiwanese Mandarin into an English-speaking courtroom without the need for translation. I accept that a Sino Board Meeting did take place on 12 December 2006 and that the Minutes of that meeting set out above authorising the making of a loan record resolutions that were passed at that meeting. 
The December 2006 Loan Agreement  
The Written Loan Agreement  
Mr Yehan Koo and Mr Tsung-Te Lee signed the written Loan Agreement on behalf of Sino and Maygood Australia at Mr Lee's Shanghai apartment on 20 December 2006. This document was difficult obstacle for Maygood Australia's defence that the $1 million advance was a gift. It was a document that Yehan Koo needed to explain. He gave an elaborate explanation of its creation grounded in exchanges between himself and Yi-Fawn and between himself and Tsung-Te Lee. Assessing the accuracy of his account of these conversations is central to the credit findings in the case. In the result, I do not accept Yehan Koo's account of either conversation for the reasons explained in this section. 
The Loan Agreement as executed provides as follows:- " LOAN AGREEMENT  
BETWEEN  
SINO SYNERGY INVESTMENT CO. LTD  ("The Lender")  
AND  
MAYGOOD AUSTRALIA PTY LTD  ("The Borrower")  
December 2006  
LENDER Sino Synergy Investment Co Ltd  
BORROWER Maygood Australia Pty Ltd ACN 114 532 599  
PURPOSE To be used at Borrower's discretion in the purchase of the properties at 31, 33, 35 Devonshire Street, Chatswood ad 40 Claude Street, Chatswood  
AMOUNT A$1,000,000  
COMMENCEMENT DATE 20 December 2006  
TERM 5 years 
Principal payable earlier than full term at Borrower's discretion  
INTEREST 10% (Fixed for term of loan)  
INTEREST PAYMENT Interest to be capitalised for the term of the loan 
Interest payable in full on payment of the principal amount  
LOAN SECURITY Unsecured  
THE LENDER 
EXECUTED by SINO SYNERGY 
INVESTMENT CO. LTD  ............................. 
Signature of Director  ............................. 
Name of Director (block letters)  
Dated.............................  
THE BORROWER 
EXECUTED by MAYGOOD AUSTRALIA 
AUSTRALIA PTY LTD  .............................. 
Signature of Director  .............................. 
Name of Director (block letters)  
Dated....................." 
The Loan Agreement differs in some respects from the oral loan contract. For example, the Loan Agreement refers to repayment in 5 years or earlier than full term at the Borrowers discretion rather than the detailed terms agreed orally. I accept Mr Lee's evidence that he allowed Mr Yehan Koo to draft the Loan Agreement because Mr Lee trusted him. I also accept that for the same reason Mr Lee did not seek to have Mr Koo's Loan Agreement, expressed in English as it was, checked by a notary. I accept Mr Lee's account that he did not ask for the loan agreement before sending the money though because Mr Yehan Koo said he would prepare the loan agreement. Mr Lee knew that banks not borrowers normally prepared loan agreements. But I accept that he thought this one was quite simple and that he was simply prepared to acquiesce in Mr Koo preparing the agreement because of the family relationship. 
The Parties Approach to the Loan Agreement  
My detailed findings preferring Mr Lee's evidence about the Loan Agreement are set out below. But those findings are more understandable in light of my findings about the parties' attitudes to the Loan Agreement. 
The very existence of the Loan Agreement was an embarrassment. Neither Mr Koo nor Mr Lee wanted to dwell upon it for very long, or to take any external steps through solicitors to check it. It was a private document drafted by Mr Koo for Mr Lee. Mr Koo responded to Mr Lee's request to create the Loan Agreement because he too as a matter of honour could not refuse to take this step. He also needed to show commitment to the relationship of the two families. 
Mr Koo rightly says that the $1 million was to "cement family ties". It was certainly that. The money was given and received with that very idea in both Mr Lee's and Mr Koo's minds. But it was also more than that. The fact that Yehan willingly participated in the ceremony of creating, giving over, signing then keeping the Loan Agreement indicates in my view that he too knew that something more than a gift was at stake. The words in the Loan Agreement were less important to each party than the symbolism of handing it over. The discussion, drafting, meeting, signing, giving and keeping of the Loan Agreement were a mutual assurance between Mr Lee and Mr Koo on behalf of their respective family companies that they both understood that Mr Lee expected Maygood Australia to repay Sino. There was in my view a clear intention to enter legal relations both in the course of the oral conversations commencing in October 2006 and then confirmed in December 2006 through the execution of the written form of Loan Agreement. But at the same time there was in my view an overlay of understandable optimism in each of Mr Lee and Mr Koo that the Loan Agreement would never need to be used. 
Mr Koo's counsel attacked Mr Lee's apparently casual indifference to the detail of the terms of the Loan Agreement. This attack had a sound basis in fact. Mr Lee was less than focussed on the Loan Agreement's precise terms. He accepted Mr Koo's assurance about its content and I find that he just put the document away. Such apparent negligence is to be explained because the symbolism of Yehan's drafting and giving the Loan Agreement and then signing it together were more important to Mr Lee than what it said. Yehan Koo had submitted himself to a process as Mr Lee expected. That was enough for Mr Lee. 
A problem for Mr Lee looking too closely at the document also was that it may potentially create other embarrassing problems that would have to be confronted then and there. They might not have become problems in the long term anyway. He did not have to worry about them immediately. In October - December 2006, $1 million was a not unimportant sum to Mr Lee. But the success of his daughter's marriage and therefore not appearing to distrust his son-in-law was more important to him. Unusual though it may be, I accept his evidence that he just put the document away. 
Mr Yehan Koo's Account - The Origins of the Loan Agreement  
Yehan Koo's explanation for his creation of the Loan Agreement was that his wife wanted the couple to give an official looking document to her parents when they were to meet in Shanghai in order to show them that the money had been received and was being put to good use. His account includes a conversation between the couple which is said to have occurred on 18 December 2006 when they were notified that the final $300,000 had been transferred from Sino to Maygood Australia. 
According to Yehan Koo the conversation with his wife on 18 December 2006 was to the following effect:- "Yi-Fawn: 'Another $300,000 is on its way and should get here tomorrow or the next day. You should put together something on paper to show my father when we get to Shanghai. It will look good for you and me'.  
Yehan: 'Like a note or something?'  
Yi-Fawn: 'Another $300,000 is on its way and should get here tomorrow or the next day. You should put together something on paper to show my father when we get to Shanghai. It will look good for you and me.'  
Yehan: 'Like a note or something?'  
Yi-Fawn: 'No, an official looking document to show our appreciation and to show that the money has been received by us and put to good use. That it is being used for the development project in Chatswood and not to buy a new car or even worse, for you to spend on a mistress.'  
Yehan: 'That is ludicrous'.  
Yi-Fawn: 'I know, I know. Even though the money is being given to us, it will look good for you to show something on paper. Something so he can be happy that the money will be for us. Show that you can earn more money for us from the money they have given to us. Show that the money will earn interest of 10% and make it look all official because my father will love that'.  
Yehan: 'OK, I will try to put something together'.  
Yi-Fawn: 'It can't be that hard. Prepare something to show your gratitude as a good son-in-law! I am busy packing for our trip. You better get onto it before we take off tomorrow.'  
Yehan: 'OK. I will do something and show you.'  
Yi-Fawn: 'Good'." 
Yehan Koo says he hastily prepared an official looking document, as had been suggested by his wife. He explained his reasoning for creating the document in the form that he did. He says that his decision to create what was essentially a fiction was based upon a number of family and cultural factors that he explained in detail. 
The explanation started looking from the perspective of his parents-in-law. He said that Mr Tsung-Te Lee and Mrs Limei Lee had not put any terms or conditions on the transfers and had not requested anything in writing. He understood the money was a gift for himself and Yi-Fawn and their future children and that creating a document in response to his wife's request was not going to change the nature of what was a gift. 
But he was still dealing with new in-laws. He took the view, he says, that he should be guided by his wife about how to deal with them and that he would conform with her advice about that, to ensure a successful marriage. 
He needed to decide what the document would look like. He thought it needed to be more than just a 'thank you' note or a mere receipt. He says he concluded it should be a loan agreement through the following process of reasoning:- "44. As I sat down at my desk and started to think about the preparation of a document, I did start to get concerned about the form of the document. I thought it needed to be more than a thank you note or receipt and I had to be careful to ensure that nothing I wrote could be construed as giving equity participation in the Chatswood properties. I then decided to refer to it as a loan document even though it was my understanding that the money was a gift and not a loan. I thought the document should show where the money was to be used and what return was expected of it. Yi-Fawn and I had agreed to lend the money to the first defendant and this document mirrored that arrangement." 
Yehan Koo then needed add detail to the Loan Agreement. He explained that his reasoning was that to construct the loan as between Yi-Fawn on one side and his in-laws on the other would look highly unusual from a Chinese cultural perspective. Yi-Fawn would be on the other side of the agreement from her parents. In his mind this conflicted with the casual manner in which the gift had been given. 
He says that he then came up with final parties to the agreement through the following reasoning process. "47. 'I considered Yi-Fawn's instructions to me to make the document official looking and decided that if I put the entities down as being the Lee family company, the plaintiff, that had transferred the money and the Koo family company, the first defendant, that had received the money that it would be the most straightforward way to represent it.' 
Yehan Koo also recalls Yi-Fawn gave him the corporate details for Sino so that they could be put into the agreement. 
But there is more detail in the agreement that he needed to explain. He says that he amalgamated the $700,000 and the $300,000 payments even though they were transferred on different days and that he selected a commencement date of 20 December, which was then only a few days ahead. He says it was an arbitrary choice. He further says that he really guessed at a loan term of 5 years because it was the time frame that he realistically expected for the completion of the Chatswood project. Finally, he explains he selected a 10% interest rate because he knew that the interest rate in Hong Kong was 2-3%. Moreover he added into the agreement that interest was to be capitalised for the term of the loan and not payable until the principal was repayable, so as to emphasise to Mr Lee that the money would be tied up in the project for an extended period. 
The last thing to be added to the document was space for Mr Tsung-Te Lee and Yehan Koo to sign. This was as he says part of making the document look "official" in his mind. 
After he prepared the document he says that he did not discuss it with or show it to his parents. He says that he took this course and did not seek his parents' approval because "I believe that it was only an internal document between Yi-Fawn and I and her parents to acknowledge the monies they had given to us and to impress Tsung-Te with my confidence in the Chatswood project and its commercial prospects". This was probaby right. I do not think Yehan did show this document to his parents before it was signed. That may have led to new obstacles that he could not overcome. But he did tell them, as I have found, that Sino was lending $1,000,000 to Maygood Australia. 
Just before the couple travelled to Shanghai, Yehan Koo says that he showed the agreement to his wife. She commented on his handy work favourably according to him, saying:- "That looks good, like quite official and stuff. You put in the 10% interest rate I told you to. He will love that. It will be a good way for us to thank my father properly for giving us the money and will reassure my parents that this project is a good opportunity." 
Yi-Fawn Lee and Yehan Koo then flew to Shanghai to meet her parents and spend Christmas with them. It was there that the agreements were signed one night over the dinner table. 
In my view, Yehan Koo's explanation of the origins of the written Loan Agreement are improbable and I do not accept his evidence on this subject. It is more probable in my view that Yehan Koo was simply trying to create a written document to reflect the import of his oral conversations with Mr Lee about the Loan. My reasons for drawing this conclusion include the poor way that Yehan Koo sought to explain the various loan statements in 2007 that were said to be based on this Loan Agreement, which are also said to record aspects of a fictitious transaction. As to these, see below. 
Signing in Shanghai  
The parties disagreed about much of what happened at the Loan Agreement signing in Shanghai. They disagreed about who was present. They disagreed about what was said. Yehan Koo said that he and Yi-Fawn were present when they spoke to her father. Yi-Fawn says that she was not and that the discussion was held directly between her husband and her father. 
According to Mr Yehan Koo there was a conversation at the dining room table in Mr Tsung-Te Lee's Shanghai apartment. Yehan recalls his wife opened the conversation by suggesting that Yehan had "something to say" to her father. Yehan says that he thanked Mr Tsung-Te Lee "for giving us the money" and then explained the location of the property through the information memorandum and map showing the location of the property according to Yehan Koo the conversation then continued with him saying "I have put together a document to show our appreciation with the monies and to thank you". He says he then presented the loan agreement to Tsung-Te. Then he recalls a conversation between them took place to the following effect:- "Tsung-Te Lee: 'What is this? I gave the money to you - we don't need anything in writing'.  
Yehan Koo: 'This is just to thank you. It is a simple document in writing to show you that the money will help with the purchase of the Chatswood properties.' In basic mandarin I referred to the document. 'I have put down a term of five years. I state that the interest is 10%'.  
Yi-Fawn: 'See 10% interest rate! Ba, this is big isn't it? You wont make us pay it back will you?'  
Tsung-Te Lee: 'I don't need any document. I am so happy to be able to support you and your growing family. No need to mention any interest rate or repayment. We are giving the money to you both and your babies. Anyway, when the building is up just leave an apartment empty, if you like, and me and your
Mama can stay there when we visit'.  
Yehan Koo: 'I have left an area here for you to sign'.  
Tsung-Te Lee: 'I don't need to sign anything, I am just happy that my daughter is pregnant without our first grandchild and I am happy to be able to contribute to your growing family'.  
Yi-Fawn: 'Yes it is best you sign - here where it says'.  
On Yi-Fawn's urging, Tsung-Te then signed both copies of the document and I then signed and dated both copies giving one copy to Tsung-Te and retaining one copy. We then went to dinner to celebrate Yi-Fawn's pregnancy and the fact that the birth of the Lees' first grandchild was imminent'." 
There are a number of things wrong with Yehan Koo's version of this conversation that makes it inherently improbable, quite apart from my preference for Mr Tsung-Te Lee's credibility and that of Yi-Fawn over that of Yehan Koo on this subject. 
For a man who was in my view sincerely mindful of matters of family diplomacy and pleasing his new in-laws, Mr Koo, on his own version, seemed to ignore the fact that to characterise a gift as a loan in his draft document could itself be a form of insult to Mr Lee. On Yehan Koo's own version Mr Tsung-Te Lee was very anxious for the transaction to be seen as a gift. Yet Yehan Koo was pressing upon his father-in-law a document that did the reverse of acknowledging that generosity. Had the document been created in the circumstances that Mr Yehan Koo describes this important issue would somehow have had to be squared away with Yi-Fawn. She would have had to reassure her father before the Loan Agreement was presented to him for signing. Otherwise the risk existed that he would have been offended by Yehan's conduct. But Yehan Koo's version does not make clear to his father-in-law that the document he was presenting was a loan agreement. Although Yi-Fawn seemed to think the document was satisfactory, according to Yehan, he did not have any assurance from his wife that she had checked with her father that this kind of loan document would be acceptable to him. Nor had Yi-Fawn checked with her father that a form of loan agreement would not offend him. This all makes Yehan's account more improbable and was not the way that in the Court's assessment Mr Yehan Koo was likely to treat his father-in-law. 
I prefer Mr Lee's version of this conversation. He does not refer to the presence of his daughter. She also says she was not present, evidence which I accept. Mr Lee's version of the signing was that it occurred on 21 December 2006, just before the family went out to a restaurant for dinner. The family had made arrangements for Limei, Tsung-Te, Yi-Fawn and Yehan to dine with Yi-Fawn's eldest sister, Yi-Rong and her husband, in the Xingtian Di Complex in Shanghai. According to Mr Tsung-Te Lee, Yi-Fawn was not at home at this time. According to him, the conversation then proceeded in the following terms:- "Yehan: 'Thank you for lending the money to me to buy the land in Chatswood.
It is a really big help. The money will just be used for Chatswood project. It will not be used for any other projects. Don't worry about it. My father and mother are doing this project with me. It is really going to succeed.'  
Me: 'There is no need to thank me.'  
Yehan: 'It is a great opportunity and shouldn't have any problems. It will be successful. This area is growing, so it will be good to build apartments here.
I hope it will be finished quickly'.  
Me: 'I wish you good luck'.  
Yehan: 'This is the contract I have prepared'.  
Me: 'Yes. Please give me progress reports and statements every three months. I need the statements for my accountant. I am still worrying about the length of the loan.'  
Yehan: 'I will give you progress reports and statements every three months. I wrote down 5 years as a term in the contract. But I will return the money at once when the project is finished or if we don't buy the land in Chatswood. If we sell the land or if we do not start construction within 2 years, I will also return the money'.  
Me: 'Are all the things you've told me this even ing in the contract?'  
Yehan: 'And if construction is not started within 2 years, can I request you to repay me the money?'  
Yehan: 'Yes'." 
But an early issue of importance about the Shanghai signing was Yehan Koo's capacity to speak Mandarin, especially the Hokkien dialect. Whilst I accept that Yehan had some difficulties in penetrating Mr Lee's Hokkien Mandarin dialect, I do not accept that he was incapable of having this conversation. Even on his own version of his exchange with his father-in-law he only needed some assistance from his wife about the formalities of the dialect and otherwise felt sufficiently confident to struggle on himself. On Yehan's own version of his linguistic ability as recounted in his first affidavit he seems to the Court to have been able to have the conversation that Tsung-Te Lee says that he had with Yehan. 
Yehan Koo changed his evidence about his command of Mandarin. In his affidavit of 30 June 2010 he emphasized how limited his capacity to speak Mandarin was and that Yi-Fawn was always present to assist him in the language. But there were two problems with this claimed incapacity. In his first affidavit he said, "I also speak Mandarin conversationally". Moreover, in an affidavit in the Family Court proceedings sworn on 24 September 2008 he said, "I admit my Mandarin does not have the fluency of a native speaker but its not poor. I do understand Mandarin. When I was fourteen, I spent nine months as an exchange student in China. I also worked and lived in Shanghai for over three years". Under cross-examination Mr Yehan Koo conceded that Family Law affidavit was the truth. As a matter of probability it is difficult to accept that he could have spent years in Shanghai that he did without having such a capacity. Yi-Fawn did not have to be present for the conversation to take place. This is also consistent with the findings that the telephone conversations Mr Lee recounts had taken place between father-in-law and son-in-law in October and December 2006 in any event. 
There is also objective probability to Mr Tsung-Te Lee's version, which records Yehan Koo's gratitude. Mr Yehan Koo was in my view grateful to Mr Lee, even for a loan. Short of the $1 million advance being a gift, it was still an occasion for gratitude, and Mr Lee's version reflects this. Yi-Fawn Lee had persuaded her husband to take a loan from her parents. She wanted her family to have a financial stake in the couple's prospective success. But the loan was in fact commercially convenient to the Koo family at that time. 
The features of the written Loan Agreement also support Mr Lee's case. The commencement date of the agreement, 20 December 2006, was the date of exchange of contracts for the Chatswood properties and the date the money Sino advanced was first applied. Given Yehan Koo's involvement in the detail of the Chatswood development I infer that at the time he finalised the agreement he was aware of the significance of the date 20 December. I do not accept his explanation that the choice of that date was really a coincidence. 
Did the Koo Family Need the Money?  
Maygood Australia and the Koo family based a forceful contention that they did not agree to a loan by contending that they had no immediate need of $1 million from any external source in late 2006. They advanced the same argument about the $300,000 paid in July 2007. 
Yehan Koo entered into an oral Loan Agreement and the written Loan Agreement on behalf of Maygood Australia with Sino. Just how clearly Yehan Koo had explained the true arrangements to his parents and Maygood Australia's directors by December 2006 is unclear. That was a matter internal to Maygood Australia. But within about six months Mr Harry and Mrs Geen Koo well knew that Sino had made the advance because they had recorded the payment as a loan in Maygood Australia's 2006-2007 financial year accounts. 
Despite Mr Spencer's able work in showing that the Koo's were probably asset rich but cash poor in the second half of the 2006-2007 financial year, I nevertheless accept the Koo's evidence that they did not need to borrow money for the Chatswood project from Sino or the Lee's. They had very substantial unencumbered assets to deploy as they wished. In my view what happened rather was that Yi-Fawn Lee talked her husband into a loan, an idea to which he was already disposed because of its convenience for the Koo family at that point. Yi-Fawn did not want the couple to be entirely funded by the Koo family. Sensitive to that wish, Yehan Koo went along with his wife's wishes. But he did not fully explain to his parents what his wife wanted. He did this, in my view, because he knew it would be unpalatable to them. It was just the kind of financial entanglement that his mother had warned him against. 
Mr Yehan Koo says he was comfortable with the $1 million advance. But if that is right it is difficult to explain why he hesitated for quite a long time to tell his parents about it. He delayed in my view because of the discomfort he felt about the reconciling what he knew of the Sino loan proposal with his parents' expectations. When he did tell them, he reduced the advance to the status of a gift between the Lee family and the couple. But he engaged in different language with his father-in-law, when agreeing to a loan. The reason he did this was intense pressure from his wife. I have little doubt having seen her in the witness box that Yi-Fawn Lee would have been able to persuade her husband to go along with this. She was a woman who knew her own mind and who could in a cool businesslike way have guided her husband to the outcome she wanted. Mr Yehan Koo was then left with a potential management problem within his own family. But if it all went well, it was a problem that he would perhaps never have to face. 
Sino and Maygood Australia Accounts after 2006  
The Sino Accounts  
The Sino 2006-2007 financial year accounts record the AUD$1 million loan to Maygood Australia as an asset of Sino, recorded as "other debts" of USD$788,925. The accounts appear consistently this way for a period of years. Moreover, the accounts accrue interest on the loan in conformity with the loan agreement. It was unclear on the evidence whether the accounts have been filed with any public authority in Taiwan. The fact the Sino accounts do not refer to Maygood Australia expressly is not remarkable in my view. 
The Koos' contention that that $1 million advance was a gift, implied that Sino's accounts for 2006-2007, 2007-2008 and 2008-2009 financial years contained false entries of an asset that did not exist. I have reached the opposite conclusion. My findings are that: the Sino accounts for those years record what Mr Lee thought genuine; that the asset recorded in them of the loan to Maygood Australia was correctly recorded and represented what Mr Lee believed genuinely to be an asset of Sino; and the accruing of interest on the loan advance was in conformity with the agreement. 
I accept that the accounts were created on or about the dates they purport to have been created. The first set of accounts was completed before Yehan Koo and Yi-Fawn Lee separated and were divorced. The accounts were created with the loan asset recorded in them when there was harmony between the Koo and the Lee families. It is difficult to understand why the Lees would have falsely constructed their accounts to include this asset when the Lee's than had, as yet, no motive to rethink their gift (as the Koos would have it) and to recall the money from the Koos. 
Mr Aldridge SC put to Mr and Mrs Lee, as the circumstances required him to, that Sino's accounts were false in this respect. As with the contention that the Minutes of 12 December 2006 were false, this allegation met with an emphatic denial. Mr Lee seemed genuinely affronted by the suggestion that the accounts were not genuine. He said in response "they are true. You can find it in my affidavit. They owe my money." And again "it is true that Maygood Australia owes my money". He repeated again and again "they are true". I accept his evidence as to this. 
The Maygood Australia Accounts - 2006/2007 and 2007/2008  
The Maygood Australia Accounts also show the $1,000,000 December 2006 advance as a liability, for the 2006/2007 and 2007/2008 financial years, the period that Yi-Fawn and Yehan were still together. 
The 2006/2007 Financial Year. The 2006/2007 financial statements of the Koo Family Trust No.2, for which Maygood Australia was the trustee, record an unsecured loan of $1 million to Sino accrued during the year ending 30 June 2007. Mrs Koo, an accountant, gave the instructions for the preparation of accounts and tax returns for the trust. On 1 November 2007 she and her husband certified as the directors of the trustee company that the financial statements fairly presented the trusts' financial position. Mrs Koo was well able to appreciate the difference between a loan from Sino and a loan from her son and daughter in law. The form of Maygood Australia's accounts as trustee was inconsistent with the Koo's case. 
In her evidence Mrs Koo attempted to reconcile the difference through a conversation that she says she had with Yehan and Yi-Fawn about the accounting treatment of the monies received from Sino. She says that Yi-Fawn responded to her "Mum, in regards to the money transferred, put them into the accounts under Sino", to which she says she replied, "Fine, I'll tell the accountant to do that". 
This conversation probably did occur and in almost these exact words. But the thinking of both Geen Koo and Yi-Fawn in the conversation was to confirm the loan from Sino. Mrs Koo was not seeking from her daughter in law an understanding of why a loan that she thought was being made by Yehan and Yi-Fawn should be recorded in the name of Sino. What was happening here, in my view, was that Mrs Koo was simply seeking confirmation that Yi-Fawn perceived no difficulty in there being included a commercial loan from Sino in Maygood Australia's accounts, as she understood was the transaction. I do not accept that Mrs Koo was prepared to approve the accounts in the form which disguised the identity of the true lenders of the money. Mrs Koo knew: that Sino was the lender; and that Sino was connected with the Lee family. Mrs Koo was merely checking that she was completing Maygood Australia's accounts in accordance with her understanding of a loan transaction from Sino to Maygood. 
Yehan did not add anything to this conversation about Maygood Australia's accounts, although according to his mother he was present. I accept that he knew he did not have any interest in Sino, even if his mother was mistaken about that. Here was the moment where, if his version is right, he should have contradicted Yi-Fawn's instructions to Mrs Koo to record the monies as a liability owed to Sino or at least raised the issue with his wife privately. After all, according to him, by her instructions to Mrs Koo, she had just given back to her father Yehan's half share of $1,000,000. He should have insisted that the loan be recorded as a liability to himself and Yi-Fawn. He did not give an adequate explanation why he did not intervene at this point, if his version is correct. 
The 2007/2008 Financial Year . Mr Harry and Mrs Geen Koo again prepared the financial statements for the Koo Family Trust No. 2 for the year ending 30 June 2008 and finalised them about 30 October 2008. 
The liability to Sino of $ 1 million is recorded and included in the non current liabilities in the balance sheet. But this time an item had accrued an interest of $158,164 appears as a further liability. This figure accurately represents the interest that would have been due on $1 million from 20 December 2006 to 30 June 2008 if it had been accrued in accordance with the written Loan Agreement at 10 per cent per annum compounded annually. These accounts contain other entries in relation to the Limei and Yi-Fawn proceedings which will be considered later. 
Here was a repetition of what Mrs Geen Koo and Mr Yehan Koo say was a mistake. That it should have appeared in the accounts finalised in October 2008, after Yi-Fawn had left Yehan, returned to Hong Kong, and custody proceedings were on foot, is remarkable. If Yehan Koo and Geen Koo really believed that the couple had advanced this money to Maygood Australia it is unlikely that Mrs Geen Koo would have persisted in this mistake. 
Mrs Koo sought to explain the interest entry on the basis of accountant's advice that because one letter of demand had been received for the moneys the subject of the Yi-Fawn and Limei proceedings that "we need to provide an interest amount in the financial statements as a contingency". The problem with this explanation is that the $158,164 of accrued interest is not treated as a contingency at all. I do not accept Mrs Koo's explanation. 
The 2007 Loan Account Statements  
The March 2007 Loan Statement  
Tsung-Te and Limei Lee visited Australia between 28 March and 7 April 2007. They stayed at the Sebel serviced apartments in Chatswood, travelled to Melbourne, then spent the last part of their trip at the Koo's home in St Ives. During this trip Yehan Koo gave Tsung-Te Lee a Loan Account Statement, the first of two that he created, it was dated 20 March 2007,and its reproduced below:- " LOAN ACCOUNT  
SINO SYNERGY INVESTMENT CO. LTD  ("The Lender")  
AND  
MAYGOOD AUSTRALIA AUSTARLIA PTY LTD  ("The Borrower")  March 2007  
Loan Account  
Loan Outstanding - 20 December 2006 A$1,000,000 
Interest (10% for 3 months) A$25,000  ---------------- 
Loan Outstanding - 20 March 2007 A$1,025,000  ----------------" 
I accept that Mr Lee did not get a written progress report from his son-in-law in March 2007 because Yehan Koo told him that the project had not started yet. Mr Koo seemed to say to Mr Lee that the money would be coming "shortly". 
Mr Yehan Koo's conduct in crafting and giving this loan statement was in my view the result of his actual belief that the Loan Agreement was a genuine loan transaction. The loan statements do not make sense, if the $1 million Sino paid in December 2006 was a gift. Mr Lee's request for the March loan statement and Mr Yehan Koo's provision of it were a mutual affirmation of the repayment obligations represented in the loan agreement. 
Mr Yehan Koo says he offered the March loan statement to Mr Lee but Mr Lee declined it, because the money was a gift. But Yehan Koo suggests that Mr Lee nevertheless took the March and December loan statements at Yi-Fawn's request. But I accept Mr Lee's denial that this is not what happened. Mr Lee did not decline to receive these loan statements. He accepted them. 
Yehan Koo's account about the March 2007 loan statement began to unravel as he was cross-examined. Although his explanation for the document was that he was a good business man and that it showed "I haven't lost the money", he was not able to explain under cross-examination how the document showed that. In my view it really showed nothing more than he could calculate 10 percent for 3 months on $1 million and that it did not do what Yi-Fawn is said to have requested of him. The troubling thing about the March 2007 loan statement was that on Yehan's own version it heaped fiction upon fiction and showed him as someone prepared to go along with such things, thereby damaging his credibility in any event. When the Court asked him why he was continuing the fiction of the Loan Agreement he said, "I just thought it was easier. I really didn't put a lot of thought into it". In my view, Mr Yehan Koo was doing himself a disservice. The March 2007 loan statement was not a fiction. 
Mr Yehan Koo's version of how both the March 2007 loan statement came into existence sounded very artificial. This was not surprising. With the production of this statement Mr Yehan Koo further elaborated a fiction which he says he had first embarked upon at his wife's urging back in December 2006. Mr Yehan Koo did not strike me as a dishonest person. Rather he would ultimately give way to his wife's determined persuasion and then do what he must to make that fit with his own family's expectations. His version of what led to the March 2007 statement just does not ring true. This is what it was:- "Yi-Fawn: 'You should prepare some sort of statement regarding the money that my parents gave us'.  
Yehan: 'What sort of statement? Why do we need to show anything? They gave the money to us'.  
Yi-Fawn: 'Something that shows that you are a good businessman. Show them the amount and interest because while they do not want us to repay them it will make you look good and will show that you have looked after the money properly. Do something that assures Ba that we have not forgotten the amount and how he has helped us. Also to show that the money is still there and has not disappeared. Show them that we are doing ok and that everything is looking positive'.  
Yehan: 'Are you serious? Do I have to?'  
Yi-Fawn: 'Yes, it will make you and me look good in front of them'." 
According to Mr Yehan Koo, his wife was now asking him to construct entirely fictitious documents, to show to her father. This was a very confronting request but all he says is "are you serious? Do I have to?". Yehan Koo would probably have reacted very differently to such calculated artifice. There were limits to his malleability to please his wife. If this had really been said, his likely answer in my view was simply "no". The better explanation of events is that Yi-Fawn did not ask this of him. Rather I find that he crafted a loan statement that conformed with what he thought was a genuine loan transaction, even though he had told his parents it was a gift. 
Mr Yehan Koo presented as a plainly intelligent and resourceful man. His best defence to his wife's request at this point was to question why any more documents were required at all: given that Mr Tsung-Te Lee had not asked for any more documents; given that the loan agreement had already made the couple look good in the eyes of Mr and Mrs Lee; and, given that his wife was asking him to engage in another work of fiction. 
The December 2007 Loan Statement  
Yehan Koo gave the second loan statement to Mr Tsung-Te Lee in December 2007 during his, Yi-Fawn's and Ang-Ya's visit to Taiching, Taiwan. The text of this December 2007 loan statement is set out below:- " LOAN ACCOUNT  
FOR TWELVE MONTHS ENDED  DECEMBER 2007  
SINO SYNERGY INVESTMENT CO. LTD  ("The Lender")  
AND  
MAYGOOD AUSTRALIA PTY LTD  ("The Borrower")  
Loan Account  
Initial Loan - 20 Dec 2006 A$1,000,000  - See (1) below  
Interest A$100,000  - 10% per annum for 12 months  
Initial Loan Balance - 20 Dec 2007 A$1,100,000  
Additional Loan - 20 July 2007 A$290,000  - see (2) below  
Interest A$12,083  - 10% per annum for 5 months  
Additional Loan Bal- 20 Dec 2007 A$302,083  
TOTAL LOAN OUTSTANDING A$1,402,083  
Note Transfers:  
Initial Loan Represented by:  /12/06 Sino Synergy $700,000  /12/06 Sino Synergy $300,000  
Additional Loan Represented by:  /7/07 Yifawn Lee $90,000  /7/07 Limei Wang Lee $200,000  
Also other transfers related to sale of Zhenning Lu apartment:  /9/07 Sino Synergy $114,442.66  /10/07 Sino Synergy $145,805" 
Mr Yehan Koo's account of the creation of the December 2007 loan statement is that on 12 December 2007 he and Yi-Fawn had a conversation in their bedroom at their St Ives house in which the following was said:- "Yi-Fawn: 'I think that you should do another statement for my parents'.  
Yehan: 'Is that really necessary? The statement is meaningless and they only reluctantly took the last one'.  
Yi-Fawn: 'It will continue to make us look good in front of them. My parents are very concerned that things aren't working out well with Darlinghurst and for your business. You know how they get all worried. They really don't believe that you can pull off an approval'.  
Yehan: 'These things take time, it will all come good, you will see'.  
Yi-Fawn: 'It will continue to make us look good in front of them. My parents are very concerned that things aren't working out well with Darlinghurst and for your business. You know how they get all worried. They really don't believe you can pull off an approval'.  
Yehan: 'These things take time, it will all come good, you will see'.  
Yi-Fawn: 'Do a statement like the last time but put in all the monies we have received from my parents. They will never ask us to pay them back as the money was given to us. We need to justify that things are going ok. They need to know that the money is going to benefit us and our children and has not gone missing'." 
If this was said in December 2007, the reasons for Yehan Koo saying "no" to his wife were even greater than they had been in March 2007. His protest is unconvincingly weak in the face of being asked to create yet another false document. I do not accept this evidence from him. 
Moreover, by the time Yi-Fawn made this request there would have been many more documents that Yehan Koo could have used to demonstrate the success of the Chatswood project or to keep Mr and Mrs Lee informed that the problems at the Darlinghurst project were being ironed out, without him having to create yet another fictitious document. Yehan Koo did not lack insight as to how to use commercial evidence. It was not a difficult conclusion for him to draw that the best way to satisfy Yi-Fawn's parents was by his providing hard documentary evidence about the progress of the Chatswood and Darlinghurst projects. Such documents were inherently more persuasive than another false loan statement. He professed in evidence that he did not even think of this solution. I do not think that he was that obtuse. Nor do I think that Yi-Fawn was the kind of person who would require her husband to generate so many essentially fictitious documents just to appease her father. 
In my view the better explanation for Mr Yehan Koo producing the December 2007 loan statement is that he felt he had an existing obligation to provide it under both the oral and the written Loan Agreement made between Sino and Maygood Australia in December 2006. I do not accept Mr Yehan Koo's version of the conversations he says he had with Mr Tsung-Te Lee about the loan statement. I prefer Mr Lee's version of this conversation in all respects. 
The December 2007 loan statement does not include any information about the progress of the project. Mr Lee explained in oral evidence that Mr Yehan Koo said about that time, "we will start [the project] soon". I accept that Mr Lee did ask his son-in-law about the progress of the project at this time, as he claimed in his oral evidence. But he was generally told that it had not yet started. Mr Aldridge SC challenged Mr Lee's credit on this issue. In the relevant parts of Mr Lee's affidavit, where his discussion with Mr Yehan Koo is recounted, paragraphs [56]-[62], Mr Lee did not refer to this discussion but I find that it did take place as he explained orally. 
The December 2007 loan statement also contains entries related to the advances the subject of the Limei and Yi-Fawn proceeding. This aspect of the December 2007 loan statement will be considered in the next section of these reasons. 
The Causes of Action in the Sino Proceedings  
Sino puts its case, in contract, under the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) in mistake and estoppel. 
Contract  
Sino relies on an oral loan agreement on the terms pleaded above and the written Loan Agreement signed on 20 December 2006. I conclude that the parties had reached a binding agreement orally before the written form of the Loan Agreement that was executed. I reach this conclusion because there is no indication in the conversation that on Mr Lee's version that the terms on which the money was paid would not become legally binding until a written document was executed. Indeed the first part of the advance was made before the Loan Agreement was executed. In my view, they had made an oral agreement within the first class described in Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353.]
Except in minor respects the Loan Agreement in its written form reflects the oral agreement that the two men made. The Loan Agreement refers to the Claude Street property and refers to the term of the loan as five years instead of the oral agreement's more detailed terms (set out in the 'Overview' section at the beginning of these reasons) including repayment two years from the date of the advance in the event that Maygood Australia did not commence building work within that time. Notwithstanding the fact that the Loan Agreement did not contain that term it binds Sino and Maygood Australia. 
It is not in contest in these proceedings that Maygood Australia did not commence building on the Chatswood properties within two years from 20 December 2006. So the loan advance became repayable on 20 December 2008. Sino's case is made good that Maygood Australia has in breach of that term failed to repay the loan together with accrued interest. The parties should bring in short minutes of order calculating the interest due up to the date of judgment. I will hear submissions as to whether interest should be calculated from the date 20 December 2006, given that a Holman Webb solicitors demanded the repayment of this loan earlier on 22 August 2008. 
In the alternative, Sino alleges that because Maygood Australia has in its defence denied the existence of a loan agreement, either in its oral form and denied that the written Loan Agreement is binding Sino alleges that Maygood Australia has repudiated the agreement that has now been found to exist. Maygood Australia's defence, filed 18 June 2009, contains this denial and any such repudiation is no later than that date. Sino has accepted that repudiation and terminated the contract. Sino is entitled to damages in my view for that repudiation. It is not clear that those damages are any different from the loss of interest which would otherwise accrue for the breach of contract for non-payment that I have found. If a different measure of damages is contended for the differences should be made clear when draft short minutes of order are brought in. [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) Claims  
The [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) claims treat Mr Yehan Koo's statements to Mr Tsung-Te Lee in the conversations which formed the oral loan agreement as representations as to what Maygood Australia would do with the funds if Sino advanced them to Maygood Australia. Given the Court's findings in relation to intention to create legal relations, these were discussions between two individuals on behalf of companies that were in my view conduct in trade and commerce and therefore attract the operation of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) . Sino contends that contrary to what Yehan Koo represented to his father-in-law, Mayood Australia and its directors were indifferent at the time of the representations as to what had been promised to Sino. In effect Sino says that Maygood Australia misrepresented its intentions about only using the funds for the Chatswood properties. 
Whilst it is true that Maygood Australia did use the funds to repay various expenses including some related to the development of the Darlinghurst property, it is not to be inferred on the evidence in my view that the directors of Maygood Australia had necessarily had the making of such payments in mind at the time that Yehan Koo was speaking to his father-in-law between October and December 2006. Furthermore, the funding of the purchase of the Claude Street properties is said to be an expense beyond what Yehan Koo had represented to his father-in-law. But as the Claude Street property was a closely associated property in the Chatswood development I do not accept it was an expense beyond what Yehan Koo represented to be likely to take place. Nor does the fact that Maygood Australia did not commence construction for two years, nor repay the money, nor that Maygood Australia later charged the Chatswood property with debts for the construction of the Darlinghurst property, demonstrate Maygood Australia's state of mind in the last quarter of 2006. Therefore no question of Mr Yehan Koo's accessorial liability arises under [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) , <case> nor is he liable under [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) , [s 42.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) 
Mistake and Estoppel  
These causes of action do not need to be determined, as Sino has succeeded in showing that both the oral loan agreement and the written Loan Agreement are binding upon Maygood Australia. These causes of action are essentially dependent upon the success of Maygood Australia's contentions based upon the differences between the oral and written agreements, contentions which have not succeeded. 
The Yi-Fawn and Limei Proceedings - the $300,000 Payments  
The Plaintiff's Case in the Yi-Fawn and Limei Proceedings  
The course of events in the Yi-Fawn and Limei proceedings are close in time and can conveniently be considered together. 
Yi-Fawn Lee claims in the Yi-Fawn proceedings that her husband Yehan prevailed upon her in early July 2007 to lend $100,000 to the defendants to the Yi-Fawn proceedings, Yehan Koo (First Defendant), Harry Koo (Second Defendant), Geen Koo (Third Defendant) and Maygood Australia (Fourth Defendant). She alleges an oral agreement to advance $10,000 to the first defendant and $90,000 to Maygood Australia, on terms that the principal would be repaid to Yi-Fawn within two months of the advance of the whole $100,000 principal sum. 
The plaintiff, it is not disputed, paid the $10,000 cheque to Yehan Koo from her HSBC account on 6 July 2007. She also advanced the $90,000 to Maygood Australia on 18 July 2007. Nor is it disputed that Yehan Koo and Maygood Australia have not repaid these sums. If the oral loan agreement that Yi-Fawn alleges ("the $100,000 loan agreement") is established Yehan Koo and Maygood Australia are in breach. 
Yi-Fawn's claim against her former husband in respect of the $10,000 paid on 6 July 2007 raises a jurisdictional issue, which was mentioned in the course of the proceedings but was not satisfactorily dealt with at the conclusion of the proceedings. The Family Court of Australia almost certainly has jurisdiction over this part of Yi-Fawn's claim, a quite small aspect of these proceedings: see [Family Law Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) , 1975, [s 31.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s31.html) No order has yet been made under cross vesting legislation for it to be dealt with in this Court. This will need to be addressed when the parties bring in short minutes of order to give effect to these reasons. 
Yi-Fawn's evidence about the $100,000 advance reveals some unusual inter family dealings. She says that after Ang-Ya was born her husband visited her in hospital and explained to her that Maygood Australia had lost its "s 56A" appeal in respect of the Darlinghurst property (an appeal to the Land and Environment Court from a Commissioner, provided for under [Land and Environment Court Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/), [s 56A).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s56a.html) She says that Yehan said to her, "Money is very tight at home. My mother is having trouble paying bills. We have to pay consultants and legal fees for the [s 56A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s56a.html) appeal". Yi-Fawn says that she then inquires of him what the Koo family are "going to do" and that she had the following conversation with Yehan:- "Yehan: My parents and I would like to borrow $100,000 from you so that land tax can be paid on our properties this year. The rental income from my parents' properties has been depleted and there is very little cash in the bank at the moment. We will only need the money for 1 to 2 months just to tie us over.  
Yi-Fawn: How can I say 'no' if your parents are also asking to borrow money? I will lend you the money if it is just one to two months. I can only give you around $10,000 first as my money is tied up in term deposits." 
The afternoon Yi-Fawn arrived home from hospital at the Koo's house in St Ives on 6 July 2007 she says she drew a cheque payable to her husband for $10,000 from her HSBC account and handed it to him. She asked him who the payee should be and he said to her, "write the cheque for $10,000 out to me so that I can pay the land tax on my Lindfield property". She then wrote the cheque out to him. 
Mrs Limei Lee arrived in Sydney on 7 July 2007 to support her daughter after the birth. Yi-Fawn says that she reported to her mother that Yehan's property developments were not going well at that time and told her, "They have lost their court case again. His parents asked him to borrow $100,000 from me for one or two months. How can I say 'no'". According to Yi-Fawn this was her first intimation to Mrs Limei Lee that Yi-Fawn's parents-in-law were asking her for money. In a version corroborated by Mrs Limei Lee, Yi-Fawn says she and her mother closely shared both information about this issue and their reactions to it in the following days. 
Yi-Fawn says that on 18 July 2007 she paid the $90,000 balance of the $100,000 about which Yehan had spoken to her and that Yehan said to her about making out the cheque:- "Make it out to Maygood Australia. We do not want large sums of money deposited into our personal accounts in case it gets checked for money laundering. Also my mother pays all lawyers' and consultants' bills out of that account. Can you give the cheque to her?" 
Yi-Fawn says she then went downstairs within the Koo's St Ives residence to Geen Koo's office and gave her the cheque, describing it as the $90,000 cheque, "which you and dad [Mr Harry Koo] have asked to borrow". Yi-Fawn says that Geen Koo responded to her with a degree of embarrassment at that moment:- "I am very embarrassed. We don't even have money at this time to pay for medical bills from Ang-Ya's birth. On top of this I have to borrow money from you. Cash is very tight at the moment and we have to pay land tax, legal fees and consultant bills. We will give you the money back in one or two months' time." 
The $90,000 cheque is paid and cleared into Maygood's account. Yi-Fawn did not need any explanation as to what Maygood Australia was. She already knew from Sino's $1,000,000 advance. 
According to Yi-Fawn, the next day, 19 July, Yehan asked for more money, suggesting that this time it might come from Limei Lee, who was still a guest at St Ives. She says they had this consultation:- "Yehan: Yi-Fawn, the $100,000 which we have borrowed is not enough. There are so many bills to pay and also interest payments on our loans from St George
Bank for buying Darlinghurst. The situation really is very bad. I wonder if your mother might be able to lend us more money.  
Yi-Fawn: Are you sure this is necessary? I don't think it is appropriate to borrow money from my mother especially since she is a guest in this house.  
Yehan: Unfortunately, it is necessary." 
In a conversation the same day with her mother, a conversation corroborated by her mother, Yi-Fawn foreshadows that the Koo family wish to borrow $200,000 from Limei for one or two months and suggests that her mother gets prepared for the approach. Limei Lee expresses disquiet that Yehan had asked for the $100,000 at the hospital and says, expressing some distress at a perceived abuse of their then host/guest relationship, "How can he also ask me when I am staying in their home. What am I supposed to say?" 
According to both Yi-Fawn and Limei, Yehan's approach came a few days later, on 21 July 2007. Yi-Fawn says she was present when the matter was discussed between Limei and Yehan in these terms:- "Yehan: Mom, because we lost the [section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s56a.html) appeal for the Darlinghurst property which we own, money is extremely tight.
Yi-Fawn has already loaned us $100,000 but my parents and I need to borrow an additional $200,000. We need this money to tie us over. The loan will only be for one or two months.  
Limei: I don't have that much money myself at the moment. But if you and your parents really need to borrow the money and it is only for one or two months,
I will see what I can do. But you have to return the money to me within two months.  
Yehan: Thank you. It would be really a big help to me and my parents. If you can lend us the money, can you transfer it to Maygood Australia?" 
Limei then advances the $200,000 on 25 July 2007. She says that two days later Geen Koo confirmed to Limei that the $200,000 had been received and said, "Thank you so much for doing us such a big favour. Don't worry we will repay you, very soon, maximum two months". 
According to both Yi-Fawn and Limei, they made several later unsatisfied requests for repayment of the $200,000. Yi-Fawn, Yehan and their daughter came to Taiching, Taiwan in both October and December 2007. On the first of these visits Limei Lee says that she asked Yehan for repayment of the loan to his parents as it had been "over two months". In answer Limei says she was told "we are getting a bit better financially so we will soon be able to repay you the money". Mr Limei Lee says she recalls Yehan making a similar promise of repayment in Taiching during the December 2007 visit saying, "We will repay it very soon. Sorry". Yi-Fawn says she was present at and corroborates the terms of these two conversations. 
In the Limei proceedings Mrs Limei Lee has joined Yehan Koo and both his parents as defendants. Maygood Australia is not a defendant. The case is pleaded on the basis that the $200,000 principal sum would be paid to the defendants through the bank account belonging to Maygood Australia. 
The plaintiff Limei Lee further alleges that repayment of the principal was agreed within two months of the advance but that despite demands the principal has not been repaid. The demands relied upon include conversations identified in the next paragraph. 
Yi-Fawn says she pursued repayment of the combined July 2007 advances of $300,000 in January 2008 from Harry, Geen and Yehan Koo but Harry Koo said "$300,000 is a paltry sum of money. Why do you keep asking us to return it? We will return the money as soon as we can." She further says she pressed for repayment of the $100,000 advance between March and July 2008 but was given various excuses for its non payment by Yehan: "...you can be repaid as soon as the construction loan [for the Darlinghurst property] is approved";"...we are having trouble with St George Bank because of the credit crunch. We will repay you shortly"; and, "We don't have the money at the moment". The sum was not repaid. 
The Defendant's Case in the Yi-Fawn and Limei Proceedings  
Yehan Koo and his mother give an entirely different account of how Yi-Fawn and Limei Lee came to advance a total of $300,000 to Maygood Australia and members of the Koo family in July 2007. Their account includes conversations that precede each of the main payments of funds of the July 2007 funds. The relevant discussions, according to them, commence in June 2007, just before the birth of Ang-Ya. 
Yehan Koo says that in June 2007, as Yi-Fawn was about to give birth and as he had earned little income for some years, he proposed to his wife to sell 4,600 shares he owned in Lehman Brothers, then an investment bank. He had held these shares since he had been an employee of Lehman Brothers in New York and Hong Kong from 1997 until 2002. The shares were received as part of his bonus remuneration package. As he became more senior at Lehman Brothers a greater proportion of his bonus was received in shares which as at 2 July 2007, were worth US$341,182. 
Yehan's recollection was that his wife was resistant to selling these Lehman Brothers shares and a conversation on the subject between them took place to the following effect:- "Yehan: I am going to sell some Lehman to free up some cash for us for the baby and our living expenses.  
Yi-Fawn: I don't want you to sell any Lehman. That is our safety net. Also, why is that the only account of yours that I don't have control over?  
Yehan: I am not sure how I would give you control over it, given that we haven't been to the US recently. How is the sale of the Shanghai apartment going? I have not heard anything from you or Chong Te about that.  
Yi-Fawn: Not much interest on the sale of the apartment but I will chase and see what is going on. I really don't like it if you start selling our safety net, which is the Lehman shares. If all else fails, at least we will have that to rely on. You could give me the account number and password and then I can stop you from selling them.  
Yehan: I won't sell it unless we agree. I love you. You are my wife.  
Yi-Fawn: Anyway, let me look at some research reports on Lehman and also ask my father what he thinks about it." 
Yehan records that a few days later Yi-Fawn declared that she had spoken to her father about the Lehman Brothers shares, who thought it was a bad time to sell the shares and said "Lehman will go up". Whether or not this, if said, was a wise investment call, Yehan was of the view that it was firmly communicated to him through his wife. 
Yehan Koo agrees that he had a conversation with his wife at North Shore Private Hospital after Ang-Ya's birth, but that the conversation was focussed on the sale of the Lehman Brothers shares. He says that far from this being a demand for a loan he had quite a different conversation with his wife to the following effect:- "Yehan: I still would like to sell some Lehman to bring some money back here.
Our future is here in Sydney with me as a property developer.  
Yi-Fawn: Don't do that. We have some money in term deposit in my name. I will write you a cheque when I get home tomorrow which you can then deposit and when the term deposit expired we can free that up too." 
Yehan explained that in this conversation preceding the payment of the $10,000, the $10,000 was offered as a substitute for the sale of the Lehman Brothers shares. Moreover, Yehan says a similar conversation, on or about 10 July 2007 preceded the payment of the $90,000. He says that he threatened again to sell the Lehman Brothers shares. But his wife said to him, "I will not allow you to sell Lehman" and she offered $90,000 which was said to be coming in on a term deposit. Yi-Fawn's summary position was "I will transfer about $300,000 to you provided that you do not sell the Lehman shares". On the Koo's account this is the reason that the July 2007 funds were paid. 
In a version which is substantially corroborated by his mother, Yehan Koo says that he explained this to his mother that funds were being put into the Maygood Australia account to cover living expenses so that he had the option of selling the Lehman Brothers shares at a later date. He further says that Mrs Koo urged her son to sell the Lehman Brothers shares as they might be difficult to access later. 
An important aspect of Yehan Koo's account of the July 2007 funds transfers is that he says at the very same time Yi-Fawn was reporting to him about the sale of his apartment in Shanghai. There is considerable dispute about who was managing the sale of that apartment. But according to Yehan, on 14 July 2007 Yi-Fawn reported to her husband that a buyer had been found for the apartment in Shanghai and that Tsung Te-Lee was going to go immediately to Shanghai to complete the sale and pay off the balance of the mortgage. A document in Chinese characters that Yi-Fawn gave to Yehan that day, indicates that contracts had been exchanged for the sale of the Shanghai apartment on 10 July 2007. The relationship between the plans to remit funds to Australia from the sale of the Shanghai apartment and the advance of the July 2007 funds was an important issue in resolving the contest about the July 2007 funds transfers. 
On 23 September 2007 Yi-Fawn reported to her husband that her father was sending over the first part of the money for the sale of the Shanghai apartment, saying to Yehan "I told him [Tsung Te-Lee] to send it to the Maygood Australia account". In the conversation corroborated by Mrs Geen Koo, her son explains to her that she should expect some money to come into the Maygood Australia account from overseas as a result of the sale of the Shanghai apartment. There is no doubt that on 24 September 2007 Sino paid to Maygood Australia's bank account $114,442.66 and on 23 October 2007 a further sum of $145,805.37. 
A central issue in the Yi-Fawn and Limei Proceedings was the Koo's contention that if it were right that they had agreed in July 2007 to repay $300,000 in one to two months, why the Lee's did not deduct the amount allegedly due to them from the monies remitted from Shanghai to Maygood Australia. 
Relationships between findings in the Sino Proceedings and the Limei/Yi-Fawn Proceedings  
The July 2007 funds were advanced only six months after the funds the subject of the Sino proceedings. There are some relationships between the two advances. The Court's findings about Sino's $1,000,000 loan advance shows that by July 2007 Yehan and Geen Koo were aware that the Lee family and their family company Sino had access to substantial liquid funds for investment purposes and could raise and apply $1,000,000 in a matter of months. Whilst there is no clear evidence that Yehan and Geen Koo knew that the Lee family had another liquid $1,000,000 readily available to apply in their investment discretion, it is safe to infer in my view that they anticipated by July 2007 that the Lee's would probably be able to raise $200,000 to $300,000 on a few weeks notice. This can be inferred, in my view, from the picture that may be constructed from the Court's findings in section (2) of this judgment, "The Sino Proceedings - The $1,000,000 Transfer". A family that could raise $1,000,000 after three months discussions, and which seemed fairly keen to advance the funds, was a family that was likely to be able to advance another $200,000 to $300,000 in a matter of weeks. Thus, if the Koo family were minded to look to the Lee family for additional loan funds in July 2007, they would in my view have been able to assume that there was a reasonable prospect that the Lee's would probably be able to meet such a request. This tends to support a conclusion that such a request may have been made. But for the reasons, which follow shortly in my view, such a request was not made. 
The other relationship between the $1,000,000 advance and the July 2007 funds is on the issue of the credit of Yehan and Geen Koo. The Court has made adverse credit findings in the Sino proceedings against Yehan and Geen Koo. These credit findings include findings that Yehan Koo advanced elaborate but false conversations to explain several documents that were inconsistent with Maygood Australia's case. He has not been disbelieved on incidental matters of detail about which he could be mistaken, but on whole conversations, which appear to be no more than convenient inventions. The findings against his mother are less serious but nevertheless troubling. 
The Court approaches its assessment of the credit of Yehan Koo and Geen Koo in the Limei and Yi-Fawn proceedings with these other credit findings in mind. There are problems with the Yehan and Geen Koo's version of their dealings with the July 2007 funds. But Limei Lee's and Yi-Fawn Lee's version of the July 2007 dealings also have severe problems. The findings in the Sino proceedings do impair Yehan and Geen Koo's credit in relation to the Limei and Yi-Fawn proceedings. But despite that, for the reasons that follow, I prefer Yehan Koo's version and that of his parents in relation to the July 2007 funds. 
The birth of Ang-Ya in July 2007 - Findings on the July 2007 Funds  
Despite the Court's credit findings against Yehan and Geen Koo in particular, I cannot accept that they would have so abused their host-guest relationship with the Lee's to have asked Mrs Limei Lee for a loan whilst she was living in their household at St Ives. It is a charge of serious impropriety, which in my view is not made out. Mrs Limei Lee says in her own version of conversations with her daughter at the time that the Koo's request was shameful, "They have borrowed from you, now they want to borrow from me! Shame on them." 
I do not accept that either Yehan Koo or his mother would have done this. It is simply not credible and does not fit the larger pattern of the family's relationships, for several reasons. 
First, in my assessment of them as witnesses I accept the Koo's denials of this alleged offensive conduct. I do not think that any of the Lee family gave a particularly good account of themselves in relation to these conversations. Moreover the Lee's instructions to their former solicitor, Mr Wakefield at Holman Webb, seem to suggest that it was Harry and Geen Koo, not Yehan, who wished to borrow the initial $100,000. Yi-Fawn's evidence was that the money was requested partly for Yehan and then for Maygood Australia. 
Secondly, in mid-2007 Yehan Koo was anxious to impress his parents-in-law as to his financial success and sophistication. He was equally anxious to show his wife that he was going to be successful as a property developer. I do not think that he would readily have revealed, whatever Maygood Australia's cash shortages were, that they were so bad that he needed to borrow from his in-laws. He was in my view too proud to do that. So were his parents. Moreover doing so would expose him to criticism from his wife, for financial incompetence. She had on many occasions, even early in their marriage, shown herself ready to judge her husband by exacting and at times apparently unsympathetic standards. 
Thirdly, the structure of the July 2007 funds transfers does not make sense if they are loans. Why did Yi-Fawn and Limei Lee and not Sino advance the funds, when there was already a loan structure from Sino in place? Some of the funds were to be used for and were indeed applied for Maygood Australia's business purposes. If Yehan was prepared to expose Maygood Australia's financial weakness by asking for money, then another loan from Sino would have fitted the circumstances best of all. It would only have involved a slight change to the existing written Loan Agreement executed six months previously in Taichung. Mr Lee was an agreeable man who had shown himself very willing, with his daughter's enthusiastic support, to lend $1 million to Maygood Australia. I expect that Yehan Koo would have spoken to his father-in-law again. But according to the Lee's evidence he did not. 
Fourthly, the contention that Yi-Fawn's advance of $100,000 was a loan paints her in such a Machiavellian light that I do not think it is a credible hypothesis of what happened. The final section of these reasons examines the evidence and concludes on the basis of analysis done by Yehan's lawyers, that parts of Yi-Fawn's $100,000 payment to her husband were funded from the joint account they both held with HSBC in Hong Kong. What kind of spouse responds to a husband's request for a loan by giving him back his own money without apparently telling him what it is? I do not think that Yi-Fawn Lee did this. 
Fifthly, much of the Lee family's behaviour after July 2007 is not consistent with a genuine belief on their part that Yi-Fawn and Limei had lent $300,000 to Maygood Australia or members of the Koo family at that time and to be repaid within 1 to 2 months. If the Lee family had been subjected to such shameful behaviour by the Koo's it would be expected that they would have little compunction in asking for their money back fairly quickly. None of the Lee's evidence gives a particularly convincing account of why the money was not requested in some formal way until the time of the custody proceedings. After all, according to the Lee's Mr Yehan Koo had acknowledged the sum was due in the December 2007 Loan Statement. 
So what happened? In my view the answer is that in a period of heightened family emotion surrounding the birth of Ang-Ya in early July 2007 that family communications about financial matters became highly distorted, but fundamentally Yehan's version of what happened on this issue was correct. There were discussions about financial issues, which were initiated the way that Yehan Koo describes. He wanted to sell his Lehman Brothers shares to provide funding, "to free up cash for us for the baby and our living expenses". But Yi-Fawn saw that as running down the couple's capital and opposed that course. It was then that Yi-Fawn offered the funds that she did as Yehan described. 
I accept that Yi-Fawn said to Yehan, "OK I will transfer about $300,000 to you provided that you do not sell the Lehman shares." There is a strong objective proportion between the amount transferred, of $300,000, and the value of the Lehman shares about $340,000. Such a conversation would explain why this particular sum was transferred at this time. It was a substitute for the Lehman share sale. Yi-Fawn was confident of her and her father's commercial judgment that the Lehman shares should be retained. She was prepared to take steps to arrange the substitute funding to back that judgement. 
The funds were a gift. No terms of repayment were demanded. It was quite naturally inappropriate in the circumstances for Yi-Fawn to stipulate for terms of repayment, when she had persuaded her husband not to sell his shares. She was in a weak bargaining position. 
Wherever Yehan Koo's evidence conflicts with that of Limei Lee and Yi-Fawn in relation to discussions about the terms of the July 2007 funds transfers, I accept his evidence, not theirs. 
But two events subsequent to the July 2007 funds transfers require closer examination: (1) Mr Lee remitting the proceeds of the sale of the Shanghai apartment; and (2) the December 2007 loan statement. The Lee interests contend that the latter of these compels the conclusion that the July 2007 funds transfers were a loan. 
After July 2007  
The Apartment Sale  
It was put to Mr Lee that if the Lee family was really owed $300,000 by members of the Koo family in August - September 2006 he could have easily reimbursed the Lee family from the proceeds of the sale of the Shanghai apartment before remitting them to Sydney. 
The Shanghai apartment was sold on 10 July 2007 and was due to be completed on 15 September 2007. Sino transferred the first tranche of settlement monies to Maygood Australia's bank account on 24 September 2007. On 23 October 2007 the balance was transferred. There was no dispute at the time between the two families as to how the proceeds of sale were being dealt with. In my view, the Koo's did satisfy themselves that Mr Lee had dealt appropriately with the proceeds of sale. 
In my view, Mr Lee did not concern himself with attempting to deduct any of the $300,000 that Yi-Fawn and Limei had given to Yehan and Maygood Australia, because those monies were not loans. It never occurred to Mr Lee, in my view, to deduct these amounts. I accept the defendant's contention that if the money really was due within one or two months of July 2007, it is difficult to understand why at the time that the Shanghai apartment monies were being remitted that there was not at least some discussion about a possible deduction. The reason there was not such a discussion, initiated by the Lee family, was that the monies were not a loan. 
This tends to explain, in my view, one of the worst aspects of Mr Lee's evidence. He was very confused, in my view, about what was and what was not deducted from the funds remitted from the Shanghai apartment sale to Australia. He took various positions. Mr Lee passionately denied the suggestion that he could have deducted any money from the Shanghai apartment sale proceeds before remitting those funds back to Australia. He says that he was not in a position to perform the deduction on the basis of the limited Power of Attorney he was given to handle the Shanghai apartment sale. 
The Power of Attorney expresses a number of express duties that Mr Lee had as the Attorney acting on the apartment sale. None of them include deduction of monies on another transaction. Mr Lee says he thought he could not do a deduction that was not expressly authorised by the Power of Attorney and on this I accept his statement of his belief. Although it was put to Mr Lee that the Power of Attorney did authorise this deduction, that is not the point. He genuinely did not think that he had the power to do so. 
Mr Lee was strongly pressed about whether he deducted two amounts of RMB100,000 and RMB116,600 before remitting the proceeds to Australia. His recollection was that he had not. But it turns out that Mr Lee did deduct the 116,600 RMB (Exhibit 5) which shows that Mr Lee had indeed deducted this sum. It made some of his earlier evidence look strange but he apologised for not remembering before he was shown that document that he had in fact done this deduction. But I am not convinced that Mr Lee deducted an amount of RMB100,000 from the proceeds an account of repaying himself another advance to Yehan Koo for Yehan's HSBC account in Hong Kong. I accept this deduction was probably for agent's commission. 
But in summary the fundamental issues was that Mr Lee was not minded to make a deduction for the July 2007 funds, because they were a gift. 
The Koo's Need for Money and the December 2007 Loan Statement  
The Lee interests strongly contended that in July 2007 Maygood Australia and the Koo family were in need of money. But the truth was the Koo family had substantial unencumbered assets. Whilst it is true that their cash flow position looked tight, and the Lee contentions did establish this, that partly explains why Mr Yehan Koo was thinking about selling the Lehman Brothers shares. It was not just for the purposes of looking after his own family but injecting some funds into Maygood Australia. 
But I simply cannot accept that the Koo family, with the pride in their success that they had, would, as the Lee's would have it, have asked their in-laws for money rather than go to a bank and seek further accommodation. Their assets were so substantial that such an approach would not have been at all difficult. 
Finally there is the question of the December 2007 Loan Statement. It clearly includes within it most of the July 2007 funds. The Lee's submit that this is inexplicable, if it was not part of a loan transaction. 
In my view, the answer to this contention is quite simple. This is not a precise version of either Yehan or Yi-Fawn propounds in evidence but it is in my view what happened. Yi-Fawn insisted that a reference to the July 2007 funds be added into the December 2007 Loan Statement. There is quite strong evidence of marital discord by late 2007 early 2008. In my view, Yi-Fawn insisted that the July 2007 funds be added into this Loan Statement, because she did not know how the marriage was going to work out. In fact it failed within six months. I am conscious that this is not a theory that has been advanced by either side in these proceedings but from the various contentions and looking at the circumstances it is in my view what happened. The December 2007 Loan Statement was a legal document. She simply persuaded her husband to add to an otherwise legal document between Sino and Maygood Australia, other inter family gifts. 
Mr Lee's Evidence  
Mr Lee gave other evidence about how he reacted to the Koo's request for money, when he arrived in Sydney. Mr Lee was told the Koo's needed the money and that it had been paid. Mrs Lee regarded it as very unusual for Chinese families to ask their in-laws for money. Mrs Lee told Mr Lee she was unhappy about providing the money and Mr Lee was unhappy that it had been provided. I do not fully accept Mr Lee's evidence about this. In my view he had only received a confused account of what happened from his wife and his daughter and that there had already been some misunderstanding. 
Mr Koo's Evidence  
The Lee interests strongly submitted that Yehan Koo's evidence about the $300,000 advances was unsatisfactory, partly because he was prepared to mislead the St George Bank on the subject. When the decision was made to pay some accruing interest to St George Bank, with the $300,000 funds received from the Lee family, rather than to keep capitalising interest, he wrote to the bank and said "these overseas funds have been generated by my personal capacity as a corporate financial advisor". This was not strictly true of the transfer of $199,985 received from the Lees on 26 July 2007 that it was generated "as a corporate financial advisor". Mr Koo claims it was a gift from Mrs Lee and I accept that it was. But he accepted in evidence that to say what he did to the Bank was "a bit misleading". He was asked about his representing to the Bank that this payment was the proceeds of a commercial transaction and not, as he now says, a family gift and why he put it that way. His unsatisfactory response was " I don't remember". I accept that this was an honest answer. But although he did not articulate the explanation himself in evidence, in my view, given the Court's findings, his statements were not as misleading as the Lee's now suggest. In Mr Koo's mind at the time, the $300,000 was a substitute for the sale of the 4,600 Lehman Brothers shares. The fund for which the $300,000 was a substitute was in a loose sense "generated in [his] personal capacity as a corporate financial adviser [with Lehman Brothers]". 
The Cross-Claims - for jewellery and other funds  
The remaining issues in these proceedings arise from the cross-claims in the Limei and Yi-Fawn proceedings. These cross-claims concern two groups of assets: gifts made at the engagement ceremony for the couple in Taichung on 30 October 2004 (the cross-claim in the Limei proceedings); and certain funds transfers that Yi-Fawn is alleged to have initiated in mid-2007 (the cross-claims in the Limei and Yi-Fawn proceedings). It is convenient in this section to deal with the claim in respect of the gifts made at the engagement ceremony and then the claims in respect of Yi-Fawn's 2007 funds transfers. 
The Engagement Ceremony  
In his cross-claim in the Limei proceedings Yehan Koo claims against Mrs Limei Lee (the second cross-defendant) the return of jewellery worth A$150,000 and cash to a value of USD$70,000, given to the couple on the 30 October 2004 at the engagement ceremony and allegedly wrongfully retained by Mrs Lee. This part of the cross-claim is not brought against Yi-Fawn, just against her mother. Determination of this part of the cross-claim requires a short account of the events of the engagement ceremony and the disputes about what was said and done at that ceremony. 
The parties were readily able to identify the jewellery and cash that was gifted at the engagement ceremony. Mrs Limei Lee still had the jewellery within her possession at the time of the hearing. She took photographs of the jewellery (Exhibit C) shortly before the proceedings commenced. The jewellery is arranged in the photographs in front of a copy of the New York Times for Saturday 5 February 2011 with a banner headline reporting the early events of the 2011 Arab spring, "Egypt Officials Seek to Ease Mubarak Out". I accept the authenticity of these photographs and that Mrs Limei took them on the date indicated and that she still has the jewellery. 
The jewels, said to have been contained in boxes, were described in detail in the cross-claim. The pleaded description generally corresponded with the photographs in Exhibit C. The parties did not argue about the precise identification of the jewellery, the approximate value of which was $150,000. The cross-claim identifies the jewellery by type and specifies, in most cases, a minimum number of jewels of that type. An abbreviated description of the jewellery follows: (1) one set of expensive green jade earrings and pendant/chain set in diamonds and white gold; (2) one set of green jade pendant/chain with matching jade/gold bracelet; (3) two separate jade pendants; (4) a two strand pearl necklace; (5) a one strand red Taiwanese coral necklace; (6) at least seven rings set in diamonds or pearls or red Taiwanese coral or other precious stones; (7) at least six sets of earrings set in diamonds and precious stones or red Taiwanese coral; (8) at least 10 gold chains some with diamonds/jade pendants; and (9) at least five white gold and gold bracelets some with diamonds. 
The engagement ceremony in Taichung was an elaborate affair structured around the traditional Chinese tea ceremony adapted for such occasions. The critical differences in the two families' accounts of the handling of the jewellery at this ceremony are: the Koos say that the jewellery was given to the couple but the Lees say that it was the bride's jewellery, which was being put on display for a particular purpose at the ceremony and remained hers afterwards. In relation to the cash, Yehan Koo says that it was given in part (as to USD$20,000) to him and the rest (USD$50,000) to the couple. The Lees agree with him as to the USD$20,000 but say that the USD$50,000 was Yi-Fawn's. 
I have reached the view that the Lee family witnesses gave a more reliable account of what happened at this engagement ceremony for several reasons. The Lee family were far more closely involved in organising the engagement ceremony and presented to the court a deeper understanding of its local Taiwanese cultural nuances, an understanding that did not seem to be shared by the Koos. In contest about what happened at the ceremony, Mr and Mrs Lee gave clearer and more credible evidence. Mr and Mrs Lee's version has also a greater inherent probability to it, particularly in relation to the jewellery. It seems to the Court quite improbable that Mr and Mrs Lee would before the wedding give to the couple jewellery that I accept had been accumulated for Yi-Fawn over many years. Yehan Koo had no obvious personal use for the particular jewellery depicted in Exhibit C. The Lee's version is also supported by the text of Exhibit B, an independent translation from the Hokkien dialect of the relevant part of a DVD video recording taken at the engagement ceremony. I accept Mrs Limei Lee's description of the engagement ceremony. 
Mrs Limei Lee explains in evidence that in Taiwanese custom there is a formal presentation of gifts to the engaged couple by the intended bride's and groom's families. In addition there is presentation by the intended bride's family of items that the intended bride owned prior to marriage. The ceremony involves a presentation of gifts to the intended bride and groom by the respective families and a presentation of money or objects that belonged to the intended bride. Mr and Mrs Lee organised a family friend, Mr Zhang Zhiming, to be the master of ceremonies to introduce all the guests and to oversee the progress of the whole ceremony. 
The occasion commenced with a traditional tea ceremony during which Yi-Fawn, accompanied by a friend of her mother's presented small cups of tea to members of the Koo family. All of the guests receiving tea, put inside the teacups a red packet containing a small amount of cash. 
After the tea ceremony the master of ceremonies said that Mr and Mrs Lee had provided USD $20,000 for Yehan, which Mrs Limei Lee unwrapped from a red cloth packet and gave to Yehan. The master of ceremonies then announced that there was USD $50,000 which "Mr and Mrs Lee have prepared for Yi-Fawn". He also announced that Mr and Mrs Lee "have prepared jewellery for Yi-Fawn which they have collected since Yi-Fawn was a little girl". I accept Mrs Limei Lee's evidence: she had indeed acquired this jewellery as Yi-Fawn grew up and had collected it to be given to Yi-Fawn when she was an adult and possibly at her wedding. Mrs Lee says the jewellery had been taken from the Lee's house before the ceremony and was returned to the house afterwards for safekeeping then to a place that the daughter and mother identify in their evidence. 
As to the USD $70,000 cash, Mrs Lee says that Yehan Koo took away the USD$20,000 with him back to the hotel at which he and the Koos were staying in Taichung. As to the remaining USD $50,000 Mrs Lee says that it remained on a table in their home for a period and then either she or her husband consigned it for safekeeping to a place which Mrs Lee identifies in her evidence. I accept the correctness of this account. 
Mrs Limei Lee concludes her description of the engagement ceremony by explaining that the small red envelopes containing cash presented to Yi-Fawn by the other guests during a tea ceremony were left at the Lee's home after the engagement party. 
Mrs Lee's account is supported by Exhibit B, a translation of the engagement ceremony recorded on DVD. The same independent NAATI registered interpreter, who interpreted the evidence of Mr and Mrs Lee in the proceedings, Ms Ana Zhao, undertook the translation. At the time of trial there was a shortage of Hokkien dialect interpreters in New South Wales. Ms Zhao was a Mandarin specialist but with somewhat less specialised knowledge of the Hokkien dialect. But I was well satisfied from my observations of the interactions between Mr and Mrs Lee and Ms Zhao that she could deliver a sound interpretation to the court of the Lee's evidence in the Hokkien dialect. There is another translation of the DVD from Dimo Galiungi and Associates, which is not different in substance from Exhibit B, but to the extent there are any differences I prefer Exhibit B because of the opportunity that the Court has had to see the work of Ms Zhao. 
Ms Zhao's translation (Exhibit B) of the engagement ceremony DVD records the USD$20,000 being described by the master of ceremonies as "...a gift to Yehan Koo", about which Mrs Lee then says to her future son-in-law "Buy whatever you like". To this Yehan responds "thank you mum". 
Exhibit B then treats the jewellery and the USD$50,000 in cash quite differently to the USD$20,000 for Yehan. According to Exhibit B the master of ceremonies announces, "Mr and Mrs Lee also prepares some jewelleries [sic] and USD50,000 for Yi-Fawn Lee. The USD50,000 for Yi-Fawn Lee to buy what she likes. They prepare a lot of jewelleries [sic]". Mrs Lee then says "Since she was very young", supporting Mrs Lee's narrative that the jewellery had been collected for Yi-Fawn over a long period, commencing in her early childhood. Then the master of ceremonies says, "This is for Miss Yi-Fawn Lee", again supporting Mrs Lee's narrative of the making of gifts to Yi-Fawn alone. An important omission from the events surrounding the giving of the jewellery and the USD$50,000, is any clear "thank you" from Yehan, yet another indicator that he did not perceive that he was receiving a gift of these items in the way that the USD$20,000 was undoubtedly a gift to him. 
I do not accept Yehan Koo's evidence that the USD$50,000 and jewellery were gifts to himself and Yi-Fawn. I do not accept that Limei said to him in relation to the jewellery, "This jewellery...is being given to you both in celebration of your engagement." Nor do I accept that Limei Lee gave him any other indication that he was entitled jointly with Yi-Fawn to the jewellery or the USD$50,000. Yehan also says that Yi-Fawn said to him on the day of the engagement ceremony of the USD$50,000 "The money can be deposited and we can transfer it over when we need it." This may have been said, but if it was, Yehan Koo misunderstood its meaning. In this statement Yi-Fawn was referring to the money that she believed that she owned and controlled but which she would make available for the couple's joint purposes when it was needed at her discretion. 
Mr and Mrs Koo support their son's version of what happened at the engagement ceremony. But for the reasons given, I also do not accept their evidence on this subject which is inconsistent with Mrs Limei Lee's evidence. 
Thus Yehan's cross-claim in the Limei proceedings for the value of the jewellery (A$150,000) and the USD$50,000 fails. To the extent that he claims the USD $20,000 I find that he took that away with him and used it for his own purposes. This USD$20,000 was never left with Yi-Fawn or any other member of the Lee family. 
Yi-Fawn's 2007 funds transfers  
The parties are at issue about three funds transfers that Yi-Fawn initiated in mid-2007. There was no dispute that Yi-Fawn caused these funds transfers to take place. The contest is whether Yehan Koo, the relevant cross-claimant in respect of these funds in both the Limei and the Yi-Fawn proceedings, has any legal entitlement to recover the funds transferred pursuant to these cross-claims. The funds in issue are amounts of (1) A$62,000, (2) A$75,700 and (3) RMB 84,581.91. 
St George Bank A$62,000 - the Limei proceedings  
Yehan Koo claims against Yi-Fawn as a cross-defendant in the Limei proceedings the return of a sum of A$62,000 withdrawn by Yi-Fawn between 3 May 2007 and 3 August 2007 from either a St George Bank Direct Saver account (account number X107) or a St George Bank Freedom account (account number X982), which accounts were held in the joint names of Yehan and Yi-Fawn. 
Yehan Koo's case is that when he and Yi-Fawn were married in the Australian ceremony in April 2005, that Mr and Mrs Koo and family friends gave them a number of presents including generous amounts of cash. These included a cheque for A$26,888 (a lucky number in Chinese tradition) from Mr and Mrs Koo and other amounts of cash from wedding guests (given in red packets in Chinese tradition) totalling A$12,516. Yehan says that after the wedding he and Yi-Fawn had a conversation in which they jointly decided that they could not take all this cash with them back to Shanghai. They agreed to open a joint bank account at the St Ives branch of St George Bank (Freedom Account X982). The sum of $41,126 was deposited to this account in late April 2005 within days of its opening. This amount deposited was slightly more than enough to account for moneys that Yehan Koo says were sourced from cash given to the couple at the wedding, and in my view it should be accepted it came from this source. From Freedom Account X982 the sum of $35,000 was quickly transferred to a higher interest-bearing account at the same branch of St George bank (Direct Saver account X107). After these deposits were made Yi-Fawn returned to Shanghai and Yehan focused on the Darlinghurst property. 
Yehan Koo says that other monies were deposited to the Direct Saver Account X107, including A$8,000 that Mrs Limei Lee gave him in cash when he was in Taiwan with Yi-Fawn in April 2006. This is correct. 
But Yehan says that there were a large number of transfers out of the couple's joint St George accounts between April and June 2007, with $64,000 being paid from the joint Direct Saver account X107 into the joint Freedom account X982 from which $59,000 was then transferred to accounts controlled by Yi-Fawn between 21 May 2007 and 3 August 2007. He says he was unaware that these transactions were taking place and that he would not have agreed to the transfer of joint account moneys into Yi-Fawn's own personal account, had he been aware of them. 
Yi-Fawn admits her payment of this $59,000 between 21 May 2007 and 3 August 2007 to a number of accounts that she held in her own name. She says that between 29 April 2005 and 28 June 2007 she regularly received large amounts of cash from her parents totalling $89,923.62, which she banked into the Freedom account X982, an amount that significantly outweighs any contribution to the account by Mr and Mrs Koo. 
I am not prepared to infer that these transfers were unauthorised or that Yi-Fawn was attempting to conceal them from her husband. Some of the moneys so withdrawn (about $23,000) Yi-Fawn redeployed (as Exhibit 10 demonstrates) to fund the $90,000 cheque she paid to Maygood Australia, and the subject of Yi-Fawn's claim for $100,000. No apparent motive is demonstrated for concealing payments from Yehan that resulted in funds being returned to his family. 
Nor am I prepared to infer that Yehan Koo was unaware of them. Nor am I prepared to infer that even if he was unaware of them that he would not have authorised them had he been made aware of them. The timing of these transfers must be remembered. They coincide almost exactly with the period of turmoil and evidentiary confusion surrounding the birth of Ang-Ya, which I have already described. This was a time when Mrs Limei Lee was making a gift of $200,000 to the couple. It was also a time of considerable joy and generosity between the couple and their families. It is highly improbable in my view for Yehan now to say in the face of such generosity from the Lee family, that he would not have authorised these payments. 
This part of Yehan Koo's cross-claim in the Limei proceedings also fails. 
HSBC Account X833 - The claim for $75,700 in the Yi-Fawn proceedings  
Yehan Koo claims in the Yi-Fawn proceedings the return of moneys that he claims were in accounts with HSBC that he owned and operated in Hong Kong and Shanghai before he and Yi-Fawn became engaged. He says that after his and Yi-Fawn's engagement that they both visited the Hong Kong and Shanghai branches where these accounts were maintained and he signed authorities giving her access to these accounts. Thereafter she assumed day-to-day control of these two accounts. I accept his account of this part of these events. Yi-Fawn Lee appeared to be a fiancee and then a wife who wished to exert some control over her husband's financial affairs. The dispute between the couple arises out of what she did with his control. 
Yehan claims that Yi-Fawn withdrew A$75,700 between 14 May 2007 and 28 June 2007 from a Hong Kong HSBC Power Vantage Premier account (account number X833), by then held in the joint names of Yi-Fawn and Yehan. This total sum of A$75,700 was withdrawn in the following amounts on the following dates: $7500 on 14 May 2007, $9600 on 25 May 2007, $9800 on 29 May 2007, $9800 on 31 May 2007, $9900 on 4 June 2007, $9500 on 26 June 2007, $9800 on 27 June 2007 and $9800 on 28 June 2007. Yehan says that his wife was not entitled to withdraw these monies. 
But in a curious twist of Yehan Koo's pleaded case, he also submits in his defence to Yi-Fawn's claim for the repayment of $100,000, that in making this payment to him she was only using his own money and that she is therefore not now entitled to its repayment. This court has found that the $100,000 claimed in the Yi-Fawn proceedings was not a loan by Yi-Fawn to Yehan. So it has become unnecessary for Yehan to field that defence to Yi-Fawn's claim. But all the same the money was actually paid. In my view Yehan Koo has successfully established through Exhibit 10 (a complex money trail diagram advanced in his Yi-Fawn proceedings defence) that the withdrawal of A$75,700 from the joint HSBC Hong Kong account X833 did fund, to that amount, the $10,000 and $90,000 cheques Yi-Fawn paid to her husband in July 2007. If the court had found these payments were a loan, then Yehan would have had a good defence at least to this extent. But I do not see how, in these circumstances, Yehan can now sue in his cross claim in the Yi-Fawn proceedings for the return of the sum of A$75,700, when he has demonstrated that he has received it. 
In my view Yehan Koo's claim for repayment of the alleged unauthorised transfer by Yi-Fawn of A$75,700 from the HSBC Hong Kong account X833 fails. 
HSBC Shanghai, Customer Account X404 - the claim for RMB 84,581.91 in the Yi-Fawn proceedings  
Yehan Koo also claims in the Yi-Fawn proceedings the return of RMB 84,581.91 that Yi-Fawn withdrew in September or October 2007 from an HSBC Shanghai HSBC account (customer X404) held in Yehan's name. Yehan also alleges that Yi-Fawn has retained the benefit of this sum, which she was not entitled to do. The facts in contest about this withdrawal may be briefly stated. 
Yehan Koo's HSBC Shanghai account X404 was closed on 27 September 2007. Its entire contents were transferred to another HSBC Shanghai account (customer number X986) solely conducted in Yi-Fawn's name. He says of this transfer "I was unaware that this was occurring." His case of unauthorised closure is answered by Yi-Fawn, who says that closure of the account and the transfer of the RMB 84,581.91 to her was discussed between them. 
I accept Yi-Fawn's version of this discussion with her husband, who appears not to have remembered this marital discussion when he launched this part of the cross claim in the Yi-Fawn proceedings. Yi-Fawn commences her narrative, in December 2006, about nine months before the account closure. She says that her husband was concerned that his balance within this account was too low to maintain the account's "Premier" HSBC status and that he asked for a loan of RMB 100,000 " to park in my account so I can reach the minimum". She agreed to ask her father to transfer that amount from her account at HSBC Shanghai X986. Her father, who visits Shanghai and has property there, was authorised to operate his daughter's account. Mr Lee transferred the RMB100,000 to Yehan Koo's HSBC account X404. This seems a natural arrangement, as it coincides in time with Mr Lee readily authorising Sino to advance the $1 million to Maygood Australia. 
Yi-Fawn Lee's narrative then continues with another conversation with her husband in September 2007 about closure of his HSBC Shanghai account. According to her he says to his wife that he wants to close this account in Shanghai "because I don't really use it". There is an inherent probability in this as Yehan Koo was juggling two developments in Sydney and looked less and less likely to be going back to Hong Kong. And I accept her evidence about it. I find they did ascertain together that there was about RMB84,000 left in the account at that time. 
At this point the evidence becomes hotly contested. Yi-Fawn says she then reminds her husband, "Remember you still owe me RMB100,000." and Yehan Koo agrees to transfer the remaining balance to her. He says that is wrong because her father has already been repaid by deducting that amount before he remits the proceeds of sale of the Shanghai apartment to Yehan. Mr Lee did agree that the RMB100,000 had been deducted, but Mr Lee was quite insistent that it was agent's commission and not repayment of a loan. Yi-Fawn's evidence contradicted her father on this subject, as she seemed to think that the moneys withheld were to reimburse her father the RMB100,000. I prefer Mr Lee's evidence on this. The time of closure of the Shanghai HSBC account Yehan Koo still owed his wife RMB100,000 with which she would repay her father. In any event, I find that at his wife's request Yehan Koo ultimately signs the account X404 closure form on 27 September 2007. 
Yehan Koo's case on the Yi-Fawn cross-claim that the closure of his HSBC Shanghai account X404 and that the transfer of this sum of RMB84,584.91 was unauthorised, also fails. 
Conclusion and Orders  
Accordingly, the Court has found for Sino in the Sino proceedings and for the defendants in the Yi-Fawn and the Limei proceedings. And the defendant/cross-claimants, the Koo interests fail on their cross-claims in the Yi-Fawn and Limei the proceedings. In the result each party has had a degree of success, which is likely to raise issues about the ultimate burden of costs. One or other party may seek a special costs order. The parties will have an opportunity to make submissions about such costs issues. 
Accordingly the Court directs that by 4 pm on Monday, 12 March 2012 each party shall: file submissions in relation to costs and any other issues that these reasons require to be addressed;  file the short minutes of order that each party proposes be made to give effect to these reasons, unless there is agreement before that time as to the form of such orders the appropriate orders and declarations. 
The proceedings are adjourned for mention only to Tuesday, 13 March 2012 at 9:30am with a view to fixing the proceedings for any further oral argument in relation to costs and other outstanding matters at 9:30am one morning during March 2012. * * * 
