

Lewis versus Wilson and Anor Matter No 14570/96 [1997] NSWSC 223 (27 May 1997) 
William Ray Lewis versus John Wilson and Katrina Williamson /96 May 1997 
Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
PARTIES: William Ray Lewis versus John Wilson & Katrina Williamson 
FILE NO: 14570/96 
JUDGMENT OF: Sperling J 
DATES OF HEARING: 17, 25 March 1997 
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 27 May 1997 
CATCHWORDS: 
Account stated - appeal from the decision of a magistrate dismissing a claim for money due on account stated - whether an admission must be absolute and unqualified - held: a bare admission of a sum certain may be sufficient to found the cause of action, the ultimate question being whether the debt is truly owing. 
Clark versus Glennie <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1839) 5 M & W 656] 
Irving versus Veitch <case>; [(1837) 3 M & W 90] 
Knowles versus Michel <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1830) 131 ER 39] 
COUNSEL FOR THE PLAINTIFF: F Kunc 
SOLICITORS: Watson & Watson 
COUNSEL FOR THE DEFENDANTS: G J Bellew 
SOLICITORS: Liston & Loveband 
NO. OF PAGES: 13 
No. 14570/96 -William Ray Lewis versus John Wilson and Katrina Williamson 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal by way of stated case from the decision of a magistrate dismissing a claim for money due on an account stated. 
The claim was based on a conversation or conversations between the plaintiff,
Mr W R Lewis, and Mr George Wilson (since deceased), whose executor and executrix were joined as the defendants in the proceedings. The claim was for $25,000 in respect of the sale of tin by the plaintiff to Mr George Wilson and his brother Mr Donald Wilson (who was deceased at the time of the conversation or conversations relied upon).

The claim related to the supply of tin by the plaintiff to the Wilsons, dating back to 1980. The conversations with Mr George Wilson occurred in 1990.

If the claim had been framed as one for debt, the claim would have been statute barred. It is a feature of the cause of action for money due on an account stated that time runs from the event which constitutes the statement of account. If the plaintiff was entitled to succeed on his chosen cause of action, the claim was not statute barred. That was common ground.

A copy of the stated case appears as a schedule to this judgment. The quotations which follow are from the stated case.

In relation to what was described as the second conversation which the plaintiff had with Mr George Wilson, his Worship made the following finding of fact: "I held that whilst in that conversation George Wilson may have earlier acknowledged that he was indebted to the plaintiff and had accepted that the plaintiff was claiming $25,000, the final words said by George Wilson, namely, `Right, I'll just leave those papers there, Bill. I'll get Stan to check through them. I'm not much good at figures anyway', led me to infer that
George Wilson wished to examine the plaintiffs papers and consult with his brother before finally binding himself to a specific figure." 
As to the legal principles involved, his Worship held as follows: "I held that for an `account stated' to arise, the amount due must be specified by the claimant and the admission of liability and of the amount due must be absolute and not qualified by any condition or reservation." 
His Worship's conclusion was as follows: "As a result of the inference I drew which is set out in paragraph 3 above (that being the first of the passages quoted above), I held that there was not an absolute and unqualified admission of both liability and quantum by
George Wilson and accordingly the second conversation did not amount to an account stated." 
Relevantly, the plaintiff submits that the learned magistrate erred in law in his understanding that an admission had to be "absolute and not qualified by any condition or reservation" in order to provide the basis for the cause of action for money due on an account stated. The plaintiff submits that the correct legal principle is that a bare admission will suffice.

If the plaintiff's submission is correct, the determination must be set aside because the learned magistrate would have imposed too strict a standard on himself. The plaintiff seeks an order setting aside the learned magistrate's determination and the entry of judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $25,000.

There are two distinct forms of an action for money found to be due on an account stated. These were succinctly described by Jordan CJ in Commonwealth
Dairy Produce Equalisation Committee Ltd versus McCabe <case>; [(1938) 38 SR 397], in which his Honour held as follows (at 401). (I have omitted the citation of authority from the passage.) "An action for money found to be due on accounts stated may take one of two forms. It is always essential in such an action that there should have been before action brought an admission by the defendant or his agent to the plaintiff or his agent that the sum claimed is due by the defendant to the plaintiff. But this admission may be so framed as to be merely an acknowledgment of indebtedness, in which case although it supplies evidence of the debt the evidence may be rebutted by proof that no debt in fact existed.
Or it may take the form of an account stated and agreed to between two parties, by which it is in effect agreed that the items on both sides shall be set off and the balance paid. In the latter type of case, the agreement for set-off supplies good consideration for the promise to pay the amount of the balance; and the account stated is itself an agreement for valuable consideration constituting a cause of action, and not merely evidence of liability." 
In the present case, the claim was based on the first form of the cause of action.

Bullen & Leake & Jacob's, Precedents of Pleadings (13th edition, ), at page 7, supports the proposition that such an admission must be absolute to qualify: "For the claim to an account stated to lie there must be an absolute acknowledgment (or admission) made by the defendant (or his agent) to the plaintiff (or his agent) of a debt (or a sum) due from the defendant to the plaintiff and payable at the time of action brought (see Day versus William Hill (Park Lane) Ld <case>; [(1839) 5 M & W 656)".] [emphasis added] 
In the course of my review of the authorities, I will mention the two cases cited by Bullen & Leake.

In Knowles versus Michel <case>; [(1811) 104 ER 366], Lord Ellenborough CJ, said (at 366) that "if there were an acknowledgment by the defendant of a debt due upon any account, it was sufficient to enable the plaintiff to recover upon the count for an account stated." This statement contained no requirement other than a bare admission of the debt.

In Clark versus Glennie <case>; [(1820) ER 750], the defendants' promise that he would call and settle an account with the plaintiffs was considered to be a sufficient admission.
Abbott CJ said (at 750) that the critical question was whether "the defendants had acknowledged the account which had been sent to them, and had admitted the sum now claimed to be due." The same observation may be made.

In Wayman versus Hilliard <case>; [(1830) 131 ER 39], the plaintiff demanded 40 pounds upon an agreement by the defendant, an incoming tenant, to pay for the crops sown on the land. Upon such demand by the plaintiff, the defendant offered to pay 17 pounds. The plaintiff's action on account stated failed on the basis that there was no acknowledgment of a debt. Bosanquet J said an "absolute acknowledgment of debt may amount to an account stated. [emphasis added]" The other three judges spoke only in terms of admission or acknowledgment.

In Porter versus Cooper <case>; [(1834) 149 ER 1130], the defendant told the plaintiff's lawyer to "Go to my attorney ... and he will either arrange or pay". The court held that this was an admission sufficient to constitute the cause of action. Alderson B said (at ), "The cases have come to this, that an admission of a certain sum being due in respect of a demand for which an action would lie, is evidence sufficient to support a count on an account stated." Parke B said (at 1133), "I take the rule to be this, that, if there is an admission of a sum of money being due, for which an action would lie, that will be evidence to go to the jury on the count for an account stated." Again, no mention of "absolute".

In Hughes versus Thorpe <case>; [(1839) 151 ER 278], the court held that there was not sufficient evidence of an account stated because the quantum of the debt admitted by the defendant was not certain. To make out a claim of account stated, the "evidence ought to be clear and certain" (Lord Abinger CB at 283); "there must be a statement of some certain account of money being due" (Parke B at 283). I make the same observation.

In Taylor versus Nicholls [(1876) 1 CPD 242], the statement "I will call at your office in the early part of next week, and hope to make some satisfactory arrangement for the payment of Mr Taylor's claim" was held to be a sufficient admission to support an account stated.

In Evans versus Nicholson [(1875) 32 LT (NS) 778], Lord
Coleridge CJ (at 780) expressed approval of a principle said to have been enunciated in an earlier case: "I find in the books it is stated, from the words of Lord Abinger in Irving versus Veitch [(3 M & W 107):] `An account stated is an admission of a balance due from one party to another, and the count lies upon an absolute acknowledgment made by the defendant to the plaintiff of a debt due by him to the plaintiff and payable at the time of the action brought.' [emphasis added]" It was helpfully pointed out by the defendants' counsel that the quotation which Lord Coleridge attributed to Lord
Abinger does not in fact appear in the case cited. Nevertheless, the defendants submit that Lord Coleridge - on whatever basis - supported a principle that the acknowledgment must be absolute. Other members of the court used the words "absolute" (Archibald J at 779) and "distinct" (Lindley J at 778) to describe the nature of the admission required.

In Wheaton versus Macgeorge [(1876) SALR 29], the defendant's statement "I have not a cheque with me, or I would pay you at once" was enough to constitute an account stated. There was nothing about the admission having to be absolute.

The word "absolute" or its equivalent is not to be found in the Australian authorities on the topic. Lord Atkin in Siqueira versus Noronha [[1934] AC ] said (at 337): "An account stated may only take the form of a mere acknowledgment of a debt, and in those circumstances, though it is quite true it amounts to a promise and the existence of a debt may be inferred, that can be rebutted, and it may very well turn out that there is no real debt at all, and in those circumstances there would be no consideration and no binding promise." [emphasis added] 
To similar effect, Jordan CJ said in Commonwealth Dairy Produce Equalisation
Committee Ltd versus McCabe (supra), in the passage quoted earlier in this judgment, that "(the) admission may be so framed as to be merely an acknowledgment of indebtedness." [emphasis added] 
Day versus William Hill (Park Lane) Ld (supra) did not involve the question of whether an admission had to be absolute. However, the court stated the requirements of the cause of action by reference to the 3rd edition of Bullen & Leake, where a statement, including the adjective "absolute", appeared in similar terms to that appearing in the 13th edition.

Brereton J in Lockyer versus Macready [[1965] NSWR 801] said (at 803) that an account stated "involves no more than an admission of liability for a specified sum. An IOU is a simple instance of this type of account stated." 
I return to the passage from Bullen & Leake & Jacob's, Precedents of
Pleadings, 13th edition, to which I referred. As I have shown, of the two decisions cited by the authors as support for the stated requirements of the cause of action, Hughes versus Thorpe (supra) does not mention that the admission must be absolute and Day versus William Hill (Park Lane) Ld (supra) merely picks up substantially the same formulation from an earlier edition of the same work.

I conclude that the distinction between an absolute admission or acknowledgment of a debt and a bare admission or acknowledgment of a debt is one without a difference. It seems to me that all that has been intended by those judges who have used the expression or any similar expression is that there must be an admission or acknowledgment of a debt for a sum certain.
Otherwise, there could be no basis for a judgment on the cause of action requiring the defendant to pay a specified amount.

It further appears from the authorities - as one would expect - that the certainty of the sum admitted may be established by the express terms of the admission or by other evidentiary material such as a bill that has been sent which is expressly or impliedly referred to in the admission. But, however the certainty of the amount admitted to be owing is to be established, it must be established by the admission one way or another.

If more has been intended by the use of such adjectives as "absolute", the approach is wrong under the Australian authorities.

It is also to be noted that the admission may be rebutted by other evidence.
If other evidence is led, the ultimate issue is, on authority, whether the defendant is truly indebted to the plaintiff as alleged. The ultimate issue cannot be different in the absence of other evidence. Thus, it will always be a question for the court as to whether the court is persuaded that the indebtedness truly exists. Why then in policy is there a need for imposing some kind of standard on the admission other than that it should be for a sum certain? The court must decide in every case whether the admission, in terms and context, is sufficient to support the ultimate finding of indebtedness. If an admission is not in absolute terms, it may be sufficient. It may be insufficient.

There is no support to be found in the authorities for the further limitation imposed by the learned magistrate that the admission must not be qualified by any condition or reservation. This limitation cannot be correct. For example, if a defendant said he was 99% sure he owed the plaintiff the money, that would be a reservation which, under his Worship's formulation of principle, would disqualify the admission. That cannot be right.

A condition or reservation may result in the court not being satisfied that the defendant is truly indebted to the plaintiff. On the other hand, the court may be so satisfied despite the condition or reservation.

Having regard to the principles relating to the relevant form of the cause of action as I hold them to be, the learned magistrate introduced a restrictive consideration which was contrary to law. The consequence is that his Worship's determination must be set aside.

It does not follow, however, that, as a matter of law, there must be judgment for the plaintiff. The ultimate result depends on a finding of fact as to whether, on the whole of the evidence, the defendants were truly indebted to the plaintiff. It is a rare case where the evidence, as a matter of law, mandates a finding of fact in favour of a plaintiff where the plaintiff bears the burden of proof. This is not such a case.

The practical result of my consideration of this topic is to equate proof of a cause of action for money payable on an account stated, when based on a bare admission, with one way of proving a cause of action for debt. That is by leading evidence of an admission of the debt if that evidence is available. If there is evidence in rebuttal, that would be taken into account. The ultimate question would then be whether the defendant was truly indebted to the plaintiff as alleged. As I hold the law to be, that is the same ultimate issue as arises where a plaintiff seeks to make out a cause of action for money due on an account stated in reliance upon an admission.

This is anomalous if, as the law appears to be, time runs under the Statute of
Limitations from the date of the admission rather than from the date on which the cause of action for debt would have arisen. There are strong reasons for abolishing this form of the cause of action in these circumstances. However, it is not competent for me to do so.

Accordingly, the orders I make are as follows:
The determination of the learned magistrate is set aside.
The proceedings are remitted to the learned magistrate to be determined according to law.
The defendants are to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings before me.
The defendants are to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) in relation to those costs.
 * * * 
