

Duke versus State Rail Authority of NSW Matter No 14903/96 [1997] NSWSC 604 (4
December 1997) 
Duke versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales /96 December 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /96 - Duke versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Summons filed on 20 December 1996. The Summons claims an order extending the relevant limitation period pursuant to section 60C of the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969. 
The plaintiff relies on two affidavits. One has been sworn by the plaintiff himself. The other has been sworn by his solicitor (Mr Gunson). The plaintiff has given supplementary oral evidence and has been cross-examined.

The plaintiff worked for the defendant between 1979 and March 1996.

On 4 December 1992, there was a suicide on the railway line near Albury. At the time, the plaintiff was an Assistant Station Master. He attended the scene of the suicide for the purposes of providing assistance. When he arrived, another Assistant Station Master (Mr Howell) was present. Mr Howell left the scene and the plaintiff remained there as the railway representative.

In his affidavit, the plaintiff deposes, inter alia, to the following:- "11. I was required as part of my duties to pinpoint, as close as I possibly could, the exact kilometreage from Sydney of the actual point of impact of the
XPT with the body of the deceased person. I walked back down the track past numerous body parts. I found an umbrella with watch and wedding ring on it. I then related that to the nearest kilometre peg.
As I walked down the line, I had a torch. I saw ripped clothes, shoes, hands, legs, arms, feet, internal organs, blood and bones. I had never encountered anything like this before.
Having established the kilometreage, I then went back down the line to where the Police were. The ambulance had gone. Before the train can be moved, the Coroner is supposed to be notified. I inquired of the Police as to whether he had been notified. The Coroner had not been notified so the Police then attended to that.
The XPT went in to Albury Station. I waited for the Police physical evidence officer to arrive. He arrived and the job of clearing the line began.
I carried a generator with light attached. Police marked, bagged and numbered body parts. I walked with the Police as the marking, bagging and numbering took place.
After this was finished, I commenced to go back to railway station and relieve Geoffrey Howell so that he could go home. The Station Master, Neville
Clarke, arrived and came in to the Station with me. He took charge of the
Station while I went home to get a dry set of clothes. I then came back to the
Station. Neville Clarke went home. Shortly after, I had a call from a woman in
Sydney from the Defendant's Human Resources Section. I believe the woman's name was Pauline Kirby. She asked me using words of or to the following effect: `Are you okay?' 
I replied using words of or to the following effect: `Yes'.
My conversation with Ms. Kirby was very brief.
I received no other phone calls whatsoever from employees of the defendant nor from any other persons in relation to my condition after the suicide on 4th December, 1992.

I was not asked if I wanted de-briefing and received no de-briefing. I received no counselling in the immediate period following the suicide nor was
I offered any counselling." 
In his affidavit, he further deposes, inter alia, to the following:- "18. Prior to the suicide, I had a happy disposition. I had no mental problems. I did not suffer from nightmares nor did I suffer from sleeplessness. I had neither sought nor required psychiatric assistance.
On the first occasion that I endeavoured to sleep after the suicide, I had nightmares. The nightmares involved re-runs of the suicide scene. I also experienced sleeplessness. I was physically sick the morning after the suicide. I vomited uncontrollably several times.
A pattern of nightmares and sleeplessness set in. The pattern was horrific in the weeks after the suicide.
I also began to experience flashbacks to the suicide. Certain events would trigger flashbacks. For example, I saw the `Adams Family' movie on television. This included scenes of a detached hand moving of its own accord.
This triggered flashbacks. I had seen two detached hands at the suicide scene.
Both hands were pulsating.
I began to feel depressed. I fell in a heap. I became wary of people and limited my involvement with others. My work was adversely affected. I began to drink very heavily." 
During his oral evidence, other material emerged. The plaintiff informed the
Court that his wife had died in June 1993. In 1994, he experienced emotional distress because of problems he was having with his then de facto wife. He made a claim for compensation in December 1994 (see Exhibit 1). The claim specified the date of the original injury as 4 December 1992.

On 25 April 1994, he made a suicide attempt. He saw a psychologist (Ms Robyne
Slade) on a number of occasions. He saw a psychiatrist (Dr Whittaker) on two or three occasions.

In June 1996, he became aware that Mr Howell had a case in the Supreme Court claiming damages for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder arising from his exposure to the aftermath of the suicide. This happened when he was contacted in relation to the case.

Mr Gunson received instructions to act for the plaintiff. He took a Statement on 15 June 1996. Arrangements were made for various appointments (including an appointment for the plaintiff to see Dr Shand). In September 1996, Dr Shand provided a report. Further information was received from Dr Shand on 14
October 1996. This material provided a diagnosis that the plaintiff was suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, which was attributable to the exposure to the aftermath of the suicide.

A brief was then delivered to Counsel. Advice was received from Counsel on 11
November 1996. There was a telephone conference with Counsel. A further report was obtained from Dr Shand on 10 December 1996.

Mr Howell's claim was heard by Abadee J at Albury. Mr Howell recovered judgment in the proceedings. The proceedings have gone on appeal both to the
Court of Appeal and the High Court. A re-trial has been ordered, limited to the question of damages.

Whilst the process claimed relief pursuant to the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969, there was a consensus between the parties that the plaintiff needed leave to commence proceedings pursuant to section 151D(2) of the Workers Compensation
Act, 1987 (the Act). The provision is expressed in the following terms:- 
A person to whom compensation is payable under this Act is not entitled to commence court proceedings for damages in respect of the injury concerned against the employer liable to pay that compensation more than 3 years after the date on which the injury was received, except with the leave of the court in which the proceedings are to be taken.

The provision confers a discretionary power upon the Court to grant leave. The power is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before the Court and so that justice is best served between the parties. The applicant bears the onus of satisfying the Court that an order should be made.

It is important to observe that the provision requires the granting of the leave of the Court in which the proceedings are to be taken.

The proceedings came before Abadee J on 21 October 1997. His Honour made no order pursuant to section 143 of the District Court Amendment Act, 1997. The
Court was informed that, if leave was granted, the plaintiff had in mind a hearing of the claim at the next Albury Sittings of this Court when Mr
Howell's proceedings are also listed for hearing.

There is credible evidence which provides a diagnosis of Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder and which relates that Disorder to the incident in December 1992.
There may well be issues between the parties as to whether or not the plaintiff does suffer from that Disorder and, if he does, the causation of the condition. There are other factors (such as the death of the plaintiff's wife and the emotional problems had with his former de facto wife) which may be seen as the cause of any problems that he does have. However, these are questions for trial. It is not said that this is a case in which it would be futile to grant leave.

Further, it is not said that delay has occasioned prejudice. There has been a police investigation and an inquest. The claim made by Mr Howell has been investigated and litigated.

The focus of the defendant's opposition is founded on delay. At least by
December 1994, the plaintiff had connected his condition with the incident in
December 1992. The relevant limitation period expired in December 1995. He did not bring this application until December 1996. The defendant says that the plaintiff should have acted earlier.

There clearly has been delay. It may be said that there are some deficiencies in the explanation for the delay. The plaintiff says that he did not realise that he had any legal rights against the defendant until he saw Mr Gunson in
June 1996. Largely, this reason does account for the delay in a significant sense. Between June and December 1996, there was reasonable expedition of the case. There has been some delay in this application coming on for hearing.
Largely, this is a matter that has been left unexplored. Some of that delay may be due to the jurisdictional changes that have taken place and which saw the matter come before Abadee J.

If leave is refused, the plaintiff will be deprived of the opportunity of prosecuting his claim. If leave is granted, the defendant loses the benefit of the statutory defence.

The potential of the claim is not entirely clear. On one view, the District
Court would seem to be the appropriate jurisdiction for the prosecution of the claim. However, there are reasons for the prosecution of the matter in this
Court.

It seems to me, when regard is had to all of the relevant circumstances, that the interests of justice favour the granting of leave. In my view, the requisite onus has been discharged.

I grant the leave of the Court to the plaintiff to commence Court proceedings for damages in respect of the injury claimed against the defendant. The leave is to be exercised within 28 days. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the
Summons. The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
