

The Civil Aviation Authority versus Australian Broadcasting Corporation No. Ca /94 Contempt - Coroners - Practice and Procedure - Human Rights [1995]
NSWSC 98 (24 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), HANDLEY(2) AND SHELLER(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 9 and 22 June #DATE 29:6:1995 #ADD 24:10:1995 
Counsel for the Claimant:    R V Gyles QC and G O'L Reynolds 
Solicitors for the
Claimant:   Corrs Chambers Westgarth 
Counsel for the Opponent:    M J Sexton and CJ Mellard 
Solicitors for the Opponent:
M Martin, ABC Legal Department
ORDER
Summons dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
KIRBY P The Civil Aviation Authority (the claimant) seeks declarations that the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (the opponent) is guilty of contempt of court for broadcasting matter which was likely, or had a tendency, to interfere with the administration of justice in connection with an inquest by the Coroner into the deaths of seven passengers killed in an aeroplane crash near Young.
On 11 June 1993, a Piper Navajo aircraft, registered
VHNDU (sometimes described as NDU), owned and operated by Monarch Airlines Ltd (Monarch), crashed during stormy weather while approaching
Young Airport. Six of the seven people on board died in the crash. The other passenger, one of three school girls returning home from school, died two days later. She had sustained bums to fifty percent of her body. On 4 November 1993, notification was given by the Coroner of an inquest. The hearing was set down to commence on 1 August 1994. It has proceeded.
On 3 April 1994, the opponent's "Radio National" network broadcast on its regular programme Background Briefing a programme discussing the events surrounding the crash. The broadcast was repeated on 5 April 1994, in substantially the same format. It is alleged that these broadcasts constituted the contempt with which the opponent is charged.
 
A radio programme with "an angle" about an aircrash
Without objection, the
Court heard in its entirety, the radio programme complained of The programme commences with a discussion of the events surrounding the accident. It draws the conclusion that the essential responsibility for the crash lay with the claimant. But it goes further.
By using the accident as an illustration, it discusses matters of considerable public interest and importance. These include in particular air safety, economic deregulation of the aviation industry and the Federal Government's "corporatisation" scheme for the claimant.
In order to understand the complaint of contempt made, it is necessary to describe the radio programme in detail. The broadcast begins with an emotive rendering of the accident from the perspective of the onlookers, mostly family and friends of the victims, who were waiting at Young Airport for the arrival of the plane. The general tenor of the programme is set early in the broadcast as the reporter interviews the parents of one of the passengers, asserting: .... But the crash of NDU is not simply a case of pilot error and Janine and Fred Clark don't believe it was simply an accident.

JANINE CLARK. "No, it's not an accident.
It's a crash isn't it?
An accident is something that couldn't be avoided but this could be avoided had there been proper guidelines" 
FRED CLARK:" I think most people can accept an accident happening. But in this situation to accept something that was avoidable is very difficult.... "
Mr Barry Sergeant leader of the Bureau of Air Safety's investigation team, clearly a potential witness at the Coroner's inquest, provides an account of the last moments of NDU's flight. He concludes there were missing and inoperative devices of the plane which may, had they been operative, have picked up some of the irregularities which presumably led to the crash. The reporter asserts that the technical failings of NDU were a reflection of the general condition of Monarch, the operator of the aircraft. In November 1991, just one month after Monarch had begun its operations, staff of the claimant had recommended that Monarch's air operating certificate be suspended. Less than two months before the accident the claimant's staff again made the same recommendation. However, neither of these recommendations was followed up.
Some of Monarch's woes could be traced to its poor cash flow and marginal profitability. According to Mr Tony Taggart a chartered accountant who had been looking into Monarch's finances, Monarch had suffered financial losses in to the amount of $800,000. In his opinion, stated in the broadcast: "... an insolvent company cannot operate a safe and sound airline business."
On 16 April 1993, the aircraft NDU had been issued with a permissible unserviceability schedule (PUS) as a result of its auto pilot being "dysfunctional". A PUS is issued for a limited time to allow the airline concerned to keep an aircraft running while the operator orders and refits the malfunctioning parts. Until the auto pilot was replaced, the PUS required two people to fly the subject plane. But according to Mr Laurie Foley, the claimant's Chief Air Worthiness Inspector in 1992, the removal of the auto pilot from NDU affected the working ability of other instruments, including the aeroplane's main directional guide (the HSI). In his opinion, expressed in the broadcast, this would require checking the effect on other systems, "and not to do so would be erring fairly significantly in your duty". However, on May 1993 the claimant issued Monarch with an extension of the PUS in respect of NDU for a further month. It did so apparently without being satisfied that the requirements of the safety regulations had been met.
Mr Nigel Clarke, an inspector with the claimant and also a witness at the then pending coronial inquiry, inspected NDU twelve days before the crash. The
HSI was still missing. He claimed that he had been led to believe that the part had been replaced. However, he did not have a chance to verify whether this was so or not before the crash occurred. It was only after the accident that he found out he had been misled. Other problems involving NDU were apparent. Components were not being changed at the right time. Necessary maintenance was not being done. The claimant, according to the broadcast, was aware of these failings.
Having discussed the accident and the situation at Monarch, the broadcast moves from the specific to the general. It discusses the impact of "corporatisation" and economic deregulation on airline safety. Economic deregulation has required that monopolies on airline routes be broken, exposing some routes to competition which, it is suggested, cannot be sustained by customer demand. At the same time, in order to cut costs, the claimant, so the broadcast asserts, had has been forced to put much of the onus of ensuring air safety regulation on the industry itself. As a consequence, the industry had become partially self regulating. It was the thesis of the reporter that this could lead to the situation where an airline, in order to stay profitable, might take risks without accountability to an effective supervisory body obliged to ensure safety. Mr Terry O'Connell,
Executive Director of the Australian Federation of Pilots, identified alleged confusion within the claimant as to whether they were now a service, to do what the industry desired, or a safety regulator, as the Department of Civil
Aviation had been in the past.
The claimant, so it was said, was forced to fund its operation from the industry which it had been established to regulate. The fundamental question "how do you police your customers?" remained unanswered, according to Mr O'Connell.
Much of the remainder of the broadcast concerns these problems in the case of Monarch. The accident at Young provided an illustration of the suggested problems involved with de-regulation and "corporatisation" of air safety regulation. The broadcast also touches on other problems, such as the difficulties which the families of victims had experienced in applying for insurance benefits because Monarch's insurance was affected by the fact that it was allegedly operating outside applicable regulations.
The programme, as described, has what might be called an "angle". On several occasions the reporter, and persons whom he interviews, are prepared to draw their own conclusions about the claimant's responsibility for the accident at Young. Mr Jim Papworth, a relative of one of the victims was interviewed in relation to recommendations on 20 April 1993 that the airline show cause why its operator's certificate should not be cancelled.
In spite of the problems at Monarch, the claimant allowed Monarch to continue flying. Mr
Papworth commented: "I think the CAA have got it totally wrong." and "Therefore they (the CAA) are without a doubt responsible for the death of seven people."
In the conclusion, the programme makes a direct reference to the then pending coronial inquest. The reporter states: "The specific causes of the crash will be analysed and determined by the Bureau of Air Safety and the Coroner BUT THERE IS NO
DOUBT
THAT THEY WILL LAY MOST OF THE BLAME ON A COMPANY THAT OPERATED
OUTSIDE THE LAW AND AN AIR SAFETY REGULATOR WHICH KNEW
ABOUT THE
BREACHES AND DIDN'T STOP THEM." (emphasis added) 
The claimant's statutory power to bring the proceedings
The [Civil Aviation Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caa1988154/) (Cth) [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caa1988154/s8.html), establishes the claimant as a body corporate with the power to sue and be sued. The opponent contended that the bringing of the summons did not fall within the claimant's functions set out in [s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caa1988154/s9.html) of the Act. Those functions can be summarised relevantly, as relating to the provision of air navigation and safety services. The claimant is also empowered by the Act to engage in conduct incidental to these functions. The proposition advanced was that [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caa1988154/s8.html) of the Act, read with [s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caa1988154/s9.html), did not extend the bringing of contempt proceedings against the opponent.
The essential nature of contempt proceedings, relevant to this objection, is summarised in European Asia Bank AG versus Wentworth [(1986) 5 NSWLR 445 (CA)] at "...(Contempt proceedings) are not private proceedings for the vindication of the rights of (parties to litigation but) ... are proceedings, criminal in their nature, to vindicate the public interest in the due administration of justice."
In the words of Lord Reid in Attorney-General versus Times Newspapers Limited [(1974) AC 273 (HL)] at 301 "contempt of court has nothing to do with the private interests of the litigants". The opponent contended that the present contempt proceedings were not concerned with the interests of the claimant per se, but only with the protection of the public interest in the due administration of justice. Nowhere in [s 9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caa1988154/s9.html) of the Act was this public interest mentioned as being a power conferred on the claimant. Accordingly, so the argument ran, the public interest necessary to sustain the proceedings fell outside the ambit of the powers conferred by the Act dealing with air navigation and safety or matters incidental thereto. That was the claimant's charter. It should leave the enforcement of the law to the relevant law enforcing bodies and confine itself to its own proper concerns.
The issues involved in the alleged contempt suggest the error of this argument. The two broadcasts of the opponent made very serious allegations against the claimant. The responsibility for the death of the seven people on board NDU was laid, without much subtlety, at the claimant's feet. There might be substance to these allegations. There might not be. The wheels of justice have already been set in motion to determine the manner and cause of the deaths of the passengers. As a central focus of the proceedings before the
Coroner, there is obviously much at stake for the claimant. The claimant is the sole regulator of air space in Australia. Its function is a vitally important one. The claimant is highly dependent on the confidence and respect of the public, business and not insignificantly, the airline industry itself.
Without such confidence, it is difficult to see how the claimant could ever effectively fulfil its statutory function to provide air safety regulation for
Australian aviation. As the broadcast points out, the claimant is also now dependent on the aviation industry for a portion of its funding. The defence of the public interest in the administration of justice, in so far as it is incidental to the confidence of the community in the claimant, is sufficiently pertinent to the proper functioning of the claimant and the performance by it of its statutory charter to be within its powers.
Although the powers under [s8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caa1988154/s8.html) and s[9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caa1988154/s9.html) of the Act do not expressly allow the bringing of contempt proceedings, the claimant may still do so. Support for this proposition is to be found in The Director of Public Prosecutions versus The
Australian Broadcasting Corporation [(1987) 7 NSWLR 588 (CA).] There, this Court (Street CJ, Hope, Glass, Samuels and Priestley JJA) said (at 595). "A corporation established by State legislation and having power to sue and be sued would be entitled to bring proceedings for contempt in order to protect the integrity of litigation to which it was a party without the conferring upon it of any express power in that regard It would be a power necessarily incidental to its power to be a party to litigation."
The same can obviously be said of an authority established under Federal legislation. The Court went on: "It would not be necessary for its constituting statute to give it such a power expressly although no doubt that statute could, expressly or impliedly, deny it that power.
There is no denial under [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caa1988154/s8.html) of the claimant's Act to bring proceedings for contempt of court. The opponent argued that the above proposition was valid only for parties already engaged in litigation. The nature of the
Coroner's court, it was suggested, was such that were no "parties". The opponent relied in this regard on what Lord Lane said in R versus South London
Coroner, Ex parte Thompson (The Times, 9 July 1982) as set out in Jervis On the Office and Duties of Coroners (10th ed., 1986, at 6), approved by Toohey J in Annetts versus McCann <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 596], at 616: "Once again it should not be forgotten that an inquest is a fact finding exercise and not a method of apportioning guilt.
The procedure and rules of evidence which are suitable for one are unsuitable for the other. In an inquest it should never be forgotten that there are no parties, there is no indictment, there is no prosecution, there is no defence, there is no trial, simply an attempt to establish facts. It is an inquisitorial process, a process of investigation quite unlike a trial where the prosecutor accuses and the accused defends, the judge holding the balance or the ring, whichever metaphor one chooses to use.
Although in the strict sense it is true that there are no "parties" to the proceedings before the
Coroner it by no means follows that the claimant lacks the interest to bring proceedings for contempt. Under [s 19](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/s19.html) of the [Coroners Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/), the Coroner has the power to make a finding that a prima facie case lies against any person. In such a case the Coroner is to forward the matter to the Director of Public Prosecutions. This demonstrates the power which the Coroner has to affect profoundly, albeit indirectly, the rights of people and their reputations. The claimant is not itself a party to the proceedings before the Coroner.
However, it was obvious that it would be an important potential focus of the inquest to investigate the conduct of the claimant and its officers. The claimant thus had significant interests which could be deeply affected by the outcome of the inquest.
Accordingly, the claimant's statutory powers extended to the circumstances of this case (sufficiently demonstrated by the broadcast complained of) to sustain the proceedings brought by it to defend the administration of justice in matters incidental to the claimant's express statutory functions. I would reject the first objection to the proceedings.
 
The standing of the claimant in the summons
Closely linked to the question of the claimant's power to bring the proceedings is the question whether the claimant had the standing in law necessary to initiate proceedings for contempt. It is well established that parties other than the AttorneyGeneral have the requisite standing to commence proceedings for contempt of court where such parties can demonstrate that they have a special interest or personal stake in the proceedings. See eg John
Fairfax and Sons Ltd versus Police Tribunal of New South Wales [(1986) 5 NSWLR 465 ] at 581. There is even a suggestion in the authorities that a special interest may not be required. European Asia Bank AG versus Wentworth (see above) at .
The opponent endeavoured to draw a distinction between the present case and a case which involved the
New South Wales Egg Corporation, a statutory authority, sharing standing with the Attorney-General to bring contempt proceedings.
See Peek versus NSW Egg Corporation [(1986) 6 NSWLR 1 (CA).] There the question arose whether the corporation had the standing to bring proceedings for an injunction to restrain the defendants from producing and selling eggs in contravention of the Egg Industry Act 1983. So long as an authority is furthering, or defending, its statutory function in bringing the action, it may enjoy standing along with the Attorney-General or public prosecutor. In that case, the corporation, in bringing the injunction, was held to be sufficiently pursuing the goals for which it was established, namely to regulate the production and sale of eggs in New South Wales. For the reasons already set out, it is clear that the claimant is also defending its conception of its statutory role in bringing this summons, albeit for contempt and not an injunction. Considerations of community and industry respect and confidence in air safety are arguably involved. The findings of the Coroner, going to the manner and cause of death of the victims of the Young aircrash, could have a significant effect on the capacity of the Authority to perform its functions effectively. Theoretically they could even lead to a charge of criminal negligence against the claimant or one of its employees. To say that the only role of the claimant at the inquest is to provide evidence is unconvincing. In the words of Fullagar
J in R versus Registrar-General; Ex parte
Lange <case>; [(1950) VLR 45] at 385; "Alike in the case of a coroner's inquest and in the case of a magisterial inquiry what is produced is, in form and in substance, a finding, a decision. The finding or decision is the result of a process of inquiry, which involves the taking of evidence on oath, and which must, one would think, be conducted with due regard to certain essential requirements of justice. The finding or decision, though it may carry no immediate legal consequences, may directly and profoundly affect the interests of persons."
Such a statement is particularly apt in the present situation. Clearly, the claimant has a special interest in the proceedings to share standing with the AttorneyGeneral and public prosecutors. If that is so, it has the requisite standing to prosecute its summons. I would also reject the second objection to the summons.
 
Contempt and the Coroner's court
The Court heard argument concerning whether the Coroner's court is susceptible of a finding of contempt of the kind complained of in the present summons. No attempt was made by the opponent to re-argue Attorney-General v
Mirror Newspapers Ltd [(1980) 1 NSWLR 374 (CA).] It was conceded that there could be contempt of a coroner's court in certain circumstances. However, the opponent argued that, because of the diffuse and open ended findings of a coroner in a case such as the present, statements asserting the guilt of parties prior to the coronial proceedings, in other words going to the findings which the Coroner might ultimately make, could not, of their nature, amount to a contempt punishable on a summons before the Court.
An analogy was drawn by the opponent between a coronial inquest and a royal commission. A royal commission is typically protected against contempt in certain situations; but by specific legislation.
A witness who declines to be sworn or who treats the commissioner with actual contempt is liable to be dealt with for contempt. However, the canvassing of the possible outcome of a royal commission would not ordinarily be contempt. The issue is discussed in R v Browne-Kerr <case>; [(1990) VR 78], at 85. There, a publication suggesting that the royal commissioner carried out certain of his functions for improper reasons was considered a contempt. However, where the findings of an inquisitorial body are pre-judged, a conclusion that there has been a contempt in the prejudgment is much more problematical. In the case of a royal commission, if such a ground of contempt were accepted by our law, very serious restrictions on the communication of public information typically in matters of acute public concern, would result.
Those aspects of comment on a royal commission have not until now, been taken to be covered by the law of contempt.
However, a royal commission is not part of the judicial structure of the
State. It is set up by statute which typically sets out its relevant powers and may also set out its terms of reference. The subject matters dealt with by royal commissions vary widely.
Some investigate the activities of particular people or institutions.
Others are concerned with general matters of public interest, such as corruption or drugs. Similarly, their aims and conclusions differ significantly. Some might result in charges being laid, or a trade union being dissolved. Others might result in recommendations being made for the reform of certain areas of the law. Coronial inquests and royal commissions are in this respect distinct. The Coroner's court has a much clearer role in the judicial system.
For the reasons set out in Mirror Newspapers, a coronial inquest treated as part of the administration of justice. The Coroner may come to a conclusion about the manner and cause of death and may make recommendations about criminal prosecutions. Although these conclusions do not themselves involve the actual determination of blame for an accident, they are usually an important step in that process. As such, they could significantly affect the rights of people involved in the proceedings. Consequently, coronial inquests are protected in the same way as other proceedings in the ordinary courts.
It does not follow that to apply the principles of contempt to the
Coroner's court as they are to civil or criminal proceedings, will necessarily result in those principles being applied to all inquisitorial bodies. The form and structure of the proceedings and their affinity to the general judicial system must first be assessed. However, if the statements made by the reporter in the present case fall within any of the established categories, they will, subject to the application of the relevant test, amount to a contempt punishable in these proceedings. I would therefore reject the opponent's third objection to the proceedings.
 
The test of contempt: serious risk to the administration of justice .
The test of contempt has been stated in many decisions. Relevantly, the words impugned must have a tendency to interfere in the due administration of justice. The test has been developed over time to express the balance which is struck in our community between the competing interests in protecting the due administration of justice and upholding the ordinary right to free speech. On the one hand, the courts cannot jealously prevent the discussion of matters which have occurred in the public arena. If they attempted to do so the result would be oppression. Undue restriction of discussion of matters of legitimate public concern could result. Often there is great benefit in, even a need for, public discussion and airing of matters which are before the courts. On the other hand, the right to free speech is sometimes a popular banner under which many wrongs can go unremedied. The public interest is not advanced when sensationalist media, with their own vested interests (often far from the public interest) are allowed a completely free rein to present their "angle" on any matter although it may concern parties and causes which are before the courts. It is in the courts that evidence is marshalled, considered and balanced and the crucial decisions of society pronounced in disputed cases.
The balancing of free speech and due process involves a delicate task.
The intrusion of contempt law into freedom of expression is justified only where a real risk to the administration of justice is apparent, which can be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Certainty of disturbance, therefore, is the key. Such interference can occur on various levels. Media utterances may, on occasion, affect the inquest or trial by influencing actual or potential witnesses and jurors, or even the parties to the proceedings and even the decision-maker involved.
 
The position in relation to the Coroner
The claimant submitted that the emotional conclusions expressed in the subject broadcasts concerning the very matters for the Coroner's determination raised a likelihood that the Coroner might improperly be affected in his findings.
It has long been established that a judge will not be affected, or adversely influenced, by pre-trial publicity.
Lord Parker in R versus Duffy; ex parte Nash (1960) 2 QB 189, went so far as to say that such affectation in the case of a judge was "inconceivable".
Mason J pointed out in Victoria v
Australian Building Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation <case>; [(1982) 152 CLR 25] at 102 that, although adverse or biased pre-trial publicity creating an atmosphere of prejudice surrounding the matter may bring subconscious pressure to bear on judges, this type of pressure falls short of creating a substantial risk of serious prejudice, demanding the protection of the law of contempt. All human beings are susceptible to the opinions put forward every day by the media or indeed by other institutions having a public voice. To deny this in the case of judges would be suggesting that judges were in some sense superhuman, entirely aloof from the pressures to which other members or the public are susceptible. The training and experience of a judge may assist the judge to recognise such influences and consequently to attempt to ignore them or to allow for and discount them. But a residuum of prejudice sometimes may remain. In such a case the question becomes whether, as was stated in the BLF case , the resulting risk is a substantial one or not.
The claimant submitted that the position in relation to coroners was qualitatively different. Such a proposition,, tantamount to saying that a coroner may not be expected to fulfil his or her tasks with a professional judicial attitude, is unacceptable. A magistrate has been held, to have the same ability as a judge to disregard matters inadmissible at the trial. See
Waterhouse versus Australian Broadcasting Corporation <case>; [(1986) 61 ALJR 24(HC)] at 591. The same can be said of coroners. In this State they are all chosen from the magistracy, all of whom are now professionally qualified and offered the protections and independence of judicial tenure. The Coroner presides over a court to decide on the place, manner and cause of death of people who have died in suspicious circumstances. The proceedings involve questions to be decided after formal inquiry, regulated by statute and the rules of the common law. Evidence is taken on oath. A finding is made which may directly, and even profoundly, affect the interests of people involved in the inquest. To say that the
Coroner in this State today would approach such tasks with anything less than a judicial attitude is unacceptable.
In the present case, the conclusions made by the broadcast, the subject of the summons, might have been heard by the Coroner. If so it is possible that they might have brought subconscious intellectual pressure to bear on him. However, the Coronerwould undoubtedly approach an inquest with exactly the same attitude with which a magistrate in the Local Court or a judge approaches a trial. Accepting this, any subconscious pressure which the broadcast might have exerted, falls a long way short of demonstrating a real or substantial risk of interference with the administration of justice. We can have greater confidence in the integrity and discernment of coroners. Like magistrates and judges they are citizens too. They are daily affected by facts and opinions, including in the media. But they know the high professional expectations which are required of them. And, like other magistrates and judges, they develop skills in excluding the opinions of others and focussing their attention on the proved facts, from which only their substantial conclusions will be derived. I would reject the fourth objection of the opponent that the Coroner's Court is outside the protection of the law of contempt in a case such as the present. But I would also reject the claimant's argument that a coroner is somehow more susceptible to influence by the media than other judicial officers are held to be.
 
Coronial witnesses are interviewed in the broadcast
A broadcast or publication will be a contempt if there is a real and substantial risk of adversely influencing actual or potential witnesses. The danger of this occurring is more acute where the witnesses themselves are interviewed in advance of a hearing. A central feature of the subject broadcast was the attempt to present an authentic account of the events leading up to and including the accident to the aircraft at Young. To this end, the reporter interviewed several potential witnesses. Most of these were witnesses to the accident who merely gave a personal account of what they saw and experienced on the night of the crash. It is difficult to imagine what evidence they could give to the Coroner which would be affected by the fact of the interview. Similarly it is difficult to see how anything they said in the interview could in this case interfere with the testimony of other witnesses.
None of them would be required to give evidence regarding the precise manner and cause of death of the deceased victims of the crash. None of them had any involvement with Monarch, the claimant or airline safety in general.
The interviews with Mr Barry Sergeant and Mr Nigel Clarke, however, are of far greater significance. Both men discuss, in their broadcast interviews, the conditions surrounding the subject aircraft accident. Mr Sergeant gives an account of the events directly leading up to the accident and suggests a possible explanation of what actually happened in the cockpit of the doomed plane. Mr Clarke recounts the technical failings of NDU and the situation at
Monarch. Both witnesses relied on notes prepared soon after the accident and well in advance of the broadcast. Those notes have been admitted into evidence. They would be available to the Coroner and to the parties before him. Both witnesses hold the requisite knowledge in their fields. Each might be considered an expert in air safety. It seems unlikely that either would be susceptible to pressure or distortion in the presentation to anyone, including the Coroner, of their expert findings and opinions.
However, the danger in presenting accounts of witnesses before a matter comes to hearing is that the memory of what in fact happened might become distorted. Witnesses for one party might become more emphatic in giving their evidence while other witnesses might become more hesitant or even be deterred from coming forward at all. See Bell versus Stewart (1920) 28 CLR 419. The judgement of the court in AttorneyGeneral versus Mirror Newspapers Limited [(1980) 1
NSWLR 374 (CA)] was emphatic in this respect: "... the publication of statements, by persons likely to be called as witnesses, about the matters in respect of which they will be likely to give evidence is, subject to the de minimus rule, undoubtedly contempt."
This dictum must be considered in light of the facts being dealt with by the Court in that case. A Coroner's inquest was there in progress to determine the manner and cause of the death of people in the ghost train fire at Luna
Park. The accident had been well publicised. There was a great deal of public interest surrounding the inquest. One witness, Mr Said, gave evidence damning of the conduct of the train operator, Mr Bissell. The Mirror newspaper proceeded to conduct a doorstep interview at Mr Bissell's house.
The reporter secured, and the newspaper published, statements by Mr Bissell which went directly to the matters about which he would be required to give evidence to the Coroner. Perhaps unsurprisingly, he spoke in his defence, giving an account which was in conflict with Mr Said's account. The Court considered that there was a substantial risk that Mr Bissell would be constrained to adhere to the published account in his evidence whether it was true or otherwise. Similarly, the possible adverse effect on other witness was considered significant in the circumstances of that case. It resulted in a situation which was likely to interfere with the conduct of the inquest.
The facts of the present case are quite different. Here, there was a distance of four months between the broadcast and the assigned date of the inquest. Although not decisive, in the context of the surrounding facts the delay helps to demonstrate the difference between the situation here and in the Mirror case where the very inquest was then in progress. There has been no doorstep interview in this case, with shock allegations and sensationalist responses. No one has been forced into defending their individual roles or their personal innocence or culpability. In fact, the circumstances could not be further from that. In the Mirror case there were grave inconsistencies between Mr Bissell's evidence and the evidence already given at the inquest.
There has been no question of inconsistency of testimony in the present case.
Both Mr Sergeant and Mr Clarke have given their accounts in a sober and considered manner. Mr Clarke's account is given in the form of a chronology of events and a technical explanation and opinion. The accounts appear largely, or wholly, consistent. Previously prepared notes were relied upon by both witnesses in the interview. There is no reason to suggest that they would be driven to tamper with their written evidence at the inquest. Indeed, the fact that prior statements were relied on, suggests not only the consistency of the statements made at the time of the broadcast (indicating that the comments were made free from any undue pressure), but that their evidence when given before the Coroner will be consistent and reliable - calling in both cases on the contemporaneous written reports.
Any inconsistencies which did emerge would be likely to be revealed by cross examination. In Schering Chemicals Limited versus Falkman Limited [(1982) 1 QB (CA)] a number of people were interviewed in a film made discussing the effects of the drug 'Promodos'. Some of the interviewees were almost certain to be called as witnesses in civil litigation relating to the alleged effects of the drug on unborn children. Lord Denning
MR did not consider that the fact that these witnesses might later be examined in court in relation to statements which they had made in the programme presented a risk of contempt of court. Inconsistent testimony may readily be exposed by effective cross examination.
So it would be here. But in the present case, there is, additionally, no evidence to suggest there would be any inconsistencies.
The law of contempt is not based on conjecture and remote possibilities. It could therefore be safely assumed that both Mr Sergeant and Mr Clarke would give their evidence to the Coroner free from any interference occasioned by the subject broadcast. The contrary suggestion is unconvincing and unproved.
Many of the other likely witnesses to the inquest are in a similar position to Mr
Clarke and Mr Sergeant. A substantial amount of the evidence before the inquest would be likely to be in the form of expert evidence given by medical practitioners, air safety investigators and engineers. The Bureau of Air Safety Investigation's findings would also be available to the Coroner.
A broadcast such as the present would not, in my view, influence witnesses such as these. A medical expert is unlikely to be deterred from giving evidence, or affected in the content of evidence, relating to an autopsy report of a victim of an air accident merely because a an opinion has been expressed in a radio broadcast concerning who was responsible for the crash.
The same can be said of expert engineers reporting on the technical condition of the plane or investigators discussing a safety report. It is clear that the jurisdiction to defend the administration of justice is to be invoked only where there is a substantial risk that such witnesses will either be deterred from giving evidence or that the truth or content of their evidence will, in some way, be interfered with. This has not been proven in this case to the requisite standard.
The same can be said of the other witnesses who, in effect, were observers of the accident. There is nothing which they could add to the matters in contention before the Coroner which could be influenced by the allegations made in the subject broadcast. The listening public is not so gullible as to believe everything they hear, see or read in the media. The public in this country is well able to discern substantiated claims from bald statements of a radio reporter's opinion. In the present broadcast, several conclusions could have been drawn from its content in spite of the comments of the reporter and the statements of several interviewees suggesting that the claimant was responsible for the aircrash. Simply because a reporter of the opponent has drawn and stated his conclusion about the accident, does not mean that everyone listening will slavishly accept it as the undeniable truth or even a sound opinion. High jury verdicts against media defendants in defamation cases in this State suggest the generally reserved opinion which the public, represented by juries, often has of the media - including the opponent. Witnesses at an inquest will be much closer to the matters in issue.
They and will have their own knowledge of what happened and the role which they played. None of the witnesses before the Coroner would be likely to be affected by the broadcast in a way that would affect the proceedings before the Coroner in this case. To the extent that the summons relied upon that assertion, it fails.
 
Prejudging the issues before the Coroner
The claimant nonetheless argued that, given the canvassing of the opinions and versions of various witnesses, together with the views and conclusions stated in the programme by the reporter, and the interviewees amounted to 'trial by media'. On that ground, it was urged, it constituted an unwarranted usurpation of the functions of the Coroner's court and a punishable contempt with which this Court should resolutely deal.
It is well established in Australia that the reporting of 'the bare facts' of a case before the courts is permissible. See eg Packer versus Peacock <case>; [(1912) 13 CLR 577], 588. But it is claimed that the subject broadcasts went far beyond the permissible, amounting to a contempt of court on the basis explained in Attorney-General versus Times Newspapers Ltd [(1974) AC 273 (HL).] There the plaintiff company, Distillers, had manufactured and supplied a relaxant drug 'thalidomide' for provision to pregnant women.
The drug had been promoted as safe for such use. However, as the world now knows, the drug was later found to contain toxins dangerous to the unborn foetus. Several of the children affected as a result of their mother's use of the drug commenced an action in negligence against the manufacturers for damages. The articles complained of, published by the Sunday Times, were alleged to constitute part of the newspaper's campaign to force the manufacturers to settle the action generously with the victims. The background to the case was reported in considerable length whilst the victim's civil litigation was still pending. In particular, the articles in The Sunday
Times claimed that Distillers had failed to consider all scientific literature about the drug and had also failed to undertake sufficient tests before manufacturing and supplying the drugs as safe for use during pregnancy.
The House of Lords upheld an injunction granted at first instance restraining publication of the articles in the The Sunday Times. Their
Lordships did so not on the ground that, if published, there would be a substantial risk of interference in the administration of justice in the case.
But on the ground that the articles constituted a 'trial by media' which could, if countenanced, have a long term effect on the administration of justice generally both by deterring future litigants from having their cases heard and by embarrassing the court in the performance of its duties. In the words of Lord Reid, at 300: " ... anything in the nature of prejudgment of a case or of specific issues in it is objectionable not only because of its possible effects on that particular case but also because of its side effects which may be far reaching. Responsible "mass media" will do their best to be fair, but there will also be ill informed, slapdash or prejudiced attempts to influence the public. If people are led to think that it is easy to find the truth, disrespect for the processes of the law could follow, and, if mass media are allowed to judge, unpopular people and unpopular causes will fare very badly." 
Lord Morris, at 304, spoke of the need to protect the parties to active litigation: "The courts, I think, owe it to the parties to protect them either from the prejudices of prejudgment or from the necessity of having themselves to participate in the flurries of pre-trial publicity." 
Such protection should be extended to litigants in future and unrelated proceedings as well. Lord Diplock, at 3 10, said: "If to have recourse to civil litigation were to expose a litigant to the risk of public obliquy or to public and prejudicial discussion of the facts or merits of the case before they have been determined by the court, potential suitors would be inhibited from availing themselves of the courts of law for the purposes for which they are established.' 
Furthermore, this was to be considered a general rule. Lord Reid, at 300, observed: "Most cases of prejudging of issues fall within the existing authorities in contempt. I do not think that the freedom of the press would suffer, and I think that the law would be clearer and easier to apply in practice if it is made a general rule that it is not permissible lo prejudge issues in pending cases." 
Criticism of pre-judgment contempt
The Sunday Times decision has been much criticised. When the publishers took the case to the European Court of Human Rights, complaining that the law as determined was in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the
European Convention on Human Rights their complaint was upheld by a majority of the judges. The general rule against prejudgments was not considered to be a restriction on the freedom of expression, necessary to a democratic society or to maintain the authority of the judiciary, guaranteed under Article 10 of the European Convention. See
The Sunday Times versus The United Kingdom <case>; [(1979) 2
EHRR 245 (ECHR).] The joint judgment of the majority stated, at 280: "Whilst (the courts) are the forum for the settlement of disputes this does not mean that there can be no prior discussion of disputes elsewhere, be it in specialised journals, in the general press or amongst the public at large. Furthermore, whilst the mass media must not overstep the bounds imposed in the interests of the proper administration of justice, it is incumbent on them to impart information and ideas concerning matters that come before the courts just as in other areas of public interest.
Not only do the media have the task of imparting such information and ideas: the public also has a right to receive them." 
The principle of freedom of expression was held to be subject to a number of exceptions which must be narrowly interpreted. The restriction on prejudgment in that case was held not to fall within such exceptions.
The asserted principle was also criticised as being too vague and too wide by the Phillimore Committee, established to bring the law of contempt into line with the United Kingdom's international obligations. The Contempt of
Court Act 1981 (UK) was enacted, in part, to remedy these inconsistencies and to repair the defect in the law identified by the European Court's decision.
Subsequent case law in England has refrained from applying the pre- judgment principle. The English Court of Appeal, in a case presenting somewhat similar facts, discussed but failed to apply the prejudgment principle. See
Schering Chemicals versus Falkman . Lord Denning MR preferred to distinguish the Sunday Times case believing (at 21): "There is nothing here prejudging the issue or bringing undue pressure on a party to settle."
Shaw LJ, at 30, was of the opinion that: "... the larger question as to the undesirability of presenting simulated trials of the subject matter of pending or prospective litigation ... (is) ... a matter of degree. Where the presentation appears to encroach upon the function and authority of the judicature, the limits of tolerance are clearly exceeded.
In other circumstances the opportunity for free public discussion of topics of general concern should, ... not be unduly curtailed."
Shaw LJ found no challenge or threat to the due administration of justice in the production of "the Primodos Affair". However, it was clear that his
Lordship felt the restriction should be imposed only where the tendency was to interfere in a particular case. Similarly Templeman LJ (at 40) stated that the courts of England should not be ready to restrain discussion on material in a pending action unless it is: "necessarily unseemly or harmful to the administration of justice. EACH CASE MUST BE JUDGED ON ITS OWN MERITS." (emphasis added)
On the facts, the risk of harm must justify the granting of an injunction. Presumably, to warrant punishment for contempt, the case of interference would have to be very strong indeed.
The position of the law on this subject in England has now been further clarified by the House of Lords in In re Lonrho
PLC and Others [(1990) 2 AC 154 ] at 208. After reviewing the decision in the Sunday Times case and the criticisms which had followed, their Lordships concluded: "How far these passages from the speeches of their Lordships may still be relied upon as accurate expressions of the law is extremely doubtful."
The general trend, in England at least, therefore appears to involve a distinct retreat from the prejudgment principle stated in Attorney-General v
Times Newspapers.
In Australia, long before the Sunday Times case was decided, the test to be applied was expressed by the High Court in John Fairfax and Sons Pty Ltd v
McRae <case>; [(1954) 93 CLR 351] at 372. When considering prejudgment a publication must have 'as a matter of practical reality, a tendency to interfere with the due course of justice in a particular case' in order to constitute contempt.
In Ex parte Attorney-General; Re Truth and Sportsman
Ltd [(1961) SR 484], the Full Court of this State attempted to widen the restriction to include any statements suggesting the proper determination of a matter which was before the courts. However, this suggested principle was criticised by Hope JA as being too wide. His Honour believed that the narrower McRae test was preferable. See Attorney-General for New South Wales versus Mundey [(1972) 2 NSWLR (CA)], 901.
In Watts versus Hawke and David Syme and Co Ltd <case>; [(1976) VR 707], Kaye J in the
Supreme Court of Victoria, was faced with the question whether to apply the general McRae test or the more specific rule then recently laid down by the
House of Lords in Sunday Times. His Honour cited both tests with apparent approval. While accepting that there was a general rule against prejudgments, such that a non curial tribunal investigating matters in issue in a pending civil action would be in contempt if its decision took the form of a prejudgment his Honour simultaneously applied the test laid down in
McRae and in Sunday Times. He concluded that the same outcome would result whichever rule was applied. This might not always be so depending on the facts in the case. Kaye J's decision was criticised at the time for departing from the well tested and more stringent
Australian formula in McRae and for moving away from the central concern of contempt law: namely to prevent mischief in a particular case. It was suggested that the decision unnecessarily confused the law of contempt. See eg case note and comment (1977) 51 AU 319.
In spite of these criticisms, Hunt J in Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd v Preston [(1981) 2 NSWLR 554 (SC)] cited with approval the Sunday Times decision of the House of Lords. His Honour stated that he preferred it to the decision of the
European Court of Human Rights. After a detailed discussion of both cases, his Honour stated, at 567: "It is the far-reaching nature of its side effects which makes such a publication objectionable, in that to permit such publications will permit also other ill-informed, slapdash and often prejudiced attempts to argue the case in public, to the detriment of justice.
In particular, unpopular people and unpopular causes will fare very badly if a trial by newspaper is encouraged." 
No one doubts that trial by media is undesirable. It is to be resisted by the law. See eg Her Majesty's Attorney-General for the
State of New South
Wales versus Time Inc Magazine Company Pty Ltd, unreported, Court of Appeal 15
September 1994; (1994) NSWJB 94. However there is a risk in the Sunday Times principle that the focus of the court's attention will not be on whether there has been any actual detriment to the course of justice but on the question of whether poor or offensive journalism should be allowed. Objectionable as some forms of modem media reporting often are, the law of contempt is not established to operate as a form of media censorship or quality control.
Ill-informed and sensationalist reporting is undeniably a feature of much modem media. But, it is only when those elements in modem reporting present a real detriment to, or interference in, the course of justice that the law of contempt legitimately restricts or sanctions such reporting. A general restriction on prejudgments of everything which is, or might be before every court of the land would, in effect, amount to a complete refocussing of the purpose of the law of contempt. it would constitute an extension of that body of law beyond the role which, in Australia, it has hitherto been held to play.
I would not make that extension.
 .
There has been no definitive rule laid down by the High Court of
Australia in relation to the applicability of the Sunday Times case to
Australian law. Several observations about the issue were offered in the BLF case (above). Mason J (at 96) seems to have suggested that, for a contempt to be proved, there must be a serious risk of grave injustice in the particular case. His Honour appeared to doubt that the Sunday Times decision was applicable in Australia. However, Mason J, declined to go further than this.
He limited the decision to its facts, suggesting that the rule was confined to the situation where a prejudgment was designed to influence a party to litigation. Brennan J (at 167), on the other hand, appears to have accepted the general rule as propounded in Sunday Times as a way to protect unpopular people and their causes from calumny and pre trial prejudgment in the media.
This Court is not bound to either approach by a holding of the High Court.
The Australian Law Reform Commission has been critical of the prejudgment principle. At least it has been critical of the opinion that a prejudgment which shows no tendency to interfere with the administration of justice in a particular case should nonetheless be considered a contempt of court. (See
Contempt Australian Law Reform Commission,
ALRC 35, AGPS, Canberra, December at 233). The Commission was not persuaded that the alleged detriment to the administration of justice which might result by occasional prejudgments was sufficiently clearly established to warrant the existence of restrictions on publications where there was no acknowledged risk to the testimony of the participants in the actual proceedings. One criticism voiced was that criminal liability was being imposed by the law of contempt on the alleged contemnor on the basis of extremely vague and uncertain criteria. There are no satisfactory grounds to support a claim that future litigants might refrain from bringing actions because of a fear of press prejudgment. Litigants typically bring their actions for reasons ranging from a desire to assert a cause, to recover in damages, to protect an interest or to search for justice. The influence of the prejudgment will rarely have the slightest bearing on a litigant in such circumstances. There is also an assumption that the media will invariably be biased in their presentation of a case and that people will condemn the court for making a "wrong" decision. However, commentary will often come from more than one perspective. It will frequently increase public interest in the case and stimulate public debate about the issues involved. The result could, at least in many circumstances, be a better informed public. Courts and judges might attract greater respect and understanding for having made a "tough" decision, even if a controversial one.
Another criticism of the general restriction on prejudgment of current litigation is that there is no similar restriction on post-trial judgment by the media. It is difficult to see how pre-trial judgment would affect future litigants more adversely than the fear of post-trial judgment. According to the suggested formulation, it is justifiable to protect the parties, witnesses, jurors, counsel and the trial itself from the undue influence of ill informed or biased debate. However, once a decision has been handed down, discussion by law journals and every form of media to the tabloid press is generally unfettered so far as contempt law is concerned. Yet if prejudgment of issues in a case is forbidden, in order to protect future litigation, it would follow that restriction on post trial commentary would sometimes also be necessary. Such a rule would be an unacceptable intrusion upon freedom of expression.
Of significance in determining what the common law in this country provides is a recognition of Australia's commitment to Article 19 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. Australia is a party to that Convention. Article 19 permits restrictions on the freedom of expression in a signatory state only to the extent that they are necessary (a) for respect of the rights or reputation of others, or (b) for protection of national security or of public order or of public health or morals. The restrictions are thus even narrower than those permitted under European
Convention which, in addition, allows restriction to maintain the authority and impartiality of the judiciary. In light of the European
Court of Human
Rights decision in the Sunday Times case, the adoption of the prejudgment principle in Australia could be in breach of Australia's international obligations. Although such obligations are not binding as part of the law of
Australia, the Convention not having been incorporated into domestic law,on this court, they should certainly be considered when determining the state of the common law when it is necessary to resolve an uncertainty. See Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs versus Teoh <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 423 (HC)], 430, 447.
See also Director of Public Prosecutions versus United Telecasters Sydney Limited (in liquidation) [(1992) 7 BR 364] at 371.
 
Constitutional freedom of speech and prejudgment contempt
This view of the law relating to prejudgments is further supported, although indirectly, by the trend of recent decisions of the High Court of
Australia affecting the constitutional freedom of communication. See
Nationwide News Pty Ltd versus Wills <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 1]; [66 ALJR 695 ]; [124 ALR 80 .] The discussion of such freedom has so far centred on the freedom of communication with regard to political discourse including public affairs and political matters. See eg Theophanous at 11. The freedom has been held to be implied in the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) as a right, fundamental to the effective working of our representative democracy. In Nationwide News, Brennan
J explained, at 47: "To sustain a representative democracy embodying the principles prescribed by the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), freedom of public discussion of political and economic matters is essential (as the European
Court of Human rights recognised in the Observer and the Guardian v United Kingdom <case>; [(1991) 14 EHRR 153] at 178): it would be a parody of democracy to confer on the people a power to choose their
Parliament but to deny the freedom of public discussion from which the people derive their political judgments." 
Or in the words of Mason CJ in Australian Capital
Television at 140: "The fundamental importance, indeed the essentiality of freedom of communication (in relation to public affairs and political discussion) ... in the system of modern representative government has been recognised by Courts in many jurisdictions ... Freedom of communication in the sense just discussed is so indispensable to the efficacy of the system of representative government for which the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) makes provision that it is necessarily implied in the making of that provision." 
See also Deane J in Theophanous, at 57. Cf
Lord Simon of Glaisdale in
Attorney-General versus Times Newspapers, at 315. The freedom, however, is not an absolute one. It is a right which must be balanced against other public interests, in particular prohibitions which are necessary for the proper functioning of an ordered society. See eg Mason CJ in Australian Capital
Television, at 142; Deane and Toohey JJ, at 169. But the freedom does extend to all political matters including matters relating to the three tiers of government, Commonwealth and State. It consequently covers discussion about public bodies. See Mason CJ, Toohey and Gaudron JJ in Theophanous, at 13.
Furthermore, in Theophanous the implied freedom was considered to affect the content not only of statute law but of the common law. In Theophanous, statements made by the then President of the Victorian Returned Services
League and published in a newspaper concerned a member of the Federal
Parliament,
Dr Andrew Theophanous. The comments suggested that Dr Theophanous was biased, an "idiot", and that he stood for things that most
Australians were against. As such, the comments were potentially defamatory of him. They were made in relation to Dr Theophanous' fitness for office. They were clearly directed towards his suitability to his position as a Member of Parliament.
They were given wide currency by the newspaper. But they were made in the course of a public debate concerning immigration policy in which Dr
Theophanous undoubtedly played an important and influential role as Chairman of Parliamentary and Party Committees. A majority of the High Court (Mason CJ,
Deane, Toohey and Gaudron JJ) extended the implied constitutional freedom to communicate and discuss political matters to protect such published comments from the application of State defamation laws upon which Dr Theophanous had sued. Their Honours observed, at 15, that if "the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), expressly or by implication, is at variance with a doctrine of the common law, the latter must yield to the former".
Of fundamental importance is the balancing of interests in ascertaining whether impugned legislation or common laws doctrines will continue to apply with the effect of curtailing discussion or whether the implied constitutional freedom will apply to override such legislation and laws. Where the criticisms pertain to elected public officials and relate to how they carry out their duties and their fitness for office this will often, although not always, outweigh that public figure's concern to protect his or her reputation. If the defamatory statements affect matters irrelevant to public discussion of political affairs, or if the office of the public figure was not greatly influential, then the freedom might not apply. Dr Theophanous was considered to be part of the former group. Thus the implied freedom applied. It did so by force of the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).
Deane J, in Theophanous, at 62, made some comments concerning the impact of the implied constitutional freedom on the law of contempt. He stated: "... I would make clear that nothing in this judgment should be understood as suggesting that the traditional powers of the
Parliament and superior courts to entertain proceedings for contempt are not justifiable in the public interest. In that regard, it is important to remember that, while the distinction is not always as clear as it should be, the justification of proceedings for contempt of court or parliament lies not in the protection of the reputation of the individual judge or parliamentarian but in the need to ensure that parliaments and courts are able effectively to discharge the functions, duties, and powers entrusted to them by the people." 
See also Dawson J, ibid, at 66; Australian Capital Television per
Mason CJ, at 142 and Brennan J, at 159 and John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd v
Doe Court of Appeal unreported, June 1995, 39. I do not suggest that the implied constitutional freedom, upheld by the High Court in the foregoing decisions, narrows or extends the general law of contempt. However, the High
Court's discussion lends considerable weight to the comments which
I have made concerning the inappropriateness of so called prejudgment contempt. It is doubtful that the prejudgment principle is essential to the protection of the capacity of courts effectively to discharge their functions. In light of the recognition of the implied constitutional freedom of communication, and the observations of the Justices of the High Court with regard to the importance of public discussion of political and other affairs for the efficacy of a representative democracy, I suggest that it is not. It is difficult to justify the maintenance of a body of contempt law which condemns prejudgment on the doubtful basis of it being in the public interest to do so, when the effect of such a curtailment is to stifle the very public comment generally on matters of public concern which is now upheld by constitutional principles essential to the furtherance of those interests in our society. The law should strive to avoid such inconsistencies.
 
Conclusions: no substantial risk of interference is proved
I would reject the suggested separate rule against pre-trial prejudgments should in my view be rejected as part of the common law in this jurisdiction.
The law of contempt exists to protect the administration of justice. A general rule prohibiting public comment suggesting a conclusion to a case or prejudging issues before a coroner, magistrate or judge is an unacceptable infringement on the freedom of expression.
It constitutes an unjustifiable enlargement of the law of contempt. If the administration of justice is protected in each particular case this is sufficient. To go beyond such protection is to enter the realms of conjecture and uncertainty. This is unjustifiable.
It is the very nature of the matters which come before our courts that they will often involve issues of the highest public importance and the most intense public interest. The public interest in discussing matters which are before the courts is also of great importance to our freedoms. Where discussion of such matters, even extending to speculation on the proper outcome of a case or a suggestion as to its proper conclusion, fails to impinge on the particular case, no contempt has been committed. Our citizens can readily distinguish between media opinions and journalists' "angles" on the one hand, and the solemn decisions of those in the courts who have the responsibility of decision-making based on all the evidence and full argument, on the other.
The circumstances of the present case may be considered in light of this approach. There is no doubt that the broadcast here in question was made with an "angle" That "angle" was undoubtedly designed by the reporter to lay the blame for the Young aircrash at the door of the claimant. At the same time, there were other issues canvassed in the programme. In particular, there was detailed discussion of the undoubtedly important public issues of air safety and the economic deregulation of the airline industry. With the general trend towards privatisation in many areas of the public sector in Australia, the public airing of the problems said to arise, problems which are not always apparent at first glance, was extremely important and useful. It was in the interests of the Australian community that it should take place. It is part of the function of the media, and particularly of the opponents as the national broadcaster, to challenge accepted or dominant ways of thinking by exposing inefficiencies, doubting accepted wisdom and presenting for consideration various alternatives.
 .
Much of the motivation for producing the instant programme would appear to have been to do just that in relation to the corporatisation of the claimant. Yet whatever the merits might be in reporting such issues, the overwhelming impression given by the particular programme was, nonetheless, that the claimant was principally to blame for the Young air disaster. The charge was expressly stated at the end of the broadcast. The implication was that all the material canvassed led to this undeniable finding of responsibility in the claimant.
Some of the claims made by those interviewed were clearly in line with this conclusion. Many matters, raised beforehand, suggesting other possible causes, such as bad weather, human error and
Monarch's impecunity, were eventually passed over. The reporter's "angle" dominated the overall impression left by the programme. The listening public were not really favoured with the privilege of reaching their own conclusion.
The result was a piece of journalism clearly biased and somewhat sensationalist. Objectionable as this might be to those who value free speech and truly informed public opinion, the law of contempt is not the cure. It is part of the criminal law in the broad sense. It is confined to preventing an actual mischief to the administration of justice. The inquest before the
Coroner in question here is not a proceeding which could be easily influenced.
The Coroner and witnesses are almost wholly free from the likelihood of influence. Possibly, the broadcast added marginally to the general pressure on the claimant to admit to supposed faults and inefficiencies in their regulation of air safety. But it is difficult to imagine how, realistically, the broadcast could interfere with any stance which the claimant might take before the inquest. It does not appear as a party before the Coroner. None of its members have been threatened or intimidated. The situation might be different had there been a jury summoned in the inquest.
However, no jury had been called when the matter was before this Court. That consideration can therefore be put to one side in this case.
During the hearing in this Court, there was a suggestion that the opponent endeavoured to trick the spokesman for the claimant Mr George
Macionis, into recording an interview by falsely stating that the aim of the broadcast was to discuss the reorganisation of the directorate of the claimant. There is some evidence to suggest that the opponent's reporter did claim this to be the principal object of the programme. However, there is nothing to indicate this was ever going to be the only focus of the interview.
Before the Court is a collection of newspaper and magazine clippings associated with the accident at Young, the position of the claimant and air safety generally. By reference to these concerns expressed in the broadcast were not particularly new. Mr Macionis must have been fully aware of the public interest which had already arisen as a direct result of the Young air crash. Part of the reason for the continued debate about the reorganisation of the claimant appears to have arisen from what happened at Young. It was therefore clearly predictable that at least some reference would be made to the accident in any interview which he gave. Mr Macionis may have been ill prepared. The reporter might have been less than frank. However, this hardly justifies a claim that Mr Macionis was entrapped in a conspiracy to interfere with the inquest at Young. To the extent that the claimant suggested as much,
I would reject the suggestion.
The abundance of the media material surrounding the accident diminishes even further any potential risk to the administration of justice occasioned by the broadcast complained of. Put in context, that broadcast was only part of an extremely widespread and wholly understandable public discussion of an unfortunate accident and its impact on the future of air safety in this country. The chance of interference with the administration of justice remains merely an unsubstantiated possibility. Certainly, no significant risk of interference has been proved beyond reasonable doubt. By our law, that is necessary to make out the complaint of contempt charged.
Order 
I would dismiss the summons with costs.
JUDGE2
HANDLEY JA These proceedings for alleged contempt of court arise out of a program broadcast by the ABC over Radio National on Sunday, 3 April 1994 at am and again on Tuesday 5 April at 7.15pm.
Both broadcasts could be heard across the State. The program related to the crash of a Piper Navajo aircraft
VHNDU operated by Monarch
Airlines as it approached Young Airport on 11 June killing all seven on board.
The program is sufficiently described in the reasons for judgment of Kirby
P which I have had the advantage of reading. It lasted for approximately forty minutes. Shortly before the end of the program the reporter said:- "The specific causes of the crash will be analysed and determined by the
Bureau of Air Safety and the Coroner but there is no doubt that they will lay most of the blame on a company that operated outside the law and an air safety regulator which knew about the breaches and didn't stop them."
On 4 November 1993 the
State Coroner notified an inquest into the deaths by notice under the [Coroner's Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/). The proceedings were mentioned before the relevant Coroner on 15 December when the hearing was fixed for two weeks commencing on August 1994. The proceedings were again mentioned on 17
February. It was common ground that the Civil Aviation Authority (the
Authority) had been given leave to appear at the inquest pursuant to <case> of the Act.
The alleged contempts related to the proceedings in the Coroner's Court which were pending when the broadcasts occurred. Although further proceedings, civil and criminal, were then foreseeable, there was no evidence that any had been commenced. James versus Robinson <case>; [(1963) 109 CLR 593] establishes that conduct which interferes with the proper administration of justice in particular proceedings is not punishable as a contempt if those proceedings had not been commenced. Senior counsel for the Authority made a formal submission that this case was wrongly decided but did not attempt to develop that submission.
The ABC contended that the [Civil Aviation Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/caa1988154/), which established the
Authority, did not confer on it any power to take proceedings for contempt of court and that even if it did have that power it had no relevant interest in the present case and was acting as a mere busybody. However the Coroner had earlier considered that it had an interest which warranted the grant of leave to appear. It therefore had an interest in protecting the due course of justice in the inquest from unlawful interference. I agree therefore with
Kirby P that the ABC's preliminary objections should be overruled and I do not wish to add to his Honour's reasons for those conclusions.
Proceedings in the Coroner's Court are protected by the law of contempt.
See A G versus Mirror Newspapers [(1980) 1 NSWLR 374.] at 640,641 and A G versus BBC [(1981) AC 303] at 338, 342, 349.
The test for determining whether a publication is a contempt of court was stated in A G versus TCN Channel 9 Pty
Ltd [(1990) 20 NSWLR 369] at 379 as follows:- "... the publication of material in circumstances where the clear tendency of the publication is, as a matter of practical reality, to interfere with the due course of justice in a particular case, constitutes the crime of contempt of court."
It is not necessary to reexamine the High Court decisions which have established this test. The Authority contended that the broadcasts had a clear tendency to interfere with the course of justice in the pending inquest because of their likely effect on the Coroner or the witnesses. It also contended that they were contempts because they involved a public prejudgment of the result of the inquest regardless of any effect they were likely to have on the coroner or the witnesses.
 
THE CORONER .
The State Coroner and any Deputy State Coroners must be magistrates and thus legally qualified. See [Coroner's Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/) [s 4A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/s4a.html) and [Local Courts Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lca1982149/) [s 12.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lca1982149/s12.html) However other coroners need only be "fit and proper persons" [(s 5(1))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lca1982149/s5.html) and may be medical practitioners [(s 26).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lca1982149/s26.html) This inquest was mentioned on 14
February before Coroner P D Gould who is a Magistrate and at the time of the broadcasts it was likely that he would conduct the inquest. There is no need therefore to consider what the position may have been if the particular coroner had not been a professional magistrate.
The courts have held that media publications are not likely to improperly influence professional judges. See Victoria versus BLF <case>; [(1982) 152 CLR 25] at 58, -102, 119 and 136 and the cases there cited. See also R versus Duffy Ex parte
Nash [(1960) 2 QB 188] at 704 (McHugh JA) and Waterhouse versus ABC (1986) 6 NSWLR 733 at 734 (Glass JA). These principles apply to professional magistrates.
(See A G versus John Fairfax (above) at 709, Waterhouse versus ABC (above) at 734, Waterhouse versus ABC <case>; [(1986) 61 ALJR 24] at ) and to such a magistrate when acting as a coroner. (See AG versus Mirror
Newspapers (above) at 387).
When the broadcasts took place the hearing of the inquest was still some four months away. Independently of authority I would have held that a professional magistrate hearing an inquest expected to last at least two weeks would not be influenced by listening to a broadcast lasting forty minutes some four months earlier. It follows that the Authority failed to establish "as a matter of practical reality" that these broadcasts had a clear tendency to interfere with the due course of justice by influencing the coroner.
The position in the case of a sustained media campaign conducted over a long period in an apparent attempt to influence judges may raise different considerations which can be considered if and when the occasion arises.
 
THE WITNESSES
The second basis relied upon to establish that the broadcasts had the necessary tendency was what was said to be their likely effect on actual or potential witnesses. The witnesses interviewed in the program able to give evidence relating to the causes of the crash and the events within Monarch and the Authority beforehand were Mr Sergeant from the Bureau of Air Safety and Mr
Nigel Clarke. Mr Clarke was an independent engineer who had inspected the plane twelve days before the crash.
Mr Sergeant who was appointed within the Bureau to investigate the crash made extensive notes in the course of his investigations. His statement for the Coroner is dated 18 August 1993. Mr Clarke also made extensive notes soon after the accident prior to being interviewed by an officer from the Bureau.
His record of interview for the Coroner is dated June 1993.
The publication of detailed statements in these broadcasts goes well beyond publication of "the bare facts" which the High Court said in Packer v
Peacock <case>; [(1912) 13 CLR 577] at 588 was always permissible. The Court said that "alleged facts depending on the testimony of some particular person which may or may not be true" were in a different category where "other considerations" arose (588). It said that publication for example "of the proofs of the plaintiff's witnesses" before the trial of an action for fraud would be "obviously unjustifiable" (590). However at that time such an action would almost certainly have been heard by a jury and those statements are not necessarily applicable to proceedings to be heard without a jury.
No such question arises in relation to Bell versus Stewart (1920) 28 CLR 419 where the primary proceedings were pending in the Commonwealth Court of
Conciliation and Arbitration. The charge of contempt of that court had been heard by a magistrate and the case had then gone on appeal. The publication complained of in "The Argus" included statements attributed to an unnamed persons relating to an issue in the arbitration proceedings. Isaacs and Rich
JJ said at 434:- "...
how can it be doubted that (the article) had a 'tendency' to weigh with ... witnesses who might be called to state their opinion on the subject. Witnesses for the employer might easily find themselves more emphatic than they otherwise would have been. Witnesses for the employees might as easily hesitate to state their views as confidently as they otherwise would.

Intending witnesses might be deterred altogether. Whether it would happen we cannot tell; it might reasonably occur, and that determines the 'tendency'."
The publication of a purported verbatim statement by an eye witness to an affray was held to be a contempt in Ex parte Kear (1954) 54 SR 95 because of its possible effect on other witnesses, quite apart from any possible effect on a future jury. In reaching this conclusion the Full Court relied on the "elementary rule in collecting evidence for use in court proceedings that a proof of a witness is never taken in the presence of another witness" (99).
After citing the passage from Bell versus Stewart quoted above this Court in
Attorney General versus Mirror Newspapers said at 387:- "... the publication of statements, by persons likely to be called as witnesses, about the matters in respect of which they will be likely to give evidence is, subject to the de minimis rule, undoubtedly contempt. This is so for the reasons discussed by Isaacs and Rich JJ ... "
These principles were applied and a finding of contempt made in in A G v
Mirror Newspapers (above) at 387-389. During the inquest into the death of seven persons in the fire in the ghost train at Luna Park a witness gave evidence implicating the attendant on duty. The next day the defendant published on the front page of "The Daily Telegraph" an account of that evidence together with a detailed rebuttal by the attendant. The Court rejected as irrelevant the fact that the published statement did not "vary much" from that earlier taken by the police. At 389 it said:- "... the probability, or fact, that a prospective witness has already made statements to persons concerned with the conduct of the proceedings, and the fact that a statement published to the world does not differ at all, or does not differ much, from a statement not published to the world, does not provide any answer to the charge. The effect of such a published statement on a person in the position of (the attendant) may be less than if he had not made a statement to the police but it could still be significant. It could make him more adamant in keeping to what he had said, and less likely to agree to departures from it, even though they were the truth. The effect of the published statement on other witnesses could be more significant, even if they had already made statements to the police. We do not think that these are matters of remote possibility; as a matter of practical reality, the publication might well have these results."
The effect that publishing statements by some witnesses might have on others was also considered in the BLF contempt case. The Full Federal Court held that continued public hearings by a Royal Commission into the conduct of the union was a contempt of that court because of its tendency to prejudice the hearing of deregistration proceedings against the union. This conclusion was based in part upon the effect that the Royal Commission might have on potential witnesses in the proceedings. The passage from the judgment of
Isaacs and Rich JJ in Bell versus Stewart previously referred to was applied. See
BLF versus The Commonwealth <case>; [(1981) 53 FLR 396] at 401, 404. An injunction was granted to restrain the Royal Commission from conducting further public hearings. This decision was reversed. See Victoria versus BLF <case>; [(1982) 152 CLR 25.]
The High Court considered at some length the effect that continued public hearings by the Royal Commission would be likely to have on potential witnesses in the Federal Court. Mason J said at 103-104:- "In applying the test of substantial risk of serious prejudice one important factor to be taken into account is that the litigation is civil, not criminal, and that it is to be heard by three judges, not by a jury. Furthermore it is litigation of an unusual and complex kind. The reaction of the reading public to a newspaper report of an interview with a witness to a murder of which Smith has been accused will be 'That is very damaging evidence. Smith must be guilty'. But the reaction of the reading public to a newspaper report of proceedings before the Royal
Commission will probably be unrelated to deregistration. Maybe the reader will think ... 'the Federation ... has been guilty of misconduct'. But will he be aware that a deregistration case is pending and will he have any knowledge of what are the issues in that case? ... The public reaction will lack immediacy and direct relationship with the civil litigation that is such a vital element in the public reaction to a newspaper report concerning a criminal offence".
 
Wilson J said at 136-137:- "It may be that the publication of material which tends to affect the attitude of witnesses and so influence their evidence will constitute a contempt ... But the tendency must be established. ... That has not been done in the present case.
The argument to the contrary is pure speculation. In the first place one cannot be sure of the content and degree of coverage by the media that will occur should the Commissioner continue to sit in public. In the second place ... what is news today is no longer news tomorrow. In the third place there are no particular persons ... liable to be affected by the publicity that may occur and hence no sufficient basis on which to evaluate the contention. Finally there is the absence of any contemporaneity between the publication that is likely to occur and the hearing and determination of the deregistration proceedings ... There can be no question of trial by newspaper in the mere reporting in a fair and accurate manner of the evidence which is given in the inquiry. Such reporting does not involve a canvassing or evaluation of the evidence ... the concept of a trial implies a judgment or conclusion as the outcome of the process, whereas here there is no public determination of anything. The Commissioner hears evidence and reports privately ... to the Governor General or Governor..."
See also at 58-59, 100, 119 and 131-2. The differences between that case and the present are considerable. This Court is concerned with an actual broadcast and not merely with possible future media publicity, the broadcast involved a trial by media, it was likely to be of great interest to those directly concerned, and it canvassed the very issues that would arise in the inquest which was only four months away.
Such questions have also been considered in England but the courts there have been reluctant to interfere on this ground where civil proceedings have been involved. See Vine Products versus Green [(1966) Ch 484] at 496-7 (passing off case - trade witnesses involved - no "real and grave risk") and Schering
Chemicals versus Falkman [(1982) QB 1] at 14 ("no element whatever of trial by television"), 20-21, 29-30 (deterrence of potential witnesses "insubstantial objection").
However as Templeman LJ noted at 40 the primary proceedings based on product liability would "involve a battle dominated by medical experts and statisticians". Such witnesses were not likely to be influenced by the program. The present case on the facts is far removed from both Vine Products v Green and Schering Chemicals versus Falkman. Both cases in my opinion could fairly be seen as within the "de minimis" exception referred to in AG versus Mirror
Newspapers at 387.
In each case the Court must apply the basic test and ask itself whether it is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the publication has "a clear tendency as a matter of practical reality" to interfere with the due course of justice. This question cannot be determined by findings of fact made in earlier reported cases. On this basis I am not satisfied that the broadcasts had any such tendency to affect the evidence that might be given at the inquest by Mr Sergeant or Mr Clarke. The relatives interviewed in the program who had been waiting at Young Airport could only speak of "the bare facts" of the crash and in this respect also the program could not be a contempt.
There remains for consideration the effect of the broadcast on employees on Monarch and officers of the Authority not interviewed in the program who had been concerned in the licensing and maintenance of the aircraft in the weeks immediately before the crash. It seems to me that the program as a whole, and particularly the reporter's conclusions quoted at the beginning of this judgment might well deter such witnesses from coming forward and influence the content of their evidence if they were called. If they listened to the program they could be pardoned for thinking that there were open and shut cases against both Monarch and the Authority in relation to the crash.
The transient effect of a broadcast on strangers has been recognised judicially. See Hinch versus AG [(1987) 164 CLR 25] at 31 per Mason CJ. However there is no reason for thinking that these broadcasts would have a transient effect on interested listeners with some knowledge of the facts. There was no evidence that the ABC took special measures to publicise the program but the second broadcast took place nearly three days after the first. Interested persons, including potential witnesses from Monarch and the Authority who missed the first broadcast may well have heard about it in time to listen to the second. The news that the program would be broadcast a second time could have been passed around within the Authority and within the civil aviation industry where former employees of
Monarch were likely to be employed.
It seems to me therefore in the words of Isaacs and Rich JJ in Bell v
Stewart that this "might reasonably occur" and in the words of this Court in
Mirror Newspapers "as a matter of practical reality" the program "might well have these results". See also Borrie and Lowe's "Law of Contempt" 2nd Ed 1983 at 106-108 and Sharpe versus Goodhew [(1989) 90 ALR 221] at 239241. In my opinion for these reasons the programs had the clear tendency, as a matter of practical reality, to interfere with the due course of justice in this case.
The public, of course, are vitally concerned with air safety and the crash and its possible causes, including incompetent or ineffective enforcement of the licensing and air safety regulations were legitimate subjects for public discussion. There was therefore considerable scope for the application of the Bread Manufacturers principle. The evidence of articles published in the print media before the broadcasts dealing with the crash and its implications showed that a vigorous discussion of these matters had been proceeding for some time. There was no suggestion, nor could there be, that any of these articles were contempts of court. Clearly, the discussion in the print media was protected by the Bread Manufacturers principle.
However, the articles in the print media, unlike these broadcasts, did not contain details of the evidence to be given by key witnesses in the pending inquest and did not express a confident opinion as to its outcome. It is evident that a vigorous public discussion can take place of the kind protected by Bread Manufacturers without the need for the undesirable features included in these broadcasts which, in my view, brought them within the principles established in AG versus Mirror Newspapers and involved a contempt of court.
 .
In my opinion, those parts of these broadcasts which rehearsed the evidence of Mr Sergeant and Mr Clarke and contained a prejudgment of the result of the inquest were not incidental features and their likely effects could not be said to have been unintended within the Bread Manufacturers principle. Those responsible were aware of the pending inquest and of the probable importance of the evidence of those witnesses.
 
A POSSIBLE JURY
An inquest is normally held by a coroner without a jury (s 18(1)).
However certain persons including "a relative" of a deceased, or a union to which a deceased belonged can request a jury (s 18(2)). Such a request may only be made as of right fourteen days or more before "the commencement of the inquest" (s 18(2A)(a)). I take it that this inquest was due to commence on 1
August 1994, the date fixed for the start of the hearing. A qualified applicant was entitled to require the inquest to be held with a jury until a date in mid July more than three months after the last broadcast took place.
The question of contempt or not must be determined as at the date of the broadcasts. See Ex parte Auld <case>; [(1936) 36 SR 596] at 382-3, A G versus Time Inc (Court of Appeal, unreported, 15/9/94, at 4). At that time it was not known whether the Pilots'
Union or any of the relatives would request a jury. I believe that inquests in this State are now normally, if not invariably, held without a jury but I have no direct knowledge of this and we were not furnished with relevant statistics. I would be reluctant to find that the broadcasts were contempts solely because of their prejudicial effect on potential jurors at an inquest when there was no evidence that a jury had been or was likely to be requested.
At the same time I do not think the Court can altogether ignore the possibility at the date of these broadcasts that a jury would later be requested. It seems to me that it is a factor which may be taken into account with other relevant factors in considering whether the broadcasts had the tendency which attracts criminal responsibility.
 
THE INQUEST
Counsel for the ABC contended that an inquest was not comparable to ordinary commercial or civil proceedings because it would not affect the rights of any parties. He relied upon Annetts versus McCann [(1990) 170 CLR 597] and especially the dissenting judgment of Toohey J at 616-617 as establishing that at an inquest there are no parties, and there is no trial but simply an attempt by an inquisatorial process to establish the facts without apportioning guilt. While this may be true it is not the whole truth. As
Brennan J said in the same case at 612:- "The finding in an inquest into a death is naturally likely to deal with the conduct of the deceased leading to death."
Similarly in the present case a finding as to the cause of the death of the persons on board is likely to deal with the conduct of the airline, the pilot, and the Authority leading to those deaths. Accordingly, as the High
Court unanimously decided in Annetts versus McCann persons entitled to appear at an inquest, whether as of right, or following a grant of leave, are entitled to be heard before the Coroner makes any finding adverse to their interests.
See per Mason CJ, Deane and McHugh JJ at 599, 600-601. At 608 Brennan J said:- "... a coroner's finding as to 'how, when and where the deceased came by his death' is plainly apt to affect adversely the interests of any person upon whom the finding would reflect unfavourably, even if ... the finding is not framed in such a way as to appear to determine any question of civil liability or guilt of an offence."
The narrow view of the functions of a coroner currently taken in England as reflected in the decision of the Court of Appeal in Reg versus N Humberside
Coroner Ex parte Jamieson [(1994) 3 WLR 82] is contrary to Annetts versus McCann and to AG versus Mirror Newspapers (above) at 381-386 and does not reflect the law in this country. Compare [(1994) 110 LQR 536.] Moreover the [Coroner's Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/) was amended with effect from 1 February 1994 to insert [s 22A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ca1980120/s22a.html) which, so far as relevant, provides:- "(1) A coroner ... may make such recommendations as (he) ...
considers necessary or desirable ... in relation to any matter connected with the death ...

Public health and safety are examples of matters that can be the subject of a recommendation. A recommendation that a matter be investigated or reviewed by a specified person or body is an example of a recommendation that can be made.

The record ... is to include any recommendations made by the coroner... "
In these circumstances it is clear that the nature of an inquest and the functions of a coroner in this
State do not provide any basis for finding that the broadcasts could not constitute contempts of court.
 
PUBLIC PRE-JUDGMENT .
Public pre-judgment by the media is an element in many of the well established grounds for a finding of contempt. Compare DPP v
ABC [(1987) 7
NSWLR 588] at -58, 59, 74, 96, 97, 98-9, 100, 137, and 167. Although AG versus Times Newspapers [(1974) AC 273] may be authority for a general proposition that any media pre-judgment of a pending case is a contempt, the pre-judgment in that case was part of a media campaign to put pressure on a litigant. Australian courts have not, so far at least, accepted any such general principle. National
Mutual versus General Television [(1988) 62 ALJR 553] and Victoria versus BLF. At 57-8
Gibbs CJ said:- "The position may be different if the publication exposes the litigant to public and prejudicial discussion of the merits of the facts of his case while it is still pending ... but since that is not so in the present case ... I need not consider that question."
Similarly at 97 Mason J, after referring to AG versus Times Newspapers said:- "I see no reason for giving a general operation to a rule which was specifically fashioned to deal with the peculiar problem in that case ... posed by press pre-judgment designed to bring pressure to bear on a litigant to compromise claims brought against it."
There has been no suggestion in this case that the broadcasts were made with an intention of bringing pressure to bear on the Authority in relation to the proceedings in the Coroner's Court. Since I have found that the pre-judgment in the broadcasts was a contempt because of their tendency to affect potential witnesses there is no need for me to further consider the supposed general rule.
 
IMPLIED CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO FREE SPEECH
The ABC did not contend that the broadcasts were protected by the implied freedom of expression in the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) recognised in
Nationwide News versus Wills <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 1.] However Kirby P has considered this question and I will therefore make some brief comments.
The judgments in Nationwide News v Wills contain a number of references to the common law governing contempt of court without any suggestion that it infringed the implied constitutional freedom. See at 31, 33, 34, 38, 98 and -105. In AG versus Time Inc (the backpacker photograph case) (CA, 15/9/94 unreported) the defendant relied on the implied constitutional freedom as an answer to the charge of contempt but the defence was rejected. Gleeson CJ said at 10-11:- "It was argued on behalf of the opponents that, if the relevant principles were as they have hitherto been supposed to be, they would contravene an implied right of freedom of communication or expression that is established by the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) (cf Nationwide News versus Wills <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 1).]
The common law principles ... are ... the result of a balancing of competing interests; the public interest in freedom of expression and the public interest in the administration of justice. Freedom of expression is not unconditional. Expression can, for legally relevant purposes, be free even though it is subject to other legitimate interests ... It is perfectly legitimate for the opponents to seek profit from providing information and entertainment to the readers of their magazine.
But they have no right, under the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), or at common law, to do so at the expense of the due adminsitration of justice."
The High Court refused special leave ((1995) [4 Leg Rep SL2] 17/2/95). In these circumstances the proper conclusion in my opinion is that the ABC has no constitutional protection against these charges.
 
CONCLUSION
I would make a declaration that the ABC committed contempts of court in making the relevant broadcasts, and adjourn the case to a date to be fixed for consideration of the question of penalty.
JUDGE3
SHELLER JA By summons filed on 15
April 1994 the claimant, Civil Aviation
Authority, sought an order that the opponent, Australian Broadcasting
Corporation, be found guilty of contempt of court for broadcasting material which had a tendency to interfere with the administration of justice in New
South Wales in connection with a coronial inquiry of which notification had been given on 4 November 1993 to be held in the two weeks commencing on 1
August 1994. The inquiry was into the deaths of seven persons as the result of the crash near Young airport on 11
June 1993 of an aircraft operated by
Monarch Airlines Limited.
I have had the benefit of reading the judgments prepared by
Kirby P and
Handley JA. I agree, for the reasons given by the President, that the claimant was able to bring these proceedings and had standing to do so and that the publication of material which would constitute criminal contempt in respect of proceedings pending in a court would constitute contempt in connection with proceedings before a coroner.
The opponent broadcast the material complained of at 9 am on 3 April and at 7.15 pm on 5 April 1994 on Radio National. The broadcast lasted for about forty minutes. The Court heard the broadcast the contents of which the
President has outlined. It was introduced by a statement that the aircraft was on a regular passenger transport flight operating under the highest level of safety regulation, "but when it hit a hill two kilometres south east of the runway it was flying outside the law." The reporter said that it was well documented that the aircraft was flying without important instruments and known that the claimant had been warned that the airline was in financial strife ".... in today's show we reveal the Authority not only knew Monarch was insolvent but they also knew it was unsafe."
Relatives of those killed, Mr
Barry Sergeant, who "for the last nine months...... had led the Bureau of Air Safety's investigation", Mr Nigel
Clark, a licensed engineer, "called in by Monarch to inspect the plane twelve days before the crash" and other people were interviewed. Towards the end of the broadcast the reporter said: "The specific causes of the crash will be analysed and determined by the Bureau of Air Safety and the coroner but there is no doubt that they will lay most of the blame on a company that operated outside the law and an air safety regulator which knew about the breaches and did not stop them.

There are a number of people, particular families of those who were killed in the Young crash, who believe that the CAA is directly responsible for the crash and for the death of those seven people. How do you respond to that?" 
CONTEMPT
The general rule is that the publication of material in circumstances when the clear tendency of the publication is, as a matter of practical reality, to interfere with the due course of justice in a particular case, constitutes the crime of contempt of court. "The reference to 'practical reality' is made because the nature and circumstances of the publication must be such that it could be plainly discerned that there is a real or definite possibility that it may prejudice the administration of justice"; Attorney General versus TCN
Channel Nine Pty Limited [(1990) 20 NSWLR 369] at 379. The importance of this settled test is that it emphasises that the circumstances of each case must be examined to determine whether there is a real or definite possibility that the matter complained of will interfere with the due course of justice. Each case must be judged on its 'own merits: Schering Chemicals Limited versus Falkman
Limited [(1982) QB 1] at 209. An obvious distinction exists between proceedings pending or continuing before a jury or non professional person and proceedings before a professional judicial officer, such as a judge or magistrate. There is no rule of law, certainly in Australia, that all cases of media prejudgment or the publication of statements by potential witnesses amount to contempt. In each case the critical question is whether such actions have produced a real or definite possibility that pending proceedings will be prejudiced or embarrassed;
John Fairfax and Sons Pty Limited versus McRae <case>; [(1955) 93
CLR 351] at 581-2, Griffith CJ spoke of the jurisdiction which every superior court possesses to protect itself from any action tending to impair its capacity to administer impartial justice. "Such action is called contempt of Court, and it must be action affecting the Court itself. Punishment for such contempt, however, is not inflicted in order to vindicate the affronted dignity of the members of the Court, whether Judges or jurymen, but in the interests of the public in general, and in particular of suitors, whose right to obtain a hearing of their suit free from prejudice or bias might otherwise be imperilled."
In the hallowed words of Wills J in R versus Parke [(1903) 2 KB 432] at 436-7: "The reason why the publication of articles like those with which we have to deal is treated as a contempt of
Court is because their tendency and sometimes their object is to deprive the Court of the power of doing that which is the end for which it exists - namely, to administer justice duly, impartially, and with reference solely to the facts judicially brought before it. Their tendency is to reduce the Court which has to try the case to impotence, so far as the effectual elimination of prejudice and prepossession is concerned. It is difficult to conceive an apter description of such conduct than is conveyed by the expression 'contempt of Court'."
However a balance must be struck between the public interest in the due administration of justice and the public interest in the right of citizens freely to express themselves about public affairs.
In Ex parte Bread
Manufacturers Limited, re Truth and Sportsman Limited <case>; [(1937) 37 SR 242] at 249 Jordan CJ said: "The discussion of public affairs and the denunciation of public abuses, actual or supposed, cannot be required to be suspended merely because the discussion or the denunciation may, as an incidental but not intended by-product, cause some likelihood of prejudice to a person who happens at the time to be a litigant." 
TRIAL BY MEDIA
The claimant submitted that the broadcast created an atmosphere of prejudice which could affect the hearing of the inquest and asserted guilt on the basis of statements which might or might not be true or admissible in evidence. The broadcast amounted to trial by the media.
The House of Lords in
Attorney General versus Times Newspapers Limited [(1974) AC 273] held that it was contempt of court to publish material which prejudged the issue of pending litigation or was likely to cause public prejudgment of that issue. At 300
Lord Reid said: "There has long been and there still is in this country a strong and generally held feeling that trial by newspaper is wrong and should be prevented....... What I think is regarded as most objectionable is that a newspaper or television program should seek to persuade the public, by discussing the issues and evidence in a case before the court, whether civil or criminal that one side is right and the other wrong."
In Victoria versus Australia Building
Construction Employers and Builders
Labourers Federation <case>; [(1982) 152 CLR 25] at 167 Brennan J said: "What is proscribed is the public prejudging of a case or of the issues in it, whether or not the public discussion of the case or the issues is likely to affect the judge before whom the case will come for determination.
His function is not to be usurped by a public prejudgment. I would adopt with respect that passage in Lord Reid's speech in the Times Newspaper case where he saw that, if any other view were taken, unpopular people and unpopular causes will fare very badly'." ((1974) AC at 300) 
However at 96 Mason J observed: "Although in Times Newspapers the House of Lords came down in favour of an absolute prohibition against press pre-judgment designed to bring pressure to bear on a litigant to compromise proceedings, in preference to a 'balancing' test or a defence of public benefit, there has been no suggestion that a similar prohibition is the appropriate criterion in this case. Of course, the European Court of Human Rights, working from a different foundation, adopted another approach to the question, deciding that the paramount principle of freedom of expression must prevail except in the fact of a 'pressing social need' (The
Sunday Times versus United Kingdom <case>; [(1979) 2 EHRR 245] at 275). It was this decision and the United Kingdom's obligation to comply with its international obligations that induced
Lord Scarman to say, in the context of reforming the law: '.... the prior restraint of publication, though occasionally necessary in serious cases, is a drastic interference with freedom of speech and should only be ordered where there is a substantial risk of grave injustice.' (Attorney General versus British Broadcasting Corporation [(1981) AC ] at 362)."
During the broadcast the opponent and other people exercised their liberty to discuss a matter of considerable public interest and to denounce a supposed public abuse. At times they may have used emotional or extravagant language. The discussion led to an expressed conclusion adverse to the claimant. But as Gibbs CJ said in the BLF case at 57 "the fact that the public may form an adverse opinion of one of the parties to litigation does not in my opinion mean that there has been an interference with the due administration of justice, when the public as such plays no part in that administration"
Whatever may be the effect of published prejudgment in other cases and particularly cases where a jury is about to or is in the course of trying a matter or where the prejudgment is directed to compelling a person to act in a particular way, I am not satisfied that to the extent that the broadcasts involved prejudgment they amounted to contempt of court. I reject this basis for the claim.
 
EFFECT ON THE CORONER
The claimant submitted that the broadcast might subject the coroner to subconscious pressure; Bell versus Stewart (1920) 28 CLR 419 at 433 where Isaacs and Rich
JJ spoke of the right of the parties to have the judgment of the arbitrator in that case unswayed irregularly by newspaper or other outside comments. I think that the public can confidently accept that professional judicial officers, such as the coroner, would not be influenced by material not in evidence or opinions such as those expressed in these broadcasts;
Schering Chemicals Limited v Falkman Limited at 29. As Gibbs CJ observed in the BLF case at 58 it is the everyday task of a judge to put out of mind evidence of the most prejudicial kind that the judge has heard and rejected as inadmissible. I reject this basis for the claim.
 
EFFECT ON
WITNESSES
In Attorney General versus Mirror Newspapers Limited [(1980) 1 NSWLR 374] at 387 this Court said that "the publication of statements, by persons likely to be called as witnesses, about the matters in respect of which they will be likely to give evidence is, subject to the de minimis rule, undoubtedly contempt."
However I agree with the
President that that case has to be understood in the context of its particular facts, the newspaper's publication of a doorstep interview of a witness who was about to give evidence before the coroner and whose conduct had been damned by a previous witness. The decision of the
Federal Court in the BLF case ((1981) <case>; [53 FLR 396], which the High
Court reversed, was that the contemplated proceedings before the Royal
Commission would be liable to have an undesirable effect on prospective witnesses. In the High Court, Stephen J, who dissented, at 75 said that the
Federal Court recognised that continued public proceedings of the Commission could create bias against the Union in the public mind in relation to matters relevant to the deregistration application and would tend to have an undesirable effect on prospective witnesses in that application, creating "an adverse environment for the future and proper conduct of the proceedings."
However Gibbs CJ considered at 59 that it was no more than speculation to say that the continuance of the inquiry in public would influence witnesses in the
Federal Court. "If the allegations made at the inquiry are true, and are relevant to the issues arising in the Federal Court, an honest witness called to give evidence in that Court, and aware of the facts, will give evidence in support of those allegations; if they are false, an honest witness, if aware of the falsity, will say so. No doubt some persons (including potential witnesses) who read or hear the evidence given at the inquiry may form an adverse opinion of certain officers of the
Federation, but any suggestion that such incidental or unintended prejudice will amount to a contempt is sufficiently answered by the........
passage from the judgment of Jordan CJ in Ex parte Bread Manufacturers Limited at 249." 
At 103 Mason J referred to the possibility that witnesses, perhaps not called before the inquiry, might be influenced as to what they should say in evidence before the court by the publicity given to the inquiry which, it was assumed, would be hostile to the Federation. His Honour said: "The risk of this occurring is a mere matter of speculation, not a matter of genuine inference. It simply cannot be assessed in terms of practical reality as a likelihood or as a substantial risk of serious prejudice. We simply have no basis for predicting that it will happen at all, or if it does happen, what form it will take, or what its consequences may be. I am not aware of any case in which a possibility of this kind has formed that basis of an apprehended contempt justifying restraint." 
At Wilson J said: "It may be that the publication of material which tends to affect the attitude of witnesses and so influence their evidence will constitute a contempt: Times Newspapers Ltd. But the tendency must be established. In my respectful opinion, that has not been done in the present case. The argument to the contrary is pure speculation. In the first place, one cannot be sure of the content and degree of coverage by the media that will occur should the Commissioner continue to sit in public.
In the second place, the growth both in range and intensity of mass media coverage in modem times carries with it a greater liability to transience in its hold on the public mind. What is news today is no longer news tomorrow. In the third place, there are no particular persons in mind who are liable to be affected by the publicity that may occur, and hence no sufficient basis on which to evaluate the contention. Finally, there is the absence of any contemporaneity between the publication that is likely to occur and the hearing and determination of the deregistration proceedings." 
See also Aickin J at 119.
 .
In my opinion there is no reason in this case to infer that the substance of the evidence of any witness or the readiness of any witness to contribute it will be affected or in any way impaired. As Shaw LJ said in Cchering
Chemicals Limited versus Falkman Limited at 29: "Witnesses in an action are credible and reliable or they are not. Our system of trial in which evidence is elicited by examination and cross examination provides the means of demonstrating the character and quality of a witness." 
I am not satisfied there was any real or definite possibility, as opposed to a remote possibility, that the broadcasts would have had any adverse effect on prospective witnesses at the coronial inquiry.
 
CONCLUSION
I agree with the President that the summons should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/98.html  
