

Regina versus Orrock Matter No Cca 60483/97 [1998] NSWSC 307 (22 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 September 1998 
REGINA versus SHANE LEON ORROCK 
CCA 60483/97 July 1998 
Smart J, Studdert J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant, Shane Leon Orrock, pleaded guilty before his Honour Judge Job QC in the District Court at Newcastle to an offence of supplying a prohibited drug, namely heroin, between 4 November 1996 and 20 November 1996. In due course his Honour sentenced the applicant to a total sentence of three years comprising a minimum term of two years and an additional term of one year with the minimum term to commence on 5 September 1997, that being the date upon which the applicant was taken into custody. The applicant now seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed. 
A statement of facts was tendered before the sentencing judge and it is convenient to refer to that outline for present purposes. The applicant at relevant times was living at an address at Toronto with his then defacto wife,
Karen Martin. Their activities were under electronic surveillance pursuant to an order of this Court. The applicant was seen over a two week period to cut up a number of caps of heroin and was seen to make up thirty-six deals of heroin, together with other heroin that was used jointly by the applicant and his de facto wife. There was discussion when the caps were being cut up between the applicant and Martin about how much they were going to make from the sale of the heroin. On 9 November 1996 the applicant was observed making up eight caps of heroin and putting those in his underpants and he discussed with Martin how they would make between $650-750 from the sale of this heroin.
When later that same day the applicant and Martin were arrested the applicant said that the heroin was not his and that he was only holding it for another person.

However, later on he said that he and Martin had heroin habits and they used most of the heroin they obtained to feed those habits but some they obtained was supplied to other people.

The quantity of heroin involved overall was estimated by police at approximately six grams.

The sentencing judge was asked to take into account matters on a schedule. One of these was an offence of administering a prohibited drug, namely heroin, and the other was goods in custody of a portable compact disc player and a video recorder.

Ms Flannery, who appeared for the applicant before this Court, has submitted that this Court should intervene to disturb the sentence on two grounds.
Firstly, that there is new evidence and, secondly, that the applicant has a legitimate sense of grievance as a result of the sentence imposed on his co- offender, Martin.

It is convenient to deal with the first of those submissions. In this respect the Court has been asked to receive affidavits of the applicant sworn on 25
June 1998, of Wayne Warwick sworn 3 July 1998 and of Janet Witmer affirmed on July 1998. Each of these affidavits addresses the issue of assistance proffered by the applicant to the relevant authority. It is clear the applicant and his counsel were alert to the issue of assistance at the time of the sentencing hearing in this case. Indeed counsel started to cross-examine a police officer on the relevant topic but was stopped by the applicant from pursuing that line of cross-examination. This appears from a reading of the transcript of proceedings contained in the appeal book. Counsel's affidavit and the applicant's affidavit to which I have referred address this issue.
Whilst there was an awareness at the time of the sentencing hearing about the issue now sought to be the subject of evidence, the affidavit of Janet Witmer affords an explanation as to why the matter was not pursued in the District
Court. It was not then understood the assistance provided was going to be acknowledged by the appropriate authorities. That has changed and this Court should now receive the additional evidence in the interests of justice. This it has done. In Court there has been an additional affidavit considered which details the assistance afforded. I do not propose, for obvious reasons, to go into the matter in detail but I am satisfied, for my own part having read the affidavit in point, that the assistance provided appears to have been not insignificant.

Ms Flannery has submitted that that assistance would warrant a discount of the order of thirty percent. To my mind that is not an unreasonable submission. In my opinion the evidence placed before this Court warrants intervention by the
Court and that accordingly the sentence imposed by the District Court should be disturbed.

In these circumstances it does not become strictly necessary to address the further argument which Ms Flannery advanced to the Court upon the basis of the difference between the sentence which the applicant received and the sentence of the co-offender Martin.

One of the obvious difficulties that arises in considering the parity argument is that the co-offender Martin was dealt with inappropriately in the Local
Court. However, I do not propose to dwell upon the parity issue, the applicant being entitled to have this Court re-sentence him in any event.

I heed the subjective circumstances of this case which were considered by the sentencing judge. It has not been suggested that there was an error in his review of those subjective circumstances and I do not propose to repeat them for present purposes. I have regard to the applicant's plea of guilty upon arraignment and I am mindful of the applicant's measures to rehabilitate himself.

The District Court judge found special circumstances and, in re-sentencing the applicant, I consider it proper to heed the features recognised by Judge Job as amounting to special circumstances and to treat them accordingly.

In all the circumstances of this case I propose that the sentence imposed in the District Court be quashed and that in lieu thereof the applicant be sentenced to a total sentence of two years. I would set a minimum term of sixteen months to commence on 5 September 1997 and to expire on 4 January 1999 and an additional term of eight months to commence on 5 January 1999 and to expire on 4 September 1999.

I would direct the applicant's release upon parole on 5 January 1999 subject to the supervision of the Probation and Parole Service.

SMART J: I agree. The orders will be those proposed by Mr Justice Studdert. There will be the additional order, earlier indicated, for the placing of the affidavit in a sealed envelope not to be opened without the leave of the Court. * * * 
