

Permanent Trustee Australia Ltd and Ors versus Fai General Insurance Co Ltd
Matter Nos 3032/96 [1998] NSWSC 1018 (24 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 June 1998 
PERMANENT TRUSTEE AUSTRLAIA LTD & ORS versus FAI GENERAL INSURANCE CO LTD 
NO. 3032 OF 1996 
PERMANENT TRUSTEE AUSTRALIA LTD & ANOR versus FAI GENERAL INSURANCE COMPANY LTD 
NO. 3037 OF 1996 April 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In paragraph 10.2 of the judgment in this matter which I delivered on 1st April 1998, I expressed the view that FAI was, in relation to the Target Fund claim, to be placed in the position in which it would have been if it had not granted the thirty day extension. 
The Permanent companies have sought to re-open that matter, on the basis that my decision was on a ground not argued at the hearing, and not covered by a memorandum which I sent to the parties after reserving my decision. Mr. Gee for FAI accepts this proposition, and in those circumstances, I have thought it appropriate to allow further argument to be advanced on that point.

Both sides have provided brief written submissions which I will leave with the papers. As I understand the submissions of Mr. Coles for the Permanent companies, the essential point that he puts is that the word "claim" where it appears in s.28(3) of the Act must be limited to claims made under the very contract in respect of which there was non-disclosure or misrepresentation.
Accordingly, he submits, there having been no non-disclosure or misrepresentation concerning the twelve month policy under which the Target
Fund claim was made, s.28(3) could have no application to the Target Fund claim.

In my opinion, the words of s.28, and in particular s.28(3), do not justify such a narrow construction of the word "claim" as it appears in s.28(3). It seems to me that the intention of s.28(3) is in substance to put the insurer in the same position, in respect of any claim, in which the insurer would have been if the non-disclosure or misrepresentation had not occurred.

Accordingly, in my opinion, the subsection is wide enough to apply to any claim in respect of which the insurer would be worse off if the effects of the non-disclosure or misrepresentation are allowed to stand. In cases such as the present, it may be that the claim is not a claim under the very contract in respect of which there was non-disclosure or misrepresentation. The claim may be under another contract, or as in this case, under a principal contract which has been extended by the contract in respect of which there was non- disclosure or misrepresentation. I do not see justification in the wording of the section to read the word "claim" narrowly as not extending to that situation.

For those reasons, I adhere to the view which I expressed in paragraph 10.2 of my original judgment.

It was rather faintly submitted by Mr. Coles that this point was not raised on the pleadings. It seems to me that the substance of it was raised in paragraphs 29 and 30 of the Defence. If it could be said that the point is not raised there with sufficient precision or particularity, Mr. Coles makes no submission that the conduct of the case would have been any different if the point had been raised with more precision and particularity; and in those circumstances, it does seem to me that FAI should not be precluded from relying on that point by any consideration of the pleadings.

I have also heard submissions as to what are the appropriate orders to give effect to s.28(3) in relation to the O'Connell Street claim. Mr. Gee for FAI submitted that what s.28(3) requires is that the insurer be placed in the position in which he would have been if the non-disclosure and misrepresentation had not occurred; that is, in the position in which the insurer would have been in but for the non-disclosure or misrepresentation.

However, the only mechanism offered by s.28(3) to put the insurer in that position is the mechanism of reduction of the liability of the insurer in respect of the claim itself. It does not appear to offer the Court the mechanism of reducing the liability under the claim to nil, and making some other provision for the return of the premium. In those circumstances, it does seem to that me that the Court will give a judgment that has the effect of requiring the return of the amount of the premium and appropriate interest.
The judgment itself may not specify that this is a liability under an insurance policy; but it does seem to me that the legal basis of the judgment does, by reason of s.28(3), have to be that it is a judgment giving effect to a claim under an insurance policy; and that the amount of that claim is reduced in substance to the amount of the premium.

In 3032/96 I make orders 2, 3 and 4 in the document which I initial and date.

I give leave to the plaintiffs to apply, in sufficient time to have the matter agitated on 27tha and 28th May 1998, for orders for interest in respect of any period prior to 7th June 1996.

In 3037/96 I make orders 3, 4 and 5 in the form of orders which I initial and date.
 * * * 
