

Ag Australia Holdings Limited versus Burton and Anor [2002] NSWSC 170 (3 May )

Last Updated: 19 June 2002 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: AG Australia Holdings Limited versus Burton & Anor <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity  
FILE NUMBER(S): 1640/02  
HEARING DATE{S): 7 March 2002  
JUDGMENT DATE: 03/05/2002  
PARTIES: 
AG Australia Holdings Limited (Plaintiff) 
Nigel Victor Burton (1st Defendant) 
John Roderick Edward Price & Ors t/as Maurice Blackburn Cashman (2nd
Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Campbell J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
B Walker SC; IM Jackson; M Tyson (Plaintiff) 
I E Davidson (1st Defendant) 
J Burnside QC; A Leopold (2nd Defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Ebsworth & Ebsworth (Plaintiff) 
Geoffrey Edwards & Co (1st Defendant) 
Maurice Blackburn Cashman (2nd Defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACTS 
GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES  illegal and void contracts  contract affecting the administration of justice  whether former employee's express obligation of confidentiality void to the extent it prohibits making confidential information available, out of court, for the purpose of use in litigation 
CONTRACTS 
GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES  llegal and void contracts - methodology for finding public policy 
CONTRACTS 
GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES  illegal and void contracts  when express obligation of confidentiality is unenforceable by reason of nature of the confidential information 
INJUNCTIONS  availability against recipient of confidential information when discloser of confidential information is in breach of contract  
ACTS CITED:  [Federal Court of Australia Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/) (Cth)  [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) 
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 1989 (Cth)  [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/)  [Crimes (Classification of Offences) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/cooa1981292/) (Vic)  [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)  [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) 
Insolvent Debtors Act  [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) 
Evidence Act 1995(Cth) 
Protected Disclosures Act 1994  [Public Service Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/psa1999152/) (Cth)  [Parliamentary Service Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/psa1999235/) (Cth)  [Whistleblowers Protection Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/sa/consolact/wpa1993322/) (South
Australia) 
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1994 (QLD) 
Public Interests Disclosure Act 1994 (ACT) 
Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1956  
DECISION: 
Injunctions made - see paragraph 235  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
EQUITY LIST  
CAMPBELL J  MAY 2002  /02 AG AUSTRALIA HOLDINGS LIMITED versus NIGEL BURTON & ANOR  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff in this case was formerly known as GIO
Australia Holdings Limited ("GIO"). It was listed on the Australian Stock
Exchange. It had a number of subsidiaries, many of which carried on business as insurers and financiers. One of its subsidiaries was GIO Australia Ltd ("GIOA"). GIOA was a service company which employed staff for the whole of the
GIO group. Another subsidiary of GIO was GIO Insurance Limited ("GIOI"). GIOI carried on business as an insurer. Part of the business of GIOI was the underwriting of reinsurance. That part of the business of GIOI was known as
GIO Re.  
AMP's Takeover Bid for GIO  On 25 August 1998 AMP Limited ("AMP") made a hostile takeover bid for GIO.
GIO shareholders were offered $4.75 per GIO share by AMP. In the course of the takeover bid that offer was revised to $5.35 per share. AMP sent a statement of the reasons why it considered shareholders should accept its offer to all
GIO shareholders, in a document formally named a "Part A Statement".  On or about 16 December 1998 GIO published its response to the takeover bid in a document formally named a "Part B Statement", which was also sent to all shareholders of GIO. In the Part B Statement, GIO stated that "GIO is firmly on track to deliver a planned pre-tax profit of $250m this financial year."
The Part B Statement told shareholders that the GIO Board recommended them "to reject AMP's totally inadequate offer". The cover of the Part B
Statement included not once, but twice, the words "reject AMP's inadequate bid". The words "inadequate bid" were sprinkled through the document in various places. A section of the document was headed "Your GIO shares are worth much more than the bid price". That heading appeared not only over the text which supported that proposition, but twice, in the early pages of the document, where the contents of the Part B Statement were listed.  On 5 January 1999 the AMP takeover bid closed. It was found to have been partially successful, with AMP acquiring 57.47% of GIO's shares. The remaining .53% consisted of approximately 68,000 shareholders.  
GIO's Subsequent Profit Performance  On 12 May 1999, GIO substantially revised its profit forecast for the financial year to 30 June 1999. An announcement to the Stock Exchange said that GIO was facing much larger losses in its Reinsurance division than previously expected, that a pre-tax loss of at least $300 million would be incurred for the full year to 30 June 1999 for GIO Reinsurance, which would cause GIO itself to sustain an overall loss for the year of at least $100 million before tax and abnormal items. The Stock Exchange was told that a review over the past two months, conducted by a team from Ernst & Young
New York, had identified a number of portfolios and lines of business where provisioning for claims in past years was considered inadequate. This Stock
Exchange announcement said that the bulk of the loss related to increasing provisions for these earlier years, but in addition, some comparatively recent natural disasters had caused significant losses. The announcement quoted the
Chief Executive Officer of GIO as saying:  "I am confident that the current management team at GIO Reinsurance has the right approach to this business. Whilst the Ernst & Young review will recommend some changes and improvements, it basically supports the new direction that our team is implementing and we believe the reinsurance business is now well positioned to move forward."  
The announcement said that GIO's other businesses continued to perform well, but that the current level of dividend was not sustainable, and that "shareholders should expect a significant reduction in final dividends".  Upon this announcement the share price of GIO shares trading on the
Australian Stock Exchange dropped significantly.  On 16 August 1999 GIO made another announcement to the Stock Exchange. The summary page of that announcement read:  * "GIO Australia Holdings Limited announces operating loss of $743m  * The results reflect a severe deterioration in the Reinsurance business which reports unprecedented losses of $759m  * The GIO Board has decided to exit the Reinsurance business  * The core businesses of GIO remain strong and have performed soundly"  The text of the announcement included the following:  "The results reflect a severe deterioration in the Reinsurance business, where major losses have developed during the second half of the year. On 12 May , the company announced that its Reinsurance loss would be at least $300m.
Since that time a further deterioration in claims experience has led to additional reserves of $202m and a shortfall of investment income of $32m and today the Board approved a prudential margin of $225m. ...  
The unprecedented losses in the Reinsurance business of $759m before tax stem mainly from events occurring during the 1998-99 calendar years. In addition the adoption of a "best estimate" claims reserving approach has resulted in higher claim estimates for business written mainly in the 1998 financial year.
...  
The losses experienced in 1998 and 1999 have more than offset the cumulative profits from inception of GIO Re in 1986. This situation reflects a business where the management processes and disciplines were historically poor. Prior to recent changes GIO Re's exposures were out of line with reasonable risk tolerances.  
Over the last 12 months managements' response to the significant issues underlying this poor performance has included the following:  * A revamp of the reinsurance program protecting the business for 1999 involving lower retention of risk and higher spending on reinsurance. ...  * Improved underwriting controls and assessment of risks;  * General reunderwriting of the portfolio resulting in gross written premiums being reduced from $970m in 1998 to $488m in 1999;  * Strengthening of claims management and processing across all classes.  
These matters are now largely in hand but they were not able to arrest the claims development experienced on business written by the company in earlier years."  The announcement went on to say that the Board had decided to exit the reinsurance business, either by sale, or by an orderly run-off of the business. It was announced that there would be no final dividend for the year ended 30 June 1999, that future dividends were unlikely to be "at the historically high levels", and that "due to significant accumulated tax losses any dividends will be franked to a very limited extent for the foreseeable future."  Following this announcement the market price of GIO shares dropped further.
On 20 December 1999, AMP acquired the minority shares in GIO by a scheme of arrangement at $2.75 per share.  
The Federal Court Representative Proceedings  The second defendants in this action are solicitors, who make up the firm of Maurice Blackburn Cashman ("MBC"). On 31 August 1999 (that is, after the second announcement to the Stock Exchange, but before the implementation of the scheme of arrangement) MBC started proceedings in the Federal Court of
Australia, N955 of 1999.  These proceedings had a Mr King as applicant, and were brought as representative proceedings (commonly referred to as a "class action") pursuant to Part IVA of the [Federal Court of Australia Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fcoaa1976249/) (Cth).
They were brought as representative proceedings on behalf of all persons who were shareholders of GIO continually between 25 August 1998 and 4 January 1999 and who did not accept the takeover offers for those shares made by AMP by reason of conduct alleged in the statement of claim. The proceedings named as respondents GIO, a merchant bank which had provided a report to GIO and the directors for inclusion in the Part B Statement which valued the shares in
GIO, and the directors of GIO who had authorised the issue of the Part B
Statement.  The proceedings alleged that each of the respondents had engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct (and thereby breached [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) or s
DA of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 1989 (Cth) or [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) ), and had committed the tort of negligent statement. As well, the directors were said to have breached a fiduciary duty, and the merchant bank was said to have breached <case> of the Corporations Law. The application contained a long list of orders sought, but they amount to declarations of breach, and orders for monetary compensation, interest and costs.  Those proceedings have now reached a stage where the orders sought are articulated in a fifth further amended application, and the basis for those orders is articulated in a seventh further amended statement of claim. That document identifies numerous statements in the Part B Statement which are said to be misrepresentations, and also identifies 12 matters called "Risk
Factors" which it alleges were ones which might have substantially and adversely effected the financial forecasts and valuation of the GIO shares, and concerning which the reader of the Part B Statement was not given any (or any adequate) information. These Risk Factors included:  "Risk regarding Inadequate Outstanding Claims Reserve 
GIO Re sought to set reserves to properly reflect claims cost already incurred from past events ("Outstanding Claims Reserve" including Incurred but not Reported Reserve ["IBNR"]). At the time the Part B Statement was given to shareholders there was a real risk that GIO Re's Outstanding Claims Reserve was inadequate. GIO Re's profitability in the financial year ended 30 June ("FY1999") would be substantially reduced by the increasing of the
Reserve to address the inadequacy.  ...  
Risk regarding Poor Management and Control of Underwriters and Underwriting 
At the time the Part B Statement was given to shareholders there was a real risk that GIO Re had underwritten a significant volume of reinsurance in at least UY1996, UY1997 and UY1998 on terms, conditions, and premiums that were likely to be unprofitable because GIO Re had poorly managed and controlled its underwriters and underwriting. GIO Re's profitability in FY1999 would be substantially reduced as a result of meeting claims on such reinsurance."  
Mr Burton  The first defendant, Mr Nigel Burton, was employed by GIOA between February and December 1999. Throughout the time he was so employed, Mr Burton was an executive in the reinsurance business of GIOI. Initially he was an underwriter with GIO Re, with specific responsibility for production and profitable underwriting of property treaty business emanating from the
Americas and Caribbean. In 1996 his underwriting responsibilities were increased to include North-East Asia (Japan and Korea). In 1998 he was appointed a senior underwriter with responsibility for all the areas just mentioned, plus Europe and Australasia. Later in 1998 he became Underwriting
Manager, with responsibility for the underwriting of all GIO Re's reinsurance portfolio, as well as continuing with the underwriting of the specific kinds I have just mentioned. He also became a member of the four-person Reinsurance
Committee.  In his role as a senior underwriter and as part of the senior management team at GIO Re, Mr Burton was privy to high level, commercially sensitive information, management decisions and discussions relating but not limited to:  business operations and planning;  actuarial, valuations, underwriting and business management reports;  reports by advisors to GIO;  cedants - including lists, actuarial, underwriting, claims data, premiums data and valuations;  delegations and underwriting guidelines;  reinsurance arrangements and programs;  contracts;  terms of commercial settlements.  When he was first employed, it was on the terms of a written agreement which Mr Burton signed on 18 May 1995. That agreement contained an express term requiring him to act honestly, faithfully and diligently in the performance of his duties and responsibilities, but no express confidentiality clause. On 28 May 1998 he entered a new employment contract with GIOA, which included the following express term:  "CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION  .1 All records, reports computer software, client lists, trade secrets, financial information, commercially sensitive information or material obtained, written or prepared by you in the course of your employment or relating to the affairs of the Company, related companies or clients which is not generally in the public domain is "Confidential Information".  .2 During your employment the Confidential Information may not be used or disclosed except as authorised or required by your duties and in the event of termination of your employment may not be used or disclosed for any purpose.
The Confidential Information must never be used for the personal advantage of employees or other persons. In the event of termination of your employment you will be required to promptly return to the Company all of the Confidential
Information in your possession and you must not retain any copies, extracts or reproductions in whole or in part of any of the Confidential Information. All material in whatever form prepared by you during the course of your employment will be and remain the property of the Company."  On 31 May 1999 Mr Burton executed a document in the following form, and gave it to GIO:  "CONFIDENTIALITY UNDERTAKING 
To: GIO AUSTRALIA HOLDINGS LIMITED  
In consideration of GIO Australia Holdings Limited (and its related bodies corporate) (the "Employer") disclosing to me certain information: 
I acknowledge that all of the information described or relating to the matters set out in Schedule 1 below is confidential (the "Confidential
Information") and is either the property of the Employer or is the subject of confidentiality obligations of the Employer. 
I undertake:  not to disclose the Confidential Information to any other person or corporation, including other employees of the Employer, unless they have signed a confidentiality undertaking;  to take or cause to be taken all such precautions as may be necessary to maintain the secrecy and confidentiality of the Confidential Information;  that the Confidential Information will only be used exclusively and only to the extent necessary to perform my duties for the Employer;  not to grant third parties access to the Confidential Information without the prior written approval of the Employer; and  to ensure that any third party to whom access to the Confidential
Information is granted under clause 2(d) signs a confidentiality undertaking. 
The covenants in this agreement shall not apply to any information which becomes generally known to the public otherwise than as a breach of this agreement or the breach of any similar agreement. 
I acknowledge that this undertaking does not limit the confidentiality obligations under my contract of employment.  
Schedule 1  "Confidential Information" means any information relating to the Reinsurance business conducted by GIO Insurance Limited, including but not limited to information concerning the past and future revenue and profitability, and the business, operations and management, of that business (whether I receive such information in writing or by any other form of communication).  
Signature: [signed] 
Name: Nigel Burton 
Date: 31 May 1999"  On 9 December 1999 GIOA informed Mr Burton that, following the company's decision to exit the reinsurance business, his position as General Manager,
Reinsurance Underwriting would be redundant from 31 December 1999.  On 10 December 1999 Mr Burton emailed the Human Resources Manager of GIOA, mainly discussing his termination benefits, but also saying:  "Given the circumstances that have led to the closure of GIO Re, it is impossible for anyone not to be assumed guilty by association. From the day I started my employment I have made a profit of over $50million and have more recently designed and placed a retrocession programme that has protected our exposures in a highly efficient way. At all times I have conducted myself in a conscientious, honest and professional manner. I therefore request a letter of reference to this effect.  
Finally I believe my 20 years in the reinsurance industry and my last 5 at GIO
Re, could be of immense help to GIO Re in the coming months. I have spoken to
Paul and Jenny about the possibilities of working as a consultant for GIO Re, and this will be considered as and when needed."  It appears that he did not thereafter work as a consultant for GIO Re. The document with which he was provided on termination of his service read:  "STATEMENT OF SERVICE 
This is to certify that Mr Nigel Burton has been employed by GIO Australia Ltd from 1 February 1995 to 31 December 1999. Mr Burton's last position held was
General Manager, Reinsurance Underwriting.  
Yours faithfully"  
Mr Burton Becomes Involved in Preparations for the Federal Court Proceedings  Mr Bernard Murphy is a member of the firm of MBC with the responsibility for the conduct of the representative action brought by Mr King against GIO and others in the Federal Court. He and three other solicitors have been preparing that case since the proceedings were issued in August 1999. The case preparation has primarily involved an investigation of the basis for the forecast that GIO would make a profit of $250 million, together with the reasons why this forecast turned out to be wrong by nearly $1 billion. The significant losses incurred by GIO Re, not predicted or warned about in the
Part B Statement, have been a major topic of investigation.  On 28 November 2000 Mr Murphy first met with Mr Burton. Mr Murphy accepts that he persuaded Mr Burton to make a witness statement for the purpose of the
Federal Court proceedings. From the end of that first meeting on 28 November it was Mr Murphy's view that he would probably call Mr Burton as a witness in the Federal Court proceedings. The decision to call him was not absolutely final, as a statement had not been taken at that stage, and Mr
Murphy intended to seek the advice of senior counsel, shortly prior to the hearing, about what witnesses should be called, but it was still the view that
Mr Murphy had at that time.  In the period from 30 November 2000 to 30 March 2001 Mr Murphy met with Mr
Burton on numerous occasions and obtained a detailed draft witness statement from him. At some of the conferences after the first, Mr Burton brought documents emanating from GIO with him, which Mr Murphy saw. Mr Murphy regarded those documents as both (a) potentially discoverable, and (b) confidential.
This disclosure of documents by Mr Burton took place before any of the documents were discovered in the Federal Court proceedings.  On 30 November 2000 Mr Murphy wrote to Mr Burton, referring to their meeting on 28 November 2000, and saying:  "We confirm that we desire to obtain a detailed witness statement from you regarding the operations of GIO for use in the above proceedings. In order to ensure that no breach of confidentiality arises we attach a written
Confidentiality Agreement. This confirms that any information you provide can only be used for the purpose of these proceedings.  
We confirm our intention to subpoena you to give evidence at the hearing of this matter in any event. Evidence given in court proceedings cannot be a breach of confidentiality as you can be compelled to answer questions and produce documents.  
We note that it is likely that the preparation of the witness statement will take a considerable period of time and your advice that you are actively pursuing a new and substantial business venture. We will of course reimburse you for time spent on this matter."  The Confidentiality Agreement enclosed with that letter was signed by Mr
Murphy, dated 30 November 2000 and took the following form:  "CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENT 
From: Maurice Blackburn Cashman  
Solicitors  Swanston Street 
Carlton  
To: Mr Nigel Burton  
Whereas:  
On various occasions Mr Nigel Burton ("Burton") disclosed information concerning the business activities of GIO Australia Holdings Limited to
Maurice Blackburn Cashman, Solicitors ("MBC").  
This Deed Records:  
MBC agrees not to disclose any information Burton has provided to MBC in the past or may provide to MBC in the future except to the following persons and for the following purposes:-  any body created by statute with a responsibility for undertaking corporate prudential or criminal investigations in relation to which the information provided is relevant;  any lawyers or experts retained for or dealing with litigation or proposed litigation in relation to illegal conduct where the information provided is relevant to the litigation, and where the information is used only for the purposes of the litigation;  any other person or body where MBC is compelled to do so by law.  [Signed] 
Maurice Blackburn Cashman Solicitors /11/2000" Mr Murphy estimates that MBC has spent in the order of $200,000 in professional time, counsel's fees, travel expenses and witness expenses in the preparation of Mr Burton's witness statement. The evidence does not disclose how this sum is made up, and in particular does not disclose how much has been paid to Mr Burton.  Although the witness statement was in draft form, and had not been settled by counsel, Mr Murphy requested that Mr Burton sign it to verify its truth. On March 2001 Mr Burton signed the draft witness statement. He did so only after first requiring that he be given an indemnity against any claims that may later be made by GIO or its former directors alleging that he was in breach of his obligations of confidentiality. Mr Murphy and Mr Burton each signed a document in the following form:  "DEED OF CONFIDENTIALITY AND INDEMNITY 
Parties:  
Maurice Blackburn Cashman 
Solicitors  Swanston Street 
Carlton, Victoria  and  
Nigel Victor Burton  Ormiston Avenue 
Gordon, 
New South Wales  
Whereas: 
Maurice Blackburn Cashman, Solicitors ("MBC") are the solicitors for the
Applicant in representative proceedings brought in the Federal Court under [Part
IVA](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/index.html#p4a) of the Federal Court Act by Shane King versus GIO Australia Holdings Ltd and
Others, N955 of 1999, (the proceedings). 
Nigel Victor Burton ("Burton") is a former employee of GIO Australia
Holdings Ltd ("GIO") with knowledge of the facts and circumstances relevant to the claim by the Applicant, including the business activities of GIO. 
MBC have informed Burton on behalf of the Applicant that it proposes to subpoena Burton to produce documents, and to give evidence in the proceedings when a hearing date is fixed. 
MBC have informed Burton that he is able to provide a witness st atement prior to the hearing date in the proceedings, and provide information for the witness statement regarding the issues in the proceedings including information regarding the business activities of GIO, to MBC for the sole purpose of the proceedings, without being in breach of any continuing obligations and duties that he may have to GIO. 
Relying upon the information provided by MBC and solely for the purpose of the proceedings, Burton has disclosed confidential information to MBC concerning the issues in the proceedings on various occasions. 
Burton is a proposed witness in the proceedings, and has been informed by
MBC that he is not a client of MBC. Nothing in this Deed or in any information provided by MBC or Burton shall be construed as amounting to a
Solicitor/Client relationship between them.  
Now this Deed Records: 
MBC agrees not to either directly or indirectly disclose to any person any confidential information Burton has provided to MBC in the past, or may provide to MBC in the future, except in the following circumstances:-  to any body created by statute with a responsibility for undertaking criminal or corporate investigations in relation to which the information provided is relevant;  to any lawyers or experts retained or other witnesses providing statements or giving evidence in the proceedings, or related proceedings, where the information provided is relevant to the litigation, and where the information is used only for the purposes of the litigation;  any other person or body where MBC is compelled to do so by law. 
MBC hereby indemnifies Burton from all costs, claims, demands, suits or actions of any kind arising out of his provision of the confidential information to MBC for the purpose of the proceedings. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, MBC indemnifies Burton against all, costs, claims, demands, suits, or actions by GIO, or its former Directors who are respondents to the proceedings, alleging breach of confidentiality, misuse of confidential information or any related tortious or contractual breaches by
Burton arising out of his provision of the confidential information to MBC for the purpose of the proceedings. 
The indemnity is conditional upon: 
Burton notifying MBC within 7 days of the making of any claim, demand, suit or action of any kind related to his disclosure of confidential information to MBC, and/or the threatening of the same. 
Burton informing MBC of the progress of any claim, demand, suit, or action of any kind related to his disclosure of confidential information to MBC on the request of MBC. 
In giving this indemnity MBC agree that they shall pay to Burton the amount of all costs referred to in this Deed as and when they are incurred within seven (7) days of provision of an invoice of such costs by Burton to
MBC.  
DATED 30 March 2001  [Signed] 
Bernard Murphy, for and on behalf   of Maurice Blackburn Cashman  
Solicitors  
Nigel Victor Burton"  Mr Murphy believed, from the first time he met Mr Burton, that Mr Burton would have some confidentiality obligations arising from his employment, and that the information Mr Burton was giving him would have been given in breach of those obligations if it had been given to a trade competitor or generally made available in the marketplace. Mr Murphy accepted that the expression "confidential" properly applied to the information Mr Burton gave him.  Mr Murphy has explained the course of conduct he has followed with Mr
Burton:  "It was and remains my opinion that no breach of any obligation of confidentiality arises because:  a) Burton is a compellable witness in the proceedings;  b) Any information he supplied to me was for the purpose of legal proceedings and was used only for that purpose; and  c) Maurice Blackburn Cashman gave an agreement to Burton that any information he supplied to Maurice Blackburn Cashman would be used only for proper purposes. In this regard I gave Burton a confidentiality agreement. Now produced and shown to me and marked "BMM4" is a copy letter from Maurice
Blackburn Cashman to Burton dated 30 November 2000 together with a confidentiality agreement.  
An additional point which is relevant, but which I am not sure was in my mind at the time is that Burton is giving assistance to Maurice Blackburn Cashman (see paragraph 20 below) in relation to Maurice Blackburn Cashman's gathering of evidence to support the allegation that Risk Factors 4 and 1 which were not disclosed in the Part B Statement existed at the time the Part B Statement was published to shareholders, and that this failure to disclose was within the meaning of the law of confidential information, an iniquity in the form of statutory contraventions and other breaches of duty;"  Mr Murphy came to the view set out in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above on the basis of his general understanding of legal principle, without reference to any particular case law.  
GIO Attempts to Enforce Confidentiality Obligations  On 1 May 2001 Mr Vujcic, an in-house legal counsel employed by AMP Services
Ltd who has day to day responsibility for the management for GIO of the
Federal Court class action, wrote to Mr Burton, referring to the representative action, saying that the proceedings were at the discovery stage and that GIO was required to search for relevant documents in its possession custody or control which fell within the category to which discovery was required. The letter continued:  "It has come to GIO's attention that in some instances former employees have retained documents belonging to GIO in their possession after leaving GIO.
Copies of GIO documents also belong to GIO. Such documents, which may also be in electronic form, may be relevant and liable to be produced by GIO pursuant to its discovery obligations. If you have any such GIO documents, in your possession, then those documents must, in any event, be returned to GIO.  
Would you please advise as to whether you retain any GIO documents including copies of GIO business records and any information recorded in an electronic form. If so, would you please provide particulars of any such material to enable our lawyers to consider whether it is discoverable in the proceedings.  
In some instances former GIO employees have been served with a subpoena for production requiring production of documents to the Federal Court. If you are served with a subpoena would you please also notify me immediately and forward a copy of the subpoena to us for our information.  
You will be aware that you have a duty to maintain confidentiality in respect of confidential information relating to GIO and your knowledge of GIO's operations obtained during the course of your employment with the company. If you are approached by the solicitors acting for the applicant and requested to provide them with a statement or information then you must ensure that you do not breach your continuing obligations to GIO. If you are approached would you please contact me by phone, fax or email."  On 8 May 2001 Mr Burton wrote to Mr Vujcic a letter the entire text of which (excluding formal parts) was:  "I am in receipt of your letter dated 1 May 2001 and duly return 1,474 documents and 12 discs."  He made no mention of the ongoing contact he had had with Mr Murphy concerning the litigation or that he had already signed a draft witness statement. The discs which were returned contained electronic data of GIO. The documents returned comprised information relating to the reinsurance business conducted by GIOI.  Meanwhile, discovery was being given in the Federal Court proceedings.
Justice Moore had made orders on 11 May 2001, for discovery by reference to categories of documents. That discovery proceeded by making documents available in tranches. On 1 August 2001 MBC wrote to the solicitors for GIO saying:  "We understand your client has been in possession of a large quantity of material provided to it by former GIO Re underwriter Nigel Burton for at least two months ...  
We understand the documents delivered to you by Mr Burton also go to other issues including but not limited to aggregate exposure to loss, poor management and control of underwriting, retrocession, portfolio composition, pricing levels and GIO Re's future prospects.  
We are of the view the material supplied to your client by Mr Burton are discoverable."  
The letter went on to suggest a time by which the documents could be discovered.  GIO solicitors responded by saying that they would give discovery in accordance with the procedures laid down by Justice Moore.  On 16 October 2001 Mr Murphy swore an affidavit, in the Federal Court proceedings, which told the story of Mr Burton being asked, in early May, to return any documents, and doing so, of MBC's letter to GIO's solicitors of 1
August 2001, and the response it produced. As well, that affidavit said:  "Burton was employed by GIO Re throughout the period which is highly relevant in the proceedings herein. He informs me, and I believe that the documents he retained were highly relevant to the revised Risk Factors set out in the
Statement of Claim, for which leave is being sought on 18 October 2001, and that they include memorandums and e-mails between officers of GIO Re, internal reports, statistics regarding GIO Re operations and other relevant documents.
He informs me that the documents concerned the level of reserves, aggregate exposure to loss, poor management and control of underwriting, retrocession, portfolio composition, pricing levels and GIO Re's future prospects."  On 18 October 2001 the representative proceedings were before Justice Moore for further directions. Dr Hanscombe, counsel for the applicant in those proceedings, read the affidavit of Mr Murphy which I have just summarised. She went on to say:  "Your Honour, what that is about, here is Mr Burton's box of documents that he sends. Mr Burton is involved in the preparation of the case and the witness statement and so on. Until these documents which we know existed because Mr
Burton told us about them, and he delivered them and so on, until they're discovered they can't formally be used."  Dr Hanscombe went on to ask his Honour to make an order for specific discovery of the documents which Mr Burton had returned.  Mr Jackman, counsel for GIO, responded to that application by, in effect, submitting that the Court should stick to the discovery regime it had already ordered. He continued:  "There is another matter which has emerged only just now while Ms Hanscombe has been addressing the court. For the first time, we have been told that Mr
Burton is now cooperating with the applicant's solicitors in preparing a witness statement. Mr Burton in doing so is breaching his obligations of confidentiality to GIO. That was the original proposition that was put to Mr
Burton which prompted him to send the documents back to GIO. He seems to have recognised that he had no right to be hanging on to the GIO documents.  
Similarly Mr Burton has no right to be voluntarily cooperating with Maurice
Blackburn Cashman in disclosing what we take to be confidential information of
GIO. That has only just been articulated for the first time now and I would have to take instructions as to how we deal with Mr Burton in the light of the concession which has just been made by Ms Hanscombe about what he is doing.  
The directions hearing continued, with Dr Hanscombe saying, "There has never been any doubt that Mr Burton was talking to Maurice Blackburn Cashman" and putting the proposition that in due course Mr Burton would be subpoenaed, and that there was absolutely nothing wrong about his talking to MBC.  On 23 October 2001 the solicitors for GIO wrote to Mr Burton, referring to the proceedings before Justice Moore on 18 October, and saying, "During the course of proceedings before the court counsel for the applicant stated you were involved in the preparation of the case and were preparing a witness statement." The letter also referred to Mr Murphy's affidavit, and enclosed a copy of it. The letter went on:  "We confirm your duties of confidentiality owed to GIO are ongoing and operate to prevent you from discussing the contents of any confidential document belonging to GIO or from communicating any other confidential information of
GIO which is within your knowledge. We are instructed that our client is very concerned having regard to the documents wrongfully retained by you when you left its employ, the matters set out in Mr Murphy's affidavit and the statement made in court on 18 October, that you may be in breach of your obligations to GIO.  
It is not open to you during the period of pre-trial preparation to disclose to the applicant or his solicitors the nature or contents of confidential information or document which became known to you during the course of your employment with GIO. If you are ultimately served with a subpoena to give evidence at the hearing then it may be that you will have to answer questions in open court which overrides your legal and equitable duties of confidentiality. In the meantime, even after service of any subpoena, it is not open to you to provide any confidential information to the applicant or his solicitors."  
The letter went on to request a written undertaking that confidential information would not be disclosed.  The solicitors for GIO wrote a letter to similar effect, also on 23 October , to MBC.  On 25 October 2001 Mr Burton wrote back to the solicitors for GIO saying:  "I agree that I informed Mr Murphy of the matters he sets out in his
Affidavit, however following receipt of your letter I had a telephone conversation with Mr Murphy in which he rejected your assertion that Counsel for the Applicant had told the Court on 18 October 2001 that I was preparing a witness statement.  
I returned all documents retained by me following cessation of my employment immediately upon request. I have not provided copies to anybody.  
I have been advised of the law regarding confidential information and I do not consider that I am in breach of any obligations to GIO.  
I do not intend to provide the written undertaking requested by you."  MBC wrote back, saying:  "We dispute the accuracy of your paraphrasing of the statements made to the
Court by Counsel for the Applicant.  
We are aware of the law regarding confidential information and our obligations. We intend to comply with our obligations.  
Accordingly, we are not required to, and do not intend to, provide an undertaking as requested."  Those responses mollified GIO's solicitors. GIO's solicitors did not understand that the reason why the responses had been given in the terms they were, was that MBC took the view, and had advised Mr Burton, that there was no breach of confidentiality involved in Mr Burton talking to MBC in the circumstances in which he had done so.  On 15 February 2002 the Federal Court proceedings were back before Justice
Moore, to deal with a set of disputes about discovery. The first of the orders sought in the Notice of Motion which was returnable that day, sought:  "That discovery of the Burton documents (as described in the affidavit of
Bernard Murphy sworn 16 October 2001) insofar as they fall within the categories of discovery which are the subject of court orders, be completed by February 2002.".  An affidavit filed by Mr Duffy, one of the solicitors at MBC working on the matter, deposed to MBC having been under the impression that the Burton documents would all be discovered by the time tranche eleven of the discovery was complete, at the end of December 2001. He deposed to it coming as a surprise to be informed by GIO solicitors that some of Mr Burton's documents would not be discovered until tranche twelve of the discovery. He said that delay in provision of those documents was continuing to delay preparation of the applicant's case.  In the course of the hearing before Justice Moore on 15 February 2002, Dr
Hanscombe outlined this evidence, including that the Burton documents would not be completely discovered until tranche twelve. She continued, "Now your
Honour's perfectly sensible question is well does it matter? And the answer is yes, it does matter. It matters because it is delaying preparations. It matters in particular because it is delaying the preparation and finalisation of Mr Burton's witness statement.  Mr Jackman thereupon tendered to Justice Moore the confidentiality undertaking which Mr Burton had signed, and asserted that Mr Burton's cooperation in preparation of a witness statement involved a breach of contractual and equitable obligations of confidence. That proposition was disputed by Dr Hanscombe.  On 21 February 2002 GIO's solicitors wrote to MBC, requesting an undertaking that MBC would not counsel, procure, induce or in any way directly or indirectly be knowingly concerned in or a party to a breach by Mr Burton of his duty of confidentiality owed to GIO. That undertaking was not forthcoming, and these proceedings were commenced soon afterwards.  Mr Burton has chosen not to give evidence in these proceedings.  
The Relief Sought in These Proceedings  The further amended summons in the proceedings seeks the following orders:  "1. An order that the first defendant by himself, his servants or agents be restrained from passing, publishing, communicating, using, or otherwise disclosing to any person any information relating to the Reinsurance business conducted by GIO Insurance Limited, including but not limited to information concerning:  the past and future revenue and profitability; and  the business, operations and management of the Reinsurance business  save insofar as the first defendant is expressly authorised in writing by the plaintiff so to do, or by order of the Court. 
The first defendant deliver to the Court all documents and materials, including draft witness statements and/or draft affidavits in Federal Court proceedings No. N955 of 1999, which are in the possession power custody or control of the first defendant relating to, or containing information relating to, the Reinsurance business conducted by GIO Insurance Limited, including but not limited to information concerning:  the past and future revenue and profitability; and  the business, operations and management of the Reinsurance business  save insofar as the first defendant is expressly authorised in writing by the plaintiff to retain the said documents and materials, or by order of the
Court. 
The second defendants by themselves, their servants or their agents be restrained from inducing or procuring breaches or interfering in or in the performance of the confidentiality undertaking that is annexed and marked "A" hereto. 
The second defendants deliver to the Court all documents or materials which are in the possession power custody or control of the second defendants which documents or materials relate to or contain information relating to the
Reinsurance Business conducted by GIO Insurance Limited, including but not limited to information concerning:  the past and future revenue and profitability; and/or  the business, operations and management of the reinsurance Business  
AND WHICH documents or materials relate to, or are based on, or make use either directly or indirectly of:  any discussions between Nigel Victor Burton and any of the second defendants or their agents or employees;  any correspondence between Nigel Victor Burton and any of the second defendants or their agents or employees; and/or  any documents returned by Nigel Victor Burton to the plaintiff;  including draft witness statements and/or draft affidavits of Nigel Victor
Burton in Federal Court of Australia proceedings No. 955 of 1999, save insofar as the second defendants are expressly authorised in writing by the plaintiff to retain the said documents or by order of the Court or where the documents are discovered in Federal Court Proceedings No. N955 of 1999. 
The Second Defendants by themselves, their servants or their agents be restrained from utilising in the course of the preparation of the Applicant's case in Federal Court of Australia proceedings No. N955 of 1999 or otherwise any documents or materials which are in the possession power custody or control of the second defendants which documents or materials contain information relating to the reinsurance business conducted by GIO Insurance
Limited, including but not limited to information concerning :  the past and future revenue and profitability; and/or  the business, operations and management of the Reinsurance Business  
AND WHICH documents or materials make use either directly or indirectly of:  any discussions between Nigel Victor Burton and any of the second defendants or their agents or employees;  any correspondence between Nigel Victor Burton and any of the second defendants or their agents or employees; and/or  any documents returned by Nigel Victor Burton to the plaintiff other than documents discovered in Federal Court Proceedings No. N955 of 1999;  including the witness statement signed by Nigel Victor Burton in March 2000. 
The second defendants by themselves, their servants or their agents be restrained from supplying a copy of the witness statement of Nigel Victor
Burton signed in March 2000 to any expert witness retained by them for the purposes of the Applicant's case in Federal Court of Australia proceedings No.
N955 of 1999.  ..."  GIO has proved that the business of GIO Re is still in a state of run off.
GIO Re is seeking the "commutation" of reinsurance treaties that it entered.
That involves, essentially, either getting the ceding insurer to release GIO
Re from its reinsurance obligations, or persuading another reinsurer to take over those obligations. Information which someone in Mr Burton's position had would, potentially, be very valuable to a party with whom GIO Re was seeking to negotiate a commutation of some of its obligations.  In the evidence which GIO filed to establish the continuing sensitivity of information of the kind which Mr Burton would have access to, particular mention was made of detailed reports made by Ernst & Young New York in May which in part, identify many of the cedant relationships of GIO Re and attribute a value to the claims or expected losses in respect of the treaties on foot between GIO Re and the cedants. Mention was also made, in this context, of some valuations prepared by Greg Schneider, GIO Re's Chief Actuary in 1998 and 1999, which identified and explained GIO Re's potential exposures under its reinsurance treaties. The Ernst & Young New York report is one which MBC obtained by subpoena from AMP in April 2001, and also obtained when it was discovered by GIO in the Federal Court action in April 2001. The valuations of Mr Schneider from 1997 and 1998 were discovered to MBC in March by the merchant bank which is second respondent in the Federal Court proceedings. Valuations of Mr Schneider relating to 1997, 1998 and 1999 were discovered by GIO in that action in April 2001.  The draft witness statement of Mr Burton was not tendered before me. Mr
Murphy said, in his affidavit, that Mr King claimed privilege over it. The sole information which was given about the statement was that it comprised 228 pages (meaning 228 pages of text, exclusive of annexures or exhibits), and the following:  "In general terms, Burton has been giving assistance to Maurice Blackburn
Cashman in its gathering of evidence in support of its allegation that Risk
Factors 4 and 1 existed at the time the Part B Statement was published to shareholders but were not disclosed to the shareholders, giving rise to an iniquity in the form of statutory contraventions and other breaches of duty.
The draft witness statement is directed to the inadequate management and control of underwriters and underwriting in the calendar years 1996, 1997 and
In saying this, I have no intention or instructions to waive the privilege Mr King maintains."  
However, none of the information which Mr Murphy obtained from Mr Burton has led to any amendment of the statement of claim. I should record that, when Mr
Murphy was asked, in cross-examination, whether the information from Mr Burton had led to any amendments to the statement of claim he sought, and was granted, a brief adjournment in which to seek advice before answering the question. Thus his answer, that none of the information had led to any amendment of the statement of claim, was a considered one.  In the course of his cross-examination, Mr Murphy took meticulous care to frame his answers so as not to waive privilege in the draft statement. He was determined not to let GIO, "get an advance look at the witness statements in this litigation".  On 20 June 2001 the Australian Securities and Investment Commission announced that it was commencing proceedings against three senior former GIO employees, being the former Chief Financial Officer of GIO and the two former
Executive Directors of GIO Re seeking civil penalties for breaches of duty by those officers during the AMP takeover bid. The action alleges that these three senior employees induced the making by GIO of a misleading profit forecast for the 1999 financial year in the Part B Statement. Though the statement of claim in those proceedings was in evidence before me I was not taken to any portion of the statement of claim, nor was any submission made to me on the basis of it.  
How the Burton Statement Fits into Preparation of the Federal Court Action  The present state of preparation of the Federal Court representative action is that, approximately 16,000 documents have been discovered by the respondents so far, but discovery was not complete by the time of the hearing before me. The final tranche of discovery was due on 31 March 2002. In
December 2001 GIO joined three third parties to the action, namely two companies connected with its auditors, and a company which had advised it on the Part B Statement. It will inevitably take some time for those newly joined third parties to come to grips with what has already happened in preparation of the case. There has been some delay in preparation of the case as amendments to the statement of claim have been made as information has become available through discovery and the taking of witness statements. Mr Murphy's present expectation is that the Federal Court will make an order for the preparation and delivery of witness statements by the applicant once discovery is complete. These witness statements are in an advanced state of preparation, but not complete. Mr Murphy intends to seek a trial date in early 2003.  When Mr Burton's statement is in final form, Mr Murphy intends supplying a copy of it to two expert reinsurance actuaries, and also to a reinsurance underwriting expert. He expects that the statement will be supplied to these experts upon the basis that each of them signs an appropriate confidentiality undertaking. Each of the reinsurance actuaries has already indicated to Mr
Murphy that he will sign a confidentiality undertaking that he:  not disclose the contents of any statements or documents supplied to him to any person other than solicitors retained by Mr King and/or other expert witnesses who have themselves signed a written confidentiality undertaking to the Federal Court in the same terms, and  not use the information contained in the statement or documents supplied to him for any purpose other than the Federal Court proceedings.  Each of the actuaries acknowledged that this requirement meant that he could not perform any work for any company which related to any contract of reinsurance that the company had with GIO Re, whether this reinsurance was inwards to, or outwards from, GIO Re. Mr Murphy has not been able to contact the reinsurance underwriting expert he was planning to use, to find out that expert's attitude to the giving of such a confidentiality undertakings.  The independent experts will require a lengthy period to prepare their reports. In relation to Risk Factors 4, their reports would involve a detailed review of the management and control of underwriters and underwriting by GIO
Re over at least the calendar years 1996, 1997 and 1998. A detailed review of the management and control of underwriting is also important in establishing the existence of Risk Factors 1, as the applicant contends that there was poor quality underwriting associated with the risks that GIO Re accepted, and that that poor quality underwriting was not properly taken into account in setting reserves. Mr Murphy contends that if MBC are unable to provide the independent experts with the information supplied by Mr Burton, or are delayed in doing so, the preparation of the experts' reports will be either seriously prejudiced or seriously delayed.  Further, Mr Murphy contends that if the information which has been supplied by Mr Burton, is not able to be used in the trial, then the conduct of the trial will be seriously prejudiced. He estimates that should counsel for the applicant be prohibited from relying on the information which Mr Burton has provided to MBC, that it would take in the order of three weeks of examination in chief to obtain this evidence from Mr Burton in court. Mr Murphy intends that once a trial date is set, Mr Burton will be served with a subpoena to give evidence. As no trial date has as yet been set, it has not been possible up to now to serve Mr Burton with a subpoena to give evidence.  Mr Murphy is an experienced litigation solicitor. His experience is that in every Federal Court case in which he has been involved, the judge has required that witnesses provide witness statements prior to giving evidence. His experience is that witness statements are particularly necessary in complex or large litigation such as the representative action brought by Mr King against
GIO. As well, his experience is that ordinarily the respondents to such litigation prefer the preparation of witness statements so that they are not surprised by the viva voce evidence given in examination in chief.  On 22 February 2002 MBC gave their written undertaking that, "We will not counsel, procure, induce or in any way directly or indirectly be knowingly concerned in or a party to a breach by Mr Burton of his duty of confidentiality owed to GIO." This undertaking, framed as it is in the language of legal conclusion, does not assist to resolve the present dispute.
The present dispute concerns whether any of the conduct which MBC has engaged in, in communicating with Mr Burton, constitutes a breach of his duty of confidentiality owed to GIO, or not.  On 25 February 2002 Justice Moore delivered judgment on the notice of motion which had been argued before him on 15 February 2002. His Honour said, at [19]:  "I am not satisfied that I should, as a matter of discretion, refrain from making the orders sought by the applicant if there is good reason to make those orders. I do not accept, on the material presently before the court and on the submissions made, that there is a prima facie case of unlawful conduct (present or future) on the part of Mr Burton or the applicants' solicitors."  His Honour went on to make the order which had been sought in the notice of motion concerning the discovery of the Burton documents.  After his Honour had prepared his reasons for judgment and notified the parties that he was about to deliver them, he was informed that the proceedings now before me had been commenced, and were returnable before the
Supreme Court on 27 February 2002. His Honour then stayed the order for discovery of the Burton documents until 4:00pm 28 February 2002. The evidence before me does not disclose whether the stay has been extended.  By his affidavit of 1 March 2002 Mr Murphy proffered more specific undertakings:  "I have not and will not communicate any information provided to me by Burton to any persons other than solicitors, counsel and witnesses engaged in the litigation and always on a confidential basis. I am prepared to ensure that any barrister, solicitor or witness involved in the case be required to enter into an appropriate written confidentiality undertaking before being allowed to view the contents of the final witness statement made by Burton."  He stated that that undertaking extends to ensuring that there is no disclosure to any third party, other than solicitors, counsel and experts who themselves give a confidentiality undertaking.  MBC have provided examples of three confidentiality regimes which GIO has agreed to in connection with the representative proceedings. These are proffered as examples of how a confidentiality undertaking can be used to protect confidential information when it is used in litigation. They have the extra persuasive power of being regimes that GIO itself has agreed to, or put forward.  I have earlier mentioned that ASIC has on foot proceedings against three officers of GIO. In preparing to bring those proceedings, ASIC held examinations of numerous senior officers of GIO and GIO Re. MBC subpoenaed those transcripts in the Federal Court representative proceedings. On 8
November 2001 Justice Moore made an order, with the consent of all parties in the representative proceedings, including GIO, and of those examinees who were legally represented, which permitted access to the transcripts to counsel, solicitors, expert witnesses, lay witnesses, and officers of the insurers or reinsurers of the respondents with responsibility in relation to indemnification of any respondent and solicitors retained by any such officers, on the basis that each person to whom access was granted, signed a confidentiality undertaking, the form of which was set out in the court order, and each person to whom the transcript was shown destroyed all copies of the transcript or parts thereof, and any notes they might have made or received in relation to the transcript or any part, upon conclusion of the proceedings.  The second example of a confidentiality regime related to confidential documents, which had been produced by Mr King, including his tax return. The third example was of two rival confidentiality regimes which were proposed by the solicitors for GIO, and by MBC, in relation to the Burton documents which
Justice Moore had just ordered be discovered.  
Sources of Any Obligation of Confidentiality  The law recognises three different ways in which an obligation of confidentiality might arise. The first is by express provision in a contract.
The second is by an implied term in a contract. The third is as an obligation recognised in the exclusive jurisdiction of equity.  In any litigation which seeks to enforce an obligation of confidentiality, it is important to recognise which of these three types of obligation is alleged. The considerations which enter into the validity, and means of enforcement, of an obligation of confidentiality can differ, between these three types.  In the present case, the obligation which is sought to be enforced is, primarily, an express contractual obligation, namely that arising under the confidentiality undertaking which Mr Burton executed on 31 May 1999 (see paragraph 18 above). It would only be to the extent that this express confidentiality agreement could not be enforced that GIO would need to fall back on an implied term in Mr Burton's contract of employment, or an equitable obligation of confidence.  
How the Defendants Say There is no Breach of Confidentiality Obligations  There was no argument put (nor could any argument have been put) that Mr
Burton, by his communications with MBC, was not in breach of the literal words of that confidentiality undertaking. Rather Mr Burton and MBC put two related arguments. The first was that the confidentiality undertaken should not be read in accordance with its literal words, but rather should be "read down" so as to not prohibit the communication by Mr Burton, of the information which he communicated to MBC. If that argument fails, then MBC and Mr Burton submit that the confidentiality agreement is, in part, void, to the extent that it prohibits Mr Burton engaging in such communications.  The same consideration underlies both these arguments, namely, a matter of public policy, concerning the due administration of justice. They submit that the confidentiality agreement,  "... can sensibly be read so as not to prevent disclosure properly required for the due administration of justice. Plainly, it cannot operate to prevent the witness from giving evidence. By the same reasoning, it should not prevent disclosure for the purpose of preparing a witness statement. The alternative is to permit the evidence to be obtained, but to require it to be called "blind". That achieves nothing by way of protecting confidentiality, and would substantially hinder the efficient conduct of the trial of the Federal
Court proceedings."  "Reading Down"?  Any attempt to construe is an attempt to expound the meaning of the words which the parties to that contract used, employing such extrinsic aids to construction as might be legitimate (Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd versus State
Rail Authority of NSW <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337], at 348-352). Looking at the language of the confidentiality agreement which Mr Burton has signed, I see nothing in the words which suggests that they should be given the limited meaning for which MBC and Mr
Burton contend. There is nothing in the situation that the contracting parties were in, at the time the document was entered, as known one to the other - namely, that there were respectively an insurance company conducting a substantial business, and a senior executive of that company who had had, and continued to have, access to commercially sensitive information - which would lead to treating the parties as having intended anything other than the literal meaning of the words they used. There is no suggestion that at that time there was any litigation against GIO, or that GIO would not continue a reinsurance business. I reject the suggestion that the wording of the confidentiality undertaking should be read down, as a matter of construction.  
Voidness Through Public Policy?  MBC and Mr Burton submit that in the present case, the Federal Court litigation makes serious civil claims, on behalf of thousands of former shareholders of what was then a listed public company of misleading and deceptive conduct (which is alleged to be a breach of various norms of conduct established by statute), and of negligence. They submit that there is a very high public interest in the administration of justice, namely, the fair, efficient and just resolution of (in this instance) civil claims. They say that there would be a grave injustice if these former GIO shareholders were to be denied the ability to obtain factual information from a principal witness capable of establishing the allegations made against GIO and others in the
Federal Court proceedings. They say that, as a matter of public policy, GIO should not be able to elevate its interest in the preservation of its private and confidential information above the public interest in the due administration of justice.  
A versus Hayden  MBC and Mr Burton rely on A versus Hayden <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 532.] That case concerned an application for an injunction by members of the Australian Secret Intelligence Service to prevent the
Commonwealth from disclosing their identities to the Victorian State
Commissioner of Police. The Victorian Police were investigating criminal conduct alleged to have been engaged in by ASIS members. The Victorian State
Government, at the request of the Victorian Police, had asked the Commonwealth
Government to disclose the identity of those ASIS agents. The ASIS agents had an express term in their contract of employment which bound the Commonwealth not to disclose their identity. The court held that that provision in their contracts of employment was contrary to public policy (Gibbs CJ dissenting on this issue - at 543-544). The basis on which Mason J found the term void was (at 553),  "... because the promise seeks to impose an obligation which is at variance with a fundamental head of public policy - the public interest in the enforcement of the criminal law and in the administration of justice."  His Honour's discussion of the case law, and subsequent application of it, at 553-561, retains a continuing flavour of focusing on contracts which interfere with the due administration of the criminal law. Thus, his Honour said:  "... that there is a powerful public interest in the enforcement of the criminal law is an important element in the administration of justice does not admit of debate. Indeed, its importance has been such that the common law has regarded as illegal "any contract or engagement having a tendency, however slight, to affect the administration of justice" to use the words of Lord
Lyndhurst in Egerton versus Brownlow (Earl) <case>; <case> ER 359 at ]."  "...the underlying thrust of the common law principle was directed as much against the detriment which would be caused to the administration of justice if agreements of the kind in question were to be enforced as against the evil of making knowledge of the commission of the crime a source of profit to the individual." (at 554-555)  "... the effective enforcement of the criminal law and the administration of justice, which are central elements in a well ordered democratic society, depend for their efficacy on the unrestricted freedom of each and every citizen to assist and co-operate with the authorities in the investigation and prosecution of criminal offences. There is therefore a powerful public interest in promoting and preserving the citizen's freedom to assist and co- operate with the authorities in the investigation and prosecution of crime." (at 555)  "... the public interest in the enforcement of the criminal law is not diminished because it now depends, not on any duty or obligation on the part of the citizen to give information concerning the commission of an offence, but on his freedom to decide what action he will take." (555-556)  "At first glance it might be thought that the making of a contract not to disclose information which may prove to be relevant to the investigation of a crime is no more than an exercise of the citizen's freedom of action to which
I have referred, but this is to ignore the element of public policy." (556)  "It is obvious that the public interest in the enforcement of the criminal law as an element in the administration of justice would be seriously impaired if the citizen were at liberty to assume in return for a benefit an obligation not to disclose information concerning the commission of a criminal offence.
The enforcement of the criminal law cannot be allowed to hinge on the willingness of the citizen to make a profit out of his silence, whether the contract be made before or after the commission of the offence." (556)  It was on the basis of this discussion of principle, and in the context of a factual situation where the particular inference with the administration of justice which was at issue was the administration of criminal justice, that
Mason J came to his conclusion, at 556-557.  "The foregoing discussion indicates that, subject to minor qualification only,
Lord Lyndhurst was correct in Egerton versus Brownlow (1853) 4 HLC at 163 (10 ER at 424) when he said that any contract having a tendency, however slight, to affect the administration of justice is illegal. He was of course speaking of a contract or engagement which has a tendency to affect the administration of justice adversely. ...  
Sometimes it is said that a contract to which the principle applies is void; at other times it is said that the contract is unenforceable or, ... that the court will not lend its aid to the enforcement of the contract. The true position, as I see it, is that some contracts are void whereas others are valid, though the court will decline to enforce the particular provision in a valid contract in particular circumstances when enforcement of that provision would have an adverse effect on the administration of justice. Thus, a simple agreement not to disclose the existence of a serious criminal offence, which has been, or is about to be, committed in consideration of the payment of a sum of money may well be void because it is illegal. However, it will be otherwise with a contract which is in all respects lawful but nevertheless contains a provision which, if enforced according to its terms, will result in an interference with the administration of justice. Take a contract which contains a minor or subsidiary provision which, though not directed to non- disclosure of criminal offences, imposes an obligation of confidentiality in sweeping terms. If those terms are not susceptible of being read down, the court will refuse to lend its aid to the enforcement of the provision if enforcement would result in the non-disclosure of a criminal offence adversely affecting the administration of justice."  Wilson and Dawson JJ concluded, at 574:  "... if the court was to grant the plaintiffs the permanent injunctions which they seek it would be elevating their private right to confidentiality above the interest of the community in the efficient investigation of alleged breaches of the law. The Commonwealth seeks to advance that interest, yet the injunctions would prevent it from doing so. The administration of justice, and in particular the enforcement of the criminal law, must always rank highly in any assessment of the public interest."  Brennan J held that the term in the contract was void because the Crown could not bind itself, by contract, to give up a discretion of this type (at ). It was in that context that his Honour said:  "The variety of circumstances comprehended by the promise and the unqualified obligation not to disclose in any circumstances (except for the purposes of
ASIS) would preclude the executive government from furnishing information that might otherwise be available to assist the police to enforce the law. Such a promise has a tendency adversely to affect the administration of justice and is void: (Egerton versus Brownlow (Earl) <case>; <case> ER 359, at ]; Horne versus Barber <case>; [(1920) 27 CLR 494], at 499-500.)  "... the ability of any citizen to assist in the detection and suppression of crime cannot be bargained away except where the crime is not a matter of public concern: cf Kerridge versus Simmonds <case>; [(1906) 4 CLR 253.] That is not to say that obligations of confidence cannot be accepted by contract or imposed by law but such obligations cannot enjoin silence where disclosure is reasonably required by the police (or other law enforcement agency) to assist in the investigation of crimes reasonably suspected to have been committed and such disclosure is justified in the public interest: cf Initial Services Ltd versus Putterill [[1968] 1 QB 396], at 405. A term of a contract not to disclose confidential information though disclosure is reasonably so required to be made and though disclosure is in the public interest is void."  Deane J said:  "... the courts of this country will not lend their aid to enforce a promise not to disclose information where the circumstances are such that the enforcement or insistence upon observance of the promise would obstruct the due administration of the criminal law of Australia, whether Commonwealth or
State. The rationale of that proposition is that, apart from the exceptional case (such as that of a professional legal adviser) where the overall administration of the law itself requires that confidentiality be maintained, it would be contrary to public policy for the courts to enforce a right on the part of one person to insist that another fail or refuse to disclose relevant information to assist those entrusted with the ordinary administration of the criminal law in the proper investigation and prosecution of criminal activity: the enforcement by the courts of such a private right to insist that another fail or refuse to disclose relevant information would involve the courts in the obstruction of the due administration of the criminal law which is a mainstay both of the rule of law which they exist to serve and of the very existence of effective private rights. For the purposes of that proposition, the investigation of actual or reasonably apprehended criminal activity by a regular law enforcement agency of the Commonwealth or of a State is part of the administration of the criminal law." (595)  It can be seen from this analysis of the decision in A versus Hayden that the ground of the decision, that the term of contract there in question was void, was that it interfered with the administration of the criminal law.  Thus, if the confidentiality promise in the present case is to be struck down, or not enforced, on the grounds of public policy, some source other than the ratio decidendi of A versus Hayden must be found for that statement of public policy.  
How to Find Public Policy   In Egerton versus Brownlow <case>; [(1853) 4 HLC 1]; [10 ER 359] the House of Lords was considering a settlement of property which settled land on Lord Alford for life, with successive interest to various of his descendents, but with a proviso that, "if Lord Alford shall die without having acquired the title of Duke or Marquis of Bridgewater to him and the heirs male of his body, then" certain of the gifts to his successors would not occur. The House of Lords held that the proviso was a condition subsequent, that it was void as being contrary to public policy, and hence did not take effect. Lord Lyndhurst, at 160 (423 of ER) said:  "It is a well established rule of law that a condition against the public good, or public policy, as it is usually called, is illegal and void.
Sheppard's Touchstone and Lord Coke are direct authorities on this point. In more modern times we find Lord Hardwicke, in a case already cited by the Lord
Chief Baron, stating that, "political arguments in the fullest sense of the word, as they concern the government of a nation, must be, and always have been, of great weight in the consideration of the Court; and though there may be no dolus malus in contracts as to other persons, yet if the rest of mankind are concerned as well as the parties, it may properly be said that it regards the public utility."  
And in another case he says,  "These reasons of public benefit and utility weigh greatly with me, and are a principal ingredient in my present opinion." ...  
The inquiry must, in each instance, where no former precedent has occurred, have been into the tendency of the act to interfere with the general interest.
The rule, then, is clear. Whether the particular case comes within the rule, it is the province of the court in each instance, acting with due caution, to determine."  His Lordship then went on to consider how, if a substantial gift of property was made dependent on attaining a peerage, and given that peerages were usually conferred on the advice of the ministry then in power, the person who so stood to gain might be swayed from the impartial performance of his duty as both legislator and judge. It was in that context that his Lordship made his oft quoted remark:  "It is admitted, that any contract or engagement having a tendency, however slight, to affect the administration of justice, is illegal and void."  These days, the courts are more constrained than in Lord Lyndhurst's day in deciding what counts as public policy. Courts do not now entertain or decide "political arguments in the fullest sense of the word, as they concern the government of the nation" when deciding whether a contract contravenes public policy. In Re Morris (deceased) <case>; [(1943) 43 SR 352], at 355-356 Jordan CJ said:  "... the phrase 'public policy' appears to mean the ideas which for the time being prevail in a community as to the conditions necessary to ensure its welfare; so that anything is treated as against public policy if it is generally regarded as injurious to the public interest. 'The "public policy" which a court is entitled to apply as a test of validity to a contract is in relation to some definite and governing principle which the community as a whole has already adopted either formally by law or tacitly by its general course of corporate life, and which the courts of the country can therefore recognise and enforce. The court is not a legislator: it cannot initiate the principle; it can only state or formulate it if it already exists': Wilkinson v Osborne <case>; [(1915) 21 CLR 89] at 97. It is well settled that a contract is not enforceable if its enforcement would be opposed by public policy: Mogul Steamship Co v
McGregor, Gow & Co [[1892] AC 25] at 39, 51. Public policy is not, however, fixed and stable. From generation to generation ideas change as to what is necessary or injurious, so that 'public policy is a variable thing. It must fluctuate with the circumstances of the time':
Naylor, Benzon & Co versus Krainische Industie Gesellschaft [[1918] 1 KB ], at
New heads of public policy come into being, and old heads undergo modification."  This passage has been quoted with approval by Mason J in A versus Hayden <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 532] at 558, and by Spigelman CJ in R versus Young <case>; <case>; [(1915) 21 CLR 89] contained in it, was cited by Wilson and Dawson JJ in
A versus Hayden at 571.  While the courts have no choice but to make findings about what public policy requires, and to revisit those findings from generation to generation, it is a task which is performed using the approach laid down in Wilkinson v
Osborne and in Re Morris (deceased). Further it is a task which must be approached with extreme caution. As Mason J said in A versus Hayden, at 559:  "The problem is one of formulating with any degree of precision the criteria or the circumstances which will justify a court in refusing to enforce a contract on the ground that there is a countervailing public interest amounting to public policy. The difficulties in ascertaining the existence and strength of an identifiable public interest to which the courts should give effect by refusing to enforce a contract are so formidable as to require that they "should use extreme reserve in holding such a contract to be void as against public policy, and only do so when the contract is incontestably and on any view inimical to the public interest", to use the words of Asquith LJ in Monkland versus Jack Barclay Ltd [[1951] 2 KB 252], at 265."  To find out whether public policy does not permit the entering, or enforcement, of the contractual arrangement on which GIO sues, it is necessary to look to various areas where the law has already expressed choices which might bear upon that question.  
Criminal Law - Perverting the Course of Justice  Attempting to pervert the course of justice (sometimes also referred to as attempting to defeat or obstruct the course of justice) was an indictable common law misdemeanour. In Victoria (where the distinction between felonies and misdemeanours has been abolished by the [Crimes (Classification of
Offences) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/cooa1981292/) (Vic)) it is an indictable common law offence. (I mention the Victorian position because
Mr Murphy conducts his practice in Melbourne, and it may be - the evidence does not establish - that at least some of the disclosures occurred in
Melbourne.)  The common law has been abolished in New South Wales in this respect, by amendments to the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) in 1990 which inserted a new [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s341.html), which abolished the offence of perverting the course of justice, and the offence of attempting or conspiring to pervert the course of justice. Now, [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/index.html#p7) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) deals with various offences connected with interfering with the administration of justice.  [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/index.html#p7) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) is divided into Division 1 (definitions), Division 2 (interference with the administration of justice - [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s314.html) to [319](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s319.html) inclusive), and Division 3 (interference with judicial officers, witnesses, jurors etc - [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s320.html) to [326](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s326.html) inclusive), and Division 4 (perjury, false statements etc - [sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s327.html) to [339](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s339.html) - inclusive), and Division 5 (miscellaneous).  The 1990 amendments inserted the following new provisions in the [Crimes
Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/):  "312 A reference in this Part to perverting the course of justice is a reference to obstructing, preventing, perverting or defeating the course of justice or the administration of the law.  A person who does any act, or makes any omission, intending in any way to pervert the course of justice, is liable to imprisonment for 14 years."  The [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) contains, in [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s314.html) and following, various prohibitions of conduct which are specific ways in which the administration of justice might be interfered with. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s319.html) is a provision of much greater generality than those other sections. None of those other sections could possibly be infringed by enforcement, in the circumstances of the present case, of the confidentiality obligation.  The only other provisions of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) which could even arguably bear on the present case are:  "322 A person who threatens to do or cause, or who does or causes, any injury or detriment to any person ... intending to influence a person called or to be called as a witness in any judicial proceeding to give false evidence or withhold true evidence or to not attend as a witness or not produce anything in evidence pursuant to a summons or subpoena ... is liable to imprisonment for 10 years.  A person who does any act ... intending to procure, persuade, induce or otherwise cause any person called or to be called as a witness in any judicial proceeding to give false evidence or withhold true evidence or to not attend as a witness or not produce anything in evidence pursuant to a summons or subpoena ... is liable to imprisonment for 7 years.  A person who without lawful excuse wilfully prevents, obstructs or dissuades a person called as a witness in any judicial proceeding from attending as a witness or from producing anything in evidence pursuant to a summons or subpoena is liable to imprisonment for 5 years  
A person who without lawful excuse wilfully prevents, obstructs or dissuades another person who the person believes may be called as a witness in any judicial proceeding from attending the proceeding is liable to imprisonment for 5 years."  None of these provisions deal with the case of someone using a contractual provision to prevent a potential witness in litigation from disclosing confidential information, out of court, to a solicitor who seeks to use that confidential information in the preparation of pending litigation. Thus, only [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s319.html) remains a candidate for possibly articulating the sort of public policy which
MBC and Mr Burton invoke in the present case.  The [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Cth) contains in [Part
III](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/index.html#p3) a set of offences relating to the administration of justice.  The only sections which could even arguably have any bearing on the present case are:  "36A A person who:  threatens intimidates or restrains; ...  causes or procures the punishment of  a person for or on account of his having appeared, or being about to appear, as a witness in a judicial proceeding shall be guilty of an indictable offence.  A person who intentionally prevents another person who has been summonsed to attend as a witness in a judicial proceeding from attending as a witness or from producing anything in evidence pursuant to the subpoena or summons shall be guilty of an offence.  (1) Any person who attempts, in any way not specially defined in this Act to obstruct, prevent, pervert or defeat the cause of justice in relation to the judicial power of the Commonwealth, shall be guilty of an offence.  Sections 36A and 40 do not strike at the present situation, of GIO seeking to enforce a confidentiality obligation in relation to disclosures out of court of confidential information.  [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s319.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) , and [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s43.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Cth) would be influenced, in their interpretation, by the previous common law on the subject. For help in construing those sections, and to ascertain the
Victorian law concerning this topic, I now turn to consider the common law concerning perverting the course of justice.  The case law concerning the offence of perverting the course of justice is strongly weighted with cases concerning interference with the processes of the criminal law. They include a doctor giving a medical certificate which falsely states that an accused is unfit to stand his trial R versus Edelsten [(1990) 21
NSWLR 542]; attempting to influence a judicial officer concerning the disposition of a case before him R versus Murphy <case>; [(1985) 158 CLR 596)]; an accused providing self bail R versus Freeman [(1985) 3 NSWLR ]
at 309; a solicitor representing a client in court when the client is charged under a name which the solicitor knows is not the client's real name Hatty v
Pilkinton <case>; [(1992) 35 FCR 433]; pressuring an accused to plead guilty Meissner versus R <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 132]; and making an accusation of crime one knows is false to the police, and planting items one intends to be taken to be evidence of the truth of the accusation R versus Rowell [[1978] 1 WLR 132.]  From the multitude of reported cases concerning this offence, Mason J, in
A versus Hayden chose to refer to those cases which bore a close analogy to the facts of the case then before the High Court. Thus, his Honour said, at -554:  "In Howard versus Odhams Press Ltd [[1938] 1 KB 1], at 29 Slesser
LJ pointed out that the perversion of justice may take place in many ways. One example was concealment or procuring the concealment of a felony amounting to the offence of misprision. Another example is an agreement not to prosecute or to stifle a prosecution which at common law is void or unenforceable:
Williams versus Bayley (1866) LR 1 HL at 220 per Lord Westbury.  
Yet another example is an agreement between a prosecutor and persons indicted that a witness should not give evidence at a trial for reward."  Similarly, Wilson and Dawson JJ at 571 referred to Collins versus Blantern <case>; [(1767) 2 Wils. KB 347] at ; <case>; [95 ER 850] at 852, a case concerning a contract to stifle a prosecution for perjury. That it was these cases that were referred to by Mason J, and by
Wilson and Dawson JJ, demonstrates how their Honours were carrying through the methodology for recognition of public policy laid down in Wilkinson v
Osborne, searching for cases which had articulated, in another sphere of law, the public policy which was then to be applied to decide whether a contract is enforceable.  Notwithstanding the preponderance of cases concerning perverting the course of justice being ones which related to interfering with criminal proceedings, there are some cases concerning the offence of perverting the course of justice, which relate to interference with civil proceedings. R v
Vreones [[1891] 1 QB 360] held that the offence was established when the accused had tampered with samples of goods, the quality of which was disputed, with intent to deceive arbitrators. R versus Kellett [[1976] 1 QB 372] held that the offence was committed where a respondent to a divorce case threatened to sue a potential witness in that case for slander for a statement which that person had made to an enquiry agent, with the intent of causing that potential witness not to give evidence in the case. The ratio decidendi of that case was that:  "... a threat (or promise) made to a witness is, like an assault on a witness, an attempt to pervert the course of justice, if made with the intention of persuading him to alter or withhold his evidence, whether or not what he threatens (or promises) is a lawful act, such as the exercise of a legal right, and whether or not he has any other intention or intends to do the act if the evidence is not altered, or withheld." (at 393)  However, I had not been referred to any case, and my own researches have not revealed any case, which suggests that any offence connected with interfering with the course of justice is committed if an employer seeks to enforce a confidentiality clause in an agreement with his employee (or former employee), by preventing the employee from disclosing, to a solicitor, out of court, confidential information of the employer.  
Interfering with the Course of Justice - Application in Civil Law  The notion of interfering with the administration of justice has been recognised, in connection with certain civil proceedings, outside the context of a criminal charge. I have already mentioned Egerton versus Brownlow, where the concept was applied to strike down a condition subsequent in a settlement.
When that was the context in which Lord Lyndhurst made the remark, "It is admitted, that any contract or engagement having a tendency, however slight, to affect the administration of justice, is illegal and void", some caution is called for in applying that remark to a widely different context.  In Lound versus Grimwade [(1888) 39 Ch D 605] Stirling
J dealt with an action to set aside a bond under which the plaintiff promised to pay money. The action succeeded, because part of the consideration for giving the bond was a promise that no criminal proceedings would be begun against the plaintiff, and that certain other criminal proceedings would be conducted in such a way that the plaintiff's name would not be mentioned, or if it was mentioned the plaintiff would be exonerated from all blame in connection with the transactions there in question. This consideration was clearly one which would amount to the offence of interfering with the administration of justice. However, in coming to that conclusion Stirling J made some remarks which could potentially mislead. His Lordship quotes Lord
Lyndhurst's famous sentence from Egerton versus Earl Brownlow, and continues (at -3):  "Upon this principle it has been repeatedly held that agreements tending to affect the course of legal proceedings are illegal, even though those proceedings may not be strictly criminal in their nature. Thus an agreement to pay money in consideration of the withdrawal of opposition to the discharge of an insolvent has been held to be illegal: Hall versus Dyson (17 QB 785); Hills v
Mitson <case>; [(8 Ex 751).] In Elliott versus Richardson (Law Rep [5 Cp 744)] an agreement by a shareholder in a company which was being compulsorily wound up that he would endeavour to postpone the making of a call was held to be illegal on the ground that it amounted to an interference with public justice; see especially the judgment of Mr Justice Willes (Law Rep [5 CP 748)] with which the other judges (Keating J and M Smith J) agreed. A fortiori, must an agreement which tends to interfere with the course of criminal proceedings be illegal."  It is the last sentence in this passage just quoted which is the ratio of the decision. The first sentence of the passage quoted is, in my view, too widely stated, and not borne out by the cases relied on.  Hall versus Dyson [(1852) 17 A & E 785] and
Hills versus Mitson <case>; [(1853) 8 Ex 751] were each cases where an insolvent debtor had applied for his discharge from custody, the plaintiff had set about opposing that discharge, but dropped his opposition in return for money. The report of Hall versus Dyson does not mention Egerton versus Lord Brownlow. The reasoning of Lord Campbell CJ (at 791) was:  "In the present case, the creditor is, as it were, bought off; and he was under a moral obligation to continue his opposition, in as much as, by giving notice of it, he had led the other creditors to believe that he really intended to oppose. The consequence of his withdrawing is that justice is disappointed, because the adjudication is made without the proper investigation having taken place. It seems to me that the consideration for receiving the money, which is, to withdraw his opposition, and that after having given notice of it, is clearly immoral.  
Patterson J held that the agreement sued on was illegal:  "... in as much as it is contrary to the policy of the Insolvent Debtors' Act, and amounts moreover to a fraud on the creditors. The duty of opposition on the part of the creditor may be a duty only of imperfect obligation: but, if he has the option of pursuing one course or the other, it is an immoral act, against the policy of the law, and a fraud upon the other creditors, to take money for exercising that option (at 792).  
Colleridge J agreed.  Thus, in Hall versus Dyson it was the specific type of interference with the administration of justice which led to the conclusion that the agreement was contrary to public policy - that the opposing creditor had taken on a role in the litigation, that other creditors were likely to rely on his continuing to perform, so that the opposing creditor was not free to consult only his own private interests in deciding to withdraw his opposition. As well, for any creditor to receive a personal benefit in this way was contrary to the policy of the Insolvent Debtors Act, which required creditors to be treated equally.  Hills versus Mitson did no more than apply Hall versus Dyson (at 758). Elliott v Richardson [(1870) LR 5 CP 744] concerned an agreement between A (a shareholder in a company in the course of winding up) and B (a shareholder in and creditor of that company) that A would seek to postpone the making of a call on shares in the company, and support the admission to proof of B's claimed debt, in return for which B would pay the calls due on A's shares. Willes J's preferred ground of decision was that the agreement was unenforceable because it amounted to maintenance. He went on to give a view on another point that had been raised, holding that the agreement amounted to an interference with the course of public justice.
However, he then went on: "In order to explain my view on that point, we must look at the nature of the Winding-Up Acts", and gave a summary of the way those Acts had substituted a court-controlled process for the previous cumbersome procedures. He concluded, at 749:  "It seems to me that this an essential part of the intentions of the legislature, that the proceedings should be taken with reasonable speed; and that being so, any secret agreement by which persons who are given a locus standi, as representing their own interests, should, for money, undertake to delay proceedings to the prejudice of the other shareholders and creditors, is void, not only as being against public policy, but as being against the clear intention of the legislature under the Winding-Up Acts."  Both Keating J and Montague Smith J, gave separate judgments, based solely on the agreement being contrary to the policy of the Winding-Up Acts. Holding the agreement to be contrary to public policy because it was contrary to the policy of a specific statute is, with respect to Stirling J, a long way from holding that "agreements tending to affect the course of legal proceedings are illegal."  A moment's consideration will show that there are many agreements which "tend to affect the course of legal proceedings" in one sense of that expression, but which are not illegal.  * Legal practitioners are paid for their services, and sometimes have a provision in their retainers whereby, if funds are not provided in advance, they are entitled not to appear at litigation. That type of contract could have a significant effect on the course of legal proceedings, if it resulted in the lawyer ceasing to act close to the hearing date, yet it would not seriously be suggested that it was illegal or unenforceable as contrary to public policy.  * An agreement settling legal proceedings has a profound effect on the course of those legal proceedings, but is not contrary to public policy. Even a claim for private injury resulting from an act which amounts to an indictable offence can be compromised, provided that it is not a matter of public concern, Kerridge versus Simmonds <case>; [(1906) 4 CLR 253], at 258-260 per Griffiths CJ.  * Many agreements to fund the bringing of litigation are now regarded as not amounting to maintenance. In Kien Nam Quach versus Huntof Pty Ltd <case> Dunford J quoted, at <case>; [[1993] 3 All ER 321] at 328, "Nevertheless the offences and torts of maintenance and champerty lingered on in atrophied form for more than a century after any public interest in maintaining them had disappeared". Dunford J continued, at [11] and [12]:  "Since then the offences and torts of maintenance and champerty have been abolished in England and in a number of the Australian states. In New South
Wales, the relevant statute is the Maintenance and Champerty Abolition Act No. 88. However, <case> provides that the Act does not affect any rule of law as to cases in which a contract is to be treated as contrary to public policy or as otherwise illegal whether the contract was made before or after the commencement of the Act.  
In recent times the courts have taken a more liberal attitude to what constitutes an interest in the litigation or other motive recognised as justifying maintenance of litigation by a stranger to it: Stevens v
Keogh <case>; [(1946) 72 CLR 1], Trendtex Trading Corporation versus Credit Suisse [[1982]
AC 679],
Magic Menu Systems versus AFA Facilitation Ltd [(1997) 72 FCR 261] at 267,
Roux versus Australian Broadcasting Commission <case>; [[1992] 2 VR 577] at 607, Martell versus Consett Iron Co Limited supra, so that the provision of legal assistance by trade organisations, trade unions and employers or where the maintainer has a "genuine commercial interest" in the outcome of the litigation are no longer regarded as offending the rules against maintenance of other persons' litigation. It appears that there is a further exception in relation to bankruptcy and company administration cases, e.g. Re Tosich Constructions Pty Limited, Re William Felton Co Pty
Ltd [(1998) 28 ACSR 228] at 232."  
See also NAB Ltd versus Market Holdings Pty Ltd (in Liq) <case>; <case>- <case> per Young CJ in Eq; Hogarth versus Gye <case> at <case> per
Bryson J; Cadwallader versus Bajco <case> at <case> per Austin J.  
Officer's Statutory Duties - [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/)  On the other hand, there are several indictors that it is in accord with public policy that a confidentiality agreement, like the one on which GIO sues in the present case, should be enforceable.  [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s183.html) of the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) says;  a person who obtains information because they are, or have been, a director or other officer or employee of a corporation must not improperly use the information to:  gain an advantage for themselves or someone else; or  cause detriment to the corporation.  
Note 1: This duty continues after the person stops being an officer or employee of the corporation.  
Note 2: This subsection is a civil penalty provision (see [section
E).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s1317e.html)  The definition of "officer", in [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s9.html) of the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth), includes:  "... a person ... who makes, or participates in making, decisions that effect the whole, or a substantial part, of the business of the corporation."  In Grove versus Flavel [(1986) 4 ACLC 654], at 659
Jacobs J (with whom Matheson and Olsson JJ agreed) noted the wide variety of roles in a company which fell within the definition of "officer", and said:  "It seems to me, therefore, that what is "improper" for the purposes of [sec (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s124.html) cannot be determined by reference to some common uniform or inflexible standard which applies equally to every person who is an officer, but rather must be determined by reference to the particular duties and responsibilities of the particular officer whose conduct is impugned."  That observation would also apply to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s183.html) of the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth).  While [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s183.html) is contravened only if the employee, etc improperly uses the information, concerning the predecessor of that section (section 232(5) of the
Corporations Law) Young J said, in Rosetex Co Pty Ltd versus Licata [(1994) 12
AC LC 269], at 273:  "... "information" in [s232(5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s232.html) means the sort of information which equity would protect by injunction if a director used it in breach of his fiduciary duties. "Improper" use of that information is in much the same plight as a breach of fiduciary duty under the general law."  In R versus Byrnes <case>; [(1995) 183 CLR 501], at 514-515 Brennan, Dean, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said, concerning the proscription, in section 229(4) of the Companies (South
Australia) Code, of an officer or employee making, "improper use of his position as such an officer or employee, to gain, directly or indirectly, and advantage for himself or for any other person or to cause detriment to the corporation":  "Impropriety does not depend on an alleged offender's consciousness of impropriety. Impropriety consists in a breach of the standards of conduct that would be expected of a person in the position of the alleged offender by reasonable persons with knowledge of the duties, powers and authorities of the position and the circumstances of the case. When impropriety is said to consist in an abuse of power, the state of mind of the alleged offender is important (Hindle versus John Cotton Ltd [(1919) 56 SLR 625] at -631): the alleged offender's knowledge or means of knowledge of the circumstances in which the power is exercised and his purpose or intention in exercising the power are important factors in determining the question whether the power has been abused. But impropriety is not restricted to abuse of power. It may consist in the doing of an act which the director or officer knows or ought to know that he has no authority to do."  
See also per McHugh J at 521-522.  That construction can, it seems to me, properly apply to section 183 [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth).  The existence of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s183.html) suggests that the maintenance of confidences by a former corporate officer is something which public policy requires - at least in those circumstances where there is not a countervailing obligation.  But MBC and Mr Burton do not assert that there is any obligation on someone who is the repository of confidential information, which could possibly be of use in litigation, to assist a legal practitioner in the preparation of that litigation. In this respect there is a fundamental difference between the position Mr Burton has been in when he has been freely disclosing information in the privacy of MBC's offices, to the situation he would be in when he was answering questions, pursuant to a subpoena, in a courtroom.  What MBC and Mr Burton say is that public policy requires that, if a person who has such information wishes to assist a lawyer in preparation of litigation, public policy requires that he be free to do so, notwithstanding any contractual obligations he might have undertaken. It does not seem consistent with [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s183.html) that a former corporate officer have that freedom, except perhaps if the nature of the information sought to be disclosed was such that the former employee was not acting "improperly" in disclosing it. I shall return to this topic later (see paragraph 210 below).  
Confidentiality and the Availability of Evidence in Court Proceedings  There are well established limitations on obligations of confidentiality, being limitations which are established for the purpose of enabling the system of administration of justice to operate. Thus, at common law, a witness who is called to give evidence in court is not entitled, on the ground of owing an obligation of confidence alone, to decline to answer any relevant question which is permitted to be put (D versus National Society for the Prevention to
Children <case>; [[1978] AC 171], at 218, 230, 237). If the confidential information also is the subject of a privilege recognised in the law of evidence which applies in the court before whom the person is called, it is that privilege, not the confidentiality, which provides a ground on which that person need not give the evidence.  However, the rules of court state the extent of the obligation in this respect. The rules of court standardly provide for the issue of subpoenas to give evidence and subpoenas for production. They standardly provide for the form of the subpoena which may be issued, though allowing for the court to authorise the subpoena to issue in some other form (eg Supreme Court Rules
Part 37 Rule 2, Federal Court Rules Order 27 Rule 2). The obligation under the subpoena is, typically, an order that the recipient shall attend for the purpose of giving evidence before the court, at a nominated time and place and until the recipient is excused by the court from further attending. The rules of court which create this obligation to attend, say nothing about the recipient of a subpoena having any obligation to say a single word to the party who issues the subpoena, outside the context of answering questions in court.  While the administration of justice is a very important matter of social policy, it is not one which overrides all other matters of public importance.
There are many constraints under which litigation operates, where, as a matter of public policy, information is not able to be used at all in litigation. In the Federal Court (which is probably the relevant court to consider for present purposes) the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/)(Cth) applies. It denies the court evidence when it is the subject of client legal privilege [(section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s117.html)-[126](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s126.html)), religious confession privilege [(section )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s127.html), self incrimination privilege [(section )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s128.html), evidence relating to the reasoning process of a judicial officer [(section )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s129.html), various public interest privileges [(section )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s130.html), or evidence of settlement negotiations [(section ).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s131.html)
As well, the court has a discretion to exclude evidence in the circumstances where [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) applies, to limit the use of evidence under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s136.html), and to not receive evidence which was obtained improperly or in contravention of a law, or in consequence of an impropriety or contravention of a law under [section .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) A subpoena to give evidence will usually not be enforced against an expert who has had no connection with the facts of the case (Application of Forsyth;
Re Cordova versus Philips Roxane Laboratories Inc [[1984] 2 NSWLR 327).] When there are these limitations on the court actually receiving evidence in litigation, it ought not come as a surprise if more extensive limitations can be imposed, consistently with public policy, on a lawyer's receipt of information and documents, in the privacy of his own office, for the purpose of eventually being used in litigation.  As well, when a case is in the course of preparation, limits are imposed on the ability of a litigant to compel the production of information which is relevant to the case. While there are procedures of discovery, and interrogatories, whereby a litigant can compulsorily obtain documents, and information, from an opposite party, those procedures are always subject to the control of the court. In the course of controlling those procedures, one of the factors which the court takes into account, is whether information is confidential. Confidentiality can be taken into account in deciding whether to order discovery at all, and if so to what extent, Science Research Council v
Nasse <case>; [[1980] AC 1028] at 1065-1066, 1071-1072, 1073, 1077, 1085, 1089-1090.
Further, the court can, in appropriate cases such as when the opposite party is a trade rival, allow inspection of a discovered document which is confidential on the basis that it is disclosed only to counsel, solicitors and nominated experts, not to the client: Mobil Oil Australia Ltd versus Guina
Developments Pty Ltd <case>; [[1996] 2 VR 34.]  If documents are obtained from a third party on subpoena, and the third party objects to those documents being inspected, the court decides whether, when, and subject to what, if any, limitations, inspection can occur:
National Employers' Mutual General Association Ltd versus Waind and Hill [[1978] NSWLR 372.]  If the court requires the disclosure of information, or documents, for the purpose of one piece of litigation, the court ensures that (unless leave of the court is obtained) the information, or document, is not used for any other piece of litigation - Harman versus Secretary of State for the Home Department [[1983] 1 AC 280] (document obtained on discovery) Ainsworth versus Hanrahan [(1991) 25 NSWLR 155] (answer to interrogatories); Central Queensland Cement Pty
Ltd versus Hardy [[1989] 2 Qd R 509] (witness statement).  It is already established that there are circumstances where the law will prevent a repository of confidential information from making that information available to someone else, for the purpose of litigation. The obligation of confidentiality which is imposed on legal practitioners, is a familiar example of this restraint. In Rakusen versus Ellis, Munday & Clarke [[1912] 1 Ch ], at Cozens-Hardy MR said:  "A solicitor can be restrained as a matter of absolute obligation and as a general principle from disclosing any secrets which are confidentially reposed in him. In that respect it does not very much differ from the position of any confidential agent who is employed by a principal."  Concerning the responsibility of a solicitor entrusted with confidential information, who is called on to use that confidential information for another client, in another case, Cozens-Hardy said, at 835-6:  "... and if this had been a case of Mr Munday having obtained from the plaintiff, who said that he had been wrongfully dismissed, confidential information bearing upon the circumstances or the alleged justification of the wrongful dismissal, and if it had been a case of Mr Munday afterwards appearing in the action for the defendants, speaking for myself, I should have said that was a case in which he was putting himself in a position in which he could not as an honest man discharge his duty to the defendants without consciously or unconsciously availing himself of information which he had obtained while acting for Mr Rakusen. That would be a typical case in which a person ought not to be allowed to put himself in a position in which he could not clear his mind from the knowledge he had obtained. I cannot bring myself to doubt that any respectable solicitor would in those circumstances have said at once, "I am very sorry I cannot act for you because I am familiar with the circumstances alleged by the other side, which circumstances have been communicated to me confidentially"".  Fletcher-Moulten LJ said at 839:  "In almost all business there must be persons in such a confidential relationship to the employers or to the people who are employed by them for purposes connected with the business, that the knowledge which they acquire is not knowledge at their own disposal but consists substantially of the secrets of the employer. Such employments come to an end sometimes at the choice of the master, sometimes at the choice of the servant, and thereupon difficulties necessarily arise, because the person who is no longer in employment still has in his breast secrets which are the property of his past employer. The view that the law takes of the rights of the parties in that position is too clear to be disputed. The employee is quite free to go into the service of people who may be rivals or the opponents of his former master. The law does not say that the possession of those secrets shall cripple his work, or sterilise it.
He may go into employment quite inconsistent with the employment which he had in the past. All that the law says is: you shall not disclose or put at the service of your new employer the secrets that belong to your old employer."  Buckley LJ said, at 842:  "There is a general principle, applicable not to solicitors only, but to confidential agents of all kinds, that confidential information shall not be used against the principal from whom, or for whom, and in whose employment, it has been obtained. There is no general rule that a solicitor who has acted in a particular matter for one party shall not under any circumstances subsequently act in that matter for his opponent. Whether he will be restrained from so acting or not depends on the particular circumstances. Of course he will be restrained from communicating confidential information ... "  No doubt there are many cases where it would be convenient for a plaintiff to prove its case by obtaining confidential information from a former solicitor of the defendant. Yet it is quite clear that a plaintiff cannot adopt this course, notwithstanding the practical difficulties which not proceeding this way might occasion to the plaintiff in running his litigation.
It is also quite clear that if a plaintiff attempts to do so he will be restrained by injunction, and that any difficulties which the issuing of such an injunction might occasion to the plaintiff in running his litigation will provide no reason for refusing to grant the injunction. This outcome is not a consequence of particular responsibilities which are placed upon solicitors, but is the operation of the ordinary law concerning confidential information.  The availability of an injunction to restrain a solicitor from disclosing confidential information has not since been doubted. - D & J
Constructions Pty Ltd versus Head [(1987) 9 NSWLR 118], Edmonds, "Trusting Lawyers with Confidences - Conflicting Realities (A Review of the
Test and Principles Applying to Lawyers' Conflicts of Interests)" (1998) 16
ABR 222; In Re a Firm of Solicitors  <case>; [(1999) 2
WLR 215)](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281999%29%202%20WLR%20215 "View LawCiteRecord" ), it was on the grounds that it did not go far enough, in refusing an injunction in circumstances where it could not be demonstrated that acting for a later client would result in an abuse of confidential information. In
Bolkiah versus KPMG, at 225, Lord Millett (with whom all other of their Lordships hearing that case agreed) said, at 225:  "Whether founded on contract or equity, the duty to preserve confidentiality is unqualified. It is a duty to keep the information confidential, not merely to take all reasonable steps to do so. Moreover, it is not merely a duty not to communicate the information to a third party. It is a duty not to misuse it, that is to say, without the consent of the former client to make any use of it or to cause any use to be made of it by others otherwise than for his benefit. The former client cannot be protected completely from accidental or inadvertent disclosure. But he is entitled to prevent his former solicitor from exposing him to any avoidable risk; and this includes the increased risk of the use of information to his prejudice arising from the acceptance of instructions to act for another client with an adverse interest in a matter to which the information is or may be relevant."  (See also Wan versus McDonald <case>; [(1992) 33 FCR 491] at 512, Carindale Country Club Estate versus Astill <case>; [(1993) 42 FCR 307], Malleson Stephen Jaques versus KPMG Peat Marwick [(1990) 4 WAR ] at -3.)  
Lord Ashburton versus Pape  The question of whether an injunction is available to prevent confidential documents from being used, by a party to litigation, and the solicitor of the party to litigation, has been decided in Lord Ashburton versus Pape [[1913] 2 Ch .] Mr
Pape was a bankrupt. Lord Ashburton was a creditor of Pape, who opposed Pape's discharge from bankruptcy. Lord Ashburton had, previously, written letters to his former solicitor, Mr Nocton, which were privileged. Pape served on one of
Mr Nocton's clerks a subpoena requiring him to produce the letters in the bankruptcy court. The clerk took the letters to the court, and, before the subpoena was called on, handed the letters to Pape. Pape's solicitors,
Langford and Redfern, took copies of the letters, and returned the originals to Pape. Lord Ashburton commenced litigation against Pape, Langford, Redfern, and Nocton, seeking an injunction restraining the defendants from, in effect, disclosing the contents of the letters, or parting with them, otherwise than to the plaintiff or by deposit in court. An interlocutory injunction was granted by Neville J, requiring Pape to hand over to Nocton all original letters from Lord Ashburton to Nocton in his possession or control. There was also an order restraining Pape, Langford and Redfern, their servants and agents,  "... until judgment or further order from publishing of making use of any of the copies of such letters or any information contained therein except for the purpose of the pending proceedings in the defendant ... Pape's bankruptcy and subject to the direction of the Bankruptcy Court."  Lord Ashburton appealed against the inclusion of the exception in the interlocutory injunction.  In Calcraft versus Guest [[1898] 1 QB 759] the English
Court of Appeal had dealt with the admissibility of copies of privileged documents. The action was one where Mr Calcraft sued for trespass in a fishery. The substantial question concerned the upper boundary of that fishery. The plaintiff succeeded at trial. On appeal, the defendant wished to rely on some documents which had been discovered since the trial. The documents in question were proofs of witnesses, and rough notes of evidence used in defence of an earlier action for trespass in that fishery. Mr John
Calcraft, a predecessor in title of the present plaintiff, had financed the defence of that earlier action. (Thus, though the report does not expressly say so, it seems a reasonable inference that Mr John Calcraft was one of the persons entitled to the legal professional privilege in those proofs of witnesses and notes of evidence.) The proofs of witnesses and notes of evidence had remained with Mr John Calcraft's solicitor, until that solicitor's practice was wound up, and were then placed in storage. It was from that storage that the present appellant had obtained the proofs of witnesses and rough notes of evidence. They made copies of the documents. The plaintiff (the 1898 Mr Calcraft) threatened legal action, and the originals of the documents were thereupon handed over to him. The question for the court was whether the copies were admissible in evidence. Lindley MR (with whom
Rigby and Vaughan Williams LJJ agreed) held that the copies were admissible, notwithstanding that the originals were privileged.  When Lord Ashburton versus Pape was heard, the argument for the appellant started out by giving a precis of the principle in Calcraft versus Guest, namely (at 471):  "Communications which have passed between a client and his solicitor before any dispute has arisen between the client and his opponent are privileged from production, so the original letters cannot be used. If, however, an instrument in the hands of a solicitor which is privileged from production comes improperly into the hands of a stranger who makes a copy of it, the secondary evidence so obtained is admissible in case of notice to produce the original being duly given, and the production resisted on ground of privilege."  The argument then went on:  "But in this case there has been a breach of confidence on the part of Nocton.
Pape obtained the letters from him, and a person who obtained privileged letters from anyone who is in a fiduciary is in no better position than the trustee himself. The equity prevails against persons deriving under the breach of contract or duty: Tipping versus Clarke <case>; [(1843) 2 HARE 383]; Morrison versus Moat <case>; [(1851) 9 HARE 241.]"  Thus, the argument pointed to an essential difference between Calcraft v
Guest, and Lord Ashburton versus Pape. In Calcraft versus Guest, while the documents in question were privileged, that privilege was one owed to Mr John
Calcraft. All the report tells the reader about the relationship between Mr
John Calcraft, and the 1898 Mr Calcraft, is that Mr John Calcraft was a predecessor in title of the 1898 Mr Calcraft, so far as the fishery was concerned. There is no basis in the report of Calcraft versus Guest for finding that any obligations of confidence, which might have been owed by Mr John
Calcraft's solicitor to Mr John Calcraft, (and also, presumably, by the people into whose hands the proofs of witnesses and rough notes of evidence had come) were owed to the 1898 Mr Calcraft. Thus, a difference between Calcraft v
Guest and Lord Ashburton versus Pape was that in Lord Ashburton versus Pape Lord
Ashburton was a plaintiff who was owed an equity of confidence, in relation to the papers in question.  The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal, striking out the exception which had been contained in Neville J's interlocutory injunction. Cozens-Hardy MR said, at 472:  "Now, the question is raised that that exception is wrong, and that the injunction ought to go to the full extent until the trial of the action, namely from publishing or making use of any of the copies of letters or information contained therein. In my opinion the contention of the appellant is right."  After referring to authorities to show that a recipient of confidential information can be restrained from using it, Cozens-Hardy MR went on, at 472:  "Apart, therefore, from these pending or threatened proceedings in bankruptcy, it seems to me to be perfectly clear that the plaintiff can obtain the unqualified injunction which he asks for. Now, can it make any difference that
Pape says "I want, by means of these copies, to give secondary evidence in the bankruptcy proceedings?" In my opinion that is no ground for making any distinction. The rule of evidence as explained in Calcraft versus Guest [[1898] 1
QB 759] merely amounts to this, that if a litigant wants to prove a particular document which by reason of privilege or some circumstance he cannot furnish by the production of the original, he may produce a copy as secondary evidence although that copy has been obtained by improper means and even, it may be, by criminal means. The court in such an action is not really trying the circumstances under which the document was produced. That is not an issue in the case and the court simply says "Here is a copy of a document which cannot be produced; it may have been stolen, it may have been picked up in the street, it may have improperly got into the possession of the person who proposes to produce it, but that is not a matter which the court in the trial of the action can go into." But that does not seem to me to have any bearing upon a case where the whole subject matter of the action is the right to retain the originals or copies of certain documents which are privileged. It seems to me that, although Pape has had the good luck to obtain a copy of these documents which he can produce without a breach of this injunction, there is no ground whatever in principle why we should decline to give the plaintiff the protection which in my view is his right as between him and
Pape, and there is no reason whatever why we should not say to Pape in pending or future proceedings, "You shall not produce these documents which you have acquired from the plaintiff surreptitiously, or from his solicitor, who plainly stood to him in a confidential relation." For these reasons I think the appeal ought to be allowed so far as it asks, and only so far as it asks, to strike out the exception."  When Cozens-Hardy MR said, "without a breach of this injunction", I take him to be meaning, "without a breach of the injunction granted by Neville
J". Further, while the case before the court concerned an interlocutory injunction, in this passage Cozens-Hardy MR seems to be stating principles which would apply even on a final hearing. If that is so, then to that extent the remarks are obiter dicta; even so, they are, in my respectful view, a correct application of principle.  While the basis of the order made in Lord Ashburton versus Pape was that the documents were confidential, the particular form of order which it was appropriate to make was also influenced by the fact that the documents were the subject of legal professional privilege. When a court grants a remedy to enforce an equity of confidence, it aims to provide a remedy which ensures that the defendant gains no advantage from there having been a breach of confidence. In Ashburton versus Pape, if the breach of confidence had not occurred, the copied documents would never have been made, and would not have been available to tender in evidence. It is well in accord with the principle on which a remedy for breach of equitable obligations of confidence is founded, that copies so made should not be, ever, tendered in evidence.  Kennedy LJ said, at 474:  "I agree that the better view seems to me to be that although it is true that the principle which is laid down in Calcraft versus Guest [[1898] 1 QB 759] must be followed, yet, at the same time, if, before the occasion of the trial when a copy may be used, although a copy improperly obtained, the owner of the original can successfully promote proceedings against the person who has improperly obtained the copy to stop his using it, the owner is nonetheless entitled to protection, because, if the question had arisen in the course of a trial before such proceedings, the holder of the copy would not have been prevented from using it on account of the illegitimacy of its origin. If that is so, it decides this case. There is no question here as to the facts, and on them it is quite clear that these copies ought never to have got into Mr
Pape's possession in any shape or form."  I confess I have difficulty in understanding the first sentence that I have just quoted. My difficulty arises from the use of the word "because".
If, however, "because" were replaced with "notwithstanding that", the sentence is readily intelligible, and consistent with the views of Cozens-
Hardy MR. Further, it is clear from the final sentence that Kennedy LJ regards that as important that these copies should never have been in Mr Pape's possession at all.  Swinfen Eady LJ said, at 475, that the act of Mr Nocton's clerk in handing over the letter was a gross breach of his duty of confidentiality, and that by that means Pape had obtained possession of the letters and had proceeded to copy them, and still kept the copies. He continued.  "The principle upon which the Court of Chancery has acted for many years has been to restrain the publication of confidential information improperly or surreptitiously obtained or of information imparted in confidence which ought not to be divulged. Injunctions have been granted to give effectual relief, that is not only to restrain the disclosure of confidential information, but to prevent copies being made of any record of that information and, if copies have already been made, to restrain them from being further copied, and to restrain persons into whose possession that confidential information has come from themselves in turn divulging or propagating it."  Swinfen Eady LJ then, at 475-476 said:  "If the defendant has obtained copies of books, it would very probably be by means of some clerk or agent of the plaintiff and if he availed himself surreptitiously of the information, which he could not have had except from a person guilty of a breach of contract in communicating it, I think he could not be permitted to avail himself of that breach of contract.  
That is Pape's position here. If he is allowed to retain possession of these copies or to divulge the contents, he is availing himself of the breach of contract by Brooks the clerk, by means of which these letters have come into his hands."  His Lordship continued, at 476:  "Then objection was raised in the present case by reason of the fact that it is said that Pape, who now has copies of the letters, might wish to give them in evidence in certain bankruptcy proceedings, and although the original letters are privileged from production he has possession of the copies and could given them as secondary evidence of the contents of the letters, and, therefore, ought not to be ordered either to give them up or be restrained from divulging their contents. There is here a confusion between a right to restrain a person from divulging confidential information and the right to give secondary evidence of documents where the originals are privileged from production, if the party has such secondary evidence in his possession. The cases are entirely separate and distinct. If a person were to steal a deed, nevertheless in any dispute to which it was relevant the original deed might be given in evidence by him at the trial. It would be no objection to the admissibility of the deed in evidence to say that you ought not have possession of it. His unlawful possession would not affect the admissibility of the deed in evidence if otherwise admissible. So again with regard to any copy he had. If he was unable to obtain or compel production of the original because it was privileged, if he had a copy in his possession it would be admissible as secondary evidence. The fact, however, that a document, whether original or copy, is admissible in evidence is no answer to the demand of the lawful owner for the delivery up of the document, and no answer to an application by the lawful owner of confidential information to restrain it from being published or copied."  In Goddard versus Nationwide Building Society [[1987] 1 QB 670] the English
Court of Appeal considered another case where a note to which legal professional privilege attached (being legal professional privilege of the plaintiffs - 678G) came to be in the hands of the defendants. The plaintiffs were in the process of suing the defendants. The defendants used the privileged note as the basis for an amendment to their defence. The plaintiffs applied to have those portions of the defence struck out, and sought an injunction restraining the defendant from using or relying on the copy note, and requiring the defendant to deliver up the note and any further copies which it might have made of that note. That application succeeded. May LJ, at said:  "I confess that I do not find the decision in Lord Ashburton versus Pape logically satisfying, depending as it does upon the order in which applications are made in litigation. Nevertheless I think that it and
Calcraft versus Guest [[1898] 1 QB 759] are good authority for the following proposition. If a litigant has in his possession copies of documents to which legal professional privilege attaches he may nevertheless use such copies as secondary evidence in his litigation; however, if he has not yet used the documents in that way, the mere fact that he intends to do so is no answer to a claim against him by a person in whom the privilege is vested for delivery up of the copies or to restrain him from disclosing or making any use of any information contained in them.  Nourse LJ, at 684D, agreed with this proposition. Nourse LJ also stated some propositions in which he contrasted the rule of evidence established by
Calcraft versus Guest, and the equitable jurisdiction reaffirmed in Lord
Ashburton versus Pape. He says, at 685:  "Second, although the equitable jurisdiction is of much wider application, I have little doubt that it can prevail over the rule of evidence only in cases where privilege can be claimed. The equitable jurisdiction is well able to extend, for example, to the grant of an injunction to restrain an unauthorised disclosure of confidential communications between priest and penitent, or doctor and patient. But these communications are not privileged in legal proceedings and I do not believe that equity would restrain a litigant who already had a record of such a communication in his possession from using it for the purposes of his litigation. It cannot be the function of equity to accord a de facto privilege to communications in respect of which no privilege can be claimed. Equity follows the law ...  
Fourth, once it is established that a case is governed by Lord Ashburton v
Pape [[1913] 2 Ch 469] there is no discretion in the court to refuse to exercise the equitable jurisdiction according to its view of the materiality of the communication, the justice of admitting or excluding it or the like. The injunction is granted in aid of the privilege which, unless and until it is waived, is absolute. In saying this, I do not intend to suggest that there may not be cases where an injunction can properly be refused on general principles affecting the grant of a discretionary remedy, for example on the ground of inordinate delay."  The decision in Ashburton versus Pape has been referred to in the High Court without any adverse comment: The Commonwealth of Australia versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 39] at 50 per Mason J; Baker versus Campbell [(1983) 153 CLR ], at 68, per Gibbs CJ.  The decision in Ashburton versus Pape has been applied in a series of cases where documents the subject of legal privilege have, by mistake, come into the hands of an opposite party to litigation. In each case, the courts have made orders aimed at undoing the mistaken disclosure - Guiness Peat Properties Ltd v Fitzroy Robinson Partnership [[1987] 1 WLR 1027]; Hooker
Corporation Ltd versus Darling Harbour Authority [(1987) 9 NSWLR 538]; Webster v James Chapman & Co [[1989] 3 All ER 939]; Derby & Co Ltd versus Weldon [[1991] 1 WLR 73.]  In Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) versus Kane [(1997) 140 FLR ]
Hunt CJ at CL considered a situation where, by mistake, the DPP had sent to the solicitor for some accused persons an internal memorandum which drew together facts, and advice received from counsel, the case officer, the informant police officer, and the Senior Assistant Director of Public
Prosecutions in the Sydney office, concerning an application made by the accused that the committal proceedings be discontinued. His Honour made orders restraining the defendants from using or otherwise dealing with the document, and requiring them to deliver the document up to the DPP. The basis of that decision was expressly stated to be both the equitable obligation of confidence, and legal professional privilege (at 486).  In Deputy Commissioner of Taxation versus Rettke [(1995) 31 IPR 457] Cooper J considered a situation where Mr Rettke, a public servant employed in the
Australian Tax Office, was engaged in litigation with the Commission for the
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation of Commonwealth Employees. He annexed to an affidavit filed in those proceedings a copy of a tax return (then 17 years old) of a taxpayer. Mr Rettke said that a copy of that taxpayer's file had been sent to him, unsolicited. The court held that the contents of the file were confidential information, and ordered Mr Rettke to deliver up to the
Deputy Commission of Taxation all copies of the taxation return in his possession power of control, and:  "Other than  in the performance of his duties as an officer within the meaning of that term as defined in section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act; or  in proceedings pending in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal between
Rodney Noel Rettke and Comcare if it be held to be relevant and admissible by the Tribunal,  
Rodney Noel Rettke by himself his servants and agents or otherwise be restrained from disclosing to any person the contents of the 1978-1979 taxation return of NL, A and D Land Trading as NL Land & Co." (at 465)  In Sullivan versus Sclanders <case>; [(2000) 77 SASR 419] the South Australian Full court considered a situation where
Sclanders was suing Sullivan, concerning a business venture which Sullivan and
Sclanders had formerly operated. Sclanders came into possession of various copied documents. The copies were obtained by the original of the documents being surreptitiously removed from Sullivan's room, the copies made, the originals returned to Sullivan's room, and the copies sent off to Sclanders.
Sclanders sought an order from the Supreme Court that he be permitted to seek legal advice about the contents of the documents. That order was made, at first instance. On appeal, it was held that an obligation of confidentiality attached to the documents, and that orders should be made restraining the use of that confidential information. Gray J said, at 424:  "A person who has confidential information belonging to another may be restrained from using it without the owner's consent, by injunction. Equity acts in regard to the unconscionable circumstances in which the confidential documents were obtained and disseminated. Equity may grant relief from the consequences of reprehensible conduct. To be effective, this relief may bind third parties who have come into possession of the information and can protect the defendants from oral or written dissemination or other use.  
The granting of equitable relief as sought in this matter does not preclude the truth from being ascertained. Discovery and production, either pre action or during an action, will ensure that the relevant documentary material is available, according to the ordinary rules of procedure. If the documents are relevant, then they will be discovered and produced, subject to claims of privilege.  The orders made included orders requiring Sclanders to file an affidavit identifying all copies made, an order that all copies be brought into court, sealed, preserved and not opened without an order of the judge of the court, and orders:  - "that the statement of claim be struck out, sealed, preserved and not opened without an order of a judge of this court  - that the plaintiff be at liberty to file a fresh statement of claim making no use either directly or indirectly of the confidential documents or their contents  - that the plaintiffs be restrained from disseminating or making use of the contents of the confidential documents" (at 431)  
Whistleblower Legislation  There has been some legislation which deals with a problem, which parliaments evidently perceived, of obligations of confidentiality sometimes inhibiting performance of more public duties. The Protected Disclosures Act provides a number of protections, including (under section 21) protection from liability, "despite any duty of secrecy or confidentiality or any other restriction on disclosure" to disclosures made to a precisely defined group of authorities, a member of parliament, or a journalist.
However, the provisions of the Act apply only to a disclosure made by a "public official" (section 8).  Commonwealth legislation also provides protection to certain federal public servants who report breaches or alleged breaches of a code of conduct to identified office holders ([Public Service Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/psa1999152/) (Cth) [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/psa1999152/s16.html); [Parliamentary Service Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/psa1999235/) (Cth) [section .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/psa1999235/s16.html)
See also [Whistleblowers Protection Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/sa/consolact/wpa1993322/) (South
Australia), Whistleblowers Protection Act 1994 (QLD), Public Interests
Disclosure Act 1994 (ACT). The South Australian and Queensland legislation can apply (at least in some circumstances) to relieve private sector employees from their obligations of confidentiality - but that legislation is not part of the public policy which is to be applied in deciding the legality or enforceability of the contractual obligation on which GIO here sues.  The partial release of obligations of confidentiality for public officials, under the Protected Disclosures Act 1994, mirrors to some extent the way that equitable principles of confidentiality operate differently when applied to private individuals, to the way they operate when applied to governments: the Commonwealth of Australia versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 39] at 51-53 per Mason J, Minister for Mineral Resources v
Newcastle Newspapers Pty Ltd [(1997) 40 IPR 403] at 408-409 per Young J.  That parliaments have, comparatively recently, enacted legislation to permit "whistleblowing" but have not made it extend to someone in the situation of Mr Burton, is an indication that there is no public policy which prohibits the enforcement of the confidentiality obligations which GIO here seeks to enforce.  
Comparing a Plaintiff's Situation in Suing a Natural Person, and Suing a Corporation  When a plaintiff sues a natural person defendant, and that defendant has confidential information which is relevant to the case, the defendant is able to make that information available voluntarily to the plaintiff if it so chooses. If the defendant chooses not to, the plaintiff can, in some circumstances, obtain that confidential information through processes of discovery, and interrogatories. To the extent it is not able to obtain the information through discovery and interrogatories, the plaintiff must do without.  Any corporation must necessarily carry on its activities through natural persons. When a corporation discloses confidential information to a natural person, on terms that this information will be used only for the purposes of the corporation, the person to whom the information is disclosed comes under a constraint, which affects what would otherwise be his freedom of action, to voluntarily disclose that information. If a corporate defendant is sued, and has disclosed confidential information to an employee, which is relevant to that litigation, for the courts to permit enforcement of that restraint on the employee places the plaintiff in the same situation it is in when it sues a natural person who has confidential information. If justice can be properly administered in the one case, it can likewise be properly administered in the other.  
Conclusion on Whether Enforcement of the Contract Contravenes Public Policy  Having surveyed these principles which the community has already adopted formally by law, I can see no basis for holding that a former employee, who has been entrusted with his employer's confidential information, and has promised not to disclose it, ought be free on grounds of public policy to disclose that information to a solicitor, if he so wishes, and if the solicitor bona fide wishes to receive that information for the purpose of advancing litigation which the solicitor is in the course of running.  In Re Morris, Jordan CJ said that the court could also look at principles which the community as a whole has already adopted tacitly by the general course of corporate life. No specific evidence on that matter was put before me. As a matter of judicial notice, I do not find that there is any definite principle which this community adopts in the general course of its corporate life, whereby former employees are free to disclose their former employer's secrets to a solicitor who wishes to use those secrets in litigation against the former employer.  In these circumstances, I do not find that public policy requires the terms of the confidentiality undertaking to be treated as void, or for the court to decline to enforce them, to the extent that the confidentiality undertaking prohibits Mr Burton from disclosing confidential information to
MBC.  
No Confidence in an Iniquity  An alternative basis upon which MBC and Mr Burton oppose the grant of an injunction is that the court will not confer the cloak of confidentiality on information which discloses an iniquity.  As Gummow J has demonstrated in Corrs Pavey Whiting & Byrne v
Collector of Customs (VIC) <case>; [(1987) 14 FCR 434] the famous epigram of Wood V-C in Gartside versus Outram [(1856) LJ Ch (NS) 113], at 114, that "there is no confidence as to the disclosure of iniquity" was made in the context of deciding the scope of an implied obligation of good faith in an employment contract. That being the proper sphere of operation in the decision in Gartside versus Outram, it is not directly applicable to the present case, where there is an express obligation of confidentiality. In case another court takes a different view concerning this matter, however, I shall make some observations about how the "no confidence in iniquity" principle might apply in the present circumstances.  In Corrs Pavey Whiting & Byrne versus Collector of Customs <case>; [(1987) 14 FCR 434] Gummow J, at 451 ff considered the supposed "public interest" defence to breach of confidence, and what could be drawn from
Gartside versus Outram. His Honour concluded at 454:  "From this consideration of Gartside versus Outram I conclude that that case provides insufficient basis for an "public interest defence" of the kind that, in its name, has been developed in the recent English authorities. The truth as to what Gartside versus Outram decided is less striking and more readily understood in terms of basic principle. It is that any court of law or equity would have been extremely unlikely to imply in a contract between master and servant an obligation that the servant's good faith to his master required him to keep secret details of his master's gross bad faith to his customers."  
And at 455-6:  "Finally, if there be some other principle of general application inspired by
Gartside versus Outram, it is in my view of narrower application than the "public interest defence" expressed in the English cases. Such a narrow principle would not be concerned with contractual protection of confidence.
Where the plaintiff asserts a contractual right, the law of contract, supplemented by equitable defences where equitable relief is sought, sufficiently deals with the situation. Any principle of the kind I am now considering will be applied in equity where there is no reliance on contractual confidence. That principle, in my view, is no wider than one that information will lack the necessary attribute of confidence if the subject matter is the existence or real likelihood of the existence of an iniquity in the sense of a crime, civil wrong or serious misdeed of public importance, and the confidence is relied upon to prevent disclosure to a third party with a real and direct interest in redressing such crime, wrong or misdeed."  As the present case is one where the plaintiff relies on contractual protection of confidence, the principle articulated by Gummow J in the last sentence of the passage just quoted, has no room to apply.  
The "Public Interest" Defence  The present status of a "public interest" defence in Australia in an action for breach of confidence in equity's exclusive jurisdiction is not clear. Both before, and after, the decision of Gummow J in Corrs Pavey there was some (though not universal) acceptance of the line of cases developed in
England, in part on the basis of Gartside versus Outram, whereby there was a "public interest defence" to actions for breach of confidence in equity's exclusive jurisdiction. By a "public interest defence" I mean a defence whereby it is the task of the individual trial judge to decide whether, in the circumstances of the individual case before him or her, the public interest is better served by enforcing, or not enforcing, an obligation of confidence. In
The Commonwealth of Australia versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 39] at 56-57 Mason J (sitting as a single judge of the High
Court) said, "It has been accepted that the so called common law defence of public interest applies to disclosure of confidential information." (This statement does not make clear whether it "has been accepted" by courts, or by the parties in the instant case.) In David Syme & Co Ltd versus General
Motors-Holdens Ltd [[1984] 2 NSWLR 294] Hutley AP said, at 305-306:  "The case for the appellant was that there had to be a balancing between the interests of the respondent and the confidentiality of its material and the right of the public to know and the right of the press to assist the public to know and that on a proper weighting of these interests no injunctions should have been granted. I am unable to accept the basis of the appellant's case.
This is not a case in which the right of confidentiality is destroyed by iniquity: see Initial Services Ltd versus Putterill [[1968] 1 QB 396.] This is a case in which the technical information must be of high commercial value and is a trade secret upon the acquisition which great sums of money have been, and may be expended. It is something in which a right of property is recognised: see Scott versus Scott [[1913] AC 417] at 443. This right of property is not to be taken away from its proprietor without good reason ... if the correct way to approach the matter were to weigh the interest of the respondent in confidentiality of its technical and project information and the interest of the public to know, represented by the professional disseminator of information, namely, the newspaper, there could be only one answer: industrial progress is more worthy than satisfied curiosity. However, in my opinion, there is no question of weighing one against the other at all. The proprietary right in its confidential information of this kind is not to be weighed against other circumstances, except in cases where questions of iniquity are involved."  Samuels JA, at 309, rejected the notion of confidence as property, and agreed with the remark of Lord Denning MR in Woodward versus Hutchins [[1977] 1
QLR 760](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1977%5d%201%20QLR%20760 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 764, that, "In these cases of confidential information it is a question of balancing the public interest in maintaining the confidence against the public interest in knowing the truth." Samuels JA went on, at 310, to say, "It therefore seems to me, without finally determining the matter, that the parties before us were correct in perceiving their dispute to depend upon a balance of competing interests. I deal with the matter on that footing."  Street CJ adopted the approach, at 297-298, of setting out the appellant's submission (which summarised circumstances which English cases had held to justify disclosure of confidential information in the public interests) said (at 298),  "I do not, however, wish to be taken to accede either to the proposition that there is a common thread running through the categories put forward by the appellant or to that proposition that, if there be a common thread, it is crystallised in the formulation of principle put forward. No matter how benevolently one views the approach advocated by the appellant, the evidentiary material in the present case does not establish any error on the part of the learned judge of first instance involving this concept of public interest."  In Westpac Banking Corporation versus John Fairfax Group Pty Ltd [(1991) 19
IPR 513](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281991%29%2019%20IPR%20513 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 525 Powell J said:  "I turn, then, to the question of the public interest, as I indicated in
Spycatcher [Attorney General for the United Kingdom versus Heinemann Publishers
Australia Pty Ltd [(1987) 8 NSWLR 341] (NSWLR] at 382), it seems to me that the law in this area has now progressed to the stage where the so called "iniquity rule" has been subsumed in a more general rule, namely, that publication of otherwise confidential material might be permitted in cases in which there is shown to have been some impropriety which is of such a nature that it ought, in the public interest, be exposed. However, as I also sought to point out in Spycatcher (NSWLR at 380), a decision that, in a particular case, information might be allowed to be published, does not inevitably lead to publication to the community at large being permitted: cf and cp Francome versus Mirror Group Newspapers Ltd [[1984] 1 WLR 392]; Lion
Laboratories Ltd versus Evans [[1984] 3 WLR 539 (Powell] J went on to say that the "balancing" exercise could rarely be carried out satisfactorily at an interlocutory stage of proceedings.)  However, the view that there is no "public interest defence" of the type
I have described has also had its supporters.  In Castrol Australia Pty Ltd versus Emtech Associates Pty Ltd [(1980) 33 ALR ]
Rath J, at 53-57 reviewed the development which had occurred in England of the "no confidence as to disclosure of iniquity" dictum. He noted (at 54) that
Viscount Finlay in Weld-Blundell versus Stephens [[1920] AC 956] at 965-6 said:  "It would be startling if it were the law that an agent who is negligent in the custody of a letter handed to him in confidence by his principal might plead in defence that the letter was libellous. There may, of course, be cases where some higher duty is involved. Danger to the State or public duty may supersede the duty of the agent to his principal."  
At 55, Rath J quoted from the judgment of Ungoed-Thomas J in Bellof v
Pressdram Ltd [[1973] 1 All ER 241], where
Ungoed-Thomas J said:  "The defence of public interest clearly covers, and, in the authorities does not extend beyond, disclosure, which as Lord Denning MR emphasised must be disclosure justified in the public interest, of matters carried out or contemplated, in breach of the country's security, or in breach of law, including statutory duty, fraud, or otherwise destructive of the country or its people including matters medically dangerous to the public; and doubtless other misdeeds of similar gravity. Public interest, as a defence in law, operates to override the rights of the individual (including copyright) which would otherwise prevail and which the law is also concerned to protect. Such public interest, as now recognised by the law, does not extend beyond misdeeds of a serious nature and importance to the country and thus, in my view, clearly recognisable as such."  
Rath J went on to say, at 55:  "This passage, in my respectful view, expresses no more than a reasonable elaboration of Viscount Finlay's "higher duty" concept, and is an acceptable statement of the law as to the defence of public interest in an action for breach of contract ... . what is particularly important in Ungoed-Thomas J's formulation of principle is his emphasis on the gravity of the conduct that may give rise to the defence. If there is to be a defence labelled public interest, some such confinement of its vague boundaries is in my view essential."  
And at 56:  "In my opinion the court, in considering whether just cause for breaking confidence exists, must have regard to matters of a more weighty and precise kind than a public interest in the truth being told."  In Smith Kline & French Laboratories (Aust) Ltd versus Secretary,
Department of Community Services and Health <case>; [(1990) 22 FCR 73], at 111, Gummow J said:  "Further, I would accept the submissions by counsel for the applicants in the
SK&F proceedings that (i) an examination of the recent English decision shows that the so called "public interest" defence is not so much a rule of law as an invitation to judicial idiosyncrasy by deciding each case on an ad hoc basis as to whether, on the facts overall, it is better to respect or to override the obligation of confidence; and (ii) equitable principles are best developed by reference to what conscionable behaviour demands of the defendant not by "balancing" and then overriding those demands by reference to matters of social or political opinion."  A similar conclusion concerning the operation of the "public interest defence" was reached in Bacich versus Australian Broadcasting Corporation (1992) NSWLR 1, at 16 by Brownie J, who, referring to the decision of Rath J in
Castrol Australia Pty Ltd versus Emtech Associates Pty Ltd [(1980) 51 FLR ]
at 210-216; [33 ALR 31] at 53-57, said that Rath J:  "... described the decision in Woodward versus Hutchin [[1977] 1 WLR 760]; [[1977] 2
All ER 751] as being "the spring tide" (at 214; 56) of the notion, substantially developed through a series of decisions to which Lord Denning MR was a party, more or less equating the defence of iniquity to the balancing of competing public interests, a view which his Honour rejected, correctly in my respectful view."  
See also Sullivan versus Sclanders  <case>; [(1981) 34 ALR 105] deserves a more extended discussion, concerning the "public interest" defence and the "iniquity" rule. In that case, Sheppard J considered a situation where Matthews, a former Victorian Manager of Allied
Mills had handed to the Trade Practices Commission a diary, and various other documents. The Trade Practices Commission later took proceedings against
Allied Mills, seeking injunctions and the imposition of penalties for breaches of section 45 of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). Allied
Mills sought orders restraining the Commission from making use of, or disclosing, information contained in those documents, and an order for the delivery up of those documents. The basis on which it asserted confidentiality was an implied term in Matthews contract of service and an obligation in the exclusive jurisdiction of equity (page 113).  His Honour accepted that, "subject to the positive matters relied on by the Commission", Allied Mills had made good its claim that there had been a breach of confidence (page 119). The "positive matters relied on by the
Commission" were that, in that case, a prima facie case had been made out that Allied Mills had engaged in an iniquity, namely a breach of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s45.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (page 143) that the diary itself disclosed that iniquity (page 145) and that, while the other documents did not themselves disclose the iniquity, the order should be refused on the basis that the Commission was an appropriate authority who had decided to prosecute the breach of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (page -146). The latter basis of his Honour's decision was one arrived at by analogy with the way that the Equity Court will not issue an injunction to compel the police, or other prosecuting authorities, to return property which those prosecuting authorities need for the purpose of a trial. His Honour drew on the decision of Goff J (as he then was) in Butler versus Board of Trade [[1971] Ch 680.] Sheppard J summarised that decision by saying:  "It was held by Goff J that the fact that the letter was relevant to criminal proceedings was not sufficient by itself to destroy the privilege, the correct tests to apply being both whether there was a bona fide and reasonably tenable charge of crime or fraud and whether the letter could be shown prima facie to be preparatory to the Commission on a crime or fraud. It was further held that on the limited facts before the court the warning in the solicitor's letter should not be regarded as being in preparation for, or in furtherance of or as part of, any criminal designs on the plaintiff's part and that therefore the letter was privileged and the copy confidential. But, although there had been a breach of confidence, and in such circumstances an innocent recipient of information could be restrained, there were good reasons why it would not be proper for the court to interfere in cases where there was a conflict between the private right of the individual in equity and the duty of the State to prosecute offenders. Accordingly, the recipient being the Board of Trade and the intention being to use the letter in a public prosecution, the court's equitable jurisdiction in confidence would not be exercised." (page 133)  
Sheppard J quoted the following from the judgment of Goff J at 690-1:  "...The right and duty of the police to prosecute offenders prevails over the accused's right of ownership. He cannot demand his own goods back. By analogy it seems to me that the interests and duty of the defendants as a department of the State to prosecute defenders under the Companies Act must prevail over the offender's limited proprietary right in equity to restrain a breach of confidence..." (34 ALR at 135)  In the course of holding that there was a prima facie case of iniquity, his Honour carried out an extensive review of the case law. He concluded, at :  "The authorities establish that the public interest in the disclosure (to the appropriate authority or perhaps the press) of iniquity will always outweigh the public interest in the preservation of private and confidential information."  This statement was expressly disapproved by Gibbs CJ in A versus Hayden <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 532], at 545-6.
After quoting the statement, Gibbs J said:  "That is too broad a statement, unless "iniquity" is confined to mean serious crime. The public interest does not, in every case, require the disclosure of the fact that a criminal offence, however, trivial, has been committed. And the administration of justice, although a fundamental public interest, is not an exclusive public interest."  In A versus Hayden, Mason J, without expressly alluding to this statement of
Sheppard J said, at 560:  "It may be that the public interest in the administration of justice and the enforcement of the criminal law is so strong that it cannot be outweighed by any countervailing public interest, but I am by no means presently persuaded that this is the case."  
Thus, that conclusion of Sheppard J cannot safely be accepted as stating the law.  Sheppard J also said, at 142:  "In my opinion a breach of the provisions, whether of part IV or part V of the [Trade Practices] Act, is an iniquity within the rule formulated in Gartside v Outram ..."  As the case before Sheppard J concerned only a breach of part IV, this conclusion of his Honour is a dictum in so far as it relates to a breach of
Part V. Section 79 [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) makes contravention of a provision of [Part
V](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p5) a crime, except where the contravention is of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and certain other nominated sections. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) can be contravened by a completely innocent misrepresentation, made in circumstances which are of no enduring importance to the community. I respectfully doubt that it is correct to say that all breaches of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) are an iniquity within the rule formulated in Gartside versus Outram. Though his Honour had noted, at 121, that a contravention of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) is not criminal, the only other specific discussion of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) in his judgment is at 123, in a passage which does not, in my respectful view, lead to any conclusion that a breach of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) is necessarily an "iniquity". It is likely, also, that Sheppard J was influenced, in reaching his conclusion, by the view he had earlier reached at (quoted above at paragraph 187 above). Further, I doubt that the tort of negligence necessarily amounts to an iniquity, within the rule formulated in
Gartside versus Outram (though, in some circumstances, it conceivably might.)  
Significance for Present Purposes of the Uncertain Status of the "Public Interest" Defence  Because the present case is one where the GIO seeks to enforce an express contractual obligation, the uncertainty about the scope of this "public interest defence" does not directly impact on the result of the present case.
The cases in which that topic has been discussed in Australia have been ones where the source of the obligation of confidentiality was either in the exclusive jurisdiction of equity, or in an implied term of a contract.  Whether the obligation of confidentiality arises from express contract, implied contract, or in the exclusive jurisdiction will bear upon how legal principles deal with the fact that the subject matter of the confidence involves some form of wickedness. Concerning the circumstances in which equity will recognise an obligation of confidence independently of any contact, Deane
J said, in Moorgate Tobacco Co Ltd versus Philip Morris Ltd <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 414], at 437-438:  "It is unnecessary, for the purposes of the present appeal, to attempt to define the precise scope of the equitable jurisdiction to grant relief against an actual or threatened abuse of confidential information not involving any tort or breach of some express or implied contractual provision, so wider fiduciary duty or some copyright or trade mark right. A general equitable jurisdiction to grant such relief has long been asserted and should, in my view, now be accepted: see The Commonwealth versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 39] at 50-52. Like most heads of exclusive equitable jurisdiction, its rational basis does not lie in proprietary right. It lies in the notion of an obligation of confidence arising from the circumstances in or through which the information was communicated or obtained."  Concerning an obligation of confidence of that type, the fact that the subject matter of the confidence is some form of wickedness can be relevant in two ways. The first concerns whether the obligation of confidence exists at all. Concerning some types of information, communicated in circumstances which might ordinarily give rise to an obligation of confidence, the recipient of the information is entitled to say, "I am not, in conscience, obliged to keep quiet about conduct like that." The second way in which the wickedness of the conduct might be relevant, in equity's exclusive jurisdiction, is if the person seeking to enforce an obligation of confidence has himself engaged in conduct which gives rise to an equitable defence of unclean hands (Dewhirst v
Edwards [[1983] 1 NSWLR 34] at 51; FAI Insurances Ltd versus Pioneer Concrete Services
Ltd [(1987) 15 NSWLR 552] at 561, A-G (UK versus Heinemann Publishers Aust [(1987) 8
NSWLR 341] at 383-384; Corrs Pavey Whiting & Byrne versus Collector of
Customs <case>; [(1987) 14 FCR 434] at 456-457.  If the obligation being sought to be enforced is said to be an implied term in a contract, the wickedness of the conduct sought to be kept confidential is relevant to whether the implication of confidentiality is made - Gartside versus Ourtram; Tournier versus National Provincial and Union Bank of
England [[1924] 1 KB 461]; Smorgon versus Australia & New Zealand Banking Group
Ltd <case>; [(1976) 134 CLR 475] at -490. In deciding what are the implied terms in a contract, the court uses well established tests for deciding whether the term is implied so as to give the contract business efficacy (BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd versus Shire of
Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266 at 282-283; Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd versus State
Rail Authority of NSW <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337] at 347), a term implied by law from the nature of the contract itself (Liverpool City Council versus Irwin <case>; [[1977] AC ]; Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd [(1995) 185 CLR 410] at 448-452 per McHugh and Gummow J), or implied from custom (Bryne versus Australian Airlines
Ltd at 440), or is an implication contained in the express words of the contract (Marcus Clarke (Vic) Ltd versus Brown <case>; [(1928) 40 CLR 540] at 553-4). (This listing is substantially drawn from Heydon
JA in Brambles Holdings Ltd versus Bathurst City Council <case> at <case>.)
Further, these rules of implication are ones which apply where there is a formal contract complete on its face. When there is no such formal contract, the court must first infer what the terms of the contract are before any question of implication arises (Byrne versus Australian Airlines Ltd at 422 per
Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ). As well, if an injunction is sought to enforce an obligation of confidentiality arising from an implied term in a contract, whether the person seeking the injunction had engaged in conduct which is iniquitous can be relevant to the equitable defence of unclean hands.  Where there is an express term in a contract, the contract will be enforced, unless there is some public policy which prevents it being enforced.
For example, I would not doubt that there is a public policy which makes void an express contract to keep secret the committing of a widespread and serious fraud, and that a contract to keep quiet about such a fraud would be void regardless of whether the way the defendant was proposing to breach the contract was by bringing legal proceedings, or assisting other people to bring legal proceedings, to redress the consequences of the fraud. The scope, and limitations, of any such public policy which makes void or unenforceable an express contract to keep confidential some iniquitous subject matter are decided by engaging in the same sort of enquiry as I have earlier engaged in to decide whether GIO's contract with Mr Burton is void or unenforceable on the ground that it interferes with the administration of justice. As well, if an injunction is sought to enforce an express obligation of confidentiality, questions of whether the plaintiff has engaged in iniquitous conduct can be relevant to whether a defence of unclean hands is made out.  In the present case, it is not necessary to reach a final conclusion about whether there is a public policy which prohibits, because it relates to iniquitous conduct, the enforcement of the particular contract which GIO has entered with Mr Burton, nor about whether breach of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth), or negligence, amounts to an "iniquity". This is because of the view which I have come to concerning whether, in the present case, any iniquity has been proved.  
How Iniquity is Proved  In the context of the related principle, that legal professional privilege does not protect communications made for an illegal or improper purpose, (R v
Cox & Railton [(1884) 14 QBD 153]) it is established that there must be a prima facie case established that the communications came into existence for the improper purpose, before the privilege is shown not to apply. See AG-NT versus Kearney <case>; [(1985) 158 CLR 500] at 516, 517, 525; Re Moage [(1998) 26 ACSR 726], at -734.  In A versus Hayden <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 532], at 546 Gibbs CJ said:  "It is clear that a person who owes a duty to maintain confidentiality will not be allowed to escape from his obligation simply because he alleges that crimes have been committed and that it is in the public interest that he should disclose information relating to them. He bears the burden of establishing the facts on which he relies to relieve him of the obligation."  
His Honour referred to cases which establish, in the related field of legal professional privilege, that if the privilege is not to apply on the ground that the communication was to further a fraud, a prima facie case of fraud must be made out. He continued at 547:  "Similarly, where an obligation of confidentiality has arisen, whether as a result of express contract or because the relationship between the parties gives rise to a duty of confidence, the party who alleges facts which show that the obligation does not extend to the circumstances of the case must prove his allegations. That means that in the present case the defendants must establish, at least prima facie that the failure to disclose the information would tend to obstruct the course of justice and would be contrary to the public interest. It would not be enough to justify the disclosure of the confidential information in the present case that the police have requested it. It would be necessary to show, at the very least, that there is reasonable ground to believe that any plaintiff whose identity it is sought to disclose is implicated in the commission of an offence. Put in another way, at least what has to be shown prima facie is that there is "a bona fide and reasonably tenable charge of crime" against any plaintiff whose identity is sought to be disclosed. The bona fides of the police in the present case is not in doubt, but it is a question whether any charge against each plaintiff is reasonably tenable."  The mere allegation that conduct which counts as iniquity has been committed is not enough: Bacich versus Australian Broadcasting Corporation (1992) NSWLR 1, at 16; Deputy Commission of Taxation versus Rettke [(1995) 31 IPR ], at 464; Grofam Pty Ltd versus KPMG Peat Marwick <case>; [(1993) 27 IPR 215] at 219-220, 222.  In Castrol Australia Pty Ltd versus Emtech Associates Pty Ltd [(1980) 33 ALR ], at , Rath J, in rejecting a submission that the Trade Practices Commission should be able to use a particular confidential report for the purpose of investigating possible breaches of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), said (at ):  "There is accordingly no evidence before the court of a breach of [section (c).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s53.html) So far as [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s55.html) is concerned, it may be necessary for the prosecution to prove mens rea. I do not decide this point; it is enough in my view at the interlocutory stage that such proof may be necessary. Even if I am wrong in this view, there is still the possibility of a defence on reasonable mistake, or reasonable reliance on information supplied by another person, under [section (1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s85.html)
Until such a possibility is negatived, or at least shown to be unlikely, I think the court should reject the submission that on the evidence as it now stands there is a prima facie case of an offence under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). For similar reasons I do not think that there is such a likelihood of relief being granted in respect of a breach of [section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) as to justify the withdrawal of this courts protection of a confidence that has been established on undisputed evidence with reasonable clarity.  
I do not mean to suggest that if the evidence had shown a breach by the plaintiff of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) this of itself would excuse the Commission from its obligation of confidence. All I am saying is that the evidence does not show such a breach , with the result that, whatever the position might otherwise have been, the Commission is not excused from its obligation of confidence on this ground."  Castrol versus Emtech concerned an interlocutory injunction, so somewhat different considerations applied concerning the standard of proof required, to those which apply in the present hearing, which is a final hearing. Even so, the decision is consistent with the view that a prima facie case of iniquity must be made out before the Gartside versus Outram principle becomes applicable.  In the present case, it is clear that the applicants in the Federal Court proceedings allege negligence, and misleading and deceptive conduct. The objective facts, about how the Part B statement gave no warning of any imminent financial disaster, and of the times at which GIO made announcements to the stock exchange, are clear. However, I am not satisfied that there has been demonstrated any case, even at the prima facie level, that there has actually been negligence, or misleading and deceptive conduct. The evidence establishes nothing more than allegations of negligence, and of misleading and deceptive conduct.  
How does the Material, Disclosure of which is Unsuccessfully Sought to be Restrained, Relate to any Iniquity?  There is a further problem about the interrelationship between the information which Mr Burton has provided to MBC, and any negligent and misleading and deceptive conduct of GIO. The cases where the "iniquity" rule has been invoked have been ones where the information sought to be kept confidential was information that crimes, or other serious anti-social activities which fell within the description of "iniquity," had been committed. In Gartside versus Outram itself the plaintiff sought to restrain their former clerk from copying documents and communicating information. The defendant pleaded that the plaintiffs carried on business in a way which defrauded their customers by creating false business records, and that the defendant had made no disclosures except of these fraudulent transactions. It was in this context that Wood VC said [(26 LJ Ch (NS) 113] at 114:  "The equity upon which the Bill is founded is a perfectly plain and simple one ... by which any person standing in the confidential relation of a clerk or servant is prohibited, subject to certain exceptions, from disclosing any part of the transactions of which he thus acquires knowledge. But there are exceptions to this confidence or perhaps, rather only nominally, and not really exceptions. The true doctrine is, that there is no confidence as to the disclosure of iniquity. You can not make me the confidant of a crime or a fraud, and be entitled to close up my lips upon any secret which you have the audacity to disclose to me relating to any fraudulent intention on your part: such a confidence cannot exist."  Initial Services Ltd versus Putterill [[1968] 1 QB 396] concerned an action where plaintiffs had commenced proceedings claiming an injunction, damages and delivery up of confidential papers, which (it was alleged) the defendant had disclosed in breach of an implied term of his contract of service. The defendant filed a defence which alleged that the plaintiffs were engaged in a price fixing agreement contrary to the Restrictive Trade
Practices Act 1956, and had issue a misleading circular saying that increased charges were mainly to offset a particular tax. As the case concerned only what was an arguable defence, its precedent value is limited. However, the remarks of Lord Denning MR at 405 are to the effect that there can be no confidence which prevents an employee disclosing:  "... the proposed or contemplated commission of a crime or a civil wrong. But
I should have thought that was too limited. The exception should extend to crimes, frauds and misdeeds, both those actually committed as well as those in contemplation, provided always - and this is essential - that the disclosure is justified in the public interest. The reason is because "no private obligations can dispense with that universal one which lies on every member of the society to discover every design which may be formed, contrary to the laws of the society, to destroy the public welfare": See Annesley versus Anglesea (1743) LR 5 QB 317n; 17 State Tr 1139.  
The disclosure must, I should think, be to one who has a proper interest to receive the information. Thus it would be proper to disclose a crime to the police; or a breach of the Restrictive Trade Practices Act to the registrar.
There may be cases where the misdeed is of such a character that the public interest may demand, or at least excuse, publication on a broader field, even to the press.  Likewise, Ungoed-Thomas J in Beloff versus Pressdram Ltd (quoted above at paragraph 182) suggested that what must be disclosed is itself the iniquity.
In Allied Mills Pty Ltd versus Trade Practices Commission <case>; [(1981) 34 ALR 105] Sheppard J gave effect to the "iniquity" principle in circumstances where the information in which his Honour held no confidence existed was information which itself disclosed the iniquity - see paragraph above.  In the present case, Mr Burton and MBC have chosen to conduct their case by not tendering the draft statement of Mr Burton. Mr Murphy regards him as a material witness in the case. However, the evidence does not let me decide whether his materiality lies in the fact that his evidence itself discloses that GIO engaged in negligent conduct, or misleading and deceptive conduct, or whether his evidence provides more general information about the re-insurance business of GIO. That nothing contained in the lengthy statement of Mr Burton led to any amendment of the statement of claim suggests that the latter alternative is at least a realistically possible one.  It would, in my view, be extending the law to decide that, even in the exclusive jurisdiction of equity, the protection of confidence did not extend to information which was relevant to an allegation of iniquity, though not itself disclosing that iniquity.  This provides an additional reason, in my view, why, even if the principle that there is no confidence to protect an iniquity had application in the present case, where an express obligation of confidence is sought to be enforced, that principle is not shown to apply to the facts of the present case.  I had earlier (in paragraph 128 above) left open the possibility that section 183 [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) might not apply in situations where the nature of the information sought to be disclosed was such that a former employee was not acting "improperly" in disclosing it. Assuming that that view of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s183.html) is correct, the foregoing discussion of how the "no confidence in an iniquity" principle would apply in the present circumstances, if there were no contractual obligation, shows that there is no reason to believe that any such exception implicit in [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s183.html) applies in the present case.  
Discretionary Considerations  Mr Burton and MBC rely on the following factors as reasons why the court should, in the exercise of its discretion, decline relief.  
The relief sought would have the consequence of suppressing evidence of
GIO's wrongdoing and that of its former directors. The unclean hands doctrine applies.  
The high public interest in the administration of justice, and the potential delay or prejudice to the Federal Court proceedings which would occur if Mr Burton's statement could not be used.  
Except to the extent that the information is ultimately disseminated in open court, the confidentiality of the information will be maintained by the undertaking which Mr Murphy has proffered.  
It would be futile to grant the relief sought, because Mr Burton can be the subject of a subpoena issued by the Federal Court requiring him to give evidence and truthfully answer questions put to him in the very areas which might have been and may in future be covered by discussions between MBC and Mr
Burton.  
The evidence of any damage or prejudice to GIO resulting from the breach or apprehended breach of the proposed confidentiality undertaking is weak, and can be adequately covered by confidentiality undertakings which will be sought by MBC from any experts to whom information obtained from Mr Burton is conveyed.  
Equity should not lend its aid to GIO so as to enforce its alleged rights against persons who, at the time the relevant events occurred, were shareholders in GIO. GIO's enforcement of its contractual right would be a technical and unmeritorious reliance on the doctrine of separate legal personality.  Any defence of unclean hands requires that the defendant prove that the plaintiff's hands, are, in the relevant sense, unclean. In the present case, that would require proof, not mere allegation, that GIO has engaged in conduct which disentitles it to claim equity's protection to protect its confidences.
For reasons which I have given earlier, the defendant has not proved that GIO has engaged in such conduct.  If the plaintiff is otherwise entitled to an injunction, I would not regard the fact that the grant of that injunction might cause delay or prejudice to the Federal Court proceedings as a sufficient reason for refusing it. While there is no denying that the public interest in the administration of justice is a high one, if the contract sought to be enforced is not itself void or unenforceable by reason of public policy, and if a defence of unclean hands has not been made out, I can see no other head of principle under which the public interest in the administration of justice can be taken into account in deciding whether or not to grant an injunction.  Here, MBC has received confidential information of the plaintiff, in circumstances where it understood that there was a contractual obligation on
Mr Burton forbidding him from disclosing confidential information. MBC thought that it was excused from that contractual obligation because it intended to use the information for the purpose, and only for the purpose, of litigation.
In so thinking, MBC was mistaken. Solicitors sitting in their offices do not have the power to relieve people from, or override, contractual obligations of confidence, merely because they wish to obtain information to use in litigation. If an employee is bound to attend at his employer's premises between 9:00 am and 5:00 pm, it is not open to a solicitor to say "You need not adhere to your contract, because I need to see you to obtain information from you to use in litigation." In the same way, the fact that a solicitor wishes to obtain information from an employee, or former employee, for use in litigation, does not relieve that employee, or former employee, from a valid contractual obligation of confidence.  Now that Mr Burton has talked with MBC, and provided a draft statement,
MBC is in the situation where it has information which it should never have had. Conscionable behaviour on its part requires that it give up the information it should not have had, and not, in the future, obtain any benefit from having once had that information. Approaching the remedy in that way is in accordance with the principle whereby:  "... a person who has obtained information in confidence is not allowed to use it as a springboard for activities detrimental to the person who made the confidential communication." (Terrapin Ltd versus Builders' Supply Co (Hayes) Ltd [[1967] RPC 375] at 391)  Approaching the remedy in that way does not prevent any of the information which Mr Burton has from being used in the Federal Court proceedings, if it is obtained in accordance with the ordinary procedures of the Federal Court, and if MBC are disentitled from using the information that they never should have had to assist them in better seeking out information and documents from Mr
Burton, using those procedures.  When MBC has taken active steps to persuade Mr Burton to disclose the confidential information, has recognised, from the time of the first meeting between Mr Murphy and Mr Burton that the information he was disclosing was confidential, has provided an indemnity to Mr Burton against any liability arising out of his provision of the confidential information to MBC, it was at all times taking the risk that its receipt of the information might be wrongful. It is not in accordance with the principles on which equity grants remedies that MBC, and the people for whom MBC acts in the Federal Court proceedings, might be delayed or inconvenienced if MBC were to be put back into the situation it should have been in, if there had been no breach of Mr
Burton's contractual obligations. It is quite clear that damages are not an adequate remedy for the breach of contract which has taken place, nor for the future breaches of contract which are likely, if an injunction is not granted, to take place.  The arguments that GIO ought not receive an injunction, because Mr Burton can be required to give all the information contained in his statement (and whatever else he might have told MBC) under subpoena, and until that happens the confidentiality undertakings can protect the information, is not an argument I find persuasive. Mr Burton is in breach of his contract, and MBC is, at least after absorbing this judgment, knowingly in receipt of the fruits of that breach of contract. It is not in accordance with equity's approach in giving remedies to allow the wrongdoer to retain the fruits of wrongdoing, on the ground that the plaintiff will not thereby be any worse off, unless it is very clearly the case that the granting of relief would be futile. (Grocott v
Aysom [[1975] 2 NZLR 586] at 589 per Cooke J; Tucker versus News Media Ownership Ltd <case>; [[1986] 2 NZLR 716] at 735 per McGechan J)  It is not as though the defendants are incapable of complying with the injunction (Wookey versus Wookey [[1991] Fam 121]; Vincent v
Peacock [[1973] 1 NSWLR 466] at 468), or that there are no means of enforcing the injunction if the defendants were to choose to disobey it (In Re S (a minor) [[1991] Fam 121).] Rather, there is every reason to believe that if an injunction were to be issued, it would be obeyed. I am not satisfied that it is inevitable that the granting of relief would be futile. Until such time as any information which Mr Burton has is obtained, in accordance with the procedures of the Federal Court, GIO is entitled to have that information kept confidential. Nor is it inevitable that all the information which Mr Burton has, to which the obligation of confidentiality attaches, will become disclosed through procedures of the
Federal Court. The Federal Court proceedings are large and complicated litigation, and the trial of them is some time off. I know nothing about the state of Mr Burton's health, or his intentions about remaining in Australia.
(He was recruited by GIO from England.) I cannot say that it is impossible that the Federal Court proceedings will settle before trial, or at least before Mr Burton has concluded giving evidence in them.  The fact that there is little risk that GIO would be prejudiced by disclosure of its confidential information, in breach of the confidentiality undertaking which MBC proffer, is not to the point. The damage or prejudice which GIO will suffer in the present case if an injunction is not granted, is the loss of the opportunity of having the Federal Court proceedings tried in accordance with the law, and meaning by that tried using evidence, obtained through procedures, which are in accordance with the law. In Sullivan v
Sclanders <case>; [(2000) 77 SASR 419] the South Australian Full Court made orders to ensure that
Sclanders could receive no benefit, in the litigation, from what amounted to stolen information. Gray J said, at 431,:  "That is not to say that the material, or much of it, may not be discoverable in due course in regard to the causes of action identified by the plaintiffs.
That is a different issue. The truth will be ascertained by the process of discovery, and production. The admissibility of relevant material will be addressed at trial. ...  
It has been suggested that, as the documents are likely to be discoverable in any event, nothing is achieved by granting relief. I do not agree. The plaintiffs should not be advantaged by what has occurred. The plaintiffs offered, in lieu of a stay, to amend the statement of claim if the appeal were to succeed. However, this would lead to considerable debate as to what part of the statement of claim reflected the document or its contents. A more effective approach to minimise any unfair advantage is to strike out the entire statement of claim. The plaintiffs should be at liberty to deliver a fresh statement of claim without either directly or indirectly making use of the confidential documents or their contents. In my view, if these steps are not taken equity will not be done."  Williams J said, at 420:  "In taking instructions for a fresh statement of claim it may be prudent for anyone who is aware of the contents of the confidential documents are who has been associated with the drafting of the original statement of claim to consider the possibility of embarrassment. Whether a change of solicitors is necessary may depend upon the precise scope of the intended further instructions - which must then be given and taken without any reliance upon the confidential material. The plaintiffs themselves and their advisers must understand the very considerable difficulties which they may face by reason of the knowledge which they have acquired. If constructed, Chinese walls may not have firm foundations."  
That approach to the granting of a remedy seems to me to be appropriate in this case.  The decision of the English Court of Appeal in Lord Ashburton versus Pape, which had the effect that the surreptitiously obtained material could not be used at all in the bankruptcy court, illustrates how it is within the scope of the way in which an equity court will enforce an obligation of confidence, to ensure that no advantage is obtained in litigation from the breach of confidence.  I see no reason of principle why it is a discretionary reason to deny the injunction that the plaintiffs in the Federal Court proceedings were once shareholders in GIO. In any listed company, shareholders come and go. The duty of confidentiality was owed to the company, not the shareholders. There is no power in the shareholders, or in any sub-group of shareholders or former shareholders, to decide that a company should not enforce its contract.
Further, the class represented by the plaintiff in the Federal Court proceedings is a minority of the people who were, during the period that the
Part B statement was current, shareholders of GIO. I see no basis on which, even if the present defendants can speak for the whole of that minority of shareholders (a matter about which I am not satisfied) that provides any reason for treating any differently the rights of the company as a whole.  
Can MBC be Injuncted?  In G versus Day [[1982] 1 NSWLR 24] Yeldham J considered a situation where a person had provided some information to the
Corporate Affairs Commission on the express term that his name not be disclosed. A newspaper proposed to name him as being the provider of information to the Corporate Affairs Commission. Yeldham J granted an injunction against the newspaper disclosing his name, saying (at 35):  "In the present case it is plain that the plaintiff initially made it apparent to the persons to whom he divulged what he claimed to have seen that, by reason of the fears which he entertained, he would only proffer such information if his identity was not disclosed. That this was his attitude and that he received assurances that his anonymity would be preserved was, and certainly now is, known to the first and second defendants, who were not, of course, parties to the original conversations. But whether or not they were aware of these matters, they are liable in an appropriate case to be restrained from publishing what is confidential information, even if they initially received it in good faith."  In Butler versus Board of Trade [[1971] Ch 680], at 690 Goff J considered a situation where the Board of Trade were handed, by mistake, a copy of a letter which had been written to the plaintiff by his solicitor, and which was consequently privileged. The Board of Trade proposed to use that letter as evidence in some criminal proceedings against the plaintiff. On the way to his ultimate conclusion, Goff J said, at 690:  "In the present case there was not impropriety on the part of the defendants in the way in which they received the copy, but that, in my judgment, is irrelevant because an innocent recipient of information conveyed in breach of confidence is liable to be restrained."  In Wheatley versus Bell [[1982] 2 NSWLR 544] Helsham CJ in Eq deal with a situation where the first defendant had received confidential information from the plaintiff concerning a novel type of business activity. The first defendant sub-licensed the right to operate such a business to two people, who knew nothing about the concept being obtained by the first defendant in breach of confidence. Even so, Helsham CJ granted injunctions against those people. His Honour said, at 549:  "The other defendants, in effect, claim that they are persons who should be likened to bona fide purchasers for value without notice. It is said that persons in that position are, in this field of confidentiality, free to make use of information which has come to them innocently; that they are in no way tainted with the breach of trust or quasi breach of trust that effects the person from who they obtained the information, and that, therefore, there is no equity in the plaintiffs to obtain any relief of any sort against the innocent recipients of information, albeit that it comes through the hands of a person who is guilty of imparting it in breach of the duty of confidentiality that that imparter owes to the giver of the information.  
I am satisfied that the analogy which has been drawn in some of the American cases and by some of the text writers, of the situation of the innocent defendants to a bona fide purchaser for value without notice, is not the correct way of approaching the question of whether the injunction should go in the present circumstances or not. The defence of bona fide purchaser for value is an equitable defence directed towards the resolution of priorities in relation to property rights. It is an attempt to sort out amongst the claimants interest in property the order in which their respective interest should prevail. But I believe that there are no property rights associated with the type of equity involved here; it is equity to restrain a person acting in breach of confidence which is owed to another ..."  
See also Goddard versus Nationwide Building Society [[1987] 1 QB 670] at 685 proposition "third"; English & American Insurance Co Ltd versus Herbert
Smith [(1987) 14 FSR 232] at 238.  This line of authority provides a sufficient ground for an injunction against MBC. As well, however, the plaintiff sought an injunction against MBC on the basis that MBC had committed the tort of inducing breach of contract.  In Short versus City Bank of Sydney <case>; [(1912) 15 CLR 148], at 160 Isaacs J said that for a defendant to have committed the tort of inducing breach of contract:  "... the defendant must have induced or procured the doing of what he knew would be a breach of contract. A bona fide belief reasonably entertained that it was not a breach of contract would be fatal to the claim. If the defendant did not know of the existence of the contract, he could not induce its breach; if he reasonably believed it did not require a certain act to be performed, his inducing a party to the contract to do something inconsistent with it could not be regarded as an inducement or procurement knowingly to break the contract; if he believed on reasonable grounds that the contract had been rescinded, or performance waived, when in fact it had not, he could not be said to knowingly procure its breach."  In Fightvision Pty Ltd versus Onisforou [(1999) 27 NSWLR 473], the New
South Wales Court of Appeal (Sheller, Stein and Giles JJA) quoted this passage, at 509, and continued:  "In summary, the defendant must know of the contract and sufficient of its terms to know that what the defendant induced or procured the party to the contract to do would be in breach of the contract. If the defendant knew of the existence of the contract but believed reasonably that what the defendant induced or procured the party to do was not a breach, or reasonably believed that the contract had been rescinded or performance waived, the defendant had not knowingly induced or procured the breach."  In the present case, no suggestion was made that Mr Murphy was anything other than bona fide in forming the view that Mr Burton would not be acting in breach of contract by disclosing confidential information to Mr Murphy.
However, Mr Murphy had no reasonable basis for this view. He conducted no research which led him to the conclusion that the view was correct. Mr
Murphy's cross-examination contained the following:  "Q. Do you accept that in light of what you have described concerning your legal opinion about the propriety of disclosures being sought by you and given by Mr Burton of matters you concede should otherwise be confidential displays, that so far as you were concerned it never mattered what the content of his equitable obligation was or the particular terms of any contractual obligation were because in your view if you wanted to speak to him as a potentially useful witness you could? Do you accept that? 
A. Yes.  
Q. Which meant that any detailed consideration of or view about the contractual obligations was to your mind irrelevant, is that right? 
A. Unnecessary.  
Q. And thus irrelevant in your progress as a litigator, is that right? 
A. Yes.  
Q. You accept, do you not, that in that attitude of yours you were knowingly taking the risk that by inviting his disclosures you were inviting a breach of contract, do you agree with that? 
A. No, I don't believe that I was taking a risk of a breach of contract because I believed he is entitled to make a witness statement to me.  
Q. You are not suggesting, are you, that you have such a confidence in your opinion that the possibility of it being wrong never crossed your mind? 
A. No.  
Q. So you were taking a risk that it was right? 
A. I believe my opinion was right.  
Q. But you were taking a risk about whether it was right? 
A. Yes."  Mr Murphy explained the evidence which I have set out in paragraph 30 above:  "Q. And it remains the case that throughout your supposed taking into account of Mr Burton's equitable and employment obligations you personally had no case law or statute law in mind making good the view based on propositions a, b and c?  
A. Me personally, that's correct. I have taken advice at various points from members of the Bar who no doubt had a better grasp of it than I."  The nature of the advice that was given by members of the Bar, the instructions on the basis of which it was given, and the time at which it was given, were not further explained. In these circumstances, I am not satisfied that the taking of that advice turned Mr Murphy's initially unreasonable view into a reasonable one. In these circumstance, in my view, an injunction against MBC is also justified on the grounds of the tort of inducing breach of contract.  
Form of Order  Mr Burnside QC tells me, and I accept, that there is an obligation on
Victorian legal practitioners to maintain their files for seven years. That will need to be taken into account, in deciding the form of order appropriate in the present case.  There has been no argument about the precise form of orders which are appropriate. I propose to make orders in the form which seem to me to be appropriate, uninstructed by argument, but to order that those orders not be entered until after 10 days from the date of this judgment. If, within seven days of the date of this judgment, either party seeks to have the matter re- listed for the purpose of argument about the form of orders, I shall extend the order that the orders not be entered until a suitable time for that argument to take place, and shall give consideration to whether the orders ought be revoked or modified in any way. The orders are made by reference to the Further Amended Summons, the text of which is set out at paragraph 52 above.  The orders I make are: 
Orders 1 in the Further Amended Summons, with the addition at the end of, "or as otherwise required by law". 
Orders 2, 5 and 6 in the Further Amended Summons. 
Order 4 in the Further Amended Summons, save that the words "deliver to the Court" are deleted and replaced with the words, "identify, place in sealed containers, each container prominently marked 'by order of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales not to be opened without the order of the
Court or the Federal Court of Australia', store at a location away from any office at which work is carried out relating to proceedings number N955 of in the Federal Court of Australia, and not open any such container without an order of this Court or the Federal Court of Australia." 
Defendants to pay costs of the plaintiff. 
These orders not to be entered until 10 days after the delivery of these reasons for judgment.  
LAST UPDATED: 10/05/2002 * * * 
