

Regina versus Michael Noel Stephenson [1997] NSWSC 12 (30 January 1997) 
REGINA versus MICHAEL NOEL STEPHENSON /97 
THURSDAY 30 JANUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT - On application for bail 
HIS HONOUR: Michael Noel Stephenson has applied for bail in respect of a charge of enter dwelling with intent to commit a felony in circumstances of aggravation.

The Crown alleges that about 1 am on 30 December 1996 he secured entry to a home at Riverside Drive, Airds, and there placed his hand over the mouth of the lady who lived in that house and forced her back into the house and on to the floor. It is alleged that the felon was wearing a pair of grey coloured canvass gloves and was holding a knife and held the knife to the throat of the lady.

A co-offender, who also entered the premises, is alleged to have produced a black pistol and cocked the weapon.

A demand was made for the lady's money and drugs. Ultimately the two men left the house without taking anything and without inflicting physical harm upon the lady.

The police were summoned. Apparently some police, whilst patrolling the vicinity of Belingen Road, Ruse, spoke to the applicant, who was wearing a singlet and black track pants; he was searched and a pair of canvass gloves were located in his underpants. The defendant declined to say anything.

A tracker dog, allegedly followed a scent trail to premises 91 Belingen Road,
Ruse, where they recovered a blue patterned long-sleeved shirt, a black bolt action pistol, a silver bladed knife with black sheaf, and two black balaclavas. The pistol, the knife and the balaclavas were consistent with the items seen by the lady at the house. Whether they were in fact is in issue.
The gloves seen by the lady at the house were also consistent with those recovered. The Crown also relies on the applicant's explanation that he was jogging.

The applicant declined to tell police his name or address. The applicant has told me that he did not want his de facto and the children to be disturbed.

The applicant is entering a plea of not guilty and it seems that much will depend on the view which the tribunal of fact takes as to the circumstantial evidence. It is a Crown case of reasonable strength but not an impregnable one.

The applicant has a poor record in Queensland. He was on parole from
Queensland as at 30 December 1996 and there is a question whether he fully complied with the terms of his parole. His evidence is that he was under some pressure from Queensland police who were visiting him and endeavouring to make enquiries about other matters with which he had nothing to do. He found the police attention unwelcome. There was also a question in relation to the custody of his daughter.

At the present time and for the last five months he has been looking after his daughter and living with Cheryl Lee Daniels at Rosemeadow. Security is offered on his behalf.

The applicant has also made friends with the Peck family while he has been living in Sydney. It has been pointed out that he has never failed to appear.

He has not been employed while in Sydney but there was some evidence there may be employment available to him, but that is far from certain.

In the whole of the circumstances I think that I should grant bail upon the following conditions:
The applicant is to enter into an agreement without security to forfeit the sum of $5,000 if he does not comply with his bail undertaking;
An acceptable person is to enter into an agreement to forfeit the sum of $12,000 if the applicant does not comply with his bail undertaking, and is to deposit the sum of $2,000 cash and provide security in the sum of $10,000;
The applicant is to reside at 12 Westminster Way, Rosemeadow;
The applicant is to report to the officer in charge of police at the
Campbelltown Police Station daily;
The applicant is to attend court as required.
The applicant is not to contact or approach any prosecution witness, and he is not to enter within a radius of 100 metres of 328 Riverside Drive,
Airds.

The bail conditions have been formulated on the basis that Mrs Peck will be an acceptable person, but there was no evidence led as to that. That will be a matter for the Registrar to attend to in the usual course along with the adequacy of the security offered.
 * * * 
