

Ryan Wealth Holdings Pty Ltd versus L & V Tomkins Pty Ltd [2015] NSWSC 533 (4 May 2015) 
Last Updated: 7 September 2015 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Claim not struck out. Leave to re-plead given. Motions otherwise dismissed.  
Catchwords: 
CIVIL PROCEDURE - strike out application under Uniform Civil Procedure Rules, r 13.4 - plaintiff made advances to corporate defendant in May 2006 pursuant to a written loan agreement - advances recorded in June 2008 agreement - proceedings for recovery of loan monies commenced in June 2014 - whether claim time barred by [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/s14.html) - plaintiff loaned money pursuant to advice from now bankrupt financial advisor - evidence suggests not all loan documentation presently available -arguable that repayment arrangements may have been agreed outside the two written forms of agreement - arguable that that loan executed as a deed.  
Legislation Cited: [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html), [16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s16.html)  [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/), rr .4, 28.2  
Cases Cited: 
Dey versus Victorian Railways Commissioners <case>; <case>; <case> 
Hillebrand versus Penrith Council <case> 
Ogilvie versus Adams <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 598]  
Category: 
Consequential orders (other than Costs)  
Parties: 
Plaintiff: Ryan Wealth Holdings Pty Ltd ACN 118272076 
First Defendant: L & V Tomkins Pty Ltd ACN 000322467  
Representation: 
Counsel: 
Plaintiff/Respondent: G. Carolan 
First & Second Defendant/Applicant: P. Walsh 
Third & Fourth Defendant/Applicant: A. Ogborne  
Solicitors: 
Plaintiff: Andrew David Harrison, Bilbie Dan 
First & Second Defendant/Applicant: John Patrick Quinn, Lockhart Quinn & Co 
Third & Fourth Defendant/Applicant: Micah Jenkins, Harris Wheeler Lawyers  
File Number(s): /176670  
Publication Restriction: 
No  
EX TEMPORE JUDGMENT
In the Equity Division Applications list on 10 April 2015, the first, second, third and fourth defendants brought motions under the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) ("UCPR"), to strike out the plaintiff's Statement of Claim. The first and second defendants were represented by Mr Walsh of counsel. The third and fourth defendants, were represented by Mr Ogborne of counsel. In the alternative the third and fourth defendants seek the separate determination of a preliminary question, pursuant to UCPR, r 28.2, namely whether the plaintiff's claims are statute barred. Mr Carolan of counsel for the plaintiff resists these applications.

Background
Some short factual background is required. The appropriate starting point is the pleadings. The plaintiff's Statement of Claim is set out below: "1. The plaintiff is and was at all material times a company duly incorporated and able to sue in and by its corporate name and style.  . The plaintiff was at all material times the trustee of the Ryan
Holdings Retirement Fund.  . On or about 12 May 2006, the plaintiff entered into a loan facility agreement (the 'First Agreement') with the following parties as borrowers: 
Leonard John Tomkins; 
L & V Tomkins Pty Ltd (the first defendant); 
Andrew Bruce Tomkins (the third defendant); 
Deborah Tomkins (the fourth defendant).  . It was a term of the First Agreement that the plaintiff would advance to the borrowers up to $616,795, to be paid at the direction of the borrowers.  . It was a term of the First Agreement that any advance would be repaid one year from the date of the initial Drawdown Notice or, alternatively, on demand.  . It was a term of the First Agreement that interest would be paid on any amount outstanding at the rate of 15% per annum on a daily basis and capitalised.  . It was a further term of the First Agreement that the borrowers would provide second registered real property mortgages over the property known as lot 55 in Deposited Plan 838068 and 3 Marshall Terrace, Clarence Town, NSW, being the land in Lot 193 Deposited Plan 752497.  . On or about 12 May 2006, the plaintiff paid the sum of $400,000 into a bank account in the name of 'Cardiff Gas', being an account operated by a company related to the defendants.  . On or about 9 August 2006, the plaintiff paid the sum of $216,795 at the direction of the defendants to the Australian Taxation Office in satisfaction of a tax liability of the borrowers.  . On or about 30 June 2008 the plaintiff entered into a further loan agreement (the 'Second Agreement') with the following parties as borrowers: 
L & V Tomkins Pty Ltd (first defendant); 
Leonard John Tomkins. 
Valerie Gladys Tomkins (second defendant)  whereby the plaintiff agreed to advance the sum of $787,324 to the named borrowers, which amount comprised the advance under the First Agreement, together with capitalised interest.  . The Second Agreement contained the following terms:  interest was payable at the rate of 15% per annum, calculated on a daily basis and to be capitalised; 
The borrowers would provide to the plaintiff second registered mortgages over lot 55 in Deposited Plan 838068 and lot 7 in Strata Plan 67807;  . The balance outstanding pursuant to the second Agreement was repayable on demand.  . The plaintiff has demanded repayment of the amount due under the First and Second Agreements, which demand has not been met. 
Particulars 
Letter from Bilbie Dan, solicitors, dated 6 December 2013  . Pursuant to the First and Second Agreements the First Defendant executed a mortgage over the property described as Lot 55 in Deposited Plan , but has refused to produce the Certificate of Title to that land in order to enable registration of the Mortgage.  . On 17 December 2013 the plaintiff obtained repayment of the sum of $216,795 from the Australian Taxation Office as a refund of an amount paid to satisfy a third party tax liability, namely that of the first defendant.  . On 6 March 2013 a sequestration order was made in respect of the estate of Leonard John Tomkins.  . The defendants are liable to repay the plaintiff the sum of $400,000, together with interest calculated in accordance with the First and Second
Agreements."
Many allegations in the Statement of Claim and many other background facts are not disputed. Before considering the arguments Mr Ogborne and Mr Walsh advanced, it is convenient to set out both some of these background facts and the contents of the various agreements which the parties are alleged to have entered. As is accepted in strike out applications, the Court will set out the facts alleged, which may be assumed to be true for the purposes of the application.
The principal of Ryan Wealth Holdings, Mrs Trudy Crittle, says that she was introduced to Mr Chris Moylan, a financial advisor, by Turnbull Hill Solicitors in late 2005 or early 2006 when she settled the sale of a property at Byron Bay. She received substantial sale proceeds in excess of $7 million.
It is alleged that Mr Moylan advised Mrs Crittle to establish a Self-Managed Superannuation Fund ("SMSF"). So Mrs Crittle set up the Ryan Holdings Retirement Fund which was established through a trust deed, the detail of which is of no present significance. Mr Moylan recommended, so Mrs Crittle says, that she open a cash management account with Macquarie Bank in the name of the plaintiff, Ryan Wealth Holdings.
Mrs Crittle did this on 7 February 2006. In the course of advising Mrs Crittle, Mr Moylan also suggested to her that he also have authority to operate the Macquarie Bank cash management account. Mrs Crittle conferred this authority on him on 6 March 2006.
The first of two agreements which are pleaded in the Statement of Claim was executed on 12 May 2006. Trudy Crittle signed the agreement on behalf of the plaintiff, according to her evidence. There is some evidence that it was signed on behalf of the counterparties, who are some of the defendants in the proceedings.
Parts of that May 2006 loan agreement are relevant for present purposes.
The May 2006 loan agreement defined "Facilities", "Loan", "Repayment Date", "Security Property" and "Specified Charge" as follows: "'Facilities' or 'Facility' means the facility or facilities to be provided by the Lender to the Borrower in accordance with this Agreement and which are specified in Item 1 of Schedule 1.  'Loan' as at any time, means the principal amount of each loan facility drawn or to be drawn under this Agreement and, if drawn, being outstanding at that time.  'Repayment Date' means the date specified in Item 4 of Schedule 1.  'Security Property' means the present and/or future assets of the Borrower or other person subject to any Security Agreement conferring a security interest to or in favour of the Lender by way of security for the Secured
Moneys.  'Specified Charge' means any security interest specified in Item 5 of
Schedule 1 to be created by a Specified Charger to or in favour of the
Lender."
The May 2006 loan agreement provided for the lender to make loans drawn upon the borrower for identified purposes.
 "2. LOAN FACILITY 
The Lender shall make Loans drawn by the Borrower during the term of this
Agreement of an aggregate principal amount not at any time exceeding the relevant Commitment:  (conditions): upon and subject to the provisions of this Agreement;  (representations) in reliance upon the representations made in the representations provision; and  (security) in reliance upon the Security Agreements.  . DRAWINGS UNDER THE LOAN FACILITY  .1 Drawdown 
On the relevant Drawdown Date, the Lender will make available to the
Facility to the account nominated in the applicable Drawdown Notice.  . PURPOSE 
The Borrower shall apply the proceeds of all Facilities for the purpose/s specified in Item 3 of the Schedule."
Drawdown Notices were made the subject of specific requirements as to form in the May 2006 loan agreement.
 "5. DRAWDOWN  .1 Drawdown Notice 
The Borrower shall request a Loan by the Lender under the relevant Facility by giving a Drawdown Notice to the Lender to be received not later than 10am (Sydney time) two business days, or any shorter period agreed by the Lender, prior to the proposed Drawdown Date for that Loan.  .2 Notice Requirements 
Each Drawdown Notice shall:  (signature): be signed by an authorised officer on behalf of the
Borrower;  (irrevocability): be effective on receipt by the Lender and when given shall be irrevocable;  (drawdown date): specify the Drawdown Date, which shall be a business day;  (principal amount): specify in Australian dollars the principal amount of each Loan to be drawn, which must not be less than $50,000.00 and which must be an integral multiple of $50,000;  (bank account): where relevant, specify the bank account or accounts to which payment is to be made; and  (representations): confirms the representations made in this agreement as at the date of the giving of the Drawdown Notice."
The May 2006 loan agreement provided for repayment either on a specified date or on demand as follows: "7. REPAYMENT  . Loan Facility  (Final repayment): The Borrowers shall repay to the Lender in full the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on the Repayment Date, together with all accrued interest and other moneys (including any interest, fees and other costs payable pursuant to the provisions of any Security Agreement) due to the
Lender under this Agreement.  .5 Payable on Demand 
If any amount payable under this Agreement is not expressed to be payable on a specified date, that amount is payable on demand by the Lender."
Relevant parts of the Schedule to the May 2006 loan agreement are as follows: "Schedule 
Item 1. (Facility) 
A Commercial Advance Facility ('Loan Facility') 
Item 2. (Commitment) 
A maximum amount of $616,795. 
Item 3. (Purpose) 
The Loan Facility is to provide capital to the Borrowers as a means of satisfying debts incurred in the operation of L & V Tomkins Pty Limited and related entities. 
Item 4. (Repayment Date) 
With respect to the Loan Facility, the date being one (1) year from the date of the initial Drawdown Notice. 
Item 5. (Specified Charge)  . Second registered Real Property Mortgage given by L & V Tomkins Pty
Limited over property known as Lots 5 in Deposited Plan 838068;  . Second registered Real Property Mortgage given by Andrew Bruce Tomkins and Deborah Tomkins over property known as Lot in Deposited Plan being [address not published];  . Any other Security Agreement, including any real property mortgage, entered into by the Borrower and the Lender from time to time which is intended to secure the payment of the Secured Moneys.  ... 
Item 9. (Permitted Security)  . First registered Real Property Mortgage given by L & V Tomkins Pty
Limited in favour of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia over property known as
Lot 55 in Deposited Plan 838068 being [address not published].  . First registered Real Property Mortgage given by Andrew Bruce Tomkins and Deborah Tomkins in favour of over property known as Lot in Deposited Plan being [address not published]."
The evidence suggests that contemporaneously with the execution of this agreement monies were transferred out of the plaintiff's account to an entity or business described "Cardiff Gas" on the same day as this agreement was signed, 12 May 2006.
Following these events, for a long period Mrs Crittle had very little understanding, of what happened to this particular loan investment. She says that when Macquarie Bank told her, about 18 November 2013, that these monies had been applied, out of her Macquarie Cash Management Account to Cardiff Gas on 12 May 2006 she became aware of the true situation for the first time.
Searches show that the name Cardiff Gas is associated with a business name named "Cardiff Gas & Welding" which is in turn owned by a company Cardiff Gas & Welding Supplies Pty Ltd. Its directors are Valerie Gladys Tomkins, the second defendant in these proceedings and Andrew Bruce Tomkins, the third defendant. The shareholders in that company in the past have been Leonard John Tomkins, who is not a defendant to these proceedings, and Valerie Gladys Tomkins.
The party to the first agreement, Leonard Tomkins was made bankrupt in 2013. This apparently explains why he was not sued when these proceedings were commenced in 2014 in respect of what was alleged to have been a debt created prior to his bankruptcy. The precise relationship between Cardiff Gas & Welding Pty Ltd and L & V Tomkins Pty Ltd is uncertain on the evidence. But the same family seems to have controlled both companies in the middle of the last decade.
The second of the two important agreements analysed in these proceedings is a form of loan agreement, dated 30 June 2008, so described because although on its face it was executed by the plaintiff as a lender and the first defendant, L & V Tomkins Pty Ltd as a borrower, Leonard Tomkins and Valerie Glady Tomkins are parties to the agreement in an ill-defined capacity. There is a factual dispute as to whether the defendants executed this document.
The June 2008 agreement relevantly first provides in its recitals: "Background 
A. Tomkins registered Ryan Wealth to lend to it the sum of Seven Hundred
Eight Seven Thousand Three Hundred and Twenty Four Dollars ($787,324.00) 
B. On 30 June 2008 Ryan Wealth loaned to Tomkins the sum of Seven Hundred
Eight Seven Thousand Three Hundred and Twenty Four Dollars ($787,324.00) 
C. The Parties now wish to record their agreement in writing as set out below."
The June 2008 agreement provided for both the commencement date and the repayment date of the Principal Loan as follows: "'Commencement Date' means 30 June 2008.  'Repayment Date' means [...........]  ...  . Principal Loan  .1 Ryan Wealth provided the Principal Loan to Tomkins on the Commencement
Date.  . Repayment  .1 On the Repayment Date, Tomkins will repay to Ryan Wealth the Principal
Outstanding in the manner set out in this Agreement in full unless otherwise agreed.  .2 Tomkins may, at any time prior to the Repayment Date, repay the whole, or any part of the Principal Outstanding."
Clause 5 provided for both the company, L & V Tomkins and for Leonard and Valerie Tomkins themselves to provide security over two properties which will be referred to respectively as Lot 55 and Lot 7 in these reasons. But the nature of the security to be provided by the two natural persons is not clearly described in the agreement.
 "5. Security  .1 Ryan Wealth may secure the repayment of amounts owing to it by Tomkins under this Agreement by the registration of second mortgages over Lot 55 in
Deposited Plan 838068 and Lot 7 in Strata Plan 67807.  .2 Leonard John Tomkins and Valerie Gladys Tomkins are the registered proprietors of the above properties and hereby consent to the registration of second mortgages by Ryan Wealth."
Finally, the June 2008 agreement provided for the consequences of an event of default as follows: "7. Consequences of Event of Default  .1 At any time after an Event of Default Ryan Wealth may do all or any of the following:  by notice to Tomkins declare all moneys (or any part of those moneys as specified by Ryan Wealth in the notice) actually or contingently owing under this Agreement immediately due and payable, and Tomkins will immediately pay to Ryan Wealth the Principal Outstanding together with accrued interest (or such part of those monies as is specified by Ryan Wealth in the notice);  enforce any security it may have in respect of the Loan.  by notice to Tomkins terminate the obligations of Ryan Wealth under this Agreement and specify the Termination Date of this Agreement; and  take any action whatsoever which Ryan Wealth (or any person acting on
Ryan Wealth's behalf) is authorised or entitled to take under this Agreement upon the occurrence of an Event of Default."
On its face the June 2008 loan agreement, appears to have been both signed and witnessed for the defendants. Both the first and second agreements declare themselves to be agreements. But their formal signing and witnessing closely resembles what may be appropriate for the execution of a deed.
The procedural history of the case may be shortly stated. The Statement of Claim was filed on 13 June 2014 in the Equity Division and first came before Sackar J on 19 June 2014 in the duty list. The proceedings commenced this way because a lapsing notice had been served in respect of the caveat AI237699 over Lot 55.
The plaintiff has filed an affidavit of Mrs Crittle. The defendants have not yet put on their evidence. There has been no discovery. There were applications about discovery and then these motions were filed. The evidence shows that Lot 55 is held in the name of the first defendant, L & V Tomkins Pty Ltd. There is no evidence that Valerie does not own Lot 7 in the strata plan.
I understand also from the evidence and what is said to me at the Bar table that Mr Moylan is also now bankrupt. Substantial parts of the monies the plaintiff invested upon his advice have been lost.

Applicable Legal Principles
The applicable legal principles may be shortly stated. Only in "plain and obvious" cases, where the plaintiff's case is "so clearly untenable that it cannot possibly succeed" should the Court exercise its power to strike out pleadings or dismiss proceedings without a substantive hearing: General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner for Railways  <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125] at 603 per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ.
The Court may hear argument "even of an extensive kind" in determining whether or not the plaintiff's case is untenable: General Steel at 130 per Barwick CJ.
In Spencer versus The Commonwealth <case>; <case> French CJ and Gummow J said: "The exercise of powers to summarily terminate proceedings must always be attended with caution. That is so whether such disposition is sought on the basis that the pleadings fail to disclose a reasonable cause of action or on the basis that the action is frivolous or vexatious or an abuse of process.
The same applies where such a disposition is sought in a summary judgment application supported by evidence. As to the latter, this Court in Fancourt v
Mercantile Credits Ltd said: 'The power to order summary or final judgment is one that should be exercised with great care and should never be exercised unless it is clear that there is no real question to be tried'." <case>; <case> - [117] per Garling J.
It is convenient to deal with the arguments in the order that they were put, that is firstly by Mr Ogborne for the third and fourth defendants and then by Mr Walsh who adopted Mr Ogborne's arguments and added some of his own for the first and second defendants.

Submissions and Consideration - the May 2006 Loan Agreement
Mr Ogborne advances a number of arguments about the May 2006 loan agreement. His first is a limitation argument, put in quite similar terms to that which Mr Walsh advanced. They argue in substance that there must have been a cl 5.1 Drawdown Notice issued under the first agreement on or about 12 May 2006, at the time that the available evidence shows that there was an advance of $400,000, because the May 2006 loan agreement required it. That being so, they argue that the Repayment Date is therefore one year later, on 12 May 2007. The Statement of Claim in these proceedings was filed in June 2014. They argue that the claim was therefore brought seven years after the Repayment Date beyond the limitation period: [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), [s 14(1)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html)
Alternatively the defendants submit that, if one assumes that no Drawdown Notice was issued, the appropriate way to construe the first agreement is that it is one without a repayment date. The limitation period would therefore, in accordance with cases such as Ogilvie versus Adams <case>; [[1981] VR 1041], run from the date of the agreement itself. If that view is correct then the filing of the statement of claim is also out of time.
Mr Ogborne submitted that the whole contract is contained in the documents that are, in substance, set out in these reasons. Mr Walsh put a similar submission. Mr Carolan disputed that submission. When one looks at these two documents, the conclusion is almost inevitable that other part of the agreement must have been made outside them. If one seeks to infer, on Mr Ogborne's argument, that the Drawdown Notice issued before the drawn down on 12 May 2006, there must have been some agreement to shorten or waive the notice period between the Drawdown Notice and the actual draw down.
No Drawdown Notice has been found in relation to the first loan. It is not clear that there was a Drawdown Notice. But if there was, it is not clear that it even preceded the first payment, or whether it came subsequent to the first payment. What is clear is that its issue is not wholly accounted for by the written agreements some transactions beyond those described in the first agreement will account for its issuing, if it can ultimately be found.
That, in my view, has important consequences. This is not a case where the Court can be confident that what is now before the Court is the sum total of what might be available at trial. The authorities indicate that, in clear cases the Court is justified in striking out pleadings on limitation grounds, as Austin J did in Hillebrand versus Penrith Council <case> But for a number of reasons I do not think this is such a clear case.

The May 2006 Loan Agreement - The Evidence
The evidentiary background is important in an assessment of the exercise of the Court's discretion in this case.
When one looks at the structure of the allegation about the May 2006 loan agreement, the plaintiff is currently in the position where the evidence suggests that its financial adviser may have deceived it. Mr Moylan, the person who dealt with the plaintiff in a fiduciary capacity, is now bankrupt. There was a lending between the plaintiff and these defendants, other clients of this financial adviser.
There is no immediate way for the plaintiff to find out for itself all the information that it might ordinarily have available to it were it the party that took direct part personally in organising all these transactions. Ordinarily the plaintiff or a person in its position would not have the opportunity of issuing subpoenas or having trial discovery until the parties have served their evidence: Practice Note No. SC Eq 11. But exceptional circumstances can require early disclosure. Here the plaintiff does not have ready access to the information that might otherwise found its pleading. Its financial advisor is bankrupt and possibly uncooperative. One can expect that getting what information the plaintiff wants may be difficult. This case may fall into the "exceptional circumstances" category within the Practice Note.
Indeed, absent limitation period concerns, had the plaintiff been in a position where its pre-trial consideration of its pleadings had been less pressured and had it not been forced to commence proceedings to stop a caveat lapsing, provisions such as UCPR, r 5.3 in relation to pre-trial discovery may possibly have been deployable at the plaintiff's option.
The plaintiff has not had an opportunity to investigate any of those things. Such gaps as there are in the evidence at this point are gaps for which the Court will give the plaintiff the benefit of the doubt in assessing whether or not its pleading and evidence disclose a reasonable cause of action. These gaps may be important at trial. Exactly when the Drawdown Notice and the first agreement were issued, for example, may be of significance.
And it is at least arguable that on the face of this agreement when all the circumstances are known it may be that it operated as a deed and [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), [s 16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s16.html) applies confer a 12 year limitation period rather than [s 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html)'[s 6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s6.html) year period. All that can be said is that this is an argument deployable at final hearing, once all the facts are known. That is another reason, in my view, why the Court would be reluctant to strike this claim out. A combination of that longer limitation period plus a later notice may well mean that this matter was brought within time. One does not yet know.

The June 2008 Loan Agreement
The second loan agreement in June 2008 contains a number of curiosities. First it contains no express contractual repayment date. There is simply a number of dots in the definition of repayment date. The other important feature of the second agreement is that in cl 5.2 it sets out that Leonard John and Valerie Gladys Tomkins are respectively the registered proprietors of the properties, Lots 55 and Lot 7.
As to the first and second of those matters, Mr Walsh's argument for Valerie is that there are no express personal guarantees in the second agreement. Mr Walsh is right about that. There are none. But cl 5.2 on its face may be a sufficient basis together with surrounding events to infer that there was an agreement to give a third party mortgage from family members to secure a primary obligation which owed by L & V Tomkins to Ryan Wealth Holdings.
Mr Walsh also submits there is no basis to infer, that the case as pleaded meant there was any consideration given for Ryan Wealth Holdings to covenant to forebear, or not to sue, or indeed that there was any dispute between the parties at the time the June 2008 agreement was made. Mr Walsh is right as to this. There is no express declaration that such consideration was provided for any promise by Valerie to give security.
But there may be a number of potential answers to this at trial. One is that, like the situation with the first agreement, a curiosity of the June 2008 loan agreement is that, if it is a genuine document at all, it bears some of the features of a deed and it may be that the limitation period is accordingly longer than had been at first assumed. But leaving that aside, this seems to me a case where the plaintiff should really be required to re-plead to identify such consideration as it relies on as clearly as possible.
And it may be that the evidence at trial makes clear, when all the interest calculations are done, that the agreement was well supported by identifiable consideration. The parties were speculating in the course of submissions about how the difference was calculated between the amount advanced under the first agreement in May 2006 and the amount acknowledged as loaned under the second agreement, but without reference to the first agreement: Recital B. The difference may well be interest under the first agreement on sums outstanding until the time of the second agreement. It is rather difficult to tell, but it may be, as often happens when parties get to trial, that interest calculations clarify that the figure in the second agreement shows that there has been some consideration for the additional promises to give security in the second agreement.
Mr Walsh also put that it has not been demonstrated that Valerie Tomkins, the second defendant, owns any property. The evidence suggests L & V Tomkins Pty Ltd owns Lot 55. But no real investigation has yet been done to show that Valerie Tomkins does not own Lot 7 in Strata Plan 67807, such that any reliance upon the giving of such a security is in any sense hopeless. A further difficulty, it seems to me, for Mr Walsh's argument on behalf of Valerie, is the form of the definition of Repayment Date in the agreement. The blank after "Repayment Date" invites the conclusion that the parties may have agreed upon a repayment date outside the agreement.
The difficulty for this plaintiff at the present time, before discovery, is that it is not in a position to readily to find out from the bankrupt Mr Moylan who apparently signed this June 2008 loan agreement, under a power of attorney on the plaintiff's behalf just what else was agreed, if anything. This too seems to me to be a matter for trial.

Conclusion
In summary therefore, although I accept that if a limitation period has obviously expired, there can be a striking out of pleadings, it does not seem to me that this is an apt case for that to occur. I therefore dismiss both motions but will allow the plaintiff to re-plead.
The Court therefore orders: * (1) Grant leave to the plaintiff to re-plead its statement of claim in accordance with the observations made in these reasons.
* (2) Otherwise dismiss the two motions * (3) Order that these two motions be the successful party's costs in the cause.
 
Amendments May 2015 - cases inserted in coversheet * * * 
