

Green versus Green (No. 2) Matter No 3312/97 [1998] NSWSC 594 (2 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 December 1998 `GREEN versus GREEN (No. 2)` `3312/97` `2 October 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings involve the will of Alice Muriel Green of 3 April 1989. I gave a judgment on 24 June 1998 and the matter is in the list today to deal with the formal orders that should be made. 
On the discussion of the various forms of short minutes which have been tendered, three issues arise, with which I will briefly deal.

The first deals with cl 7(b) of the will. I have set out the text of cl 7(b) on p 2 of my earlier judgment. There is a mention in that clause of what should occur where a grandchild has not attained eighteen as at the vesting date, 14 October 2016. It would appear that such a grandchild's interest may vest in interest and possession as at that date. However, the last sentence of cl 7(b) provides that a share of a minor grandchild entitled in expectancy should be held by the guardian of the child until he or she attains eighteen.
If that does not happen it will fall into residue.

Mr Gray for the plaintiff pointed out that this is a rather odd provision and should be disregarded because the whole scheme of the will is that there should be a distribution on 14 October 2016, and if there has been a distribution of shares calculated on that date, including some shares paid to guardians of minor grandchildren, it is almost absurd to think that seven years later a guardian might have to refund the money to a trustee that may not exist at that stage. Thus there should be a redistribution.

I understand that argument and have some sympathy with it. However, as I said in my earlier judgment, the word "expectancy" appears to have been used by the drafter of this will in a very broad sense.

I also directed my mind to a similar problem on p 11 of the earlier judgment, and on balance I do not believe I can just disregard that last sentence.
Accordingly, I will make orders dealing with the position of grandchildren who have not attained eighteen as at 14 October 2016.

The next problem is whether I should now make any order dealing with situations which may arise between now and 2016, or leave it to that date when the facts will be fully known.

The court does not decide questions prematurely. However, in more recent days courts have become far more aware of the probability that parties who are otherwise sui juris may come to some family arrangement. It is of utility in the ordinary case to make declarations in advance where the greater probability is that nothing that happens between the date of decision and date of distribution is likely to affect the question of construction. I think that is this case and I should make the necessary orders.

The other question is whether a grandchild who dies before 14 October 2016 only fits within the substitutionary clause if that child either attains eighteen years before that date or dies, but not both. Whilst this is literally what the words say, it does not seem to me that I should follow the literal words in this will where the drafter has shown that he or she has used words with a broad brush and the general intention of the will would seem to suggest that a grandchild who has fulfilled both conditions qualifies equally as a grandchild who only fulfils one of those conditions.

Accordingly, I make the orders as follows: 
Orders 1 and 2 as per Mr Sainsbury's short minutes; orders 3 and 4 as per Mr
Gray's short minutes; orders 5 and 6 as per Mr Sainsbury's short minutes; and orders 7 to 13 inclusive are made in accordance with Mr Gray's document.
 * * * 
