

Plessey Components P/L versus Cant and Anor [1996] NSWSC 302 (26 July 1996) 
PLESSEY COMPONENTS PTY LTD V CANT & ANOR /92 
Friday 31 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 4 May 1992, I heard an application by the plaintiff in these proceedings for an interlocutory injunction to prevent the defendants from dealing with the assets and undertaking of a company, EC Capacitors Pty Ltd, contrary to an agreement that they had made with the plaintiff. For reasons I then gave, I found that there were contractual relations between the parties, but that damages were an adequate remedy and declined an injunction.

The matter then proceeded. The first defendant was a chartered accountant acting as agent for a mortgagee, the second defendant, Australia & New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd ("the Bank"). He was dismissed from the suit when the plaintiff discontinued against him, and the proceedings continued against the Bank alone. After my judgment and on 1 June 1992, the Bank sold the assets of EC Capacitors Pty Ltd to a third party, ATCO Pty Ltd. The plaintiff complains that by doing this, the Bank broke its contract with the plaintiff.

The plaintiff pleaded the contract on which it relied. The Bank's answer was that it admitted that the judgment delivered on 4 May 1992 found that a contract came into existence. The matter proceeded before me virtually on the basis that the present case was one for assessment of damages. Indeed, I noted at the directions hearing: "The plaintiff no longer asserts that the defendant is obliged to sell to it the relevant business and goods and accordingly this case is now one for assessment of damages only." 
All this is quite unusual. However, I would accept that the parties at least have now adopted some conventional estoppel as to the effect of my earlier judgment whether I intended that or not, and no matter what might be the opinion of any Court of Appeal on what I then said as to the contractual relations between the parties. For present purposes I must accept that there was a contract and that it has been broken and that my only task is to assess the quantum of damages.

In its defence the Bank says that the question of quantum is affected by two factors, viz (1) that the plaintiff could not have proceeded with the contract in any event because of <case> of the Trade Practices Act; and (2) that the plaintiff failed to mitigate its damages.

Neither of these propositions has any appeal and I will say why shortly.
However, it is first necessary to state some facts so as to put the dispute in context.

The plaintiff is a successful company which produces power factor correction capacitors for use in motor run applications, fluorescent lighting applications and high voltage, high intensity discharge constant wattage and lead peak lighting applications together with specialised capacitors. A capacitor is an electronic device used to regulate electric power flow. As at there were only two manufacturers of such capacitors in Australia being the plaintiff and EC Capacitors Pty Ltd, though there was also competition from European exporters. However, the European exporters only had 5% of the total market share.

In November 1991, Mr Cant, the agent for the Bank, circulated to potential buyers a letter that he was interested in finding persons who would wish to purchase the business and assets of EC Capacitors Pty Ltd.

On about 15 April 1992, the plaintiff executed and returned to the Bank together with a bank cheque for $150,000, a due diligence agreement. This is the contract which was the subject of my earlier judgment. This agreement gave the plaintiff 42 days from the payment of its money to inspect on a confidential basis the records of EC Capacitors. At the same time as it was provided with a draft of the due diligence agreement, the plaintiff was also handed a draft sale agreement. This draft was never executed; however, it provided that it was a condition precedent that the due diligence had been completed to the purchaser's satisfaction. It also provided that the sale price would be $1.5 million of which the $150,000 deposit would be part, that both parties would use their best endeavours to complete the agreement, but that (clause 6.2) if the Bank received an offer in writing from another interested party during the due diligence period which was more attractive to it "it shall be entitled to give the Purchaser 48 hours notice to either match this offer". Doubtless the wording would have been tidied up in the final agreement. However, the Bank did not give the plaintiff any opportunity to match ATCO Pty Ltd's offer before selling to ATCO on 1 June 1992 at a higher price, namely the price of $1.63 million.

The plaintiff says that had it purchased the business it would have applied its efficiencies to the management of EC Capacitors Pty Ltd and was confident that it would have made the business profitable. The plaintiff points to the fact that it had purchased its initial business and made it profitable within a year or so, despite difficulties experienced by a previous owner. The plaintiff says that it would have rationalised EC Capacitor's Melbourne operation with the plaintiff's Sydney operation and with efficiencies and economies of scale and production, it would have been a very profitable business. It says it has been denied the chance of doing this by the actions of the Bank.

The Bank says that had the due diligence proceeded, the plaintiff may well have decided that it would not purchase the business in any event. However, even if it had done so, the business would not have been profitable. It points to the fact that the purchaser ATCO did in fact close down some aspects of the business a couple of years after purchasing it.

The plaintiff, on the other hand, says that had it purchased the business it would not now be competing with ATCO Pty Ltd as it wasn't at the time of the due diligence, and it would have had a greater market share which it could have exploited through greater efficiencies.

The Bank says that the greater market share would have amounted to a breach of [s 50](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s50.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) in that there would have been a substantial lessening of competition in a market. Mr
Forster SC, who appeared for the Bank, says that he did not have to show that there would in fact have been such a breach, but that the danger of there being such a breach would have affected the chances of a purchase of the business by the plaintiff not going ahead.

I could not be satisfied on the evidence that there was any real danger at all of there being such a breach. No-one put before me any evidence at all as to what was the relevant market. The evidence showed that with this particular type of capacitor the plaintiff had the lion's share of the trade. However, whether the type of capacitors which the plaintiff manufactured was a substantial segment of the capacitor market, if there be such a thing, or whether the market involved motors or lighting equipment or what have you was just left to speculation. In any event, Mr Kongats, the controlling director of the plaintiff, gave evidence that there were ways and means of structuring the transaction so as to minimize any infringement of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s50.html) It seemed to me that apart from the thought that some lawyer had in the Bank's team that this might be a good defence, there is no material to support its relevance.

The same might be said of the other blanket defence, an allegation that there was a failure by the plaintiff to mitigate its damages. There was no material to support that defence, the onus being on the Bank. Accordingly I can proceed without further considering it.

Extraordinarily, there was very little evidence at all tendered in the case that was of any assistance, even though the plaintiff contends that its damages are about $3 million. Both sides rely on reports prepared by partners of leading firms of accountants. One such report estimated the plaintiff's loss at nil; the other at $3 million.

There has been in existence for some time now, a belief that one values businesses or shares by producing accountants' reports. On other occasions, both other Judges and I have tried to dispel this notion. Accountants' reports are very useful to Judges in that they direct their minds to the matters that need to be taken into account in the valuation exercise and they perform the calculations that the Judge would otherwise have to do. However, they really do not go much further than this. Even if they did go further than this, as with all expert reports, there has to be some evidence of the facts and assumptions on which the opinion was based. In the present case there was precious little material given by the parties to substantiate such assumptions.

In Cross on Evidence, 5th Australian edition [29065], the learned editor says, "The facts upon which an expert's opinion is based must be available for scrutiny by the tribunal. ... This means that the factual basis of the opinion must be identified and proved. (see footnote 3) ...

A doctor may not state what a patient told him about past symptoms as evidence of the existence of those symptoms ... but he may give evidence of what the patient told him in order to explain the grounds on which he came to a conclusion with regard to the patient's condition. But this is limited to statements made by the patient as to his bodily symptoms and feelings at or shortly prior to the date of the examination. Any other statements must be confirmed by the testimony of the patient. (footnote 7). Similarly a valuer may express an opinion concerning the appropriate rent or value of particular premises even though the valuer has not got first hand knowledge of comparable rents and values. The valuer may explain that the valuation is based on comparable properties, but may not give evidence about comparable rents or values of which the valuer has not got personal knowledge unless that evidence is to be called from witnesses with such knowledge. (footnote 8)." 
In footnotes 3 and 7, there is reference to the High Court's decision in
Paric versus John Holland (Constructions) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1985) 59 ALJR 844], 846, where the High Court said, "It is trite law that for an expert medical opinion to be of any value the facts upon which it is based must be proved by admissible evidence: Ramsay versus Watson <case>; [(1961) 108 CLR 642.] But that does not mean that the facts so proved must correspond with complete precision to the proposition on which the opinion is based. The passages from Wigmore on Evidence cited by Samuels, JA in the
Court of Appeal ... to the effect that it is a question of fact whether the case supposed is sufficiently like the one under consideration to render the opinion of the expert of any value are in accordance with both principle and common sense." 
The principal authorities given in footnote 8 are Wright versus Municipal Council of Sydney <case>; [(1916) 16 SR 348];
English Exporters (London) Ltd versus Eldonwall Ltd [[1973] Ch 415] and Bevan
Investments Ltd versus Blackhall & Struthers (No 2) [[1978] 2 NZLR .]
Richmond, P said in the lastmentioned case at p 123, "As neither Mr Bevan nor
Mr Pearce were experts in the field of conducting commercial skating rinks or squash courts it was at least necessary that direct evidence be given of the actual experiences of such businesses before it was permissible for Mr Bevan or Mr Pearce to express opinions based thereon." 
I made mention of this problem during the hearing. When Mr Van Aalst, for the plaintiff, wished to supplement his expert's report by further evidence from
Mr Kongats, Mr Forster SC very very strongly objected. Mr Forster SC said that the point had been made to the plaintiff on numerous occasions and it was unfair for the material to be put in as supplementary material on the day of trial. I indicated that it may well be that the case would have to be adjourned and perhaps at the cost of the solicitors who had brought about the adjournment. After adjourning for a short time, Mr Van Aalst withdrew his application. The same problem afflicted Mr Forster SC. Needless to say, Mr Van
Aalst objected. I rejected the first affidavit of Mr Marsh, the witness who endeavoured to give substance to the Bank's valuer's report because it was inadmissible. Mr Forster SC and his solicitors prepared a second affidavit of
Mr Marsh which was read the next day, but again the vital parts of the material which was to be submitted as evidence were rejected and so little was left of the affidavit of Mr Marsh that Mr Van Aalst did not even bother to cross examine him.

I now turn to the experts' reports. On behalf of the plaintiff, expert evidence was given by Mr Wehby, a partner of Coopers & Lybrand, a leading firm of chartered accountants. For the Bank, expert evidence was given by Mr
Fischl, a partner of another well known firm of chartered accountants, Price
Waterhouse.

Mr Wehby pointed out that he had not had any access to full financial statements of EC Capacitors Pty Ltd and had had to rely solely on information provided by the plaintiff, including documents which the plaintiff had obtained on discovery or information that was in the public domain. He said that the information memorandum published by the Bank and its agent indicated that EC Capacitors had a strong customer base which had been established for many years with over 120 active clients. Mr Wehby considered the plaintiff to be in the category of a "special purchaser" which could gain an additional nett financial benefit from being associated with EC Capacitors; accordingly, he considered that the plaintiff would normally be willing to pay in excess of fair market value.

Mr Wehby said that there were two components of the plaintiff's loss - 
A. Loss of value of the business; and 
B. Losses suffered in existing business through not being able to minimise costs and the like, that is, loss of profits.

Mr Fischl was content to deal with the losses under these headings and I will do likewise.

A. LOSS OF VALUE 
Mr Wehby said the methods of valuing businesses such as EC Capacitors include the present value of future nett cash flows; (b) the capitalisation of future maintainable earnings; and (c) the nett asset backing of the business.
He considered the most appropriate method is on the basis of future nett cash flows. It would seem that Mr Fischl was prepared to concur in this method because, on his figures, the result would be a negative number. It seems to me that as both valuers have proceeded along this track, I should do so also.

Mr Wehby proceeded on the basis that EC Capacitors used to be owned by a large overseas company, but was subject to a management buy-out in 1990. This, according to information provided by Dun & Bradstreet, mercantile agents to which Mr Wehby resorted, caused disruptions which affected turnover during the 1991 financial year. There was, however, no independent evidence of this.

Mr Wehby, in looking to future nett cash flows, endeavoured to assess the nominal cash flow of EC Capacitors before interest and after tax for a 10 year period commencing with the financial year ended 31 May 1993, assumed cash flows occurred mid-year, made an assessment of the terminal value of EC
Capacitors at the end of the 10 year period and calculated the present value of the future nett cash flows and terminal value as at 31 May 1992. He did this by making an assessment of a base level of sales, working out how the base level of sales would grow in line with price inflation and with his assessment of real rates of growth for each of its major business lines.

The Coopers & Lybrand working papers are in evidence. Under the [Evidence
Act, 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), I can take these working papers as some evidence of the truth of the fact which they purport to give. Mr Fischl said in para 6.6 of his report that it is appropriate to augment that data "by estimating an amount of total sales for
June 1990 as being in the same proportion to sales for July 1990 as June 1991 is to July 1991 (85.5%) and utilising the monthly data for March to May 1992 from Mr Marsh's report dated 15 July 1994." However, Mr Marsh's report never got into evidence. Mr Fischl discounted Mr Wehby's figures by about 10% because of this exercise. Of the two sets of figures, however, on the evidence before me, Mr Wehby's are more likely to be correct.

Mr Wehby's forecasts as to sales growth in domestic capacitors were not challenged by Mr Fischl and appeared to be based on statistical information available throughout the community. However, his figure for assuming real sales growth of export business at 10% does not have any material to back it up. Likewise, there does not appear to my mind to be any probable basis for assuming that there would be an increase in agency sales. Mr Wehby then under a heading "Synergistic Benefits and Other Improvements" suggests that there should be a 5% increase in price on 17% of EC Capacitors sales. Mr Fischl doesn't agree with this, though in part he relies on Mr Marsh's report. I am not satisfied that it is appropriate to include an increase as Mr Wehby has put under the heading "Pricing" (Mr Fischl's "Monopoly Pricing"). However, I do consider that it was reasonable to increase by 1% for R & D pricing.

Making all these adjustments in a manner which should appear in more detail from my working papers which I will mark MI1503, I have adjusted the figures on Mr Wehby's calculations (which appear in a simplified form as Appendix B/1 to Mr Fischl's report) by taking the total sales as follows:- 5,137,000 5,015,000 5,129,000 5,359,000 5,566,000 5,878,000 5,999,000 6,230,000 6,471,000 6,720,000 
I now pass to the cost of sales. The accountants on the figures seem to agree on the percentage margins. Indeed, the only difference between them is that Mr
Fischl has taken a zero figure for costs savings on raw materials, whereas Mr
Wehby has taken 3%. Mr Fischl's figure is based on what he was told by Mr
Marsh which is not in evidence. On the flavour of Mr Kongats' evidence, I would prefer Mr Wehby's figure.

Although it is not completely satisfactory, I have calculated the percentage on Mr Wehby's figures of the gross margin on the sales base that he used and have found a figure between 19.48% and 21.79%. I have then adjusted the cost of sales figures in Appendix B/1 by that percentage. This makes the cost of sales in the years under review:- $4,080,000 $4,010,000 $4,083,000 $4,245,000 $4,387,000 $4,609,000 $4,682,000 $4,838,000 $5,036,000 $5,231,000 
One has then got to turn to administrative and selling costs. The fixed costs appear to be virtually agreed between the accountants, Mr Fischl's figures, for some reason or other, are slightly less towards the end of the 10 year period than Mr Wehby's. I will adopt Mr Fischl's figures because they appear to be based on a lower volume of sales.

It is apparent from the figures that both accountants have used document A22, namely PX1221, which is Plessey's cost analysis. This is appropriate because one is looking to see what the business would have done under the Plessey administration. On these figures one takes the variable administration costs at 0.53% and the variable selling costs at 5.3% of sales.

I have endeavoured to make the adjustments that both of the accountants say should be made for the cost of working capital for income tax and for discounting the present values of the figures reached for nett cash flow and also for calculating the residual value. It may well be that there is some mathematical error in MI1503 because I just do not have available to me the ability to adjust for present value etc as the accountants had and where I have any doubt, I have merely adjusted the figures on an arithmetical progression basis rather than what might be a more scientific method. On this basis I derive that the value of cash flow was $1,347,000; the value of the residual $485,000 so that the business was worth to the plaintiff $1,832,000.
To my mind one has to deduct $1.64 million for the sale price of the business to ATCO because it was fairly certain that the price would have been pushed up by competition to at least this figure. Accordingly, before any discount for the chance that the plaintiff may not have bought the business at all, the damages suffered under this head are $192,000.

B. LOSS OF PROFITS 
The other head of damages claimed is the loss of profits that the plaintiff otherwise would have made because it owned both businesses and was not the subject of competition by ATCO.

Both counsel referred me to the words of the High Court in Sellars v
Adelaide Petroleum NL <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 332], 355, where four Justices said, "we consider that acceptance of the principle enunciated in Malec versus JC Hutton Pty Ltd <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 638] requires that damages for deprivation of a commercial opportunity, whether the deprivation occurred by reason of breach of contract, tort or contravention of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s52.html) [of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/)], should be ascertained by reference to the court's assessment of the prospects of success of that opportunity had it been pursued. ...
 "[T]he applicant must prove on the balance of probabilities that he or she has sustained some loss or damage. However, in a case such as the present, the applicant shows some loss or damage was sustained by demonstrating that the contravening conduct caused the loss of a commercial opportunity which had some value (not being a negligible value), the value being ascertained by reference to the degree of probabilities or possibilities. It is no answer to that way of viewing an applicant's case to say that the commercial opportunity was valueless on the balance of probabilities because to say that is to value the commercial opportunity by reference to a standard of proof which is inapplicable." 
Of course, I will apply this principle.

Mr Wehby valued the loss under this head at a further $1.5 million. Mr Wehby based his calculation on three sources of loss, viz: 
The plaintiff's loss of profit attributable to increased price competition; 
The plaintiff's loss of profit attributable to foregone raw material costs savings; and 
The plaintiff's loss of profit attributable to loss of potential price increase.

As to (a), I am not satisfied on the evidence that the loss was anywhere near $101,245 per year. Mr Wehby seems to have relied on Exhibit PX1313 which is a piece of paper generated by the plaintiff, but there would not appear to be any evidence before me as to the basal facts behind this document.

Undoubtedly there was some loss through increased competition and by ATCO offering customers better deals, but it is really a matter of estimation at large as to how much this would be. I do not think that I can go further than to take a fifth of what Mr Wehby allowed.

As to (b), this is thought by Mr Fischl to be an appropriate category and an appropriate amount under it should be allowed.

As to (c), I did not allow this item under the first head of damages and for similar reasons I do not allow it here.

Mr Fischl's Appendix C gives the loss of profit under (b) above as $540,373.
However, he has adjusted this for income tax. It seems to me that this part of the verdict is actually taxable so that one must write back in the income tax.
Assuming that $540,373 is 67% of the loss, then the whole loss is $806,827.

I find it difficult to work out a figure under (a). I think all I can do is assume that $20,623 per year must be added in to Mr Fischl's calculations in
Appendix C and as he has done, discount that figure to present value. I add .3% to $806,827 that is $139,581.

Accordingly, the damages under this second head, without any deduction and on the basis that they are subject to income tax in the hands of the plaintiff are $946,408.

Mr Forster SC says that the figures which I have reached must be discounted because there was no certainty that the plaintiff would have acquired the business after the due diligence exercise was completed. He says the mere fact that the plaintiff demanded due diligence showed that there was some uncertainty.

To a degree this is a bit of a circular argument. On Mr Fischl's figures there must have been very real doubt as to whether the plaintiff would have acquired the EC Capacitors business. However, on Mr Wehby's figures there would be no doubt. I believe that on the figures that I have adopted, the fact that the plaintiff would have made considerable more profit had it acquired the business and had a greater market share means that there was only a small chance, which I would assess at 5%, that the business would not have been acquired by the plaintiff. Accordingly, I will adjust each of my figures by 5% to arrive at $182,400 and $899,088 respectively.

There then has to be an adjustment for the vicissitudes of business life in respect of the damages under the second head. What I am really doing is compensating the plaintiff for the loss of a chance. There were considerable unknowns in the 10 years following the acquisition, including possible alterations of the tariff structure, the number of other competitors who might come into the market, cash crises within the company and the general national economy. It seems to me that a fairly heavy discount should be applied despite the fact that the accountants have dealt with their calculations of profit forecasts in a pseudo scientific manner.

The discount rate must depend on the number of contingencies and their predictability. As Ashworth, J said in Hall versus Meyrick [[1957] 2 QB ], , "The more the contingencies, the lower the value of the chance or opportunity of which the plaintiff was deprived. On the other hand, the contingencies must be fairly assessed, and if there was a reasonable prospect of their being satisfied in a manner favourable to the plaintiff, the amount by which the full claim falls to be discounted is correspondingly reduced."
The actual decision was reversed on appeal but this aspect of the judgment at first instance remains.

A general conspectus of cases in which courts have discounted damages in cases involving loss of a chance referred to in McGregor on Damages and other places show that a discount rate of one-third to two-thirds is not uncommon.
Indeed, I had cause to read recently for another case the decision in
Inchbald versus The Western Neilgherry Coffee Tea & Cinchona Plantation Co
Ltd <case>; [(1864) 17 CB (NS) 733] No case will be analogous to any other case in this area, but it is a good illustration. In that case, the plaintiff lost the chance of earning [sterling]400.0.0. commission. Byles and Keating, JJ merely said, at ER 297, that doing the best they could, they would award [sterling]250.0.0., a discount of 37.5%. In Yardley versus Coombes [(1963) 107 Sol Jo 597], it was held that a plaintiff would have had a fair chance of success in obtaining an award of [sterling]3,000.0.0. and it was appropriate to give him [sterling]1,000.0.0. for loss of his chance.

It seems to me that the plaintiff bears the onus of proving that it really would have suffered damage and the amount of the damages. The uncertainty of the damages does not prevent the Judge from doing the very best he or she can to make the assessment, but where there are a large number of contingencies in the business world over a 10 year period it is obvious that a significant discount for vicissitudes should be adopted. This is especially so where it is said that half of the claim for loss of profits depends upon competition in the market place remaining the same as it was in 1993. It seems to me that a very high rate should be applied. I would discount the profits to be gained by raw materials being purchased at a better price by 35% but the claim for loss of profit attributable to increased price competition by 65%. Accordingly, I must adjust the figure of $899,088 to $544,626. This figure is calculated by taking 65% of 95% of $806,827 and adding 35% of 95% of $139,581.

Thus, under the first head, the damages are $182,400 and under the second head $544,626, a total of $727,026.

To these figures, interest must be added under the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/). This should be at 11.25% for four years to average out the change in Court rates. This means that under both heads interest totals $327,162. All of this interest, as I understand it, is subject to tax as it is compensation for loss of income.
Accordingly, the plaintiff is entitled to a verdict for $1,054,188. Of that sum, $182,400 is for loss of a capital asset and $871,788 is for loss of income. The second figure has been assessed on the basis it is liable for income tax.

I do not consider that capital gains tax comes into the calculation of the first amount of $182,400. This is because the plaintiff is getting damages for loss of a chance of having a business which had a special value to it of greater than the sale price. I have adopted throughout this judgment the methodology of Mr Wehby that one must look at the special value to the plaintiff of the business, not its fair market value.

The parties have, for reasons best known to them, left me with incomplete evidence, have presented pseudo scientific data in an incomplete form for valuation and I must confess, were it not for Mr Fischl's schedules,
Appendices A, B and C, I really would not have been able to have made anything more than an inspired guess as to damages bearing in mind what the experts have done. The parties having chosen to present their case in this way, they cannot complain if the tribunal of fact has had to make assumptions which it might not otherwise have had to make. Accordingly, I do not consider this is a case where I should entertain argument about the validity or invalidity of some of my assumptions. I will not exclude such argument being presented, but
I am indicating it would not be received sympathetically.

On the other hand, there may well be some errors in my mathematical computations, or some errors of principle which were not addressed during argument. A party may, at its own risk as to costs, have the matter relisted so that questions can be ventilated. It is far better for them to be ventilated here as opposed to causing the Court of Appeal to have to go through the convoluted exercise I had to go through to find the final figures.

Accordingly, I will merely publish these reasons and stand the matter over until 16 July 1996 at 9.50 am for short minutes to be brought in. If that day is inconvenient to counsel, they may have liberty to contact my Associate at any time up to and including 28 June 1996 to arrange a substitute date.

PLESSEY COMPONENTS PTY LTD versus ANTHONY CANT AND ANOR /92 
FRIDAY 26 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I gave reasons for judgment in this matter on 31 May 1996. I complained that I really had insufficient material to make a proper assessment of the damages, but I did the best I could based on the accountants' agreed mode of calculation. I had to do some rough and ready arithmetic because I did not have available to me tables which would calculate present values accurately.

The parties have now produced four columns of figures which they agree correct my arithmetical errors. Column 3 is based on the premiss that I applied the accountants' agreed model. This premiss is correct. Column 4 "corrects" what
Mr Forster SC, for the defendant, says was an error made by both the accountants in their quantification of damages, that is, that the wrong tax rate from 1995 onwards was taken.

Mr Giugni, solicitor for the plaintiff, says that I should ignore that because
I am assessing damages as at the breach in 1992/1993. However, the principle is that once an unknown becomes known one can use that known factor to calculate the damages, even though one is assessing damages at a past date.

Accordingly, I adopt column 4. However, I believe I should round off the figure because a verdict in column 4 of $896,460 appears to give my calculations some semblance of precision, which they just do not have.

Accordingly, there will be verdict for the plaintiff for $900,000 and I otherwise make orders in accordance with the short minutes, which I have initialled, dated and will be placed with the papers.

The last order seeks a stay for twenty-eight days. This is obviously for the purpose of appeal. Mr Forster SC asks for a stay. It is opposed by Mr Giugni.
As the exercise that I conducted was just an assessment of damages I would have thought that it would be appropriate that at least part of the damages should be paid pending an appeal, but as the application involves a stay for only twenty-eight days, and as the defendants have the money to pay the interest, I think it is probably best to grant the stay for twenty-eight days and leave the further matter up to the Court of Appeal, if an appeal is lodged.

I make orders 1 to 3 in the short minutes of order.
 * * * 
