

Regina versus Mewett Matter No Cca 60530/97 [1998] NSWSC 276 (2 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
REGINA versus TREVOR JAMES MEWETT 
CCA 60530/97 July 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Powell JA, Newman J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA versus Trevor James MEWETT 
On 15 September 1997 the appellant was indicted on a charge of having sexual intercourse with the complainant without her consent, knowing that she was not consenting thereto. The appellant claimed that consensual intercourse took place. On 23 September 1997 the appellant was convicted by jury and sentenced to a minimum term of four years penal servitude, with an additional term of one year four months.

The appellant appealed against conviction and sought an application for leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence.

Held:
The verdict was not unsafe and unsatisfactory 
The test for determining whether a verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory is whether the court thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty:
M versus The Queen [[1994] 181 CLR 487]; confirmed in Jones versus The Queen 72 ALJR 78.

Notwithstanding inconsistencies in the complainants' evidence, those inconsistencies, when reviewed in the light of the whole of the evidence, did not demonstrate that the evidence lacked probative force in such a way as to lead to the conclusion that an innocent person had been convicted.
Accordingly, this ground of appeal was dismissed.
The trial miscarried 
The events which took place, in particular the prosecution splitting its case (which meant that matters raised were not put to key witnesses in cross- examination by defence counsel), led to a denial of procedural fairness which must be afforded to the accused. Accordingly a significant miscarriage of justice occurred.

R versus Chin <case>; [(1984-85) 157 CLR 671] 
ORDERS
Appeal upheld;
Conviction and sentence quashed;
Order a new trial.

JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: This is an appeal against conviction and an application for leave to appeal against severity of sentence. 
The appellant was indicted before his Honour Judge Armitage QC at the Penrith
District Court on 15 September 1997 on the following charges: "For that he on or about 15 January 1996 at South Penrith in the State of New
South Wales did have sexual intercourse with Elaine Mewett without the consent of Elaine Mewett knowing that she was not consenting thereto. (7 counts)" 
The above charges were brought pursuant to <case> I of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and carry a maximum penalty of fourteen years penal servitude.

The appellant pleaded not guilty and was tried before his Honour and a jury of twelve.

On 23 September 1997 the jury returned with a verdict of guilty to each count.

On 10 October 1997 the appellant was sentenced to a minimum term of four years penal servitude commencing on 12 September 1997 and expiring on 11 September with an additional term of one year four months to commence on 12
September 2001 and expire on 11 January 2003.

The Crown case may be summarised as follows: 
The appellant and the complainant married in May 1993. By January 1996 the relationship had broken down to the extent that on Saturday, 13 January the appellant rang the complainant from his work and told her the relationship was over and "he wanted her out by Monday." 
At this time the appellant and complainant were living in rented premises in
South Penrith. They had moved to Sydney two months before hand following the appointment of the appellant, a police officer, to Penrith Police Station. The complainant had casual work as a nurse with Homecare looking after aged persons in their homes. The complainant had no family or friends in the Sydney area. She suffered from health problems. In particular, she had undergone a number of operations for cervical cancer which meant that sexual intercourse was painful for her. The appellant was aware of this.

After the telephone call from the appellant the complainant rang her mother in
Melbourne to request financial assistance from her. Her mother was unable to help. She again rang her mother later in the afternoon and told her that the appellant had asked her to leave the house. Her mother advised her to talk to the appellant and to request that he allow her a week to organise alternative accommodation. After that conversation she wrote a note in the following terms: "I'll be gone by the time you return from work, sorry, there's no need for you to [?] If anything changes you will find me somehow. I live in hope. Please don't talk to my parents. I'm not involving them. I'm sorry for everything.

Elaine 
I will always love you. E" 
Later in the day she rang her mother a second time but before doing so she wrote the second note which was in these terms: "I'd load the car, it was .. to .. max. I put Shoo [the cat] in .. he couldn't go anywhere except my feet and lap, it was very sad. I am going to be driving .. quite a while .. It's going to be hot and, I .. nowhere and I .. just can't .. to him. Please don't .. let him go, he's my baby and this is very hard for me .. after him, will leave him with .. so don't be .. becoming attached to him.. take two, though you .. angry. I have to take some food as I need my money for petrol and I also took a clothes rack and Shoo's tuna. I am working .. and I will ring her periodically. Don't say anything to her, I don't want her to worry. E and S" [the cat] 
Following the writing, certainly of the first note, the complainant left the premises and was absent for some hours. She says that she tore up both notes.
As to the second note she said she threw it into the bin. In fact, she deposed as to the number of notes she wrote altogether in the following terms: "Q. How many notes did you write on that day? 
A. Two, three, four - just - because the more I sort of thought things through, `where am I going to go?' it changed, you know, one minute I was going to be gone by Monday and then I realised I couldn't, I needed time." 
Some time during the day, in a moment of frustration, she threw a bottle at a wall causing a dent.

Again, during that day the complainant telephoned a friend of the appellant,
Volker Ruehe, who came to the house and assisted in trying to locate the appellant without success. The complainant wished to speak to the appellant to advise him that she was unable to leave the house by Monday. The complainant wrote a note as to why she was unable to move out and left it attached to the front door.

Late on Monday evening, 15 January, the appellant returned to the house. When he saw the complainant he said to her "What the fuck are you still doing here?" The appellant appeared to be angry. The complainant asked for an explanation for the break-up of their relationship and the appellant said "If you don't get out I'll either shoot myself or shoot you first." The appellant "just kept going on and on about how I repulsed him and I was disgusting and he didn't like anything about me, my hair, the way I dress, he said that he never loved me even when we first got married, and it just went on and on, that I was lazy ..." 
After saying these things the appellant got a beer from the fridge and sat down in front of the television. He put on a pornographic video, pulled down his shorts and began to masturbate. The complainant stood in front of the appellant to obtain his attention. She then knelt down beside him and touched him on the knee. The appellant flicked her hand away and said "Don't fucking touch me." 
The appellant then grabbed the complainant by the wrist and pulled her towards the bedroom. He put her on the bed and put his penis in her vagina.

The appellant then grabbed her by the hair and dragged her towards the bathroom. He pushed her down onto her knees and told her to get a vibrator out of the cupboard. The vibrator was in the shape of a penis. The complainant got the vibrator out and the appellant told her to insert it into her vagina. The complainant protested and the appellant forced the vibrator into her vagina and moved it in and out. (count one). The complainant asked him to stop and was crying. The appellant then turned the complainant around and put the vibrator in her anus (count two). The complainant screamed because of the pain and continued to cry and ask the appellant to stop.

The vibrator was removed from the complainant's anus and the appellant told her to insert it in her vagina again. The complainant refused and the appellant pushed the vibrator into her vagina. He then inserted his penis into her anus. (count three).

The appellant then took his penis out of her anus and the vibrator out of her vagina. He turned her around, pushed her onto her knees and put his penis in her mouth. (count four) After some time he removed his penis from her mouth and told the complainant to go to the bedroom.

The appellant entered the bedroom with a cat lead and some rope. He told the complainant to lie on the bed and began to tie her wrist to the bed. The complainant was struggling and screaming and the appellant slapped her on the bottom "over and over - thirty times". The appellant put his penis in the complainant's anus. (count five) The appellant tied the complainant's wrist and feet to the bed. The appellant put his penis in her vagina (count six) and then he put his penis in her mouth. He then put his penis in her vagina (count seven) and eventually ejaculated.

The appellant left the room and returned wiping himself with a towel. He loosened the ropes on the complainant's ankles and went into the lounge room.
After about twenty minutes the complainant was able to free herself. She remained in the bed and sometime later the appellant got into the bed also and went to sleep.

The complainant went to work at 6 am that morning and returned home about 9 am. She knew the appellant would be at work by that time. She then made arrangements to move in with an acquaintance Nicole Ruehe. That night the complainant rang her mother and asked her to come to Sydney. It was arranged that she would come by bus, arriving on Friday evening.

Her mother arrived as arranged and the complainant told her what had happened.
The complainant's mother accompanied her to the police station on the following Saturday evening to make the complaint against the appellant. On the way to the police station they stopped at the appellant's house to pick up the pet cat. The complainant saw the appellant there with a girl. They were both dressed in dressing gowns and towels. She collected the cat and left.

Nicole Ruehe gave evidence that she met the complainant and the appellant at a barbecue. Her husband, Volker, worked with the appellant at the Penrith police station. On Sunday, 14 January or Monday, 15 January the complainant rang her and it was arranged that the complainant would move into her house the following Wednesday. Nicole was separated from her husband at the time.
However, on Tuesday the complainant rang her and requested that she move in that day. That night the complainant moved in. She appeared distressed and spent the night in her room. The next day the complainant told her that she and the appellant had been having problems. She asked the appellant for petrol money and when she got home he had only left $60 for her. In frustration she picked up a bottle and threw it against a wall. When the appellant came home and saw the damage to the wall the appellant "lost it". An altercation broke out and the appellant raped her. The complainant told her "he had her pinned down and she was screaming ... that he stuck it in and took it out and stuck it back in the other place and took it out and that she felt like she was going to get an infection ... and that it kept going on." 
Nicole gave evidence that the complainant appeared "really upset and distressed" and "she was just curled up in the foetal position." The complainant indicated to her that she would go to the hospital and police when her mother arrived.

Dr Peter Alexander Scott medically examined the complainant at 7 am on 21
January 1996. She appeared very withdrawn and tearful. Upon examination the doctor found no abnormality to the complainant's limbs, head or trunk.
Examination of external genitalia revealed no abnormality. This was consistent with the complainant's history of assault five days earlier. Proctoscopic examination of the anus revealed superficial ulcerations of the rectal mucosa just proximal to the anal margin. The rectal mucosa was also inflamed. These injuries were consistent with forced penetration of the anus four or five days before hand. The doctor gave evidence that the injuries could have been caused by diarrhoea. However, he also saw a small haematoma inside the anal margin and "it's a little more difficult to explain that from someone who's had diarrhoea." 
Constable Siewart gave evidence that she saw the complainant at the Penrith police station at about 10 pm on Saturday, 20 January 1996. She later examined the complainant's back, buttocks, ankles and wrists and saw no signs of trauma or injury to those areas.

The complainant's mother gave evidence that the complainant rang her twice on the afternoon of 13 January. She then received a phone call from her daughter on Tuesday asking her to come to Sydney. When she arrived in Sydney the following Friday evening the complainant told her the appellant had raped her.
The complainant appeared miserable and sad and was continually showering and bathing. On Saturday evening, she accompanied the complainant to the appellant's house on the way to the police station. She waited in the car while the complainant went inside. She heard the appellant shouting. She got out of the car and was about to go inside when the complainant appeared carrying the cat box. The complainant got into the car and they left.

The appellant was interviewed by police on Sunday, 21 January1996. He denied having sexual intercourse with the complainant on the night of 15 January. He said he came home and his wife was upset because of the end of their relationship. They talked for about twenty minutes and he then went to bed alone.

The Crown tendered a transcript of evidence given by the appellant at a bail application on 1 February 1996. In that evidence the appellant said that he did have intercourse with the complainant but that it was consensual.

Detectives Wallington and Clark gave evidence in the Crown case in reply. They said that Volker Ruehe did not approach them with any information relevant to the prosecution of the appellant.

Nicole Ruehe also gave evidence in the case in reply. She denied telling
Volker that the complainant told her she initiated the sex with the appellant.
She also denied telling the appellant's solicitor this.

The appellant's case may be summarised as follows: 
The appellant gave sworn evidence. He said that consensual sexual intercourse took place.

He confirmed that he spoke to the complainant on Saturday, 13 January and told her their relationship was over and that he wanted her to move out by Monday.

He said that he arrived home at about 11 or 12 o'clock on Monday night 15
January. The complainant was there and she told him to read the note on the door. He collected the note and he saw that it basically explained why she was still there, that she wanted another month and to give her another chance.

They were talking in the lounge room. The appellant saw a hole in one of the walls and asked the complainant why she had damaged the wall. She replied that she had been angry and frustrated.

They spoke for about fifteen to twenty minutes. The appellant was sitting on the couch and the complainant was pleading with him to give her another month.
The complainant came over to him and whispered in his ear "I want to fuck you." She then took him by the hand and led him into the bedroom.

The complainant took off her clothes and so did the appellant. She performed oral sex on him and then, using a lubricant which the complainant obtained, they "had sex in the conventional manner." The appellant suggested that they get the vibrator and they both walked to the bathroom. In the bathroom the complainant performed oral sex on the appellant again. She then put the vibrator in her vagina while the appellant watched her. They then had anal intercourse. After they had finished the complainant said that she was thirsty and returned to the bedroom. The appellant went into the bedroom to give the complainant a drink. He put his knee on the bed and the slats separated causing the bed to collapse. The complainant thought this was funny. They put the bed back together and the complainant went to the spare room and returned with some cord. The complainant said "Tie me up." The appellant tied her up and they had sex "in the conventional manner." He ejaculated, untied her, and went to sleep.

The next morning the complainant got up at 6 am to go to work. She asked him "Do you still want me to leave?" The appellant answered "I think it'd be best." The complainant then left for work.

The appellant got out of bed and prepared for work. He found a note from the complainant on the ironing board which was the first of the notes which I have detailed above. He read the note and then left for work.

When he returned later that day he noticed that the complainant's belongings were gone and also some food. He found a second note on the ironing board which is the second note I have detailed above.

About an hour later he rang the complainant on her mobile telephone and inquired as to how she was feeling. A short time later the complainant rang him and asked him to transfer the registration of the car over into her name.
The next day the appellant rang the Victorian RTA and made the arrangements for the transfer of the registration. He then rang the complainant on her mobile telephone to advise her of this. The appellant produced telephone accounts to verify these calls were made.

On Saturday night 20 January the appellant was at home when the complainant arrived. The appellant was in the company of a lady by the name of Kerrie
Whiteford. The appellant was wearing a towel and Ms Whiteford was wearing a bath robe. When the complainant saw them she began to scream. The complainant said "Who the fuck is she?" She also said "I can't believe you did this in my house. I want everything." She began to pack sewing gear and bags of clothing.
The complainant told him that she wanted the bed dismantled and that she would be back to collect it. The appellant carried the futon mattress to the car which was full of the complainant's belongings. The complainant also collected the pet cat. As she was leaving the complainant said to the appellant "I'm going to make you pay for this." 
The appellant admitted that he told lies to the police. The appellant gave evidence that he was panicking and that he felt embarrassed being interviewed in the police station where he worked. He also felt ashamed having to talk about private sexual matters.

The appellant gave evidence that he tore up the two notes which the complainant left for him on the ironing board and threw them in the bin. After his arrest he asked his friend, Volker Ruehe, to search through the garbage and collect the pieces of the notes. Volker did this and brought the pieces to the cells at Penrith police station where the appellant was being held. They then reassembled the notes using sticky tape. The appellant gave the reassembled notes to his solicitor shortly thereafter.

Volker Ruehe gave evidence that he saw the complainant on Saturday 13 January.
They discussed the fact that the appellant had asked her to move out. The next day the complainant rang and asked him if it was alright for her to move in with Nicole, his wife from whom he was separated.

On the following Wednesday he saw the complainant at his wife's home. The complainant said to him "Have you spoken to Trevor? Is he alright? Look after him for me." 
The appellant asked him to search the garbage for two notes which the appellant had torn up and thrown away. He did as he was requested and recovered some scraps of paper. He and the appellant then reassembled the notes using sticky tape.

Volker Ruehe gave evidence of a conversation which he had with his wife,
Nicole. His wife told him that the complainant said to her "Trevor is in gaol,
I initiated any sex that happened that night." According to his wife, the complainant had a smirk on her face when she said this.

Barry Wilson, previous solicitor for the appellant, gave evidence that he interviewed Nicole Ruehe some time after February 1996. She told him that the complainant said to her "I will do anything to get Trevor back. I instigated everything that happened anyway." 
I turn then to the grounds of appeal.

Ground One: verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory 
The test for determining whether a verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory is that set out in M versus The Queen [[1994] 181 CLR 487.] There
Mason CJ, Dawson, Deane and Toohey JJ held that the test for an unsafe and unsatisfactory verdict was whether the court thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. At 493 the majority said that:- "in answering that question the court must not disregard or discount either the consideration that the jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the jury has had the benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses. On the contrary, the court must pay full regard to those considerations." 
Then at 494 the majority went on to explain the application of the test in the following terms: "In most cases a doubt experienced by an appellate court will be a doubt which a jury ought also to have experienced. It is only where a jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by a court of criminal appeal that the court may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred. That is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it was given, a reasonable doubt experienced by the court is a doubt which a reasonable jury ought to have experienced. If the evidence, upon the record itself, contains discrepancies, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force in such a way as to lead the court of criminal appeal to conclude that, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based upon that evidence." 
That decision was confirmed by the High Court in Jones versus The Queen 72
ALJR 78.

There were a number of matters upon which the appellant relied as being indicative that the complainant's evidence lacked probative force in such a way as to lead this Court to the view that there is a significant possibility that the appellant was wrongly convicted in the terms adumbrated by the High
Court in M.

The matter which was given great stress in argument involved the two notes, the contents of which I have set out above. It was the complainant's evidence that these notes had been written on the Saturday and torn up by her on that day. The appellant on the other hand said that he found the notes on Tuesday and that it was he who tore them up.

It was submitted that if in fact the notes were not written on Saturday as claimed by the complainant then a significant shadow was cast across her credibility to such an extent that this Court would view the verdict as being unsafe and unsatisfactory.

As to the first of the notes it was submitted that its terms were affectionate and thus it is very unlikely that it would have been written by a woman who had recently been raped by its intended recipient.

As far as the second note is concerned again it was submitted that its terms were affectionate and furthermore referred to the loading of the complainant's motor vehicle. It was common ground that the vehicle in fact was not loaded until Tuesday.

The complainant explained the contents of that note by saying that on the
Saturday she was just writing her thoughts down as to what she would do following the appellant's telephone call to her saying that she had to leave.
The notes in their torn up condition had been found by Constable Ruehe when he had been asked by the appellant to go to the house and search for them. It was stressed that on the complainant's evidence the appellant could not have known of the existence of the notes. Accordingly the notes were powerful evidence that the complainant's account was untruthful. Indeed the submission went so far as to say that the evidence surrounding the notes destroyed the complainant's credibility.

In the absence of any other evidence this submission would have great force and indeed in my view lead this Court to the conclusion that the verdict was in fact unsafe and unsatisfactory.

However, there was other evidence in the case which could have led to the jury rejecting the factual basis upon which the submission was mounted.

First, it was the uncontested fact that the appellant when first interviewed by police about the matter lied about the events of the evening of 15 January
He flatly denied that any sexual activity had taken place between the complainant and himself. As is apparent from the narrative of the evidence the appellant agreed that sexual activity of the very type described by the complainant did in fact take place. The essential difference between the appellant's account and that of the complainant was that the appellant contended that all sexual activity which took place on that evening was consensual involving the use of a lubricant to make penetration easy. He agreed that he had tied up the complainant - but at her request. He did deny that he spanked her at all. Not only did the appellant concede that he lied to police when first interviewed about the matter but that he was aware, as a policeman, of his right to remain silent - a right he did not exercise.

Additionally, there was evidence to which I shall refer in greater detail in these reasons from Constable Ruehe's wife that pressure had been put upon her by her husband and the appellant to "say different things that did not even occur." Admittedly, while this evidence from Ms Ruehe was stated during a nonresponsive answer in cross-examination when she was called in reply, it was still evidence before the jury.

The appellant's evidence was that on the Saturday, on returning home, he had left the sum of $60 on an ironing board. His further evidence was that he found the two notes at various times on Tuesday, again on the ironing board.
If the jury were of the view that the appellant's credibility was severely tainted by the lies he told to police and/or a finding on their part that he and Constable Ruehe had put pressure on Ms Ruehe to tell untruths it was certainly open to the jury to conclude that in fact the appellant had found the notes on the Saturday and that he, realising the use to which they could be put, had asked Constable Ruehe to go and find them. As it was open to the jury to so conclude it is my view that the submission made on behalf of the appellant in terms of M's case cannot succeed.

It was further submitted that the complainant's evidence relating to her screaming during the course of the alleged sexual assault was suspect. Suspect because despite evidence from police that they had made enquiries from neighbours to ascertain if anyone had heard her screaming, no evidence was called to that effect by the Crown.

It was the complainant's evidence that because of the presence of mosquitoes the house windows were shut. It is also conceivable that as the assault allegedly happened late in the evening on a Monday night neighbours may have been asleep and not heard the complainant screaming. In short, as there is an explanation for why neighbours may not have heard the complainant screaming this episode of itself does not satisfy the test in M's case.

It was submitted that the complaint made by the complainant to Ms Ruehe on
Wednesday was inconsistent with the account she gave in evidence. Ms Ruehe when she was deposing as to what was said by the complainant qualified her evidence by statements such as (a) "I cannot remember word for word basically but what was generally said" and (b) "I cannot remember exactly her sort of terminology." 
Ms Ruehe also deposed that at the time the complaint was made the complainant appeared to be both upset and distressed. Ms Ruehe's account of what she was told included references to both anal and vaginal intercourse.

In my view while Ms Ruehe's account of what the complainant told her does not contain all the detail given by the complainant in evidence as to what occurred there is nothing inconsistent about the matters which she recounted were told to her. In these circumstances I am of the view that this submission has little force.

It was submitted that no complaint was made to police until the following
Saturday. It was the complainant's evidence that she did not wish to go to the
Penrith police station at a time when colleagues of the appellant might be about. It was submitted that this complaint was suspect because the complainant and her mother had found the appellant with another woman at the matrimonial home when the complainant and her mother went there to pick up the cat. While it is true that the complainant did not make any mention to police when she told them of the matter about the presence of the other woman it was also the fact that her mother deposed that they were in fact on the way to the police station on the Saturday when they deviated to call into the matrimonial home to pick up the cat.

Again, it was open to the jury to accept the complainant's reason for reporting the matter late to police and the suggestion that the complainant only made a complaint to the police because of her finding the appellant with another woman is considerably weakened by the unchallenged evidence of the complainant's mother as to their intended movements on the Saturday.

It was submitted that the complainant's denial that a police officer Renate
Siewart had inspected the complainant's back and buttocks at the Penrith police station is indicative of the unreliability of her evidence. It is true that Constable Siewart did depose that she carried out such an inspection and that accordingly there is an inconsistency between the complainant's account and Constable Siewart's evidence.

It was also put that the fact that Constable Siewart did not observe any bruising or injury to the complainant's back is again indicative of the complainant's unreliability as a witness.

In this regard the evidence of Dr Scott who had examined the complainant on 21
January 1996 is of importance. He deposed as follows: "Q. I think you then said that you examined the area of her buttocks? 
A. Yes.

Q. You found no bruising? 
A. No there was no bruising.

Q. And again would that be consistent or inconsistent with what she had told you had happened to her? 
A. Given that five days had passed it would be possible not to find anything." 
Accordingly Constable Siewart's observation is not surprising. However, the fact is that a conflict does exist between her evidence and that of the complainant. It should be noted that Constable Siewart did say that the complainant seemed to be emotionally distressed at the time of her examination.

Additionally, it was submitted that there was a conflict between Ms Ruehe and the complainant as to conversations held between them concerning the complainant moving into Ms Ruehe's house. Ms Ruehe thought it was either on the Saturday or Sunday when the complainant rang seeking accommodation whereas the complainant could only recall contacting Ms Ruehe on the Tuesday. Here, the complainant's evidence is that of lack of recollection rather than denial.

In fact Ms Ruehe's evidence was that the complainant originally was going to move in with her on a Wednesday but on Tuesday rang requesting that she be allowed to come earlier could be taken by the jury to be indicative that something had happened to cause her to wish to come earlier.

The complainant's telephone account demonstrated that she both made and received telephone calls from the appellant after the alleged sexual assault.
It is the fact that she denied making any calls and that in this regard the appellant's contention that this part of her evidence is suspect has force.

A submission that the complainant had given inconsistent accounts to her mother about when it was she first told her of the sexual assault is not borne out by a careful reading of the transcript.

It is the fact that there are inconsistencies in the complainant's evidence however when reviewed in the light of the whole of the evidence I am not of the view, applying the test in M's case, that the evidence lacks probative force in such a way as to lead me to conclude that an innocent person has been convicted.

Accordingly, I would dismiss this ground of appeal.

Ground two: The trial miscarried by reason of a combination of circumstances involving: the failure of defence counsel to put to the complainant that she had told Ms Nichol Ruehe that she instigated the whole incident; the failure of defence counsel to put to Ms Ruehe that she had made such a statement to Mr Wilson; the failure of defence counsel to call Mr Wilson in the defence case; the putting to the appellant, in cross examination, of a document containing Mr Ruehe's account of the representation made by Ms Ruehe to Mr Wilson of what she had been told by the complainant; the leading from Mr Ruehe of the representation made by Ms Ruehe to Mr Wilson of what she had been told by the complainant; and the allowance by the trial judge of the Crown to lead a case in reply.

Ground four: the trial miscarried by reason of comments made by the prosecutor in his address and by reason of the failure of the trial judge to correct those comments.

There were a series of events during the course of the trial which in my view are indicative that in fact procedural fairness was breached.

The starting point of these events was that counsel for the appellant at the trial had given the Crown Prosecutor part of a statement from Constable Ruehe which included the following statement: "My wife told me that she had a conversation with Elaine before she left to go to Victoria in which Elaine said to her: `Trevor is in gaol. I initiated any sex that happened that night.' She said that she had a smirk on her face. My wife and I have seen him in gaol. She would be happy to give evidence for him." 
Neither the complainant nor Ms Ruehe were cross-examined by counsel for the appellant at the trial on this point. During the course of cross-examination of the appellant that statement was shown to him and ultimately led to the following exchange: "Q. And did you say anything else to him? 
A. We would have said a lot of things sir, I can't recall off the top of my head no.

Q. And did he say anything to you about, at any stage what he was aware of in relation to these matters? 
A. No he said that when Elaine came into the station he left because he knew me.

Q. Did he tell you whether or not his wife had indicated that Elaine had told her anything? 
A. At that stage I don't think so sir no.

Q. Well at any time has he said to you. `Elaine told my wife such and such'? 
A. After, I think after I was bailed he said something yes.

Q. And was that, what was said relevant to whether you were guilty or not guilty? 
A. What he said that Elaine had told Nicki? 
Q. Yes.

A. Very relevant, yes." 
After he had read it to himself: "Q. Would you just read that to yourself, don't read it out loud? 
A. Yes sir.

Q. Is that - when you said there was something which was relevant to whether you're guilty or not guilty are you referring to that passage which I've marked? 
A. Yes sir, words to that effect yes sir." 
It then became MFI 5 in the trial. When Constable Ruehe gave evidence he was asked to read the passage I have cited above out loud to the jury. Having initially objected to this the Crown Prosecutor withdrew his objection and
Constable Ruehe read it to the jury. In cross-examination Constable Ruehe deposed that he told either a Constable Clark or a Sergeant Wallington of the contents of the passage in question.

This led to an application being made by the Crown at the conclusion of the evidence presented by the appellant to call evidence in reply. Over objection his Honour ruled as follows: "Yes, well I can understand your submission and I have some sympathy with it but the problem here it seems to me is that Mr Ruehe's credit is a vital issue in this case now, having regard to what he has said, absolutely vital, and I can quite understand that the Crown would want to adduce evidence that goes to his credit. I mean itis a matter of competing considerations. I mean obviously if I admit the evidence I'll give some direction to the jury. In all the circumstances it seems to me that the evidence is admissible and should be admitted, having regard to the importance of Mr Ruehe's credit." 
Constable Clark and Sergeant Wallington both gave evidence in reply that Ruehe had not spoken to them about the matter at all.

Ms Ruehe was called and denied that she ever told her husband that the complainant had told her that she initiated any sex that happened that night and indeed denied that any such conversation had occurred between herself and the complainant.

Another odd matter occurred. When addressing the jury the Crown Prosecutor criticised the accused's case on the basis that a solicitor, Mr Wilson, had not been called in the accused's case. That criticism was based on the cross- examination of Ms Ruehe by counsel for the accused that she had given a statement to Mr Wilson at an earlier stage of the proceedings when Mr Wilson was acting for the accused.

It was put to her that she had told Mr Wilson that she in turn had told a
Detective Shepherd that "Elaine said she instigated sex with Trevor and would do anything to get him back." At that point the Crown Prosecutor's address was interrupted and Mr Wilson was called to give evidence on behalf of the accused along the lines of the matter raised in cross-examination. I should add that when giving evidence in reply Ms Ruehe in cross-examination, when questioned about her ringing Shepherd, took part in the following exchange: "Q. And he responded did he by saying `You've made your statement, it's not really relevant now, that's it.'? 
A. I can't exactly recall everything. Like I said Trevor and Volker were basically there saying all sorts of things to me, basically putting pressure on to get me to go down to say different things that didn't even occur, okay.
I was having all this pressure, everything was going on all at once. I had
Elaine move in, Elaine move out, everything go on all at once, and I just, you know, they were trying to find out things, they were trying to get me to change things, I didn't want to change things, I wasn't allowed to talk to
Elaine--." 
This was the matter I referred to when dealing with the first ground of appeal.

In R versus Chin <case>; [(1984-85) 157 CLR 671] the majority of the High Court held that in a criminal trial the prosecution should not split its case but should present it completely before the accused is called upon for his defence. The judge's discretion to allow the prosecution to call further evidence after the close of the defence case is to be used only in exceptional circumstances.

In this case the matter which led to his Honour ruling that the Crown could call evidence in reply emanated from the use made by the Crown Prosecutor in cross-examination of the document which became MFI 5. Had an attempt been made to adduce evidence from Constable Ruehe that his wife had made a statement to him to the effect that it was the complainant who had instigated the sexual encounter in question it plainly enough would have been inadmissible on a number of grounds.

As I have said the matter was not put to either the complainant or Ms Ruehe in cross-examination. Not only that it, as coming from Constable Ruehe, would be second-hand hearsay.

It was thus not necessary for the Crown to raise it with the accused. It was not a matter going to the accused's credit but rather to Constable Ruehe who had not then been called in the proceedings. This placed counsel for the appellant at the trial in an impossible situation.

In an affidavit filed before the court counsel who appeared for the accused, said that he had, for tactical reasons, not put the matter to Ms Ruehe because he was of the view that she would deny that she had ever said the alleged statement. This tactical decision was soundly based because Ms Ruehe had denied that she had ever said any such thing at the committal proceedings.

In the light of the cross-examination of the appellant an appearance had been given that the defence had in its possession relevant material which it had not adduced. Hence counsel for the accused's decision was made to put the matter to Constable Ruehe. This, as I explained it, led to the successful application being made by the Crown to call evidence in reply.

In Chin's case at 686 Dawson J observed as follows: "The principle of fairness which underlies the general rule that the prosecution must lead the evidence, upon which it relies to establish its case, in the course of presenting that case, has an application beyond the exercise of the discretion to allow the reopening of the prosecution case. If in the course of cross-examination of an accused person or his witnesses, the prosecution asks questions with a view to eliciting evidence for the first time which could and should have formed part of its evidence in chief, then that evidence may be excluded in the discretion of the trial judge if its admission for the first time during cross-examination would unduly prejudice the accused, having regard to the obligation resting upon the prosecution to make its case known before the presentation of the defence case. See Reg v
Kane, [(1977) 65 Cr App R 270."] 
In my view the events which took place commencing with the Crown Prosecutor's use of what became MFI 5 in cross-examination has led to a significant breach of the principle that an accused person must be afforded procedural fairness.
Accordingly it is my view that a significant miscarriage of justice has occurred and that this appeal should be allowed and a new trial granted.

There were other grounds raised on behalf of the appellant which if successful would have led to this Court allowing the appeal and granting a new trial.
These other matters included a ground that the trial miscarried by reason of the failure of defence counsel to raise good character and his failure to put to the complainant matters which might affect adversely on her credit.

I should say particularly in relation to the latter ground material placed before this Court is such that this ground of appeal should be upheld. In this regard it is of importance to stress that, once approached by counsel for the accused concerning the question of raising good character, a Crown Prosecutor should advise defence counsel of any adverse matters prior to the close of the
Crown Case. See R versus Hamilton [(1993 ACR 298] at 300) 
However, in view of the conclusion I have already reached it is not necessary for me to deal with these matters in detail.

It follows that the orders which I propose are as follows:
Appeal upheld.
Conviction and sentence quashed.
Order a new trial.

REGINA versus Trevor James MEWETT 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: I agree with Newman J. 
REGINA versus Trevor James MEWETT 
JUDGMENT 
POWELL JA: I agree with Newman J. * * * 
