

Maheswaran versus Brito and Ors Matter No 18586/93 [1997] NSWSC 666 (19
December 1997) 
Maheswaran versus Brito & Ors /93 December 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /93 - Maheswaran versus Brito & Ors 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced in October 1993. The plaintiff suffered personal injury in a motor vehicle accident that took place on 9 March 1993 at the intersection of Montgomery Street and Brown Road, Bonnyrigg. 
The injury was suffered following a collision between two motor vehicles. The plaintiff was the driver of one of the motor vehicles. Initially, he sued only the driver and owner of the other motor vehicle (the first and second defendants). In substance, it was said that there had been a failure to obey a `Give Way' sign.

By an Amended Defence filed on 13 October 1994, these defendants raised a defence of inevitable accident. It was said that the position of a large bus prevented the observing of the sole `Give Way' sign and that the `Give Way' lines governing the approach to the intersection were not reasonably observable.

The first and second defendants brought a Cross-Claim against Fairfield City
Council. On 4 November 1994, the plaintiff filed an Amended Statement of Claim joining the Council as the third defendant to the proceedings.

On 28 July 1997, the first and second defendants filed a Cross-Claim (the
Second Cross-Claim) against New South Wales Roads & Traffic Authority (the
Authority).

The plaintiff now wishes to add the Authority as a fourth defendant. The
Notice of Motion was filed on 27 May 1997. It was heard on 18 December 1997.

The plaintiff desires to agitate against the Authority the same issue as is raised against it in the Second Cross-Claim. The Second Cross-Claim agitates the question of whether or not the Authority was wholly or partly responsible with the third defendant for the establishment and maintenance of traffic facilities at the intersection.

The relevant limitation period for the bringing of proceedings on the claim against the Authority expired in March 1996. In these circumstances, the plaintiff needs an order extending the limitation period and such an order is sought pursuant to section 60C of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969 (the
Act). The Authority opposes the granting of such relief. The question of whether or not such an order should be made was the only question argued on the application.

Section 60C is in the following terms:- 
C. (1) This section applies to a cause of action, founded on negligence, nuisance or breach of duty, for damages for personal injury, but does not apply to a cause of action arising under the [Compensation to Relatives Act 1897](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ctra1897288/). 
If an application is made to a court by a person claiming to have a cause of action to which this section applies, the court, after hearing such of the persons likely to be affected by the application as it sees fit, may, if it decides that it is just and reasonable to do so, order that the limitation period for the cause of action be extended for such periods, not exceeding 5 years, as it determines. 
In exercising the powers conferred by section 60C, the Act requires the
Court to have regard to all the circumstances of the case (including the matters enumerated in section 60E).

The language of the section requires the Court to first reach the decision that it is just and reasonable to make an order. When that decision has been made, the Court then may make an order. The onus of satisfying the Court that an order should be made is borne by the plaintiff.

In opposing the application, argument was put in relation to three matters.
Firstly, the Authority relied on the matter of delay. Secondly, the Authority relied on the matter of prejudice. Thirdly, the Authority contended that there was no arguable cause of action.

The plaintiff relies on three affidavits sworn by Mr Trainor (the solicitor for the plaintiff). The Authority relies on an affidavit sworn by Mr Dunlop (an Asset Manager for the Authority).

I shall first turn to the question of delay. There has been significant delay and it can be said that the material offered to explain the delay is less than satisfactory.

It seems that, as early as about November 1994, the solicitor for the plaintiff was aware of the possible liability of the Authority. At that time, the limitation period was extent. Little seems to have been done concerning this matter until after April 1997, when the solicitor for the plaintiff became aware that the first and second defendants intended to bring the Second
Cross-Claim against the Authority.

The Second Cross-Claim was brought in time and the Authority is already a party to the proceedings. The Second Cross-Claim requires it to meet the same question as is sought to be now raised by the plaintiff. It was said that some consideration has been given by the Authority to the seeking of summary dismissal of the Second Cross-Claim. However, the Second Cross-Claim was filed in July 1997 and no application has been made to the Court for its dismissal.

I now turn to the remaining matters agitated by the Authority. These matters of prejudice and futility were seen by the Authority as being related.

The Authority contends that there has been a delegation of responsibility to the third defendant in connection with traffic facilities on Council controlled roads. It concedes that it retains responsibilities in respect of some aspects of signage. It says that the primary responsibility is vested with the Council but that the Authority attends to matters when it is requested to do so by the Council.

The affidavits annex considerable documentary material. For present purposes, it is unnecessary to embark on any detailed examination of that material. It could be viewed as demonstrating that the case which the plaintiff seeks to put against the Authority may not be a strong one. However, it does not seem to me that it can be said that it would be futile to grant the relief sought by the plaintiff.

Delay of itself has been said to give rise to presumptive prejudice (see
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866).] The Authority relies on what was said in paragraph 7 of Mr
Dunlop's affidavit. The paragraph is in the following terms:- "7. Following receipt of a subpoena to the RTA from Messrs Malcolm Johns &
Company on behalf of Mario Brito and Channon Refrigeration Pty Limited, enquiries were made to locate records dealing with maintenance requests in respect of the intersection of Montgomery Road and Brown Road, Bonnyrigg received from Fairfield Council and RTA response thereto prior to the date of the plaintiff's accident on 9 March, 1993. No such records could be located." 
On the material before the Court, I do not consider that much weight can be given to the Authority's inability to locate such records. Without intending to be exhaustive, I shall mention a couple of matters. The claims made against the Authority do not appear to be founded on allegations relating to "maintenance requests" and the "response thereto". If such records are of significance, it may well be that sufficient documentation is still in existence. The plaintiff's material shows that some relevant documentation remains available. There is nothing to suggest that other relevant documentation is not still held, inter alia, by the third defendant.

Since the decision in Taylor, largely, the Court has followed the approach of what was said in the judgments applying to the Act (see, inter alia, BHP
Steel (AIS) Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7
March 1997)). However, recently, two Judges of Appeal (Priestley and Powell
JJA) have expressly reserved the question of its relevance (BHP Steel (AIS)
Pty Limited versus Cinquegrana (Court of Appeal, unreported, 3 September 1997)).

I should add that these matters were not debated during argument. In the circumstances, it is not appropriate to pursue them further.

As the law presently stands, Taylor would seem to be binding on this Court.
Whether or not that be the case, it seems that observations concerning delay and prejudice should still be made.

The delay can be expected to have caused some prejudice. This is a relevant consideration. I am not of the view that there is actual prejudice of a significant kind. Despite the delay, I consider that a fair trial may still take place (Henricks versus Agnew (Court of Appeal, unreported, 23 October )).

If the order is made, the Authority will be deprived of the benefit of the statutory defence. If the order is refused, the plaintiff will not be able to prosecute his claim against the Authority. He has suffered serious injury and has a potentially large claim.

This is not an easy application to determine. The Court is to have regard to all of the circumstances of the case and the plaintiff must discharge the onus. After some considerable deliberation, I have decided that it is just and reasonable to make an order and that I should make an order extending the limitation period.

I extend time for the commencement of proceedings founded on negligence against the New South Wales Roads & Traffic Authority up to and including December 1997. The plaintiff is to have leave to add the Authority as a fourth defendant and to file the Further Amended Statement of Claim by 4pm on December 1997. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the application. The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
