

Hi-Tech Telecom versus RSL Com Australia [2011] NSWSC 1120 (2 September 2011) 
Last Updated: 20 September 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Hi-Tech Telecom versus RSL Com Australia  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): /08/2011 and 01/09/2011  
Decision Date: September 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Commercial List  
Before: 
McDougall J  
Decision: 
Summons dismissed with costs  
Catchwords: 
CONTRACT - termination for breach - whether an intermediate term of the contract was breached - whether the breach was sufficiently serious to justify termination - whether termination for breach of intermediate term was valid where terminating party was also in breach of an intermediate term.  
Legislation Cited: 
Cases Cited: 
Almond Investors Limited versus Kualitree Nursery Pty Limited & Anor <case> 
Koompahtoo Local Aboriginal Land Council versus Sanpine Pty Ltd <case>; [(2007) 233 CLR 115] 
Shepherd versus Felt & Textiles of Australia Ltd <case>; [(1931) 45 CLR 359]  
Texts Cited: 
Macquarie Dictionary, revised third edition  
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
Hi-Tech Telecom Pty Ltd (ACN 098 008 587) (Plaintiff) 
RSL Com Australia Pty Limited (Receivers and Managers Appointed) (In
Liquidation) (ACN 074 627 642) (Defendant)  
Representation  - Counsel: 
Counsel: 
J C Kelly SC / D R Sulan (Plaintiff) 
D R Pritchard SC / J H Stephenson (Defendant)  - Solicitors: 
Solicitors: 
Piper Alderman (Plaintiff) 
Watson Mangioni Lawyers (Defendant)  
File number(s): /233453  
Publication Restriction: 
Judgment  
HIS HONOUR: The question for decision in these proceedings is whether a deed made between the plaintiff (Hi-Tech) and the defendant (RSL Com) on 24 July 2009 (the deed), to settle litigation, has been terminated by RSL Com for breach by Hi-Tech. That question is to be resolved by reference to the following agreed issues: whether Hi-Tech or RSL Com breached either or both of clauses 4.1 or 11 of the deed;  whether any breach by Hi-Tech entitled RSL Com to terminate the deed;  whether any breach by RSL Com precluded it from terminating the deed; and  whether (if the deed has not been terminated) the Court should order specific performance of the deed, or damages instead of specific performance. 
Before I turn to the substance of the disputes, I record that the hearing of these proceedings was brought on urgently, so that the parties should know where they stood in relation to both the deed and in relation to the earlier proceedings in this Court (290452/2008 - the 2008 proceedings). Accordingly, I am giving this judgment on the morning following the second day of hearing. I shall not refer to all the facts or submissions. What I am about to set out will be (I hope) sufficient to explain my conclusions. 
I record also that, since there was no attack on the credibility of the witnesses in the case, it is unnecessary to deal with that topic. 
For the reasons that follow, I conclude that: each of Hi-Tech and RSL Com breached clause 4.1 of the deed; 
Hi-Tech's breach was sufficiently serious to justify RSL Com's termination; alternatively, that breach constituted a repudiation that RSL Com was entitled accept and has accepted; 
RSL Com's breach did not prevent it from terminating; and  thus, that the termination was valid. 
Taking those conclusions into account, it is not necessary to consider whether, on the facts as they appear, there were also breaches of clause 11 of the deed. 
Factual background  
Hi-Tech is, and before it went into external administration RSL Com was, a reseller of telecommunication services. Hi-Tech bought telecommunication services from RSL Com (before it went into external administration) and other vendors. 
In July 2008, RSL Com commenced the 2008 proceedings. It claimed an amount of about $2.125 million from Hi-Tech for services said to have been provided from 1 June to 22 December 2007 (the period). Hi-Tech asserted that it had paid RSL Com all that was owing for the supply of telecommunication services. It said that RSL Com's records and billing systems were inaccurate. 
In July 2009, the parties agreed, on the terms of the deed, to resolve the 2008 proceedings. The deed provided that the parties would jointly retain an independent expert, on the basis of a letter of instruction, the draft of which was referred to in and a schedule to the deed, to provide a written report on the amount (if any) payable by Hi-Tech to RSL Com for calls carried by RSL Com for Hi-Tech during the period. The parties agreed that the expert's opinion would be final and binding upon them as to any amount so payable. The deed provided further for the way in which the 2008 proceedings would be dealt with on receipt of the expert's report. 
Clause 4.1 of the deed required each party to provide the expert with reasonable access to documentation etc. required by the expert for the purpose of making his determination. Clause 11 was a covenant for further assurance, obliging each party to do what was necessary or desirable to give effect to the terms of the deed. I set out those clauses: .1 Each Party must promptly provide the Expert with reasonable access to any documentation, information, hardware, software or data which it uses or maintains which is requested by the Expert for the purpose making the determination in clause 3.1 above.  . Further Assurances  
Each of the Parties will do all things necessary or desirable to give effect to the terms of this Deed. 
The parties agreed to appoint Mr Leonard William Rooke as the expert. Mr Rooke made a number of requests for documents, information and data. RSL Com asserts that Hi-Tech has consistently failed to answer some of those requests, and has thereby breached clauses 4.1 and 11. On 12 May 2011, RSL Com gave what purported to be a notice of termination of the deed based on those alleged breaches. 
The draft letter of instruction  
It was common ground that, since the draft letter of instruction was referred to in and a schedule to the deed (see clause 3.1 and schedule A), it was relevant to the question of construction of clause 4.1. 
Under the heading "Requested opinion", the draft letter stated, among other things: I shall set out paragraphs 7 and 8 from pages 49 and 50 of the court book: 
B. Requested Opinion  
Please prepare a written report expressing your opinion on the amount payable for the calls carried by RSL Com for Hi-Tech in the Period. The written report should contain sufficient reasoning to enable the parties to understand the basis for your conclusion. 
The disagreement between RSL Com and Hi-Tech is as to the number and duration of the various types of calls carried by Hi-Tech for RSL Com during the Period, including whether charges for particular calls may have been duplicated. There is no disagreement between RSL Com and Hi-Tech as to the rates applicable to the various types of calls. They are as set out in the table annexed hereto and marked " A ". Accordingly, in determining the amount payable by Hi-Tech to RSL Com for the calls carried by RSL Com for Hi-
Tech in the Period, your task is limited to ascertaining the number and duration of the various types of calls carried by RSL Com for Hi-Tech in the
Period and applying the rates as set out in Annexure A. 
Under the heading "Procedural Matters", the draft letter stated, among other things: 
C. Procedural Matters  
Without intending to interfere with your broad discretion in undertake[ing] the work necessary to provide the requested opinion including your speaking to the people you consider you need to speak to and to obtain information as you see appropriate, to the extent reasonably practicable we ask that:  
All communications to a party should be sent to their legal representatives, being Mr John Biggs at Watson Mangioni Pty Limited on behalf of RSL Com and Ms Lisa Farrand at Piper Alderman on behalf of Hi-Tech or take place with the parties' representatives present.  
The parties anticipate that it will be necessary for you to be provided with further documentation, information and data from the parties' billing systems and that it may be necessary for you to have access to the hardware and software systems maintained by the parties. Any requests by you to either party for further documentation, information or data or access to the hardware and software systems should be in writing to the legal representative of the party concerned and copied to the other party's legal representative.  
Any requests for clarification of any matter relating to these instructions or your report should also be sent in writing and addressed jointly to both parties' legal representatives. 
Each party must promptly provide you with reasonable access to any documentation, information, hardware, software or data which it uses or maintains which is requested by you for the purpose of providing the opinion required by you. 
The protocol for communication that would be established on the terms of the letter of instruction (when sent, and following the appointment of the expert) contemplated that, in the main, communications between the parties and the expert would take place through their respective solicitors, with the other party being copied with each communication. However, as will become apparent, each party offered at least once to make its expert available to Mr Rooke to assist him to understand the material that would be given to him. 
The letter of instruction that was sent to Mr Rooke was, if not identical to then at least not materially different from, the draft. 
The requests for information and events leading up to termination.  
Mr Rooke was appointed on 21 September 2009. Before he was appointed, he had been provided with some electronic information to assist him to understand the nature of the task, and to enable him to demonstrate that he was an appropriate person to appoint as independent expert. That information included material contained in seven disks provided by Hi-Tech, which were apparently extracts from its call logs. Those call logs were archived records downloaded from the computer systems used by Hi-Tech to run its business. 
Mr Rooke divided his task into three stages: stage 1: evaluation of each party's capacity to supply adequately detailed call data for his analysis;  stage 2: obtaining call data from each party, analysing it to some extent and providing a quotation for the cost of completion of stage 3; and  stage 3: preparation of his opinion and provision of the written opinion to the parties. 
On 23 November 2009, Mr Rooke produced a document called "Discovery - Stage 2 (Revised)". That document set out, among other things, the material that Mr Rooke required from each party. Since the format of Mr Rooke's later requests for information followed the format of this document, it is convenient to set those requests out from this document: 
Hi-Tech - Request for Call Detail Data  
We request all Call Transaction logs (not just the Subset in question) for the affected period. (i.e. a full export of call details without any modifications or filtering).
 a. This file should be in comma delimited CSV format and include all data for call calls irrespective of Billed Client or Wholesale Carrier.
 b. Documented details will need to be supplied explaining each field in the data set and the format of the data in each field. Particular attention is required to complex data fields containing such values as: i. Date ii. Time(Format and time zone that is used (i.e. GMT or AEST/AEDT) iii. 'A' Party - Originating phone number (what differentiates a Local, national international location) iv. 'B' Party - Destination number dialled (what differentiates a Local, national international location) v. Duration of the call or call end time (depending on the database architecture) including Punctuation used and representation (i.e. dd.hh:mm:ss) vi. All incoming & out going call routing information associated with the call including but not limited to:
C7 Gateway (RSL Com)
Remote gateways used call receipt for call delivery to customers, customers "B" party destinations and/or Wholesale traffic delivery.
 vii. Billed to customer amount (the "customer" is the party Billed by RSL Com for this call transaction) viii. Billed by vendor amount (the Vendor is the party charging RSL Com for the carriage of the call transaction).
 ix. Which Wholesale Vendor/Carrier was the call transaction handed off to for further routing for call delivery? c. Detailed explanation of the call routing rules used to identify the billed customer.
A full list of EVERY possible originating number associated with Hi-Tech
Customers.
Copy of the RSL Com's Call logs downloaded from RSL Com's WEB site for the affected period.

NB: Please advise us if these logs were not down loaded by Hi-Tech  
Supply of Data 
All data is to be supplied on DVD or CD(s) accurately identified with the files and corresponding date periods.  
RSL Com - Request for Call Detail Data  
With regard to RSL Com's data we request two data sets  ) From the Mediation Server Logs (call detail with the minimal processing and as close to the mediation server's output as possible)  ) The second data set from your Billing system (details as actually billed).

In each case above a full export of call details without any modifications or filtering.  
ALL Call Transaction logs (not just the Subset in question) for the affected period. 
This file should be in comma delimited CSV format and include all data for calls irrespective of Billed Client.
Documented details will need to be supplied explaining each field in the data set and the format of the data in each field. Particular attention is required to complex data fields containing such values as: a. Date b. Time (Format and time zone that is used (i.e. GMT or AEST/AEDT) c. 'A' Party - Originating phone number (what differentiates a Local, national international call) d. 'B' Party - Destination number dialled (what differentiates a Local, national international call)  e. Duration of the call or call end time (depending on the database architecture) including Punctuation used and representation (i.e. dd.hh:mm:ss) f. All incoming & outgoing routing information associated with the call including but not limited to: i. C7 Gateway (route Name Points) information for delivery and receipt of the calls including calls transiting the RSL Com Exchange.
Billing Details: a. Billed to customer amount (the "customer" is the party Billed by RSL Com for this call transaction).
 b. Billed by vendor amount (the Vendor is the party charging RSL Com for the carriage of the call transaction).
 c. Which Wholesale Vendor/Carrier was the call transaction handed off to for further routing for call delivery?
Detailed explanation of the call routing rules used to identify the billed customer.
List of all C7 Gateway definitions, names, and possible values stored in the call database.
List of "fictional" numbers used as substitute calling party, when the "A" party (calling party) cannot be determined directly.  
Supply of Data 
All data is to be suppled on DVD or CD(s) accurately identified with the files and corresponding date periods.
On 15 February 2010, Mr Rooke prepared a further "Discovery" document entitled "Discovery - stage 2 (revision 2)". That document repeated the earlier requests, and added further questions for each party. Hi-Tech responded to that request by email dated 9 June 2010. So far as it is relevant, that email stated: .1 The data will be in CSV format.  .2 Details will be supplied with the data to explain each field.  .3 This explanation will be supplied with the data. 
This list will be supplied with the data. 
On 5 July 2010, Mr Rooke replied, in relation to (among others) the items that I have set out "understood, with thanks". 
On 15 September 2010 Hi-Tech's solicitors wrote to Mr Rooke as follows: 
We refer to the above matter and the email from Leonard Rooke dated 5 July confirming the requirements for the Stage 2 discovery task.  
We enclose a USB which we are instructed contains our client's call detail data for the period in dispute, being July 2007 to January 2008. We are also instructed that the details requested in paragraphs 2 to 5 of your report prepared on 15 February 2010 are included with the data contained on the USB.  
We understand that you now have all of our client's data required to undertake
Stage 2 discovery. Please let us know if that is not the case. 
On 5 October 2010, Hi-Tech's solicitors wrote again to Mr Rooke. So far as it is relevant, that letter stated: 
Hi-Tech has not seen RSL's call data in the form to be provided to you. Whilst it may not be necessary for the parties to exchange the call data which is provided to you for the purpose of your expert function, Hi-Tech is concerned to ensure that the data RSL provides to you is raw data obtained directly from
RSL's switch, and not RSL's mediation server or its billing system.  
You will appreciate the basis of Hi-Tech's concern. In the circumstances, we ask that when you are in a position to, you confirm to both parties in writing that you are satisfied that each of Hi-Tech and RSL has provided to you a full export of its call details without any modifications or filtering. 
On 13 October 2010, Mr Rooke's company entered into a confidentiality deed with RSL Com and its parent company. Nothing turns on this, except that apparently it was the trigger for RSL Com's solicitors to send to Mr Rooke, on the same day, what was said to be their client's call data for the period in dispute. The covering letter said that further details requested in the "Discovery" document of 15 February 2010 were also enclosed. On 27 October 2010, RSL Com's solicitors confirmed to Mr Rooke that the call data was raw data that had not been relevantly modified or filtered. 
On 8 November 2010, Hi-Tech's solicitors raised questions as to the data provided by RSL Com, and asserted that (in contrast to Hi-Tech's data, which was said not to have "undergone any modification or filtering") RSL Com's data was "not unmodified and unfiltered". They expressed concerns about the suitability of that data for analysis. 
On 8 December 2010, Mr Rooke made a "Request for Information" of each party. The format adopted was that the original requests were set out, and comments were added as to the extent of compliance. 
As to the requests made of Hi-Tech, the document said: 
We request all Call Transaction logs (not just the Subset in question) for the date periods above. (i.e. a full export of call details without any modifications or filtering). Please include any relational data associated with the Call Transaction Logs.

Not Complied - Data is filtered to a single call route.  .1 Structure: This file should be in comma delimited CSV format and include all data for calls irrespective of Billed Client or Wholesale Carrier.

Complied .2 Documented details will need to be supplied explaining each field in the data set and the format of the data in each field including any relational data associated with these fields. Particular attention is required for complex data fields containing such values as: .2.1 Date .2.2 Time (Format and time zone that is used (i.e. GMT or AEST/AEDT) .2.3 'A' Party - Originating phone number (what differentiates a Local, national international location) .2.4 'B' Party - Destination number dialed (what differentiates a Local, national international location) .2.5 Duration of the call or call end time (depending on the database architecture) including punctuation used and representation (i.e. dd.hh:mm:ss) .2.6 All incoming & outgoing call routing information associated with the call including but not limited to: .2.6.1.C7 or other Gateways or routes.
 .2.6.2. Naming of remote gateways (C7 or other) used for call delivery to customers, customers "B" party destinations and/or
Wholesale traffic delivery.
 .2.7. Billed to customer amount (the "customer" is the party Billed by Hi-
Tech for this call transaction) .2.8. Billed by vendor amount (the Vendor is the party charging Hi-Tech for the carriage of the call transaction).
 .2.9. Which Wholesale Vendor/Carrier was the call transaction handed off to for further routing for call delivery? 
Not Complied - Field definitions and relationships to other fields in other files has not been supplied (as requested above in items 4 to 4.6)  .3 Detailed explanation of call routing rules used to identify the billed customer for the call usage.

Not Complied - No information supplied 
A full list of every possible originating number associated with Hi-Tech
Customers.

Not Complied 
The required remedial action was said to be "comply with all our original requests in the manner requested in our original request document dated 15-Feb-2010, Ref 201002319 LWR". 
A similar process was followed for the requests made of and said to have been answered by RSL Com. 
Mr Rooke provided a summary of each party's compliance. So far as it is relevant, that summary stated: 
RSL-Com: The data supplied by RSL Com is mostly compliant with our request. We have a number of queries regarding the data supplied a quick response will be appreciated for each item listed in the earlier section on this document " Remedial Action Required - RSL Com" page 9.  
Hi-Tech: The data supplied by Hi-Tech is not adequate for our purpose. We request that Hi-Tech supply the data as originally requested in our document dated 15-Feb-2010, Ref: 201002319 LWR. A quick response will be appreciated for each item listed in the earlier section of this document "Remedial Action Required - Hi-tech" on page 5.  
In relation to the statement in Hi-Tech's solicitor's letter of 5 October 2010 that Hi-Tech had provided raw data directly from its switch, Mr Rooke said: 
Response: In the absence the requested detailed descriptions as originally requested in our document dated 15-Feb-2010, Ref: 201002319 LWR, the data supplied seems to be filtered to call traffic between RSL Com & Hi-Tech, which is not compliant with our original request.  
In relation to the concerns expressed in the same letter as to the data supplied by RSL Com, Mr Rooke said: 
Response: in the absence the requested detailed descriptions as originally requested in our document dated 15-Feb-2010, Ref: 201002319 LWR, the data supplied is adequate for the current stage of analysis. We reserve the right to request additional information as per our Brief.  
On 3 February 2011, RSL Com's solicitors wrote to Mr Rooke referring to item 4 of his request. That letter stated, in relation to item 4: 
The "Field definitions, field format and relationships to other fields in other files" are set out in the EricssonSpec.doc file included in the documentation folder contained on the portable hard drive provided to you on October 2010.  
If the information within the EricssonSpec.doc is not readily accessible from the portable hard drive or requires clarification, our client can make the developer of the software available to discuss your queries if that would be of assistance to you. Your letter of engagement contemplates such direct communication where you consider it appropriate and our client will provide any such assistance it can.  
Also attached is a further copy of our client's original response to your original "Request for Call Detail Data" which was included with the information on the portable hard drive provided to you on 13 October 2010. 
There was attached to that letter a document which repeated Mr Rooke's requests and added comments to them. It is not clear who was the author of those comments. In relation to the third of Mr Rooke's requests, the document stated: . Structure: These files should be in comma delimited CSV format and include all data for calls irrespective of Billed Client or Wholesale Carrier. 
Files have been provide as CSV. All mediated records have been provided. Only
HiTech Billed records have been provided as other data is commercially sensitive to M2 and other parties. It is also not relevant to this investigation.
It appears that Hi-Tech did not respond to Mr Rooke's request of 8 December 2010. Accordingly, on 25 February 2011, RSL Com's solicitors wrote to Hi-Tech's solicitors stating, among other things: 
On or about 15 February 2010, Corporate Consulting Group (" CCG "), the expert nominated by the parties to carry out the expert determination process contemplated by the Deed, requested that both parties provide it with access to various documentation, information and data, being the documentation, information and data referred to in the document entitled "Discovery - Stage 2 (Revision 2)" dated 15 February 2010 (" the Discovery
Document" ). 
In answer to the Discovery Document, Hi-Tech provided call data and other information to CCG on a USB on or about 15 September 2010 and RSL Com provided call data and other information on a portable disk drive on or about 13
October 2010. 
Notwithstanding the clear and unambiguous terms of the request made by CCG to Hi-Tech contained in the Discovery Document, it is clear from the subsequent document prepared by CCG entitled "Request for Information" dated 8
December 2010 (" the Request for Information ") that Hi-Tech has manifestly failed to provide the requested access to CCG. 
At page 12 of the Request for Information, CCG state that the data supplied by Hi-Tech is not adequate for their purpose and request that Hi-Tech supply the data as originally requested in the Discovery Document. CCG refer, in particular, to the numerous instances of non-compliance listed at pages 4 to 6 of the Request for Information. 
Furthermore, CCG indicate at page 12 of the Request for Information, that in response to CCG's request for raw call data obtained directly from each party's switch, Hi-Tech has only supplied data which is filtered to call traffic between RSL Com and Hi-Tech. This is despite the assertion to the contrary contained in your letter dated 5 October 2010. 
It is now more than 12 months since CCG's initial request was made in the
Discovery Document, and 11 weeks since the Request for Information. Our client is most concerned that Hi-Tech has still not complied with CCG's requests as set out in the Discovery Document and the Request for Information and has not provided any explanation why it has so abjectly failed to comply with such requests. Hi-Tech's failure to provide the documentation, information and data requested is preventing the parties from progressing the expert determination process provided for in the Deed and the resolution of the dispute between the parties. 
As your client is aware, clause 4.1 of the Deed provides that Hi-Tech must promptly provide the expert with reasonable access to any documentation, information, hardware, software or data requested by the expert which Hi-Tech uses or maintains for the purpose of the expert making its determination pursuant to the Deed. Furthermore, clause 11 of the Deed requires that the parties do all things necessary or desirable to give effect to the terms of the Deed. These provisions are essential to the function and purpose of the
Deed, a breach of which would entitle RSL Com to terminate the Deed and seek damages from Hi-Tech. 
In manifestly failing to provide CCG with access to the all requested documentation, information and data contained in the Discovery Document, Hi
Tech is in clear breach of its obligations under the Deed. In the circumstances, RSL Com requires that Hi-Tech promptly rectify its breach and comply with the requests made by CCG in the Discovery Document and the Request for Information by providing CCG with access to the outstanding documentation, information and data requested by no later than 5pm on Friday, 11 March 2011. 
Hi-Tech's solicitors replied on 8 March 2011. The reply stated, among other things: ...  
We are surprised by your assertions. Much of the remedial action requested from our client is similar to that requested of your client. Your client responded to the Request on 3 February 2011, more than 8 weeks after the date of the Request. Your client has access to the significant resources of the
Receivers and Liquidators and its business. By comparison, the size of our client's business means that it has very limited resources to devote to a task such as this.  ...  
Notwithstanding that, our client regards this matter as important and is actively working to address the expert's concerns. We anticipate that correspondence will be sent to the expert in answer to the Request in the next few days. We will of course provide you with a copy of that correspondence. 
A day later, Hi-Tech's solicitors wrote to Mr Rooke. In relation to the contentious paragraphs of his request (by which I mean, those that RSL Com said and says were not answered, and on which it relied and relies as justifying its termination of the deed), the letter stated: " We request all Call Transaction logs (not just the Subset in question) for the date periods above. (i.e. a full export of call details without any modifications or filtering). Please include any relational data associated with the Call Transaction Logs.  
Not complied - Data is filtered to a single call route."  
We are instructed that the data provided is in exactly the same format as Hi-
Tech retrieves from its soft-switch, and that this was mentioned to Mr Rooke during Hi-Tech's first meeting with him. Hi-Tech uses a modern switch so that the output of the switch is in a CSV format, which can be transferred to any system for billing purposes. Mr Rooke was informed at that meeting that the data retrieved from Hi-Tech's switch is in a single line consisting of customer ID, vendor ID and all relevant details for the calls for billing purposes.  
We confirm that the data has not, as suggested, been filtered by Hi-Tech in any way. The data has been provided in the same form as produced by the switch, as requested. If it would be of assistance, our client can make the soft-switch engineer available to discuss your queries.  .2 "Documented details will need to be supplied explaining each field in the data set and the format of the data in each field including any relational data associated with these fields...  
Not complied - Field definitions and relationships to other fields in other files has not been supplied (as requested above in items 4 to 4.6)"  
We are instructed that all of the details requested in paragraph 2.2 of the
Request were included with the data provided. In the event that you are not able to locate these details in the data, our client is happy to make a representative of Hi-Tech available to meet with you to resolve any queries.  .3 "Detailed explanation of the call routing rules used to identify the billed customer for the call usage.  
Not complied - No information supplied."  
Our client provides the following explanation:  
All of Hi-Tech's customers are set up with a trunk and each trunk is assigned a customer ID. This customer ID is used for all billing purposes and identifies the customer, and is consistent throughout the system. Any call which comes to this trunk ID gets authenticated, authorised and admitted (
AAA ) and all calls which pass through the AAA gets billed to the customer. If it doesn't pass through the AAA it doesn't pass through the soft- switch. This prevents any misrepresented Caller Line Identification (CLI) being billed to the incorrect customer. If there is no CLI, the calls still get billed to the right customer. This customer ID is already available on the data supplied. During the AAA process, the soft-switch looks up to a routing database, to determine which route is to be used for the call, via IP, without the call going through the routing database. At the end of the call, the soft- switch produces a file of the customer that made the call and the vendor used, with all necessary details. This file is what has been provided to Corporate
Consulting Group.  "A full list of every possible originating number associated with Hi-Tech
Customers. Not Complied."  
We are instructed that every originating number and Hi-Tech Customer Number is in the data provided. Hi-Tech's system is an IP based system and the soft- switch automatically rejects and uncompliant number format, so what has been provided in CSV format is everything that is received by Hi-Tech's Customers and what Hi-Tech provides to its Vendors. In the event that you are not able to locate these details in the data, our client is happy to make a representative of Hi-Tech available to meet with you to resolve any queries. 
RSL Com's solicitors replied on 10 March 2011. The letter stated, among other things: ...  
As an example of Hi-Tech's non-compliance, we note that at paragraph 2 on page of the Discovery Document, CCG requests that Hi-Tech provide all call transaction logs for the relevant date periods irrespective of the billed client or the wholesale carrier. At paragraph 2 on page 4 of the Request for
Information, CCG records that Hi-Tech has not complied with this request and again requests that Hi-Tech provide all call transaction logs (not just the subset in question) for the relevant date periods. At page 12 of the Request for Information, CCG again states that the data supplied by Hi-Tech seems to be filtered to call traffic between RSL Com Australia Pty Ltd (" RSL Com ") and Hi-Tech which is not compliant with CCG's original request.  
At paragraphs 4 and 5 of our letter to you dated 25 February 2011, we again drew your client's attention to its failure to provide all call data for the relevant date periods irrespective of billed client or wholesale carrier.
Notwithstanding these repeated requests to your client, it appears (from paragraph 2 of your letter dated 9 March 2011), that in breach of its obligations under the Deed, Hi-Tech has yet again failed to provide CCG with all call transaction logs for the relevant period irrespective of the billed client or the wholesale carrier.  ...  
Our client reserves all its rights in relation to this matter including without limitation its rights to terminate the Deed as a result of your client's breach of its obligations pursuant to the Deed. 
Hi-Tech's solicitors replied on 23 March 2011. Among other things, they rejected the allegation that Hi-Tech was in breach. They asserted that "the expert has sought further information from our respective clients. Neither your client or our client has to date been able to fully comply with the expert's requests. This does not, of itself, mean that either of our clients are [sic] in breach of the deed.". 
RSL Com's solicitors replied on 4 April 2011, dealing with the various matters raised in the prior letter, and repeating "the demands previously made in our letters dated 25 February 2011 and 10 March 2011 that Hi-Tech promptly rectify its breaches of the deed and comply with the requests made by CCG in the discovery document and the request for information.". 
Somewhat anomalously, RSL Com's solicitors wrote to Mr Rooke on 3 May 2011 as follows: 
We refer to our previous correspondence and, in particular, your Request for
Information document dated 8 December 2010 ( "the Request") .  
Our client responded to the Request under cover of our letter dated 3 February and Hi-Tech responded under cover of a letter dated 9 March 2011 from
Piper Alderman to you.  
Almost eight weeks have passed and the parties do not appear to have received any further correspondence from you. The next step contemplated by your
Discovery - Stage 2 (Revision 2) document of 15 February 2010 is for Corporate
Consulting to provide the parties with a quotation to complete its investigations and analysis and provide its written opinion.  
If you require further documentation, information or data from the parties to enable you to progress the matter, please let the parties know. Alternatively, if you have all the data and information necessary, please provide the parties with the quotation envisaged.  
We look forward to hearing from you.  ... 
On 4 May 2011, Mr Rooke gave a request for information to Hi-Tech. On 5 May 2011, he gave a request for information to RSL Com. 
In relation to the contentious paragraphs, the request to Hi-Tech repeated the requests earlier made, set out Hi-Tech's response and set out Mr Rooke's comments. Thus, in relation to item 2 and Hi-Tech's solicitor's letter of 9 March 2011, Mr Rooke said: "We request all Call Transaction logs (not just the Subset in question) for the date periods above. (i.e. a full export of call details without any modifications or filtering). Please include any relation data associated with the Call Transaction Logs .  
Hi-Tech Response 09-Mar-2011  
We are instructed that the data provided is in exactly the same format as Hi-
Tech retrieves from its soft-switch, and that this was mentioned to Mr Rooke during Hi-Tech's first meeting with him. Hi-Tech uses a modern switch so that the output of the switch is in a CSV format, which can be transferred to any system for billing purposes. Mr Rooke was informed at that meeting that the data retrieved from Hi-Tech's switch is in a single line consisting of customer ID, vendor ID and all relevant details for the calls for billing purposes.  
We confirm that the data has not, as suggested, been filtered by Hi-Tech in any way. The data has been provided in the same form as produced by the switch, as requested. If it would be of assistance, our client is happy to make a representative of Hi-Tech available to meet with you to resolve any queries.  
CCG RESPONSE 04-May-2011: We accept that the data is in the format as supplied by the equipment. However, as we have not been supplied with the detailed technical information on the data structure as requested we are not able to decipher the fields. CCG reserve the right to revisit this subject upon receiving the detailed data structures requested (see below item 2.2 and other).  
In relation to item 2.1, the document stated: .1 Structure: This file should be in comma delimited CSV format and include all data for calls irrespective of Billed Client or Wholesale Carrier.

CCG Previous Response: Complied  
After repeating item 2.2 (including its individual subparagraphs) Mr Rooke said: 
CCG RESPONSE 04-May-2011: While Hi-Tech maintain that the requested technical information was supplied, only call information has been supplied. Absolutely no technical information has been provided to CCG at this point in time. We require the technical specifications and field format for each of the supplied data files, this information is imperative to CCG understanding the Call Data files and internal field structure previously supplied. Please include critical information on each field such as:  
Date & Time formats
The Relationship each field has to other field in other files supplied
If zero or space padding is used per field within each "csv" file,
If Justification is used within any field.  
Hi-Tech are requested to supply the information requested within Item 2.2 and its sub Items. Please ensure this information is supplied as soon as possible and without delays. 
There followed examples of what Mr Rooke said were inadequacies in the data supplied. 
The letter then turned to item 3 and, after setting out the request and the relevant part of the response of 9 March 2011, said: 
CCG RESPONSE 4-May-2011: Unfortunately Hi-Tech misunderstood this request. 
Additional information: The list should contain Hi-Tech's Customer Names cross references against all possible Customer "A" Party numbers that could have possibly initiated an outgoing call routed through Hi-Tech's network during the period in question. This list is required, direct from Hi-Tech, to ensure that all calls are correctly cross-referenced with the Call Data supplied by both parties. Please not we are happy to take a call from Hi-Tech's data specialist to clarify this further, after which we will publish any clarifications to the group.  
Please ensure this information is supplied as soon as possible and without delays. Corporate Consulting reserves the right to request additional clarification after we receive the response to item 2.2 above or as required.  
The request concluded as follows: 
We respectfully request that Hi-Tech resolve and properly respond to our requests in Paragraph 2 as a high priority , with Items 3 & 4 of our request to be supplied as soon as possible.  
General Observation 
Overall, we find the 4 month delay in responding to our communication of -Dec-2010 to be excessive. Upon our engagement as an independent party in this dispute, Hi-Tech agreed to provide the data requested in a timely manner.
To date, Hi-Tech have failed to do so. 
The request to RSL Com noted that RSL Com had in some cases complied, and in another case "partially complied" with the requests. As to the partial compliance, Mr Rooke stated that "[t]he data supplied is adequate for our purpose at this point of time; we reserve the right to request additional detail in the next stage of analysis". 
In relation to item 3, the request and response were as follows: 
Structure: These files should be in comma delimited CSV format and include all data for calls irrespective of Billed Client or Wholesale Carrier.
 
RSL Response 3-Feb-2011: Files have been provided as CSV. All mediated records have been provided. Only HiTech Billed records have been provided as other data is commercially sensitive to M2 and other parties. It is also not relevant to this investigation.  
CCG RESPONSE 04-May-2011: Noted  
In relation to item 4, the request set out the details that had been sought, RSL's response asserting that they had been provided, and commented as follows: 
CCG RESPONSE: 04-May-2011: The previously supplied document "EricssonSpec.doc" contains some of the required information. The supplied documentation does not contain any detail regarding the following items:  
Format of date and time fields 
If zero or space padding is used per field, 
If Justification is used within any field.  
Please supply this missing technical information at your earliest convenience. 
On 12 May 2011, RSL Com's solicitors wrote to Hi-Tech's solicitors as follows: 
On or about 15 February 2010, Corporate Consulting Group ( CCG ), the expert nominated by the parties to carry out the expert determination process contemplated by the Deed, requested that Hi-Tech provide it with access to various documentation, information and data, being the documentation, information and data referred to in the document entitled "Discovery - Stage (Revision 2)" dated 15 February 2010 ( the Discovery Document ). 
On or about 15 September 2010, Hi-Tech provided some documentation, information and data to CCG, but did not comply with all CCG's requests contained in the Discovery Document. 
By way of provision of a document entitled " Request for Information -
Revised 4 " dated 8 December 2010 ( the 2010 Request for Information ),
CCG repeated its request for access to documentation, information and data held by Hi-Tech which Hi-Tech had failed to provide pursuant to the Discovery
Document. 
In our letter to you dated 25 February 2011, RSL Com identified why the deficiencies in the documentation, information and data provided by Hi-Tech amounted to a breach of its obligations under the Deed and demanded that Hi-
Tech promptly rectify its breaches of the Deed by complying with the requests made by CCG in the Discovery Document and the 2010 Request for information by providing CCG with access to the outstanding documentation, and data by no later than 5pm on Friday, 11 March 2011. 
On or about 9 March 2011, Hi-Tech provided CCG with further information under cover of its letter to CCG dated 9 March 2011, but again did not comply with all CCG's requests contained in the Discovery Documents and the 2010
Request for Information. 
In our letter to you dated 10 March 2011, RSL Com referred to Hi-Tech's non-compliance with CCG's requests for documentation, information and data and repeated the demand made in our letter dated 25 February 2011 and Hi-Tech promptly rectify its breaches of the Deed by complying with the requests made by CCG in the Discovery Document and the 2010 Request for Information. 
By letter dated 23 March 2011 to us, Hi-Tech denied being in breach of the
Deed. 
By way of provision of a document entitled "Request for Information -
Revision 2" dated 4 May 2011 ( the 2011 Request for Information ) CCG repeated its request for access to documentation, information and data held by
Hi-Tech which Hi-Tech had failed to provide pursuant to the Discovery Document and the 2010 Request for Information. 
Clause 4.1 of the Deed requires that Hi-Tech must promptly provide the expert with reasonable access to any documentation, information, hardware, software or data which Hi-Tech uses or maintains which is requested by the expert for the purpose of the expert making the determination pursuant to the
Deed. Clause 11 of the Deed requires that Hi-Tech do all things necessary or desirable to give effect to the terms of the Deed. 
On 18 May 2011, RSL Com's solicitors wrote to Mr Rooke informing him, as they put it, that the deed had been terminated, and asking him not to undertake any further work. They asked him also to retain material that had been provided to him as it might be relevant to proceedings between the parties. 
First issue: breach of the deed  
The proper construction of clauses 4.1 and 11.  
There was not a great deal of dispute as to this. Clause 4.1 requires each party to provide Mr Rooke "with reasonable access to any documentation, [etc.] which it uses or maintains which is requested by [Mr Rooke] for the purpose of making [his] determination...". 
The dictionary definitions of "access" include "way, means or opportunity of approach"; and (specifically of computers) "to locate and provide means of getting (information) out of or into a computer storage". (See revised third edition of the Macquarie Dictionary .) Both the general definition and more specific definition relating to computers suggest that "access" involves making something available or accessible. 
Thus, in the context of clause 4.1, the requirement to provide access connotes, in my view, a requirement to make the documentation, etc required by Mr Rooke available to him for his analysis. It is a requirement to make that which is sought accessible, or readable, or capable of use for the purposes of Mr Rooke's analysis and report. 
In the case of electronically stored data, the requirement to give access might include not only providing the data to Mr Rooke by some medium such as a disk or flash drive, but also (if necessary to enable him to read and analyse the data) whatever programs or other information he required to make it meaningful to him. 
The obligation to provide access is limited to "reasonable access". In my view, the adjective qualifies or limits what is to be done, but does not otherwise bear on the connotation of the word "access" in the context of clause 4.1. 
It is not necessary to spend much time on clause 11. It is described as a covenant for further assurance. In my view, it rises no higher, and has no greater effect, than any individual covenant in the deed to which it is, in effect, ancillary. 
The breaches alleged by RSL Com  
RSL Com relied on three separate failures on the part of Hi-Tech to provide documentation etc. to Mr Rooke: the failure to supply all call transaction logs, as opposed to call transaction logs relating to calls routed by Hi-Tech through RSL Com, in response to item 2 of the "Discovery" document of 15 February 2010 and the requests for information of 8 December 2010 and 4 May 2011;  the failure to supply technical information concerning specifications, data structure and field format as referred to in item 2.2 of those requests; and  the failure to supply every possible originating number associated with
Hi-Tech's customers in accordance with item 3 of those requests. 
RSL Com submitted that those breaches were serious breaches of an intermediate term of the deed. It relied on the context of those breaches, including the repeated requests for information, what it characterised as evasive or incorrect answers, and the repeated warnings given by its solicitors, to justify the proposition that, by 12 May 2011, the breaches were sufficiently serious to justify termination. Alternatively, RSL Com submitted that the conduct of Hi-Tech was repudiatory and that it was entitled to accept that repudiation and terminate the deed accordingly; and that it had done so, if not otherwise then by its defence of these proceedings. 
Hi-Tech submitted that the alleged breaches had not been made out. Alternatively, it submitted, the breaches were not sufficiently serious to justify termination. It relied, in particular, on the fact that it had repeatedly offered to make its expert available to Mr Rooke to assist him in his enquiries: specifically, to assist him to understand the material that Hi-Tech had given him. Hi-Tech submitted further, in relation to the characterisation of the breaches (of course, if there were breaches) as serious or otherwise, that there had been some failure of understanding, in particular in relation to item 2, that should be taken into account in assessing the character of the breach. 
The breaches alleged by Hi-Tech  
In its "pleaded" case and written submissions, Hi-Tech relied on the following failures on the part of RSL Com to supply information: the failure to supply technical specifications and field format items, as pointed out in item 2 of the request of 5 May 2011;  the failure to supply technical information relating to the structure of certain files that had been supplied earlier, as pointed out in item 7 of that request; and  the failure to provide a summary of invoiced call data as sought by item 9 of that request. 
Further, in submissions in reply after the evidence was complete, Mr Kelly of Senior Counsel, who appeared with Mr Sulan of Counsel for Hi-Tech, relied also on an alleged breach said to have been constituted by failure to supply billing records relating to carriers other than Hi-Tech. (See item 3 of the request for information of 5 May 2011.) That alleged breach had not been pleaded. Nor was it referred to in Hi-Tech's written outline of submissions exchanged and delivered before the commencement of the hearing. 
Mr Pritchard of Senior Counsel, who appeared with Mr Stephenson of Counsel for RSL Com, submitted that Hi-Tech should not be permitted to rely on the asserted breach of item 3. He pointed out that his client had led evidence in some detail from Mr Rooke on the breaches that had been alleged, and submitted that, by reason of the failure of notification of the point, his client had been prevented from adducing evidence in respect of the asserted breach in relation to item 3. 
Mr Kelly sought to rely on the alleged breach of item 3 in two ways. First, he submitted, that and the other breaches were of such a character that even if Hi-Tech were in breach of the deed (which of course he denied), the breaches alleged against RSL Com were of such a character as to deprive it of the right to terminate. Alternatively, Mr Kelly submitted, RSL Com's failure to supply all records in relation to item 3 of the requests, in particular its assertion that the request "is...not relevant to this investigation", showed that any breach by his client of the like request should not be regarded as sufficiently serious to justify termination. 
I do not think that it is appropriate to allow Hi-Tech to rely on the asserted breach in relation to item 3 as something that should be taken into account in considering whether or not, assuming that Hi-Tech itself was in breach, RSL Com was able to terminate the deed. Nor do I think that the asserted breach in relation to item 3 should be given any evidentiary weight, in circumstances where RSL Com was not given notice, and where, accordingly, it was deprived of the opportunity to lead evidence of the alleged breach and its consequences. It may be - I do not know - that there is some valid reason for asserting that any breach by RSL Com in relation to this item is not of the same gravity or character as any breach by Hi-Tech of the equivalent item. I take into account also that Mr Rooke was not cross-examined at all on the significance of item 3 - another factor that, in my view, makes it inappropriate to give this complaint any evidentiary weight. 
In short, I think, Hi-Tech should be confined to its pleaded case on this issue. 
Breach by Hi-Tech  
Item 2 
The first alleged breach relates to item 2. That item called for all call transaction logs (and the word "all" was emphasised by being emboldened and underlined). Hi-Tech had extracted from its records, data relating to calls that had been routed through RSL Com. It did not supply data for calls routed through other carriers. There is no doubt that it could have done so. The evidence of its Systems Engineer, Mr M A C Delfin, is clear on this point. See T 26.19 - 27.3: 
Q. And what you understood you were being asked to do was to retrieve out of archives call transaction date? 
A. Concerning transaction data between Hi-Tech and RSL.  
Q. And you didn't understand your task to be to retrieve all call transaction data for the period; is that right? 
A. No. My instructions to me was just the whole records between Hi-Tech and
RSL.  
Q. And I take it if you had been asked you could have retrieved the entire call transaction history for customers other than Hi-Tech? 
A. No. You mean our suppliers other than RSL? No.  
Q. Sorry? 
A. No.  
Q. You could have done, but you just didn't do it; is that what you are saying? 
A. Yes, because it only involves Hi-Tech and RSL and the instructions to me was to retrieve the call transactions that is between Hi-Tech and RSL, so that is what I do. I did.  
Q. Thank you. Just so I understand, if you had been asked to retrieve and put on the USB all call transaction records for customers, not just RSL? 
A. Yes.  
Q. You could have done that? 
A. Yes.  
Q. And the reason you did not do that is you understood your instructions from
Mark were to limit-- 
A. No, not from Mark because--  
Q. You understood your instructions from someone-- 
A. Yeah. From my boss Amadu.  
Q. Yes, Amadu, to limit what would be on the USB to call transaction records as between Hi-Tech Hi-Tech and RSL only? 
A. Yes.  
Q. And if your instructions had been to produce all call transaction documents for the relevant period with all customers, not just between RSL and Hi-Tech, that could have been done and put on to the USB provided on the 15th of
September? 
A. Yes. 
At one point in his cross-examination, Mr Delfin suggested that it might take longer than the three month period to which he had referred (to supply the limited call data) to supply all call data. I do not accept that evidence, but I do not think that Mr Delfin was seeking to give untruthful evidence or to mislead the Court. Rather, I think, there was some lack of correspondence between the question that was asked and his understanding of it. The difficulty was clarified and resolved at T28.48 - 29.10: 
Q. Okay. Now, please assume that in about June 2010 someone said to you,
Please, I don't want this limited to RSL and Hi-Tech, I want the whole call transaction history for the seven month period? 
A. Mmm.  
Q. Do you understand what I am asking you? 
A. Yes.  
Q. Is it the case that you would have been able to produce that? 
A. Yes, we would.  
Q. And would you have been able to produce that by the 15th of September? 
A. Yes. 
It is also clear from Mr Delfin's evidence that the reason that the full data set was not supplied was that he was instructed only to extract, so that it could be supplied, data relating to calls routed by Hi-Tech through RSL Com. That instruction seem to have been given by Mr Delfin's superior, Mr Amadu Yahaya. Mr Yahaya, who was the Chief Operating Officer of Hi-Tech, was not called to give evidence. Thus, we do not know why it was that he saw fit to limit the production of data in the way that, apparently, he did. 
Mr Rooke gave evidence as to why he regarded it as important for him to have access to all call data, and not just to data relating to calls routed by Hi-Tech through RSL Com. He was not challenged on that aspect of his evidence, and I accept it. 
Mr Kelly submitted that there was sufficient compliance with clause 4.1, in relation to item 2, because of the offer to "make the soft-switch engineer available to discuss your queries". (That engineer was Mr Delfin.) I do not accept that submission. It was Mr Delfin's function to obtain the relevant data (relevant, that is, according to his instructions). No doubt, had there been some question as to the operation of Hi-Tech's systems, or as to the way in which the data was recorded or had been extracted, Mr Delfin could have dealt with those questions. But speaking to Mr Delfin could hardly make up for the lack of data that, Mr Rooke said, he required for the purposes of his analysis. It is not in my view a sufficient response to a request for data to say that the person who supervised the extraction and presentation of the data was available to discuss any queries in relation to it. 
Mr Rooke's position was that he wanted the data. It was not suggested that the data was irrelevant to his analysis. As I have said, his evidence on this point was not challenged. Accordingly, it was no answer to his request to withhold the data but to make available, for enquiry, the person who could have arranged its production. 
On the basis of Mr Delfin's evidence, it cannot be suggested that making the totality of the item 2 records available to Mr Rooke would have caused substantial expense or difficulty. Mr Delfin gave evidence of the elaborate process by which archived call data was extracted from the archived call logs. There are two points to be made in relation to this. The first is that at least part of that elaborate process was necessary because of, and to give effect to, the decision taken by Hi-Tech to limit production to data relating to calls routed by Hi-Tech through RSL Com. The second point is that, as Mr Delfin acknowledged in the passages of his cross-examination that I have set out above, all archived call data for the relevant period could have been produced within the time that it took to produce the limited data set that was in fact given to Mr Rooke. 
Mr Kelly relied on Mr Rooke's response to item 2 in the request of 4 May 2011. I have set that out at [42] above. After repeating the request and the relevant part of the response, Mr Rooke commented on the response. For convenience, I repeat that comment: 
We accept that the data is in the format as supplied by the equipment.
However, as we have not been supplied with the detailed technical information on the data structure as requested we are not able to decipher the fields. CCG reserve the right to revisit this subject upon receiving the detailed data structures requested (see below item 2.2 and other). 
Mr Kelly submitted, based on the last sentence, that Mr Rooke had indicated that he was content for the time being, but that he might return to the subject once he had received the further information requested that would enable him to understand what he had been given. 
Mr Kelly relied also on some evidence given by Mr Rooke in cross-examination at T81.8 - .47. However, in my view, a proper understanding of that evidence requires consideration of the three preceding questions and answers (T80.41 - 81.6). I set out the totality of that part of Mr Rooke's cross-examination: 
Q. But so far as access to information is concerned, had you had that meeting, but for the termination, you would have had the information that would have enabled you then to go forward to this next step? 
A. No, we would have found that the calls had been - and identified the calls had been filtered down to just calls between Hi-Tech and RSL Com, and we would have had to have come back and asked for all the other - the information that we'd asked for.  
Q. What do you mean you would have found out? 
A. Well, then the information would have identified that it was probably filtered to a single call route.  
Q. But the information that you got was the same as the information you'd had since August 2009, bar the two extra columns, I suggest.

A. Doesn't change the fact that the information was not what we asked for. We asked for all calls, not just calls between Hi-Tech and RSL Com. 
I do not think that it is a fair reading of this part of the document, considered as a whole, that Mr Rooke expressed satisfaction with the amount of material that had been given to him in response to item 2. Reading this aspect of the request as a whole, I think it is clear that Mr Rooke's response made two points. The first point was his acceptance of the proposition that the data given to him was in the format supplied by Hi-Tech's "equipment". The second point was that, since he could not decipher the data without the technical information that he had requested, he reserved "the right to revisit the subject" once he received that information. In short, I think, Mr Rooke was doing no more than saying that when he could understand the data given to him, he would consider whether it was sufficient. 
It is of course inevitable that, once Mr Rooke considered that data, he would have realised that it fell well short of his request. 
That is the way that I would have read the response, regardless of Mr Rooke's evidence in cross-examination. However, I think, my reading is supported by the passage that I have set out above. Thus, I do not accept that, in the part of that passage on which Mr Kelly relied, Mr Rooke indicated that he was satisfied with the call data produced to date. 
Mr Kelly relied also on item 2.1 of the request of 4 May 2011 and the response. For convenience again, I set out that passage: .1 Structure: This file should be in comma delimited CSV format and include all data for calls irrespective of Billed Client or Wholesale Carrier.  
CCG Previous Response: Complied  
Mr Kelly submitted, based on the words "include all data for calls irrespective of billed client or wholesale carrier", and the response "complied", that Mr Rooke had indicated satisfaction with the limited data set that had been given to him. I do not think that this is a fair reading of this passage of the request. It is quite clear, when one looks at the antecedent version of the request (that sent on 8 December 2010, which I have set out above) that the response "Complied" related to the request that the file should be in the specified format. It is plain, from the first part of the request set out in item 2, that Mr Rooke wanted all call transaction logs and not just those relating to calls routed by Hi-Tech through RSL Com. It makes no sense whatsoever to read his comment on item 2.1 as vacating or negating that request. 
The structure of the request is carried through into the request of 4 May 2011. In the case of the latter document, the responses that had been given are interpolated. It is apparent that the response "complied" to item 2.1 was merely carried over from the previous iteration of the document. It does not represent some further thought given by Mr Rooke to this aspect of his request. 
Mr Kelly submitted, further, that his client had misunderstood this aspect of the request. He said, that his client and Mr Rooke were "ships passing in the night". Quite why this is relevant to the question of failure to supply information I do not understand. But in any event, I do not accept the submission. Mr Rooke's request was crystal clear. He wanted all transaction logs, and not just the limited subset of data that had been given to him. If the request had been made to Mr Delfin, it is conceivable that there might have been some possibility of misunderstanding. But it was not. It was made of Hi-Tech's solicitors, and answered by them. I am unable to accept that a competent and experienced solicitor could have understood the request as limited to data relating to calls routed to Hi-Tech through RSL Com. Since the solicitor in question was not called to give evidence of the alleged misunderstanding, I do not propose to draw the inference that there was such a misunderstanding as Mr Kelly submitted. 
As I have indicated, Mr Kelly relied on what he asserted was an equivalent breach on the part of RSL Com to support the inference that the breach was not serious. Even if, contrary to what I have said, the material were available for that purpose, the failure to put the proposition to Mr Rooke in cross-examination means that it cannot be accepted. 
Accordingly, I conclude that Hi-Tech breached clause 4.1 of the deed by failing to supply all the call data requested by item 2 of the request of 4 May 2011. 
Item 2.2 
It is clear that Hi-Tech did not in terms provide to Mr Rooke the information sought by item 2.2. It was suggested to Mr Rooke in cross-examination that if he had revisited the seven disks of Hi-Tech's material given to him originally, he would have seen at least some of the information that he required. That may be so. But it was never explained why Hi-Tech did not point this out, rather than leaving the question up in the air. 
Nor was it ever explained why, contrary to the assertion made in the letter of 9 March 2011, this information had not been supplied. It is apparent from Mr Delfin's evidence in cross-examination that the answers to the questions raised in item 2.2 were known to him and other employees of Hi-Tech at the time. I infer that the information would have been known to Mr Delfin at all material times (ie, at all times since the request was first made). Certainly, when (after the notice of termination was given) Hi-Tech stirred itself to answer item 2.2, it was Mr Delfin who gave instructions for the technical aspects of the answers to be prepared. There is no reason, on the evidence, why he could not have done this earlier if asked to do so. 
Mr Kelly submitted, correctly, that the letter of instructions to Mr Rooke authorised him to make enquiries in such manner as he saw fit. It is equally correct to say, as again Mr Kelly submitted, that the broad general discretion so given was not limited by the protocol that was apparently to govern the general course of the dealings between him and the parties. But to say that Mr Rooke could have spoken direct to Mr Delfin, and obtained the information that he wanted, is one thing. To say that he should have done so is quite another. The discretion is one given to Mr Rooke. It is up to him to decide how he should exercise it. If he decides that it is appropriate to proceed by way of written communication, so that each party is informed of requests made to the other and of answers given by the other, that is within the ambit of the discretion given. It is not for either party to say that, in any particular case, Mr Rooke might (let alone should) have proceeded in a more informal way. 
I accept that both Hi-Tech and RSL Com offered to make their technical experts available to Mr Rooke. I am prepared to accept, further, that this was done specifically (by Hi-Tech) in relation to item 2.2. However, as I have said, it was up to Mr Rooke to decide whether he wished to proceed in that way, or whether he wished to proceed more formally. In circumstances where Mr Rooke chose to proceed more formally, it was not for Hi-Tech to dictate that he should do otherwise. 
I acknowledge that Mr Rooke said, in cross-examination, that he was prevented, by notification of the fact of termination, from making oral enquiries. But it does not follow that, as at and prior to the date of termination, he was bound to do so. Still less does it follow that one or other of the parties could dictate that he should do so. 
It cannot be said that it was unreasonable for Mr Rooke to seek to proceed more formally, or that it was unreasonable for him to ask Hi-Tech to provide the information sought in writing. The parties had agreed to settle their dispute on the basis of a binding expert determination. It was, no doubt, important that each of them should be satisfied that the expert was carrying out that task on the basis of full and accurate information. It was, no doubt, equally important, as a result, that each of them should have an adequate opportunity to monitor both the process of supply of information and the information supplied. Presumably, that is why they specified, in the draft and final letter of instruction, that the usual method of communication should be through their solicitors, with each party being copied into communications to or from the other. 
In those circumstances, particularly where there had been delay, and where it was open to Mr Rooke to conclude that some of the assurances given to him in communications on behalf of Hi-Tech had not been accurate, I think that Mr Rooke was fully justified in seeking information formally and openly, rather than through informal (and, it may be, unilateral) consultations. 
Thus, I do not accept that, when Hi-Tech chose to respond to item 2.2 of the request for information before May 2011 only by making Mr Delfin available rather than by replying in writing, it was doing what was reasonable in the circumstances. In the language of clause 4.1, that action by Hi-Tech could not be described as giving Mr Rooke reasonable access to the information that he had requested. 
It follows that Hi-Tech breached clause 4.1 of the deed also in relation to item 2.2. 
Item 3 
On a fair reading of item 3, it required Hi-Tech to supply not only originating numbers "associated with" its customers for calls that had been routed through RSL Com, but also all numbers "associated with" those customers, regardless of which carrier the calls had been routed through. Mr Rooke accepted that the request could be so read (T77.8 - .39, 78.26 - .45): 
Q. But you wanted a list of every customer of each of Hi-Tech's customers who could have made a call that could have been routed through Hi-Tech and RSL
Com? 
A. The number, the A party number.  
Q. But "every possible number" means every customer whose contract with those four customers of Hi-Tech enabled him or her to make calls of the kind that might be routed through Hi-Tech and RSL Com, doesn't it? 
A. It is, yes, could be.  
Q. And how would Hi-Tech, in your understanding, have access to that data of its four wholesale customers? 
A. They may not.  
KELLY  
Q. What I suggested to you was that the request for such a list was ridiculous. That is the case, isn't it? 
A. The request was to identify whether that information was available.  
Q. No, the request was to prepare a list.

A. I received no correspondence back to me to indicate one way or the other that it was either - it can be done, can't be done, or that they thought that that request was ridiculous.  
Q. But you knew it was ridiculous, I suggest, because "any possible customer" would include anyone who had bought a phone card and was still walking down a street and hadn't made a phone call yet? 
A. It could possibly go to that level.  
Q. How would Hi-Tech have any means of knowing that? 
A. They may not.  ...  
Q. But it would also require every other customer of Ghana Mobile who could have put a call through Hi-Tech and RSL, would it not? 
A. It could possibly do just that.  
Q. I thought the question was, wasn't it?  
KELLY: Yes.  
HIS HONOUR  
Q. That's what you intended to mean, isn't it? 
A. The intention would not to be - to be asked at this level. The 86,232 for
Ghana, that information is already in the billing system because the A party is recorded. We've seen that from the electronic data that comes out.  
Q. And that's why you were wanting the other potential A parties who weren't in the billing system, isn't it? 
A. For their specific clients. If that was only the method we had of actually tracking a call and reconciling it through the two systems, and also through any other wholesale vendor that they were using. 
The evidence showed that Hi-Tech had four customers, each of whom itself was a wholesaler, and that through or from those customers were routed calls from millions of individual callers each month. Those callers were customers not just of the four wholesale customers of Hi-Tech but in some cases, of other wholesale telecommunication companies who in turn were customers of one or other of Hi-Tech's customers. 
On its proper construction, the request required Hi-Tech to identify all telephone numbers of all those customers of all those other wholesalers. In my view, that was not reasonable and, in failing to give that information, Hi-Tech did not breach clause 4.1. I should note that the data that Hi-Tech did provide to Mr Rooke included the telephone numbers of all the customers of all those wholesalers whose calls had been routed through Hi-Tech and through RSL Com. 
Breach by RSL Com  
It was not disputed that RSL Com had failed to supply to Mr Rooke all the information requested by him. Nor could that be disputed, having regard to the terms of the request for information made of RSL Com on 5 May 2011. 
There was some debate as to whether the breaches were great or trivial. It is not necessary to resolve that debate. 
Conclusion on the first issue  
I conclude that Hi-Tech breached clause 4.1 of the deed by failing to supply the information requested in items 2 and 2.2 of the request for information dated 4 May 2011 (and in the earlier iterations of those requests to which I have referred). I conclude, further, that RSL Com breached clause 4.1 of the deed in the manner alleged by Hi-Tech as set out above. 
In those circumstances, it is not necessary to consider whether, on the facts that have been found, either Hi-Tech or RSL breached clause 11 as well. 
Second issue: entitlement to terminate  
It was, as I have said, common ground that clause 4.1 was an intermediate term of the deed. (See Koompahtoo Local Aboriginal Land Council versus Sanpine Pty Ltd <case>; <case> to [52].) In those circumstances, as was explained in Koompahtoo at [49], termination for breach of an intermediate term can be justified where the breach deprives the other party of substantially the whole benefit that it was intended it should obtain from the contract. In more general words, as was explained in Koompahtoo at [50], the right to terminate should be restricted "to cases where breach occasions serious prejudice". 
In this case, the effect of Hi-Tech's prolonged and repeated failures to comply with Mr Rooke's requests for information meant that Mr Rooke was unable to complete stage 2 of his task, which of course had to be completed before he could proceed to stage 3 (the preparation and issue of his expert opinion). As a result, the quantification of any amount owed by Hi-Tech to RSL Com has been delayed. 
In my view, when one looks at the nature and the extent of the delay, and at the failure to give any satisfactory explanation (apart from the "ships passing in the night" theory which was not supported by any evidence and which I do not accept), it is clear that the delay was sufficiently serious to justify termination. It should not be forgotten, in this context, that: the request had been made first of all in February 2010 and repeated in
December 2010;  the replies given to Mr Rooke on 15 September 2010 were not accurate, because what was supplied did not include all the call data that he had requested (and neither was the deficiency pointed out); 
RSL Com's solicitors had complained on three occasions about Hi-Tech's failures to comply with the requests, and had warned repeatedly that RSL Com might terminate the deed. 
In those circumstances, I conclude that RSL Com was justified in terminating the deed once it became apparent (when it received a copy of the request for information of 4 May 2011) that Hi-Tech was still in default. 
In addition, in my view, the unexplained conduct of Hi-Tech in failing to answer Mr Rooke's questions fully, despite their repetition and the warnings to which I have referred, justifies the inference that it was not prepared to perform its obligations under clause 4.1 of the deed in accordance with its terms. That inference is strengthened by the fact that the answer given on 9 March 2011 was wrong, and materially misleading. Thus, in my view, it is open to conclude, as I do, that Hi-Tech repudiated the deed and its obligations under it. RSL Com is entitled to rely, in these proceedings, on that repudiation as justifying its termination. See Shepherd versus Felt & Textiles of Australia Ltd <case>; [(1931) 45 CLR 359.] 
Third issue: did RSL lose the right to terminate?  
Mr Kelly submitted that, because RSL Com was itself in breach of its obligations under clause 4.1, it was not in a position to rely on any breach on the part of Hi-Tech to terminate. That submission seems to me to confuse termination for breach (by which I mean actual, or present, or existing breach) or repudiation with termination for anticipatory breach. It is clear, in my view, that where there is, on the part of one party to a contract, an actual breach that entitles the other party to terminate, the other party does not lose that right merely because it is itself in breach of a non-essential term. See Almond Investors Ltd versus Kualitree Nursery Pty Ltd  <case> at <case> (Bathurst CJ, with whom Giles JA and Handley AJA agreed). 
Mr Kelly strove valiantly to maintain that any breach on his client's part was an anticipatory breach. I do not agree. By 4 May 2011 (and, more relevantly, as at 12 May 2011), his client was in longstanding and substantial breach of its obligations under clause 4.1. The fact that the breach might continue into the future does not convert it from a present or actual breach into an anticipatory breach. 
I conclude that it was open to RSL Com, notwithstanding that it was itself in breach of clause 4.1, to rely on Hi-Tech's breaches of that clause to terminate the deed when, on 12 May 2011, it did so. 
Fourth issue: specific performance or damages  
This issue does not arise. However, I record that Mr Pritchard accepted that, if I were to conclude that the termination was not valid, it would be appropriate to order specific performance rather than to leave Hi-Tech to its remedy in damages. 
Conclusions and orders  
RSL Com's termination of the deed was justified. The action fails. The summons must be dismissed with costs, and I so order. The exhibits should be retained and dealt with in accordance with the rules. 
Mr Pritchard sought a declaration that the deed had been validly terminated, and directions for the conduct of the 2008 proceedings. 
RSL Com did not file a cross-summons making a cross-claim for declaratory relieve. In those circumstances, it is not appropriate to grant declaratory relief. Nor is there any utility in doing so where the validity of the termination is in any event the basis for the orders just made, and the parties are (so long as those orders stand) estopped from contending otherwise. 
It is appropriate that the 2008 proceedings should be prepared for hearing. Accordingly, I list proceedings 290452/2008 for directions on 9 September 2011. * * * 
