

Pont Data Australia P/L (In Liq) versus G P Moore [1996] NSWSC 15 (30 January )

PONT DATA AUSTRALIA P/L (IN LIQ) versus GREGORY PHILLIP MOORE & 3 ORS /95 
THURSDAY 25 JANUARY 1996 
SMART J 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Gregory Phillip Moore has applied to the Court to discharge the orders made by Simos J on 19 December 1995. On that day his Honour, by consent of the plaintiff and the third defendant, Gronnin Investments Pty Ltd., and after hearing Mrs Moore, made orders that Mr Moore as soon as reasonably practicable deliver to the official liquidator of the plaintiff, or as he directs, stock certificate 6243 in respect of 375,000 fully paid and non-assessable shares of the common stock no par value in the capital of the fourth defendant registered in the name of the plaintiff, irrevocable stock power, irrevocable general proxy and stock assignment separate from certificate. 
There were consequential orders for the sale of the shares and the application of the proceeds of sale.

A statement of claim has been filed which reveals a fairly complex security picture and seeks relief in a number of areas.

The orders as made on 19 December 1995 contained no undertaking as to damages.
The plaintiff has stated that at all times it was intended that it would give such an undertaking. It was not incorporated in the orders and that requires rectification.

Mr Moore, has sought an undertaking more extensive than the usual undertaking as to damages. The plaintiff is in liquidation and there is no evidence as to the plaintiff's assets and general financial position.

The materials do not suggest that there is any particular person who should be called upon to give a personal undertaking. Sometimes when a particular person will obtain the benefit of any suit or orders the Court may require an undertaking to be given by the person who is going to receive that benefit.

When an official liquidator is seeking to discharge his duties, the form of the undertaking normally receives special consideration. It is an unusual case where a liquidator is required to give a personal undertaking. This case does not fall into that category.

There are cases where the injunction, although interlocutory in nature, has a far-reaching and permanent effect. In such cases the substantial merits play a large part in the Court's approach to the matter.

Initially in 1989 it was intended that Momdav Investments No 3 Ltd would advance up to $2.5million to Pont Trustee Ltd and that that advance would be supported by securities provided in various forms by guarantors. Various agreements were executed to give effect to this arrangement.

The plaintiff provided security by way of a stock pledge agreement, a form of
American security. It was executed in about December 1989 and the plaintiff pledged all its 375,000 shares of no par value common stock in PC Quote Inc represented by share certificate No 6243. The shares (or share scrip) and associated documents were held by the pledgeholder upon the terms set out in the agreement.

Under Clause 4 the secured party Momdav was to notify the pledge holder in writing of the repayment in full of the loan and upon receipt of this notice the pledge holder was to deliver to the plaintiff the relevant documents.
There was provision as to what should happen in the case of default. In essence, the shares could be sold.

There was default and some $2.4million was realised by way of sales by Momdav to Gronnin Investments Pty Ltd of the assets charged with repayment of the loan.

There is a reference in the documents to $2.2million being owing. $2.4 million is probably enough to cover what was outstanding.

By an agreement dated 3 September 1991 between the plaintiff, Momdav and
Gronnin what was purported to be sold to Gronnin for $100,000 was all the assets of the plaintiff. There was no specific mention of the shares of the plaintiff in PC Quote Inc.

An ultimate question is what was sold under the agreement and whether that included the plaintiff's shares in PC Quote Inc. If it did there is a question whether that sale was within power. Even if were, the sale is challenged as being at a gross undervalue. The sale price appears to be low.

Mr Moore protests that if he complies with Simos J's orders he exposes himself to a real risk of being held accountable for any loss occasioned by the delivery of the share scrip and subsequent sale of the shares. Gronnin could not sue because of its consent to the sale. That leaves Momdav.

At least at one stage Mr Moore controlled Momdav, a Cook Islands company. He made an admission at an interview with counsel for the liquidator to this effect. He has signed documents on behalf of Momdav. There has been no evidence from Mr Moore of any change in the position, and that is a matter within his knowledge.

On the materials the suggestion of any risk so far as Mr Moore is concerned varies from slight to non-existent. There appears to be a strong case on the plaintiff's part. Objection was taken as to the delay by the liquidator, but he explained the position in par 12 of his affidavit of 15 December 1995. He was awaiting Mr Moore's return to the jurisdiction.

The share price history for PC Quote Inc reveals that between 1 June 1995 and January 1996 the shares have fluctuated in price from $1.375 per share to $21.25 to $11 as at 22 January 1996. The shares should be sold while they are at a reasonable level.

Upon the whole of the circumstances and subject to the liquidator filing by
Tuesday 30 January 1996 an affidavit that there remains approximately $200,000 in the company, which should cover costs, Simos J's orders should not be discharged. They are made upon the plaintiff company giving the usual undertaking as to damages.

I reserve all questions of costs.

Any party may apply to the Court on two days' notice.
 * * * 
