

Vihas versus Uri Printing Industries Pty Limited Matter No 20525/95 [1997]
NSWSC 313 (15 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Vihas versus URI Printing Industries Pty Limited /95 August 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /95 - Vihas versus URI Printing Industries Pty Limited 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 13 June 1995. A claim is made for damages arising out of personal injury. The personal injury occurred whilst the plaintiff was assisting in the unloading of pallets of stacked cardboard from a truck on 12 June 1992. 
The pleading alleges that a forklift driver cut the straps holding the cardboard. It alleges negligence on the part of the defendant as employer.

A Notice of Motion was filed on 13 May 1997. It has since been amended. Relief is sought under section 151D(2) of the Workers Compensation Act, 1987 (the
WC Act) and section 52(4) of the Motor Accidents Act, 1988 (the MA Act).

The application is opposed. There has been dispute between insurers as to the conduct of the proceedings on behalf of the defendant. The workers' compensation insurer presently has the conduct of the proceedings on behalf of the defendant. Mercantile Mutual Insurance (Australia) Limited (MMI) is the insurer under the MA Act. By consent, it was given leave to appear for the purposes of opposing the relief claimed under that Act.

The plaintiff relies on two affidavits. One has been sworn by his solicitor (Lynne Booth). One has been sworn by the plaintiff himself. Neither deponent was cross-examined.

The plaintiff has described the incident in the following terms:- "3. I was employed by the Defendant as a printer's offsider and just prior to my injury I was requested by one of the Managers of the Defendant to assist in unloading pallets of printing jobs from the back of a truck in the loading dock of the premises where I was employed.
It was necessary for me to get into the back of the truck to assist another employee in this procedure and there was also a forklift assisting in the unloading.
I was injured when a strap that was holding the printing job was cut by another employee and the printing job fell down on top of me." 
He completed a Workers' Compensation Claim Form on 22 June 1992. After lodging the Claim, the defendant's workers' compensation insurer accepted liability and made payments to the plaintiff pursuant to the WC Act.

In about April 1993, he sought legal advice from Geoffrey Edwards & Co. He received advice as to his rights under the WC Act. No mention was made of any entitlements under the MA Act.

On 24 May 1993, he approached his present solicitors. He received advice and understood that his entitlements were under the WC Act. In or about November , advice was sought from Counsel concerning the rights of the plaintiff, other than pursuant to the WC Act. It had been ascertained that the forklift was unregistered and that the incident did not take place on a public street.
Consideration was directed towards the fault of the forklift driver and as to whether such fault would justify the making of a claim under the MA Act. The question of potential liability arising out of the use of the truck was overlooked. After becoming aware that the plaintiff's weekly payments were to be discontinued as from 4 April 1994, he sought further advice from his solicitors and instructed them to commence proceedings in the Compensation
Court. The proceedings were listed for hearing on 21 June 1995.

Prior to the hearing, conferences were had with Counsel. On 8 June 1995, he received advice that the contents of medical reports were suggestive that the quantum of his claim was sufficient to commence Common Law proceedings against his employer. After considering this advice, he instructed his solicitors to discontinue the proceedings in the Compensation Court and to commence Common
Law proceedings.

The plaintiff says that, at that stage, he was unaware that the incident in which he suffered his injury might be regarded as a motor accident. It seems that his solicitors did not give him any advice concerning that matter until about January 1996. He was then requested to report the accident to the local police and to complete a Claim Form.

In the present proceedings, the claimed damages are to be assessed pursuant to the WC Act. By reason of miscalculation and error on the part of the plaintiff's solicitor, it was thought that the relevant limitation period expired on 13 June 1995. The correct date was 12 June 1995. Accordingly, the proceedings were commenced one day out of time.

The defendant filed a Statement of Defence on 23 August 1995. It pleaded, inter alia, a failure to comply with the requirements of the MA Act. This defence led to the plaintiff's solicitors seeking further advice from Counsel.
Advice was received from Counsel in about January 1996. This advice recommended that a claim should be made pursuant to the MA Act.

Information was sought from the defendant (concerning the forklift). The defendant did not respond to the request. Notice of claim was given under the
MA Act under cover of letter dated 18 April 1996. This claim was made against the defendant as the owner of the forklift.

In about July 1996, further advice was received from Counsel. At that time, it was first appreciated that the plaintiff may have a claim under the MA Act arising out of the use of the truck.

In September 1996, it was ascertained that the truck was registered and owned by the defendant. A further notice of claim was then served on the insurer.
This took place on 2 October 1996. It was founded on an allegation of negligence arising out of the use of the truck.

The Court has been informed that the plaintiff reported the accident to the police. In October 1996, MMI requested a full and satisfactory explanation for delay. The plaintiff responded by letter dated 8 November 1996. A copy of that letter is in evidence. The explanation has not been rejected.

Both sections 151D(2) and 52(4) confer a discretionary power to grant leave.
The discretion is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before the Court and so that justice is best served between the parties. In the case of section 52(4), the question of leave is to be considered in the context of the form that the provision had prior to the making of the 1995 amendments.

If leave is given under section 52(4), the claim cannot be maintained in the existing proceedings. The plaintiff will have to commence fresh proceedings pursuant to such leave. Both the reporting of the accident and the giving of notice of the claim took place after the commencement of the proceedings. MMI has made it clear that it will rely on the relevant statutory provisions by way of defence in such proceedings.

The defendant says that the plaintiff was clearly injured in a motor accident.
The insurer propounds the opposite view. Each contends that a grant of leave would be a futile exercise.

For present purposes, the relevant question is whether or not there has been fault in the use of a motor vehicle by the defendant (see sections 9 and 40).
This question has been considered in a number of cases. Specific reference was made to NRMA Insurance Limited versus NSW Grain Corp [(1995) 22 MVR 317.] The authorities demonstrate that loading and unloading incidents may involve use of a motor vehicle. It is clear that each case will turn on its own particular circumstances. There will be many situations in which the position will not be clear.

Generally speaking, it is not a question which will fall to be determined on the hearing of an application for leave. Largely, it is a question which should be left for determination at a trial.

In the present case, the position is not clear. Both contentions are arguable.
There are matters (including the fact that the plaintiff was on the back of the truck at the time of the incident) which may indicate fault involving a relevant use of the motor vehicle. There are matters (including the fact that the strap was cut by another employee) which may indicate that the fault did not involve the use of a motor vehicle. In the particular circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that it would be futile to grant leave under either provision.

The delay itself is not said to be of great significance in this case. Some stress has been placed on what was said in Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866] (see also BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7 March 1997)). In my view, the delay has been sufficiently explained. Principally, it has been occasioned by error on the part of the plaintiff's legal advisers. This matter has been candidly disclosed in the affidavit evidence. This is yet another one of those cases in which the legal practitioners have found it difficult to come to grips with the complexities and idiosyncrasies of the relevant legislation. I do not see that matter as one which should preclude the plaintiff in this case from obtaining the relief sought. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff is not able to give a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay on his part.

There is no evidence of actual prejudice. It is not disputed that there is presumptive prejudice and that this is a matter which is to be taken into account.

There is no issue that the plaintiff's claim has a potential of significance.
If leave is not given under the relevant provision, he will not be entitled to pursue it. If leave is granted, there will be loss of a limitation defence.

The questions that fall to be determined in this case involve the Court in the performance of a balancing exercise. The onus is borne by the plaintiff. In my view, that onus has been discharged. I consider that justice is best done between the parties if leave is granted under both provisions.

Accordingly, I grant leave pursuant to both section 151D(2) and section 52(4).
The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion. Any fresh proceedings are to be commenced within 28 days. Any amendment to the existing process is to be made within that same period (some amendment to the claim under the WC Act may be necessary).

During the course of submissions, the question of the claims being prosecuted in the District Court was discussed. I understand that the parties are presently giving consideration to that matter. In the light of the jurisdictional changes that are taking place, the District Court would seem to be the appropriate jurisdiction for the prosecution of the claims.
 * * * 
