

Regina versus James Norman Clairmont [1997] NSWSC 186 (9 May 1997) 
REGINA v. James Norman CLAIRMONT /96 
Friday, 9 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: James Norman Clairmont seeks leave to appeal against the severity of sentences imposed upon him, being a minimum term of 12 months with an additional term of 4 months for demanding money with menaces and a concurrent fixed term of 6 months for stealing in a dwelling.

Byron was a married man aged 51 years with 2 children. Prior to 8 May 1996 he had had the odd homosexual liaison. On that day he drove his car to the public toilets in Mason's Parade, Gosford. He was hoping to pick up an accommodating male and found one. Byron took the applicant to his car and back to the family home. They went to bed and engaged in sexual activities. After a period they dressed. The applicant, at some stage, removed some $600 from Byron's wallet.
Byron did not become aware of this until later. Most of the money was subsequently recovered. Byron drove the applicant back to Gosford.

The following morning the applicant telephoned Byron at his home and told him to meet the applicant in Morundah Avenue, Davistown. The time appointed was about 2.45 pm. Byron was to bring a substantial sum with him. The applicant stated that he realised that Byron would not be able to get $5000 that day but it had to be at least $1000. The applicant further said that if Byron did not turn up by 2.50 pm the applicant would telephone Byron's wife at work and tell her about her husband. The applicant enquired as to how much Byron valued his marriage as something like that could wreck it. The applicant told Byron not to even think about going to the police.

Byron told his wife what had happened and went to the police station. Byron and the applicant attended at Davistown about the nominated time. Byron handed an envelope to the applicant who took it.

The judge accepted the evidence of the applicant's uncle that the applicant's stated motive was greed and that he wanted extra money. The uncle also stated that the applicant was remorseful.

The judge accepted that the applicant had had a deprived background. He was a hard worker who had been in regular employment. A number of previous employers spoke well of him. His past history contained a few minor offences. The only one of any relevance was theft as a servant on 6 August 1995. He had nothing approaching demanding money with menaces. The judge took into account the applicant's plea of guilty at the first opportunity.

The applicant, in the course of his submissions, contended that there had been no real menace involved and that the nature of what he had done had been blown out of all proportion. He had never intended, he said, to blackmail Byron. The terms of the demand and the manner in which it was conveyed indicated that it was serious.

It is hard to accept that the applicant removed $600 from Byron's wallet because of feelings of disgust, nor is it easy to accept that it was his anger, guilt, embarrassment and disgust at the way Byron had used him that caused him to make the demands which he did. I can understand the applicant feeling guilty, embarrassed, conveying his disgust and wanting to frighten
Byron. However, he attended at the rendezvous, or in the area of the rendezvous, which he had designated to collect the money. The applicant had obtained considerable information about Byron and his family and he used that.

The applicant has pointed out that this was the first time he had been placed in custody. He submitted that this incident was an isolated one, totally out of character and repugnant to his values and prior code of conduct.
Unfortunately the incident was a serious one and the applicant persisted over some hours.

The applicant and his sister have stressed that he is needed to assist with the care of his father who suffers from an advanced stage of motor neuron disease. His father lives in New Zealand and it would be impractical, if not impossible for him to travel to see the applicant. Similarly, it would be impracticable for the Authorities to grant the applicant leave on compassionate grounds to visit his father in New Zealand.

The applicant had told this Court that he was not alerted to the kind of sentence which he could receive prior to appearing before the Judge and that he did not understand that he was likely to receive a custodial sentence of the length in question.

The applicant has told us that his father's condition has deteriorated and that he is now paralysed and in a wheelchair. We do not have any medical evidence of recent date as to the father's long-term prognosis. Although there was a reference in the probation report to the father's condition, that matter was not developed before the Judge. The condition was probably not nearly so serious at that stage. The report of Dr Riaan Windt of 7 February 1997 refers to the disease being particularly progressive during December 1996 and January .

Although I can feel considerable sympathy for the applicant's desire to return to New Zealand and look after his father, the circumstances disclosed in the evidence are not such as to justify this Court in reducing the sentence. They do not fit the category of being "truly exceptional" within the authorities by which this Court is bound.

The applicant is entitled to seek administrative action on soundly based medical reports whereby he can, in certain circumstances, be granted compassionate leave, but that is not a matter for this Court.

There is no substance in the applicant's complaints that the sentence was wrong in law or that the penalty did not fit the crime, or that he was denied natural justice. While I would grant the applicant leave to appeal, the appeal must be dismissed.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders will be as proposed.
 * * * 
