

Strathallan Investments P/L and 3 Ors versus Janusz Mark Nizik and Anor [1997]
NSWSC 24 (12 February 1997) 
STRATHALLAN INVESTMENTS PTY LTD & 3 ORS versus JANUSZ MARK NIZIK & ANOR /95 
Wednesday, 12 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
CONSTRUCTION LIST 
HUNTER J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I have been informed in relation to this matter that the reasons which occasioned its adjournment yesterday persist today, in that Janusz Mark Nizik whom I shall refer to as the defendant, has been arrested on extremely serious criminal charges involving William John Padget whom I will refer to as Padget in these reasons.

Rather than face a further adjournment and the incurring of additional costs the parties, in my respectful view with great common sense, have agreed that I should proceed to deal with this matter on the written submissions of the parties, and in the absence of the defendant.

The Notice of Motion seeks orders that, inter alia, - "Janusz Mark Nizik be committed to prison or otherwise punished for his contempt of Court upon the grounds set forth in the accompanying Statement of
Charge." and particularises the subject contempt in the statement of charge in the following way: "1.1 attempted to influence certain witnesses to be called by the Plaintiff's in proceedings number 55022 of 1995 by sending the attached newspaper article to each of them namely: .1.1 Matthew Lennon Druce; .1.2 Noel Davis; .1.3 Allan Cummins; .1.4 Dale Jennings; .1.5 Graeme Gilbert Smedley; .1.6 Les Pracey; .1.7 Stuart Jacobs; .1.8 Stephen Richmond; .2 attempted to influence the solicitor for the Plaintiff in proceedings number 55022 of 1996 by sending the attach (sic) newspaper article to him." 
The defendant is one of several defendants in proceedings brought by Padget in the Common Law Division of this court (the proceedings). The proceedings involve disputes concerning the construction of residential buildings in suburban Sydney. Cross-claims have been made in the proceedings involving issues of professional liability and negligence and insurance issues of a professional indemnity nature.

In accordance with the directions of this court, the parties have filed and served statements of the evidence in chief of persons who may be called to give evidence in the proceedings.

Some time in 1991 there appeared in the newspaper the Sydney Morning Herald, a report of court proceedings which was in the following terms: "Judge cuts sword man down to size 
By JACQUELYN HOLE 
An antique dealer who brandished a samurai sword outside his neighbour's home in Tobruk Avenue, Cremorne, was in danger of being known as the "ratbag of
Tobruk", a District Court judge said yesterday.

William John Padget's flamboyant response to the late night skateboarding practices of his neighbour's son was all out of proportion, Judge Harry Bell said.

Padget, 51, was found guilty of offensive behaviour after he allegedly requested his neighbour, Mr Terrance McNally, to "come down here you gutless wonder" at midnight on January 24, 1987.

Judge Bell did not accept Padget's claims that he issued the challenge "because of his desire to clear up any ill-feeling" and that the sword was a "prop for his declining years or to compensate for his rugger knee".

However, he said Mr and Mrs McNally were on their balcony and could not have been reasonably believed they were about to be assaulted.

He placed Padget on a three year good behaviour bond and ordered him to pay $500." 
At various times in November 1996 copies of that article were sent by the defendant to the solicitor for Padget and to several persons whose statements of evidence had been filed and served upon the defendant on behalf of Padget and his co-plaintiffs.

By his affidavit sworn 3 February 1997, the defendant disputed service of the statement of charge upon him but otherwise admitted the salient facts in the following terms: "3. In respect of the matters charged against me, I say that I sent copies of a newspaper article to a number of witnesses involved in this case. Exhibited to me at the time of swearing this affidavit is a copy of the affidavit of
Dennis Grant sworn 23 December 1996 and I say that annexure "A" to that affidavit is a copy of the relevant newspaper article.
I say that the newspaper article was printed in the Sydney Morning Herald in or about 1991 and it does not relate in any way to the present substantive proceedings.
I sent the article to the following people: .1 Matthew Lennon Druce; .2 Noel Davis; .3 Allan Cummins; .4 Dale Jennings; .5 Graeme Gilbert Smedley; .6 Les Pracey; .7 Stuart Jacobs; .8 Stephen Richmond. " 
The issue concerning service of the statement of charge has not been pursued by the defendant, and I am satisfied from the affidavit of Robert Canning sworn 3 January 1997 that the Notice of Motion, the statement of charge and related affidavits were duly served upon the defendant in relation to these contempt proceedings.

Of his conduct in so distributing the newspaper article to likely witnesses for Padget and to Padget's solicitor, the defendant stated that his "intention was not to prejudice the outcome of the (proceedings), nor to intimidate the witnesses in any way". Rather he said it was his intention "just to let them know what type of man Mr Padget was".

The defendant went on to state in his affidavit that the seriousness of his actions had been explained to him by his solicitor and he made "an unreserved apology" to the recipients of the article and to this court, and at the same time gave an unconditional undertaking not to repeat such actions.

It has been accepted that that statement of intention should be read as a statement of intention to let witnesses for the plaintiffs not only know what type of man Mr Padget was, but also to cause his likely witnesses to carefully consider their association with him as a witness in the proceedings.

It has been submitted on behalf of Padget that the contents of the article were "pejorative" and included imputations that: "(a) Mr Padget was a 'ratbag'; 
Mr Padget was inclined to make threats and act irrationally; 
Mr Padget was not a man of truth; 
Mr Padget had been found guilty of offensive behaviour".

It was further submitted that the conduct of the defendant could only have been intended to influence and/or intimidate the plaintiffs' possible witnesses in the evidence they were to give in the proceedings, or alternatively to bring improper pressure to bear upon the plaintiffs.

If the court recognised an offence of inanity in the face of the court in the form of contempt, this case would present no difficulty in finding the requisite ingredients of such contempt. Fortunately for the defendant, there is no such offence. It is common ground that the nature of the contempt of which the defendant stands charged is criminal contempt. For the offence to be established, it is necessary to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that as a matter of practical reality the conduct of the defendant had a clear tendency to interfere with the due course of justice in the proceedings. (See Attorney
General of New South Wales versus John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd [1 NSWLR ], citing John
Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd versus Macrae <case>; [(1955) 93 CLR 351] and see The Civil Aviation Authority versus Australian
Broadcasting Corporation [(1995) 39 NSWLR 541.)] 
As to the intention of the defendant in distributing the articles to Padget's possible witnesses and to his solicitor, I think it has little if any bearing on that critical question; somewhat surprisingly in my respectful opinion notwithstanding that the contempt is of a criminal nature, the authorities have given a very limited role to the subjective intention of the alleged contemptor; see Civil Aviation Authority and the authorities there referred to at 567 et seq.

I do not share the analysis of the article as presented in the submissions on behalf of Padget as quoted earlier in these reasons. The body of the article and its heading each have a facetiousness or waggish flavour which tends to put Padget in a somewhat ridiculous light which no doubt encouraged the trial judge to indulge in a play on words in describing Padget as being "in danger of being known as the ratbag of Tobruk".

While the article discloses that Padget was found guilty of offensive behaviour, a charge of assault was dismissed, and while the article revealed that Padget's explanation for his behaviour was not accepted by the judge, those features, in my opinion, do not detract from the bizarre and not unamusing circumstances disclosed by the article.

It will be apparent from my description of the issues in these proceedings, that the subject matter of the article has absolutely no bearing upon those issues. I am further of the opinion that publication of the article to the witnesses for Padget and to his solicitor, assuming that they had been unaware of the publicity previous to the distribution of the article by the defendant, would be unlikely to have any effect at all upon their role as witnesses in the proceedings, and I can find little potential of a tendency to interfere with the course of justice as the result of the contempt of the defendant, regardless of his intention as I have earlier described it.

In the circumstances, I am of the opinion that there has been no contempt as charged and the motion is dismissed.

There remains the question of costs. In the circumstances I am not disposed to make any order as to costs. I have earlier described the conduct of the defendant as inane to which one could add the characteristic of being mischievous. It is more a case of the defendant's good fortune that his unwarranted conduct does not amount to a case of criminal contempt of court.

In the circumstances of this case, I think it was reasonable for Padget to bring these proceedings and although he has failed, I am not prepared to visit that failure with an order for costs in favour of the defendant.
 * * * 
