

Keane versus West Australian Trustees Limited; Clarke versus West Australian
Trustees Limited Matter Nos 10381/91 [1997] NSWSC 272 (25 July 1997) 
Dennis John Keane versus West Australian Trustees Limited & Ors /91 
Jeffrey Terence Clarke versus West Australian Trustees Limited & Anor /92 July 1997 
Adams AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /91: DENNIS JOHN KEANE versus WEST AUSTRALIAN TRUSTEES LIMITED & ORS.
 /92: JEFFREY TERENCE CLARKE versus WEST AUSTRALIAN TRUSTEES LIMITED & ANOR.

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Dennis John Keane and Jeffrey Terence Clarke are plaintiffs in separate actions against defendants associated with premises at 580 George Street, Sydney where they were seriously injured on 22 October 1969. The plaintiffs fell a distance of some thirty feet over the balustrade on a flight of stairs leading from the mezzanine level of the building down to the ground floor. They had been lunching over a period of five hours or so in a Chinese restaurant on the mezzanine level. Others present at the lunch were Darryl Middleton, Rod Shepherd and Monica Manser. Not surprisingly, there was some uncertainty about the precise times of arrival and departure but nothing really turns on this. 
The plaintiffs, Mr Middleton and Ms Manser (married to Geoffrey Clarke) all gave evidence. More or less contemporaneous documents demonstrate that the lunch, which commenced at about 1.30 pm, finished about 6.30 pm. I fixed this latter time by reference to the records which show that the call for the ambulance took place at 6.53 pm. It seems reasonably clear that the lunch was a combined social and business occasion. I accept that all persons present with the exception of Ms Manser drank wine and beer and perhaps some spirits during this period. I am satisfied that both plaintiffs were somewhat affected by alcohol but neither of them was by any means drunk. Ms Manser (who was a nurse) told the ambulance officer after the accident that the plaintiffs "had a lot to drink" but she explained that expression as a warning in the context to the medical officer who had to deal with obviously seriously injured persons. At all events, this could only have been her impression. I do not think that this observation materially contradicts either the thrust of her evidence or the evidence of the plaintiffs.

The first and second defendants called a Mr Harper who was working on that evening as a security officer in the building. He was able to observe the mezzanine floor area immediately outside the restaurant and the stairs which led down to the ground floor by means of a video television camera which periodically exhibited an image of that area on monitors within the security room. He said that he noticed the plaintiffs "sort of staggering" out of the restaurant towards the stairs, one having his arm around the shoulders of the other. He said they were "not walking normally like most people walk, they were holding on to each other, sort of playing around a bit". He said they were under his observation for about five or six seconds. He said that they seemed to be playing some sort of game or something like that involving, so I gather, grabbing hold of each other perhaps like play fighting.

Under cross-examination, however, Mr Harper (who I accept as a truthful witness) was unable to describe in any sensible way what it was that he had seen which led him to describe their behaviour in this way. It is significant that he only had them under observation for a very short time, his attention having been brought to them when he observed them first out of the corner of his eye. His observations of them also were from the side. I do not consider that this evidence materially affects the conclusion which I have already expressed as to the extent of the plaintiffs' intoxication. I think that Mr
Harper was not describing a distinct recollection of what he saw but rather was reconstructing an impression of movement. I draw this conclusion not only from the vagueness of his description but the mode in which he gave his evidence which seemed to me to be associated with a significant degree of hesitation.

It is unnecessary for present purposes to analyse in any detail the accounts given by the various witnesses as to how they departed from the restaurant.
Considered as a whole and bearing in mind the time frame involved I do not think that there were any material differences such as to reflect upon the essential reliability of the accounts given by the plaintiffs. It is clear that Mr Keane preceded Mr Clarke down the stairs by a few seconds involving a distance between them of perhaps two or three steps.

Mr Clarke is 183 centimetres tall, a shade over six feet and, at the date of the accident weighed about 122 kilograms. Mr Keane is 186 centimetres tall or about six feet two inches and at the time of relatively slim build. These physical characteristics are significant because they help explain how this accident happened.

Mr Keane's evidence was that he was walking down the stairs on the right-hand side when, as he got to about the third step, he heard sort of a grunt or gasp behind him and, as he glanced around, Mr Clarke fell onto his left shoulder.
Mr Keane tried to anchor himself on the railing down to his right, his left hand virtually around underneath him with one hand on the railing but he felt his buttocks slide down the railing and collide with his hand so that he lost his grip and the next moment the two men went over the top of the balustrade.
The accident plainly happened very quickly and although there was some confusion evident in Mr Keane's account I am satisfied that he was attempting to describe it accurately as best he could. An essential element of the accident was that Mr Clarke fell onto him from above and at an angle which forced them both over the balustrade. I am satisfied that there was no skylarking or any other inappropriate behaviour at the top of the stairs. I have no doubt that Mr Keane preceded Mr Clarke nor that they were separated by two or three stairs as they commenced their descent. It is also clear that Mr
Clarke "cannoned" into Mr Keane from an angle to the balustrade such as to force Mr Keane as it were against the balustrade rather than simply down the stairs. Although it was suggested to Mr Keane in cross-examination by Mr
Hoeben on behalf of the first and second defendants that he and Mr Clarke were proceeding together down the stairs, one with his arm around the other and that they together overbalanced at about the second or third step, then falling over the side, there was no evidentiary basis for such a scenario.
Having regard to the accident itself, quite apart from the evidence of Mr
Keane and Mr Clarke which I accept, this simply could not, I think, have been the way in which the accident happened. I find it very difficult to envisage how it would have resulted in Mr Clarke being forced against Mr Keane at a significant angle to the balustrade rather than simply toppling them down the stairs.

It is convenient to describe the balustrade at this stage. Two "handrails" are provided as part of the structure of the balustrade. The height of the top surface of the top "handrail" is 910 millimetres above the nosing of the step.
In cross-section it is approximately 50 millimetres deep and 196 millimetres wide, with rounded edges. It is obvious that this rail was intended to permit steadying whilst descending the stairs but that it could not be adequately gripped in the event of serious imbalance. If there were any significant mis- step I think it likely that this rail would not provide any real assistance to a person who was off-balance even if they were falling down the stairs rather than off them. If, however, the direction of imbalance was against the balustrade then, to my mind, this rail would act only as a barrier and not as providing any significant support from gripping. Essentially, this is because it does not permit the opposing of thumb and fingers. It seems to me obvious that the grip provided by opposing fingers and palm will be relatively slight and easily broken. Underneath the top rail was fixed a further rail which was circular in cross-section, 36 millimetres in diameter, its top being 50 millimetres from the bottom of the top rail. This rail was fixed in such a position that its outside edge was four millimetres inside the outside edge of the top rail. The top of this rail was 805 millimetres above the nosing of the step. It will be readily appreciated that the position of this secondary rail was such that it could only be grasped with some awkwardness having regard to the overhang of the top rail. More significantly in the circumstances of this case, any grip on the secondary handrail would be broken by the leverage exerted by the top rail if the arm were moving outwards and off the stairs. It is clear, therefore, from the design alone that the balustrade was such as to enable persons to steady themselves as they went down the stairs (and even then appears to be inadequate if the person was off balance in a significant or serious way) and provided merely the protection of a barrier against movement off to the side of the stairs.

Mr Keane demonstrated to the Court on a number of occasions and attempted to describe what he did as Mr Clarke fell onto him. He showed how his right arm remained on the top rail until his movement across the rail forced him to lose such grip that he had. He was extensively cross-examined about this aspect by
Mr Joseph SC for the third defendant. He demonstrated that his right hip was against the inside edge of the top rail and Mr Clarke's weight being forced against the top of his body pushed him over the balustrade which operated, as it were, as a fulcrum, his own body knocking his hand away as he was going over. Having regard to the speed with which this event occurred, I am not surprised that Mr Keane evinced some difficulty in description and a degree of confusion about precisely where he was hit on the shoulder and what he attempted to do with his left hand in relation to gripping Mr Clarke under his armpit. However, I am satisfied that he did attempt to grip the top rail on its outside edge and that a combination of the inevitable weakness of that grip given the shape of the rail and the fulcrum-like position of the rail against his hip was a significant factor in permitting his fall 30 feet to the concrete floor below.

I turn now to Mr Clarke's description of the accident. He says that he saw Mr
Keane start to walk down the stairs as he got within a few feet of the top of the staircase. It was at this point he says that he felt his right foot slip from under him in a sharp movement. He said that he was wearing rubber soled gym boots which gripped the floor well. He was unable to say what caused him to lose his footing but thought it might have been "a lolly wrapper" or "it could have been a bit of something else". He said that he had no idea what it was. He said that his left foot which was continuing to move forward as he walked "bit into the surface of the pavement" whilst he was off balance and he continued to move forward, with the right foot going over the edge of the first stair. His imbalance was exacerbated because he had been walking quickly at the time. Mr Clarke's claim in part arose from the allegation that he slipped on some matter which ought not to have been on the floor because of the danger it represented to persons approaching the staircase. Mr Middleton who had attended the lunch with the plaintiffs had preceded them down the stairs by perhaps a minute or so said that he slipped slightly on something that looked to him like spilled food or vomit. This occurred at about half way down the first flight of stairs and, accordingly, some distance further down the stairs from where Mr Clarke slipped. Mr Harper, the security officer to whom I have already referred said that he inspected the stairs with some police officers about 20 to 30 minutes after the accident. He saw nothing on the stairs at all, in particular, nothing which could be described as vomit or spilled Chinese food. His inspection covered the area of the mezzanine floor where Mr Clarke said he slipped. In light of the state of the evidence it is not surprising that in his submissions made on behalf of Mr Clarke, Mr
Colquhoun did not press upon me an argument seeking to persuade me that Mr
Clarke slipped on some matter, the presence of which demonstrated negligence on the part of the first and second defendants.

Mr Clarke said that as he fell forward with both hands raised in a protective gesture he called out something which may have been look out to Mr Keane who was right in front of him on the third step so far as he could recall. He said that he struck Mr Keane with his chest. Mr Keane had turned around in response to the yell indicating that Mr Clarke fell towards Mr Keane at an angle of about 45 degrees or so. When he hit Mr Keane the latter's head was at Mr
Clarke's shoulder level so that he struck his shoulders and head with the top half of his torso. Mr Clarke said that he tried to grab the top handrail, with his fingers underneath the leading edge and his thumb on top but that his hand "flipped off it". He said that he was unable to grip it. He tried to dig his knees in under the top rail but he said that his right knee hit part of the grille under the handrail which knocked it out, he became entangled with Mr
Keane and they went over the side. He said that the shape of the top handrail prevented him from getting any grip and that had he been able to get a grip around a rail shaped like a pipe it may have stopped them from going over. Mr
Clarke was extensively cross-examined about his description of his fall but I am satisfied that the account that he gave in chief was essentially accurate.
It is important to note that the accident was over very quickly indeed. Mr
Clarke's account is consistent with that given by Mr Keane.

I will come to the expert evidence shortly, but, from a lay person's point of view it seems reasonable to conclude that this accident occurred because of the combination of the height of the balustrade and the fact that neither Mr
Keane nor Mr Clarke were able to get a full grasp upon the handrail. Leaving aside the question of height, I think that more probably than not had the top handrail been so shaped as to permit a full grip, this accident would not have happened.

One's first reaction to the question whether the design of the balustrade was inadequate for the purpose of ensuring safety in the circumstances is that it can be answered by the application of commonsense. It is clear, as it seems to me, that the risk that a person might stumble and fall against the balustrade as well as down the stairs is reasonably foreseeable. It is also reasonably foreseeable that contact with the balustrade might be made in circumstances where the momentum in the direction of the void was considerable.

There was a restaurant, as I have mentioned, on the first floor and it is obvious that customers might leave that restaurant to walk down the stairs in an inebriated state. It is clearly foreseeable that such persons might collide with others using the stairs. However, there are many other situations easily envisaged in which a person might stumble against another with considerable force. I think that it is also commonsense to consider, when dealing with the design of the balustrade, the range of heights and weights of persons who might use the stairway, and the utility of a handrail capable of giving optimum grip to someone who might seek to grasp it when offbalance and, in all likelihood, reacting instinctively rather than carefully. It seems to me, furthermore, that commonsense (if not high school physics) would suggest that a safe height for the balustrade would be at or above waist level, because of the risk that someone being propelled against the balustrade might find it to be a fulcrum rather than a barrier.

A number of witnesses were called by the parties as to this issue. I commence, however, with the evidence of Mr John Rayner, who was the architect practising at Rice Daubney, the third defendants at the relevant time. His role was to manage the design and documentation process in respect of the building development. He supervised a team of up to 26 architects and assistants with two senior subordinates and a team of about four senior designers and staff who prepared the detailed building drawings in accordance with the design.

The mezzanine level upon which the restaurant was situated and from which the plaintiffs were descending at the time of the accident is a wide platform forming a promenade around the large central atrium. The only public egress was the staircase in question, a set of escalators at the opposite end being provided for movement upwards only. A balustrade identical in design to that which was on the stairwell is fixed to the outside edge of the mezzanine promenade. The plans show that the height of that balustrade is 1050 mm although Doctor P.G. Towson, a chartered professional engineer called by Mr
Keane measured it at 1060 mm. The balustrade in the staircase sweeps continuously from that on the mezzanine floor. However, it commences its descent a short distance before the end of the platform. Thus the height of the balustrade at the mezzanine level is higher than its height at the stairwell. The consequence of this geometry is that, if the balustrade commenced its descent directly above the end of the platform or perhaps a little further, its height above the stair risings would have been maintained at the same height of the balustrade around the mezzanine promenade. The reason for the difference in heights was, according to Mr Rayner, that the balustrade for the stairwell was designed to provide hand support for a person rising or descending the stair whilst the balustrade for the mezzanine level was designed to prevent people from falling from the platform, as it was assumed that people would lean against the balustrade. Dealing with the appropriate height of a handrail on a stairway Mr Rayner said that it has been a standard for many years and was originally derived from an Imperial height of three feet many years ago. He pointed out that if a handrail was higher than that which is considered a normal height it becomes uncomfortable to use.
If it be too high it forces the person back and they adopt an unstable stature whilst if too low they need to lean forward and adopt again an unstable stature, it being the primary function of a handrail to steady a person as they climb or descend the staircase. Mr Rayner said that it had never been a consideration on his part in designing the height of handrails or copings (thus distinguishing parts of the balustrade) that persons might fall over the coping as they collide with another person on the stairway. When considering the height of the balustrade on a flat surface such as the mezzanine promenade in this building the possibility of such an accident is taken into account because, as Mr Rayner said, people loiter and may be expected to be in a position where they come to the balustrade and peer over. However, when asked about the possibility of someone doing the same on the staircase, he said that he considered the level of the balustrade to be satisfactory to ensure their safety. The apparent inconsistency between measuring an appropriate height on the flat as distinct from an appropriate height on the staircase was explained by the need to have a lower handrail and overall coping on the structure to permit comfortable negotiation of the stairs by a person using the coping or the handrail as a support. This answer demonstrates that Mr Rayner considered the design requirements for the balustrade on the mezzanine level and on the staircase as imposing inconsistent solutions as they perform "two different functions". However he accepted that the functions need not be contradictory.
Indeed, it is obvious from the design of the balustrade in this case that the separate handrail could have been constructed at the standard height to permit comfortable support on the staircase and the coping itself be at the same height as the balustrade on the mezzanine promenade. The measurements of the balustrade at the staircase, namely 810 mm to the top of the handrail, 910 mm to the top of the coping reflected what Mr Rayner described as "standard practice...amongst the profession". However, this standard practice did not seem to me to reflect any independent consideration by either the profession or more particularly by Mr Rayner of the particular problems posed by any site.

Furthermore, since the likelihood of imbalance is greater where there are stairs, ordinary common sense suggests that there is a greater rather than lesser need to take seriously the possibility of falling over the balustrade.
In short, if it be accepted that there was a real risk of falling off the mezzanine floor (and hence for a higher than standard balustrade) a fortiori the risk was no less on the stairway.

It is convenient at this stage I think to set out the relevant provisions of
Ordinance 70 made under the Local Government Act 1919 .
 "24.27. (1) A handrail or balustrade shall be provided along the side of any required stairway or ramp, and any corridor, hallway, external access balcony, or bridge, or the like, leading to an exit, if that side is not bounded by a wall and is more than 915 mm (or 5 risers in the case of a stairway) above the finished surface of the adjoining floor or ground, as the case may be.

A handrail shall be provided along at least one side of every flight of stairs in a required stairway and where the flight is 1,500 mm or more in width, a handrail shall be provided along each side. 
Required handrails shall be fixed at a vertical height of not less than 865 mm above - the nosings of stair treads; and the floor surface of ramps, landings, corridors, hallways, external access balconies, bridges and the like, and shall be so constructed that there will be no obstruction on or above then that will tend to break a hand hold.

Every required handrail shall be continuous between stair flight landings." " 53.9 (1) A protective balustrade or guard shall be provided along the side of any roof that is designed for use by the occupants of the building and along the side of any stairway, ramp, corridor, hallway, landing, balcony, verandah, bridge, and the like attached or appurtenant to or included in a building if that side - is not bounded by a wall; and except for a place of public entertainment, is more than 1 m (or 5 risers in the case of a stairway) above the finished level of the adjoining floor or ground.
 ...

The height of a required balustrade or guard must be at least: ,200 mm in the case of a place of public entertainment; and - mm in any other case, such height, in the case of a stairway, being measured above the nosings of the stair treads." 
The provisions as set out above contain some irrelevant amendments made after the construction of the building here in question. It will be seen that clause .27 (3) specifies the height of "handrails" should be no less than 865 mm above the nosings of stair treads and the floor surface of "landings" (such as the mezzanine promenade). If the top coping of the balustrade in this case be taken to be a "handrail" then its height of 910 mm above the step nosing would more than satisfy the requirements of Ordinance 70. On the other hand, if the lower handrail were so considered it would not satisfy the Ordinance, being only 805 mm above the step nosing. In that event the rail would fall foul also of clause 24.27 (4) as it was interrupted at intervals by the support bar. It will be seen that clause 24.27 (1) draws a distinction between a handrail and a balustrade requiring one or other should be provided along the side of any "required stairway" more than the specified distance above the floor. No submissions were put to me by any party that suggested that the stairway in question in this case was other than a "required stairway"; indeed, all parties accepted either implicitly or expressly that it was a "required stairway". It follows from clause 24.27 (2) that the stairway in question here required handrails on each side and, from clause 24.27 (3) such handrails be fixed at a height of not less than 865 mm above the nosings of the stair treads and "so constructed that there will be no obstruction on or above them that will tend to break a handhold". The case for the second and third defendants is that the top coping was a "handrail" within the meaning of
Ordinance 70. If this be correct, its height satisfied the requirements of the ordinance, there was no obstruction that might tend to break a handhold on it and it was continuous between stair flight landings. Doctor Towson, however, did not consider the coping to be a handrail within the meaning of the ordinance. He referred to a publication called the Glossary of Australian
Building and Planning Terms which, amongst other things, is material given to architecture students, according to Mr Wollaston who himself had a copy although he did not refer to it in respect of the meanings of the words "handrail" and "balustrade". The glossary defines a handrail as a railing which is grasped by the hand for support and to guard the side of a stairway, landing, platform of bridge, forming the top of the balustrade on open sides and supported on handrail brackets. The coping in this case formed the top of the balustrade and was capable of being incompletely grasped by the hand although, only with some awkwardness because of its width. It is clear from the evidence of Mr Rayner and, indeed, from observation that aside from its function as a barrier it was not expected that people would wish to grasp it, although they could do so as I have mentioned, but rather by placing a hand on it they would obtain some steadying support whilst negotiating the stairs.

It seems to me that the use of the words "hand hold" in clause 24.27 (3) of the Ordinance implies a handrail of such a shape as can be grasped by the hand in its normal or usual manner, that is to say, by the fingers and thumb being able to wrap around, although of course not necessarily completely, the rail.
I do not think that the limited grip available on the coping could be regarded in ordinary parlance as providing a "hand hold". It is obvious, for example, that the only way in which the outside portion of the coping could be gripped would be with fingers opposing the palm with the thumb forming no function.
The coping was primarily designed to provide a ledge upon which a hand would be placed to support progress up and down the stairs. To my mind such grip as it permitted did not provide a "hand hold" within the meaning of clause 24.27 and a rail which provided such a grip would not be a "handrail" within the meaning of the clause.

It is clear, however, that Mr Rayner did consider that the coping was a handrail within the meaning of the ordinance. Indeed, the plans were approved by the relevant local government authorities charged with ensuring compliance with, amongst other things, Ordinance 70. Mr Wollaston, an architect, considered that the coping could be used as a handrail and more generally, that Ordinance 70 was complied with so far as design of the balustrade was concerned. However, Mr Wallaston did agree that the implication of clause .27 (3) was that the hand hold should have a reasonable degree of firmness and stability. Mr Lumsdaine, also an architect called by the third defendant was of the view that the structure complied with Ordinance 70.

Clause 24.27 does not specify any particular measurements except in relation to height. It is clear, even to the layperson, that handrails may vary widely in shape and it is therefore scarcely surprising that a particular shape is not specified by the ordinance. However, as I have said it seems to me that the "hand hold" required must be such as to permit the natural gripping of the hand in which the thumb and fingers are opposed and at least to some degree curled around the rail. In short, it must permit the hand to "hold" the rail.
If this be the correct interpretation of the sub-clause, the coping in this case did not comply with the ordinance. The handrail beneath the coping also did not comply with the ordinance because its height was 805 mm above the stair nosing rather than the required 865 mm and also it was so placed that the coping formed a significant obstruction that would readily tend to break a hand hold. It was so positioned as to make it difficult to get at from above, which was an additional failing, although one which may not have been afoul the Ordinance.

However, even if the balustrade complied with Ordinance 70 that would not be the end of the matter since, as the expert witnesses themselves said, the ordinance merely specifies minimum standards.

Returning to Mr Rayner's position, it is clear that he did not consider, when designing the height of the balustrade on the staircase in question the possibility of a person falling over the coping as a result of a collision with another person on the stairs. Indeed it is clear that he did not consider the possibility that people might fall over the balustrade at all. It was his opinion that the height of the balustrade on the stairway was adequate if a person stopped and leant over it. However, I do not think that he gave this question any real consideration at the time the balustrade was being designed.
I am satisfied that he simply adopted, without consideration of the question of safety in respect of the risk of falling over the balustrade, a height which was aesthetically appropriate and complied with the relevant Ordinance provisions. Mr Rayner was unable satisfactorily to explain the difference in height between the balustrade on the mezzanine level and on the staircase. As
I have already mentioned, it is clear that the two requirements of guarding the space and providing a reasonably convenient hand hold could have easily been accommodated by relatively trivial changes in the design of the structure he proposed. He agreed, as is obvious, that the cost of raising the height of the balustrade to match that at the mezzanine level would be slight and it is also obvious that making adjustments to the width of the top coping and the position of the secondary handrail would not involve significant expenditure.
I note that Mr Rayner still approves the designs actually used despite the accident in this case. I must say that I find this response surprising. I am unable to think of any reasonable view of either aesthetics or building design which would not see a change of design as being at least desirable to prevent accidents of the kind that occurred here. After all, this was a place of general public resort. I have already mentioned the presence of licensed premises on the mezzanine level. It is obviously a place where children or even adults might be running and where for many reasons people might be unstable on their feet. It seems to me that the possibility that an accident of the kind that occurred here, involving a person being pushed or falling against the balustrade in such a way as to be pivoted over the side by a combination of the position of the coping and the momentum and angle of attack of the person, is reasonably foreseeable. Even if it was not an obvious possibility at the time that the railings were designed by Mr Rayner I am somewhat surprised that, this accident having occurred, he still sees no need to change the design though the economic costs of doing so are obviously negligible and the aesthetic consequence trivial. I cannot help but feel that
Mr Rayner's response was really a reflection of a natural desire to defend his original design and a natural reluctance to acknowledge any responsibility for the serious accident that occurred in this case.

I turn now to the evidence of the various experts called by the parties. I do not propose to set out the details of their expertise. There is no doubt that each witness was an expert as to the matters which were the subject of their evidence although the defendants selected witnesses who were architects and the plaintiffs' experts were engineers. Some point was sought to be made, especially by counsel for the third defendant, that engineering was not a relevant area of expertise. However, all the plaintiffs' experts had very considerable experience in the area of design and safety design. I have no doubt that the opinions that they expressed as to the design were well within the area of relevant expertise. Mr Wollaston's report of February 1992, interestingly, distinguishes between the top coping of the balustrade here describing it as a "separate balustrade" and the rail running beneath it, describing the latter only as "a handrail". In that report Mr Wollaston said that the handrail, though comfortable to use, would "be considered inadequate on the subject flight if it formed the top of the balustrade" because of its height. However, the additional height of the coping which, as I have mentioned, he described as a "separate balustrade" brought the structure within the requirements of Ordinance 70, as he saw it. As I have already said, if the top balustrade is not a handrail within the Ordinance the fact that its height satisfied the Ordinance would not be sufficient compliance. Indeed, as
I seems to me Mr Wollaston makes this point in his report - "5.5 The handrail down the subject flight, although 40 mm lower than the minimum height required by Ordinance 70, does not make the flight unsafe as the adjacent balustrade is 72 mm higher than the required minimum height." 
Mr Wollaston's report, however, provides only qualified support for the defendants' case. His opinion is - "5.4 The balustrade to the subject flight is of sufficient height to prevent a person using a stair in a normal manner from falling over the side of the stair." (Emphasis added) 
It seems to me, however, that in designing a stair balustrade in this case where the consequences of falling are obviously fraught with catastrophe it is necessary to go further than merely designing against use of the stair "in a normal manner". The reasonable possibility of untoward behaviour must also be considered.

In his second report of 18 November 1993 Mr Wollaston considers specifically the problem of a person slipping and falling over the side of the stair and carefully experimented in an attempt to simulate how this might occur. He found that despite his height (1.9 metres tall) the width of what he called "the caprail" tended to support him rather than to act as a pivot point as would, in his opinion, a narrow rail. He found also that as he was continuing to move sideways down the stair the foot which was on the lower side tended to slip down to the next step and this tended to throw him back on to the stair.
This is a persuasive response to concerns about the consequences of leaning over the balustrade. However, it does not deal, as it seems to me, with the problem of a person who is in an unsteady or unstable situation especially one who is knocked or otherwise happens to strike the coping with any degree of force. I do not think that Mr Wollaston's experiment dealt meaningfully with such a circumstance, which in my opinion was reasonably foreseeable. Of course, there are obvious reasons for this.

In his evidence, Mr Wollaston expressed the view that the top of the balustrade was the required handrail for the purposes of Ordinance 70 and consequently that the requirements of Ordinance 70 were satisfied. He was also of the view that compliance with Ordinance 70 in this case was appropriate in the sense of sufficient. However, he said in cross-examination that the existence of the drop of some 10 metres at the top of the stairs to the floor below made it advisable to increase the height from the minimum standard. He considered that in order to reduce the risk to the large body of people who might be using the stairway it would have been appropriate to increase the total height of the structure. However, he said that this was not so much in accordance with what he considered to have been proper architectural practice but relevant to his experience, in particular having regard to his own height of 190 centimetres. Mr Wollaston agreed with what was at all events obvious that, in considering the height of a balustrade and handrail, safety is the crucial factor. The secondary question of assistance to persons using the stairs, for example, a person with young children, is solved by a double handrail. Mr Wollaston commented that the geometry of the structure was important and that he thought that the handrail or balustrade should be at waist level. From his point of view that meant he designed them to his own waist height. He conceded that someone else with other personal experience, that is to say someone who was not as tall as he, acting competently as an architect, may have appropriately designed the handrail and structure with the measurements in this case. I find the distinction somewhat difficult to appreciate, however. It would be otherwise if Mr Wollaston were of excessive or unusual height. At 190 centimetres he is certainly amongst the tall people in the community. However, many people are of his height and even more at the height of the plaintiffs in this case. Once it is conceded that waist height is the appropriate safety measure then it is clear that it is necessary to consider what is the range of waist height for most if not all members of the community. Whatever it be, and disregarding statistics, I think it reasonable that such a height would include heights of the plaintiffs' stature. The mere fact that Mr Rayner was not that tall did not, as it seems to me, mean that he ought not to have considered the situation of persons of their height. What is clear, however, is that he did not really consider at all the question of the height of persons who might be using the stairs. Rather his measurements reflected a concern to comply with the Ordinance.

A report was also tendered dated 10 September 1996 by Associate Professor
Morton whose are of expertise may be described as applied physics. His first report of March 1992 concentrated on the slipperiness of the relevant surfaces as a possible explanation for the fall in this case. I do not think that, as the issues unfolded, this needs consideration. However, in the later report
Professor Morton discusses the mechanism by which the fall here might have occurred. The difficulty that I have with the opinion that he expresses is that his description of the accident appears to me to be inconsistent with that which I have accepted occurred in this case. He concludes - "It seems much more likely that this situation [that is where the plaintiffs had high velocities at right angles to and to the right of their proper direction of movement down the stairs] would have arisen either as a deliberate action on their parts, or as a result of a lack of control of their movements, for whatever reason [as distinct from one falling against the other in the way which I have described earlier in this judgment.]" 
I have no doubt that there was no deliberate action involved here but there may well have been a lack of control in respect of Mr Clarke by his tripping and in respect of Mr Keane by being struck hard. Professor Morton does make reference to the use of the measure of centre of gravity as a function of a safe height but considered that such a requirement in this case would "imply a balustrade about 1.5 metres high" which, according to Professor Morton is never used in public buildings. Professor Morton proposed that it would be appropriate, if the centre of gravity were a relevant factor, set the rail just below hip height, so that contact and friction between the feet and the floor is maintained, preventing a forward topple. However, this is not a case of forward topple. Nor is it a case where friction between the feet and the floor is significant since both men were out of balance. Professor Morton was not called and, whilst his report does give some support for the position of the defendants relating to the appropriate height of the balustrade, I do not find it persuasive in light of the other expert evidence and the view I have formed as to how this accident occurred. The occurrence against which the 1.5 metre height was designed to ensure were accidents which are quite different from those which occurred here. Of course, had the balustrade been 1.5 metres high this accident would certainly not have occurred. At the end of the day, the exiguity of explanation in Professor Morton's report leads me to prefer other views.

The third defendant called Mr Jeffrey Lumsdaine, a qualified architect, to give evidence on his behalf. In his opinion, the design and construction of the balustrade complied with the requirements of Ordinance 70 and was designed and built to satisfy "high standards of safety and ease of use". He considered that the primary function of the handrail is to provide at an appropriate height an element "which can give purchase to the hand of the person ascending or descending a stair in a normal manner". Thus, the top coping and the railing under it were both handrails adequately designed for this purpose. It is difficult to understand why Mr Lumsdaine did not consider the use of a handrail in circumstances where a person might be unsteady or unstable, since this is a frequent consequence of ascending or descending stairs. It is obvious that one function of the handrail is to maintain balance but it seems to me to be equally obvious that a function of a handrail is also to assist in re-establishing balance if it should be lost because of progress up or down the stairs. Where there is a void, it must also function as a guard. Mr
Lumsdaine's report therefore, in confining itself to the question of appropriate design to the negotiation of stairs "in a normal manner" does not bear much relevance to the issue in this case. Nor does it concern itself with the general question of safety. Mr Lumsdaine's supplementary report does not take the matter much further since it is largely confined to the measurement of the stairs themselves and a discussion of whether there was compliance with the statutory codes. He did not believe that any complying handrail would have prevented the accident which "apparently resulted from a combination of factors and vector of forces not contemplated by the regulatory authorities in
Australia now". However, the crucial question is whether or not the design of the balustrade and handrail provided a reasonable degree of safety in all the circumstances, including the possibility of reasonably foreseeable accidents.
In his evidence Mr Lumsdaine was taken to the possibility that persons might stumble and trip on the steps and agreed that the architect designing the stairs would need to look at such "normal accidents". However, he did not consider that any architects of reasonable skill or experience would consider the height or centre of gravity of persons using the stairs but would confine themselves to the risks that might affect downward or upward motion on the stairs. Mr Lumsdaine's position was really that an architect of reasonable skill and experience should address matters of "normal risk not for undue risk" and that the possibilities of stumbling against the balustrade fell outside what he felt would be a normal risk. In the end he agreed that the design of the balustrade was not sufficient to take into account people of slightly above average height moving with certain speed in a direction towards and over the banister. He agreed that a reasonable architect would not expect that persons would always be moving either up or down stairways but could be moving diagonally across the stairway. He agreed that if such a person lost their footing whilst travelling transversely then they would move both across and down and that such movement would be within the reasonable contemplation of an architect designing the safety features on the site of the stairs. It seems to me, in substance, that these (reasonable) concessions in cross- examination amount to a concession that the kind of accident that occurred here should have been within the reasonable contemplation of an architect in
Mr Rayner's position.

Mr Keane called Dr P.G.Towson, a chartered professional engineer. Although I think it fair to say that Dr Towson was somewhat baffled by certain questions asked of him in evidence and had some difficulty in explaining the reasons for some of his conclusions I found his evidence to be of considerable assistance in understanding how this accident occurred and what might have been done to prevent it. He alone of the expert witnesses seemed to me to really grapple with the particular circumstances of this accident. Although Dr Towson's qualifications lie principally in the area of engineering, he holds a degree of Master of Building Science from the University of Sydney, a subject in which he took his doctorate. He has also been a lecturer and senior lecturer in architectural science at the University of Technology for fifteen years.
Amongst other things since 1982 he has investigated many accidents, mainly industrial.

Dealing firstly with Dr Towson's view of Ordinance 70 so far as this case is concerned, his view was that the top coping of the balustrade did not qualify as a handrail within the Ordinance. It followed therefore that the other rail was not of a sufficient height nor was it so positioned to comply with the
Ordinance. Dr Towson's view as to the height of the balustrade so far as a guard from falling was concerned was that a person of average height would have most of his or her body weight above the coping while descending the stairway and that such a height would be inadequate to protect a person who was off balance for whatever reason from falling over the coping. Dr Towson disagreed with Professor Morton's view that a height of 1.5 metres was necessary to prevent the fall that occurred in this case. His view was that a height of one metre to 1.1 metres would have been likely to avoid this particular accident. In essence, as I understand it, Dr Towson's view was based upon the centre of gravity of persons who might be using the stairs. Dr
Towson thought that when designing such things as stairways it is not appropriate to design merely for the mean but thought that the stairway should accommodate 95 per cent of the population, that is to say two standard deviations from the mean. This involved the conclusion that the height prescribed by Ordinance 70 was too low for safety. However, Dr Towson adverted to the significant point that safety in this context must be considered with regard to the risk of catastrophic injury should a person topple over the balustrade in a stairway positioned such as this. For reasons on which I need not enlarge Dr Towson's view was that 1060 millimetres would be a sufficient height above the nosing of the stairs to satisfy safety. He chose that height because it could be secured merely by continuing the handrail along the mezzanine floor to the first step before angling it downward to follow the stairway. As I see it, it is not necessary for me to determine what would be a reasonable or appropriate height, if I am satisfied that the height of the balustrade was too low for reasonable safety in the circumstances. However, it does seem to me that something of the order of height proposed by Dr Towson would have been a reasonable height and would have been likely to have prevented the accident in this case. The principal reason for this conclusion rests upon an assessment of the additional height necessary to place the top of the balustrade above Mr Keane's centre of gravity. As I have already said although Mr Keane was somewhat taller than average, his height at 6 ft 2 ins was well within what I would regard as the range of normal height that should be considered by a person designing the balustrade in this case.

Exhibited in these proceedings is an article which Dr Towson considered in preparing his report entitled "Open Side Guarding of Escalators" by Dr Fruin which was published by Inside Elevator World, an American publication of March
Part of that article was tendered. It is clear from the material tendered that, according to the author the height of the balustrade in this case was inadequate for safety. Although this material was not available at the time of the designing of the building in question it provides support for
Dr Towson's opinion as to the adequacy of the balustrade in this case. Dr
Towson also pointed to the significance of the failure of the handrail to provide an adequate grip for Mr Keane as he was attempting to cope with the accident. His view was that had the height of the balustrade been at 1060 millimetres and there had been provided an accessible and graspable handrail then the chances were that Mr Keane and, hence as it seems to me, Mr Clarke, would not have fallen.

Also called for Mr Keane was Dr Brian Emerson, whose doctorate is in the area of engineering, specifically in the areas of safety management and engineering. He described his particular specialty as the causation of accidents. Dr Emerson pointed to what he regarded as inadequacies in the design of the handrail because of its position in relation to the coping and the fact that the coping (called a guard rail by him) provided an insufficient grip. However, his principal criticism of the balustrade was that it was too low to provide adequate safety having regard to the height of the plaintiff.
Dr Emerson's report notes the height "of Mr Clarke" at 1.95 metres. In fact Mr
Clarke was 183 centimetres tall whilst Mr Keane was 186 centimetres tall. Dr
Emerson refers to "Mr Clarke's high centre of gravity in proportion to the height of the guard rail" but does not explain why he considers this to be significant. However, this observation was expanded somewhat in his evidence.
Dr Emerson made what I think I have already said is the simple point that in considering the safety of a barrier one must not only consider the risk which is thought to be confronted but also the height of the barrier compared to the height of persons who may in an unstable and unbalanced way come into contact with it. This was described by Dr Emerson as "the ergonomics". I consider that it is no more than the application of common sense. Dr Emerson's view of Mr
Clarke's height and weight was corrected following his report. As I understand his evidence, that correction did not materially affect his conclusion that the balustrade was too low for safety in the circumstances. Dr Emerson explained the operation of the relevant forces as they probably applied in this accident. This scientific explanation again conforms with what in my view is common sense. It follows that I consider that this type of analysis should have been undertaken by the architect when considering the appropriate design of the balustrade, that is to say he should have considered the possibility of persons stumbling against or being pushed against the balustrade, that the height of those persons might well be six feet or above and the possibility that the top of the balustrade would operate rather as a pivot or fulcrum than as a barrier in those circumstances. He should also have considered whether the handrail provided an adequate grip for someone who was falling at or near the edge of the balustrade.

I am of the opinion that the balustrade was of an insufficient height to provide adequate safety for persons in the situation of the plaintiffs. I am also satisfied that situation was reasonably foreseeable and that the architect, in particular, had a duty to consider the likelihood that persons of the height and weight of the plaintiffs (or of that order), which were all within normal range, might by misadventure find themselves colliding with the balustrade in a way in which the relevant forces might propel them over if it were not high enough, and to have designed the balustrade against this contingency, especially having regard to the likely catastrophic consequences of a fall to the floor below. In all probability, an additional height of 100 to 200 millimetres would have prevented the plaintiffs in this case from falling over the balustrade; indeed such a height would have made this fall extremely unlikely in my opinion. Added to the inadequate height of the balustrade is the failure to provide a reasonably available handhold capable of being used by a person significantly off balance at the edge of the stairway. Had there been such an adequate handhold, again this accident would probably not have happened.

In Voli versus Inglewood Shire Council & Anor <case>; [1962-1963 110 CLR 74] the plaintiff sued for injuries sustained by him when a stage upon which he was standing collapsed. The cause of the collapse was that the joists supporting its floor, were not, having regard to their span, strong enough to carry to the load that was upon it, which load was not greater than such a stage might reasonably be expected to bear. The plaintiffs sued the
Inglewood Shire Council, which was the proprietor of the structure and the architect who designed it and "may be regarded as responsible for its not proving capable of supporting the weight which in the event proved to be required of it on the particular occasion".[1] Dixon CJ defined the architect's duty in the following terms- 
In my opinion the architect was under a duty of care expressed in terms of ordinary negligence so to design the platform as to make it safe for any burden reasonably to be expected, that is to say, if the platform were employed in the ordinary way for supporting human beings mounting thereon, without any violent or unusual movement.[2] 
Windeyer J pointed out that the architect never seriously considered what weight the stage should bear, nor did he calculate what weight it would, as designed by him, in fact bear. The architect had a duty to bring his own professional skill and competence to the task he had undertaken "so that the hall would be soundly designed, secure and safe".[3] His Honour said this about the duties of an architect-[4] 
An architect undertaking any work in the way of his profession accepts the ordinary liabilities of any man who follows a skilled calling. He is bound to exercise due care, skill and diligence. He is not required to have an extraordinary degree of skill or the highest professional attainment. But he must bring to the task he undertakes the competence and skill that is usual among architects practising their profession. And he must use due care. If he fails in these matters and the person who employed him thereby suffers damage, he is liable to that person. This liability can be said to arise either from a breach of his contract or in tort.

In this case, however, the primary question does not arise from the duty that an architect has to his employer. It is whether the respondent architect had a duty to someone not his employer, a person with whom he had no contract at all, a person unknown to him personally whose only relationship with him was that he went into a building designed by him and built under his supervision. In the abstract the question, and it is an important question for architects, is can an architect be liable for negligence to a person who, after a building is finished and has been taken over by the building owner, lawfully enters it and, by reason of false in its designing construction, comes to harm. Whatever might have been thought to be the position before the broad principles of the law of negligence were stated in modern form in 
Donoghue versus Stevenson[5], it is now beyond doubt that, for the reasonably foreseeable consequences of careless or unskilful conduct, an architect is liable to anyone whom it could reasonably have been expected might be injured as a result of his negligence. To such a person he owes a duty of care quite independently of his contract of employment....[whether] or not that duty was performed is ultimately a question of fact, to be judged by what, in the circumstances of the particular case and in the light of the apparent risks, a reasonable man would or would not do. In some situations, the courts have not left the latter question wholly at large.

They have indicated what ordinarily a reasonable man must do, or not do, to satisfy the duty of care that the situation of the parties has created. But the question is really one of fact. And what an architect must do to avoid liability for negligence cannot be more precisely defined than by saying that he must use reasonable care, skill and diligence in the performance of the work he undertakes.

In this case the third defendant argues that the evidence from the architects that Mr Rayner's design complied with Ordinance 70 and with what was usual and appropriate having regard to current architectural practice should conclude the issue of liability in its favour. I have already explained why I think that the balustrade here did not comply with Ordinance 70. At all events, it is clear that Ordinance 70 is regarded as specifying minimum standards of safety and, at least implicitly, whether that standard is sufficient in a particular situation requires to be considered independently. I am unable to accept that it was appropriate for Mr Rayner not to consider the height that the balustrade should have reached in order to ensure safety where persons within normal height and weight range could be propelled against it by misadventure. I do not accept that serious, or any, consideration was given to this aspect since, if this were done, it would have followed that the balustrade would have been at least as high above the nosings of the stairs as it was on the landing. It does not matter for the purpose of reaching this conclusion that the mere possibility of toppling over at the landing determined the height of the balustrade on the mezzanine landing. As I understand the substance of the evidence of the defendants' experts, it was not so much that the balustrade was inadequately safe for the purpose of moving up and down the stairs but that most architects would not consider it necessary to guard against the sort of accident that happened here, that is, against the risk of falling over the balustrade. However, I am of the view that especially having regard to the height of the stairway above the ground floor the architect had a duty to consider what would be a safe height and handhold in the reasonably foreseeable circumstance that one or two persons of above average but nevertheless common height should collide with the balustrade in such circumstances as occurred in this case.

In Rogers versus Whitaker <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 479] it was said[6]- 
In Australia, it has been accepted that the standard of care to be observed by a person with some special skill or competence is that of the ordinary skilled person exercising and professing to have that special skill[7]. But that standard is not determined solely or even primarily by reference to the practice followed or supported by a responsible body of opinion in the relevant profession or trade[8].

Naturally enough, the third defendant in particular sought to press upon me the distinction on the one hand between whether a particular professional activity is undertaken in accordance with the appropriate standard of care in which case it "is a question in the resolution of which responsible professional opinion will have an influential, often a decisive, role to play"[9] or whether on the other hand sufficient advice in a particular professional context is given to a lay person. To my mind, however, this distinction is not particularly relevant in the circumstances of this case.
Here, the point is whether the architect had a duty of care to the plaintiffs to provide a barrier which would have safeguarded them from the risks of catastrophic fall in the circumstances in which they fell against the balustrade on the staircase. To my mind, the determination of the existence of this duty is not much assisted by asking whether architects would think about the problem at all. The practice of architects in this area would be more significant if, accepting that there was such a duty of care, the question arose as to whether it had been satisfactorily performed, though of course, evidence of such practice would not necessarily be decisive.

It was, in addition, argued by the third defendant that falling against the stairway balustrade was "an abuse against which the architect was under no obligation to guard[10] . However, if this were an "abuse", and I do not think that it was, it was "so notorious" as to be reasonably foreseeable; "so that architects who did not take reasonable care about their design in order to cope with the consequences of such an abuse might well be regarded as negligent"[11].

The third defendant makes much, in submission, of Mr Lumsdaine's evidence that the centre of gravity would not be considered by him or by architects of reasonable skill and experience to be relevant. However, that was in the context of the factors relevant to designing a balustrade to assist movement up and down stairs and not to accidents of the kind that occurred here. In the end, Mr Lumsdaine expressed the view that he did not believe an architect of reasonable skill and experience would address the possibility of accidents of the kind that occurred in this case.

In Wyong Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1979-80) 146 CLR 40] at 47, Mason J said - 
In deciding whether there has been a breach of duty of care the tribunal of fact must first ask itself whether a reasonable man in the defendant's position would have foreseen that his conduct involved a risk of injury to the plaintiff or a class of persons including the plaintiff. If the answer be in the affirmative, it is then for the tribunal of fact to determine what a reasonable man would do by way of response to the risk. The perception of the reasonable man's response calls for a consideration of the magnitude of risk and the degree of probability of its occurrence, along with the expense, difficulty and inconvenience of taking alleviating action and any other conflicting responsibilities which the plaintiff may have. It is only when these matters are balanced out that the tribunal of fact can confidently assert what is the standard of response to be ascribed to the reasonable man placed in the defendant's position. The considerations to which I have referred indicate that a risk of injury which is remote in the sense that it is extremely unlikely to occur may nevertheless constitute a foreseeable risk.

A risk which is not far-fetched or fanciful is real and therefore foreseeable.

Of course, the magnitude of the risk and the degree of probability of its occurrence are questions of fact. I have no doubt that the risk of injury of the kind caused here was not, to use the language of Mason J (as he then was) remote in the sense that it was extremely unlikely to occur. Nor was it a risk which was either far-fetched or fanciful. To the contrary I consider that the accident that occurred here, one person falling against another in close proximity to the balustrade and being something over six feet half tall, to be well within the range of realistic likelihood.

It follows from what I have said that I find the third defendant to have been negligent and hence liable to Mr Keane, who, alone, sued the third defendant.

The liability of the first and second defendants is somewhat more difficult to determine. Mr Keane sued them as well as the third defendant while Mr Clarke sued only the first and second defendants. I should state at the outset that I do not consider that a lay person would be likely to have apprehended the risk to persons involved in a mishap such as occurred in this case although I think that a lay person would readily have appreciated the need adequately to guard against the risk of falling off the stairway. However, that may not necessarily be the end of the case.

The first defendant is the owner and occupier of the relevant property and the second defendant its managing agent.

In Voli versus Inglewood Shire Council [12] Windeyer said- 
The standard of duty of an occupier towards an invitee is to use reasonable care in prevent his coming to harm from an usual danger of which, the occupier, knows or ought to know and of which the invitee does not. It was argued for the Council that, though admittedly the insecurity of the stage was an unusual danger, it was not something of which the Council knew or ought to have known: the Council had employed a competent architect: it could not be said it ought to have known that his work was faulty and that the stage might collapse. This is a plausible argument. But it does not meet the case. It depends upon an assumption that because the architect was an independent contractor and an expert, not a servant of the Council, the Council could not be liable to an invitee for the consequences of his negligence, that it could not be said that the 
Council ought to have known what he ought to have known. But this is not so. The architect's negligence was not in some casual or collateral act. It was in the performance of the very work that he was employed to perform. It comes back to the same question. Is the case one of those in which there is a vicarious liability for the fault of an independent contractor? 
In Thomson versus Cremin [13] Viscount Simon, with whom 
Lord Roma concurred and Lord Wright expressly approved the decision of Luxmoore LJ in Wilkinson versus Rea Limited [14] that the duty of an invitor to an invitee cannot be escaped by delegating its performance to an independent contractor... The observations by their 
Lordships about the inescapable duty of invitor thus remain important. They may not be of general application; but in some kinds of case they are definite. Is this one of them? As the decisions of the Court of Appeal stand at present, there is no absolute rule. It is not an after find that a plaintiff was an invitee. Haseldine versus CA Dawn & 
Son Limited[15] stands on the one hand; 
Woodward versus Mayor of Hastings [16] on the other. In each of these cases an occupier employed an independent contractor. In the first, the contractor was a firm of skilled electricians employed to repair a lift; in the other, a charwoman employed to sweep the snow off steps at a school. For the negligence of the electrician the occupier was not liable to an invitee; for the negligence of the charwoman he was. The distinction in point of policy and on the differing facts may be clear. Its formulation as a matter of law is not easy. Lord Hodson in the Riverstone Meat Company's case[17] suggested that it may have to be reconsidered.

The Council, of course, had to employ an architect.

Its own engineer would not, one may assume, have been able to undertake the work even if the Council had wished it. Nevertheless the Council is not like a person who employs a contractor because he does not himself understand what is required and is unable to check what is proposed or examined what is done.

His Honour went to find that, "on the whole case the Council must be held liable; vicariously, for the negligence of the architect it employed; and directly, because of the failure of its officers, who in fact examined and approved the plans and specifications to ascertain whether By-laws in respect of public buildings had been complied with."[18] Unfortunately, there is no distinct analysis showing why His Honour concluded that the Council was vicariously liable for the negligence of its architect. The statement by Lord
Blackburn in Dalton versus Angus [(1881) 6 App Cas 740] that, "a person causing something to be done, the doing of which casts on him a duty, cannot escape from the responsibility attaching on him of seeing that duty performed by delegating it to a contractor" does not conclude the matter as the essential problem is to ascertain the class of case to which the principle applies[19] .

The first and second defendants seek to distinguish Voli on the basis that the Council had arranged for the construction of the building in question, had directly retained the architect and had through its engineers and planning department approved the plans whereas the first and second defendant had no such participation and only came into occupation of the building after those matters had been completed. It is submitted that no special expertise was demonstrated on the part of either the first or second defendant other than that ordinarily possessed by business persons experienced in the use of city buildings.

The difficulties of determining the appropriate principle enabling determination of whether a duty in the circumstances is delegable or not is referred to in Vial versus The Housing Commission of New South Wales and
Anor[20] by Glass JA[21]. His Honour, with whom Moffit P agreed, determined the case by accepting that where the safety of an invitee depended upon the careful performance of some act which called for no technical knowledge or experience but upon acts which the invitor could and should have done himself and which he neglected to do, the invitor is liable for his neglect to do the act and it is no excuse for his failure to do that act that, for purposes of his own, he chooses to employ an independent contractor who has neglected to perform the act or to perform it carefully[22] (quoting Green versus Fibreglass
Limited)23. Although Mahoney JA (as he then was) dissented on whether the
Housing Commission was obligated in the circumstances of this case, his Honour accepted that the rule was[24] 
Where one has... premises which are subject to a danger which is one which, let it be assumed, the occupier should remove, it may be accepted that he does not avoid liability by the mere delegation of that duty to an independent contractor.

Of course, in the circumstances of this case, the first and second defendants moved into occupation of a building which was already constructed and which contained a danger of which, in my opinion, they could not have reasonably apprehended, namely that the balustrade was 100 to 200 millimetres too low for safety in the circumstance of an accident such as happened in this case. There can be little doubt that they owed the plaintiffs a duty to ensure that the premises were safe. In one sense, of course, they no doubt relied upon the skill and technical expertise of the architect and constructor of the building. So far as the height of the balustrade is concerned, I have, though with some misgivings, come to the conclusion that the first and second defendants were not negligent in failing to appreciate that the balustrade was too low for safety in light of the reasonably foreseeable likelihood that an accident of the kind that occurred here might arise. However, as I have already said, I am of the view that two factors contributed to this accident: one was the height of the balustrade; the other was the design and primarily the positioning of the handhold below the coping. In my view, a occupier acting reasonably would or should have appreciated that the handhold was inadequate to provide anything more than a very limited support for any person in the vicinity of the balustrade who might wish to use it for support or, being out of balance, might need to use it to prevent a serious fall. I am of the view that any examination of the stairway attended by reasonable care directed to considering its safety should have conveyed the inadequacy of the handhold as an instrument of safety in the circumstances of a fall whether down the stairs or over the balustrade. It cannot, in the nature of things, be a matter of certainty but I am of the view that, applying a commonsense approach to the facts in this case, had the balustrade been higher or the handhold been unobstructed by the coping it is more probable than not that this serious accident would not have occurred.

In Burnie Port Authority versus General Jones Pty Limited <case>; [179 CLR 520] at Mason CJ, Deane Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said (at 554)- 
Where a duty of care arises under the ordinary law of negligence, the standard of care exacted is that which is reasonable in the circumstances. It has been emphasised in many cases that the degree of care under that standard necessarily varies with the risk involved and that the risk involved includes both the magnitude of the risk of an accident happening and the serious of the potential damage if an accident should occur (see eg 
Thompson versus Bankstown Corporation (1953) 87 CLR at p 265; Wyong Shire Council versus Shirt (1980) 146 CLR at pp 47-48)...in the case of ...[dangerous] activities, however, a reasonably prudent person would exercise a higher degree of care. Indeed, depending upon the magnitude of the danger, the standard of `reasonable care' may involve `a degree of diligence so stringent as to amount practically to a guarantee of safety' (Donoghue v Stevenson [1932] AC at 612 per Lord McMillan; 
Adelaide Chemical & Fertilizer Co Limited versus Carlyle CLR at 523 per Stark J and, generally Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty Limited (1986) 160 CLR at 30, 42.

Although these observations were made in the context of discussing the rule in
Rylands & Fletcher <case>; [(1868) LR 3
HL 330], where there was an escape of fire, and so must be applied with some caution to the circumstances of this case, they serve to underline the relationship on the one hand between the parameters of the possibility of catastrophic injury on the one hand and the standard of care on the other. It seems to me that the first and second defendants did have a duty to consider whether the balustrade was safe in all the circumstances, including appreciating that a person might by imbalance face a risk of toppling over onto the floor beneath. I accept, for the purposes of this case and without needing to any further, that such examination need only be with, as it were, the lay eye. That is why I have concluded that the inadequate height of the balustrade would not have been sufficiently evident to the first and second defendants for them to have taken steps to increase it in order to fulfil their duty to the plaintiffs. However, the shortcomings in the position of the handhold should have been evident to persons in the position of the first and second defendants.

It is implicit in this analysis that I have not found it necessary to express a concluded view on the question whether the duty of care owed by the first and second defendants in the circumstances to such persons as the plaintiffs is a non-delegable one. However, I am inclined to think that it was not.

I have approached the question of the possible negligence of the first and second defendants upon the assumption that the general law of negligence applies although they were occupiers: see Papantonakis versus Australian
Telecommunications Commission & Anor <case>; [(1985) 156 CLR 7]; Australian Safeways Stores Pty Limited versus Zaluzna [(1987) 162 CLR 479]; Phillis & Anor versus Daly [(1988) 15 NSWLR 65.] 
The first and second defendants argued that the danger represented by the balustrade was one that, putting the case at its highest for the plaintiffs, was a matter for expertise and pointed to the conflict that arose between the experts called by the parties. They argued that if such eminent experts could not agree on either the height or the suitability of the handrail, how could it be expected that untrained lay persons such as the first and second defendants could have made "such a fine and delicate judgment in relation to the height of the balustrade or, alternatively, the significance of having the handrail recessed beneath the coping of the balustrade." As is already clear I do not think that the height of the balustrade would have been appreciated as a possible significant risk by persons in the first and second defendants' position. However, I think that the possibility of a fall should have been appreciated by them as a real and not fanciful risk and, in that light, the fact that anybody who was imbalanced would not get any significant help from the coping shaped as it was and the handrail positioned where it was, should have been recognised on a proper (though lay) appreciation of the risk and that they failed in their duty of care in not making appropriate adjustments to the design of the balustrade. Mere disagreement between experts does not demonstrate that there was no risk to which the duty of care required appropriate attention.

It follows that I conclude that the first, second and third defendants are liable to both plaintiffs in respect of the injuries suffered by virtue of their fall from the staircase. So far as the plaintiff Keane is concerned it is now necessary for me to consider the appropriate quantum of damages.

There is no doubt that Mr Keane suffered very serious injuries from his fall.
It is likely that he had fallen in a more or less sitting position onto a low concrete construction (for a fountain) and then on to the floor. He was taken by ambulance to St Vincent's Hospital where he remained as in-patient from 22
October to 12 December 1989. When he came into the hospital he was assessed by the trauma team and found to have a fracture of L5 and S1 as well as the left ala of the sacrum and a disruption of the pubic symphysis. He had also dislocated his right elbow which had been reduced. He suffered a very significant anal injury due to the fall; under anaesthesia he was found to have completely disrupted his internal and superficial and deep portions of the external sphincter on the left side. There was a large cavity extending anteriorly to the base of the penis and laterally to the ischial ramus. This cavity was already developing gangrenous changes with spreading acute necrotising fascititis along the intramuscular fascial planes which required extensive unroofing and debridement. On the right side there was a disruption of the internal sphincter and the superficial and lowermost portion of the deep external sphincter. There was also an extensive cavity requiring unroofing on this side although not as great as on the left. There were multiple other injuries including multiple fractures of the right lower ribs and a possible fracture of the right styloid process. When it became apparent that he was going to be incontinent, the plaintiff was returned on 27 October to the operating theatre and a sigmoid colostomy to defunction the perineum was performed. This time he was under the care of Dr O'Connor, a colorectal and general surgeon. His prolonged hospital stay was due mostly to his separated pubic symphysis. Further surgery was necessary on 8 June 1990 and, on 28 September 1990 Mr Keane, according to Dr O'Connor, "demonstrated he was completely continent and able to hold saline enemas" and therefore his left iliac fossa colostomy was taken down, a segmental resection of the colon and end to end anastomosis of the colon was performed so that it was put back into circuit. In Dr O'Connor's opinion on review on 31 October 1990 Mr Keane had made an excellent recovery with normal bowel function and all his wounds had healed well. He was discharged into the care of his local doctor. Dr
O'Connor saw Mr Keane again on 14 November 1991 complaining of three or four attacks of severe peri-umbilical colicky abdominal pains, two of which had been severe enough to require pethidene and the last one lasting four days. Mr
Keane's abdomen was distended and he had a watery diarrhoeal motion when the pain wore off. An examination, however, did not reveal a cause for these attacks. The doctor noted that Mr Keane had a small mid-line incisional hernia but did not think that this had been the cause of the attacks. He felt that they were some acute incidence of small bowel obstruction on the basis of intra-abdominal adhesions and suggested to Mr Keane that if he had a further attack he should immediately come to hospital with a view to a possible laparotomy for division of adhesions. Dr O'Connor expressed the view that although Mr Keane had recovered completely from the sphincter damage which he had suffered, the injury itself was extremely extensive and dangerous requiring multiple operations to eventually solve the problem. He believed that the repairs had been excellent and that Mr Keane's bowel function had (by
June 1993) returned to normal. At the same time however due to the extensive intro-abdominal surgery he could get attacks of some acute small bowel obstruction in the future and eventually he may need a laparotomy to divide his adhesions. Dr O'Connor did not assert orthopaedic expertise but pointed out (rightly) that obviously the pubic smyphysis injury was a very serious one. He concluded that from the point of view of his colonic surgery and major sphincter repairs, they would not affect Mr Keane's future employment, unless he developed a bowel obstruction requiring further surgery. On 21 September Mr Keane presented to St Vincent's Hospital with abdominal pain similar to that which he had earlier suffered but it settled on conservative management. Dr O'Connor saw him on 14 October 1993 and recommended that his incisional hernia be repaired and any adhesions producing his small bowel obstruction be divided. On 12 November 1993 Dr O'Connor performed a laparotomy which revealed very dense intra-abdominal adhesions with small bowel obstruction, requiring difficult surgery. The incisional hernia repair was also difficult. Mr Keane made an excellent recovery from surgery with normal bowel function though he required exploration of a small serous collection in the lower end of his womb. He was last seen by Dr O'Connor on 28 July 1994 when he was found to be well, quite continent, and not complaining of further episodes of abdominal pain; his bowel function was normal. Dr O'Connor found no abnormality on examination of Mr Keane's abdomen and discharged him from follow up care. At the same time, Dr O'Connor was of the opinion that there was always the possibility of further episodes of bowel obstruction requiring operation, although this could not be quantitated.

Dr Crooks, a consultant urological surgeon examined Mr Keane early in 1996. In his opinion, as a result of Mr Keane's sacral injuries and fracture he suffered injury especially to the right lumbosacral outflow and to the sacral nerve roots which supply innervation to the anal sphincteric muscles as well as sensation to this area and also supply innervation to sexual function together with ejaculatory function and also to urinary function. He had no doubt that there was and remained some overlying problem of neurogenic supply to this area, due to his sacral fracture perhaps with some recovery but with persisting disability of anal function and with persisting anal symptoms. This view was also consistent with the further evidence of neurological motor interference to Mr Keane's sexual function including the loss of ability to ejaculate. Dr Crooks thought that Mr Keane was extremely fortunate that with the passage of eighteen months to two years (I take it from the accident) these aspects of sexual innervation and function have recovered, perhaps with some minimal residual disturbance. The doctor thought that he had lesser urinary symptoms that might also have a basis in selective sacral nerve injury which, with the passage of years, are unlikely to improve and must be regarded as permanent. On the other hand, urodynamic evaluation to further investigate these symptoms had not been carried out. He thought it possible that a urinary stricture had been associated with his pelvic fracture and prolonged catheterisation. Mr Keane had complained to Dr Crooks of having bowel movements three or four times a day with leakage of faeces and recurrent bowel opening fifteen to twenty minutes after bowel movement, together with leakage once or twice each day of urine. Dr Crooks considered that, having regard to the passage of the years since his accident, Mr Keane's residual disturbances of sacral urological function and inability to achieve complete anal continence with associated complete recovery of urinary function would not improve and these disabilities must be regarded as permanent. He pointed out that Mr Keane's urinary and faecal problems would, so far as is occupation was concerned, require ready access to toilet facilities and take into account loss of time caused by frequent passage of bowel content and excessive time taken with each bowel toilet.

Dr Seaton, a consultant orthopaedic specialist retained by the plaintiff noted (amongst other doctors) a history of unconsciousness following the fall, observing that he had a fractured nose and developed bilateral black eyes.

Whether Mr Keane suffered a head injury is the subject of controversy. The hospital notes do not refer to broken nose or black eyes although the trauma sheet notes that he was capable of orientated verbal response on admission and asserts that there was no injury to head or face. At the same time, a note by the medical officer in what appears to me to be the same handwriting lists amongst his injuries, "closed head injury-mild concussion". (Whilst dealing with these notes I observe that his occupation was given as "gambler and dog trainer".) Dr Seaton accepted that Mr Keane had suffered head injuries which led to vertigo and change of personality. However, it seems to me that this acceptance arose from the history given to him by Mr Keane rather than the result of any independent examination and consideration of these matters. Dr
Seaton noted that Mr Keane had crushed the right side of his chest and had fractured lower ribs in the right rib cage, eventually ending up with a pneumothorax which was not found until later and was not treated. He considered that a dislocation to Mr Keane's right elbow was severe. There were fractures of the fifth lumbar vertebrae, the first sacral vertebrae and a fracture of the right sacral wing. He noted the diastasis of the pubic symphysis and explained that it could not be treated either with reduction with a pin and rod external fixateurs or with a pelvic sling because of the severe injuries to Mr Keane's anus and rectum. He noted that Mr Keane had developed a urinary tract infection. These factors meant that his pelvic fracture was never completely repositioned. Dr Seaton noted that Mr Keane developed a pelvic abscess due to the laceration in his rectum. Mr Keane had also injured his right knee and sustained a severe ankle injury although there was no evidence of fracture on the x-rays.

Dr Seaton noted that, on examination of his rib cage, Mr Keane had completely recovered. He had completely recovered from his abdominal problems although still suffering some anal incontinence and evidence of urinary incontinence.
It was noted that his pelvis had healed well without gross deformity. There was full range of movement of his back without spasm, straight leg raising was normal and there were no neurological deficits from his back on examination of his lower limbs. There was two centimetres of wasting in Mr Keane's right thigh muscles with numbness over the anterior cutaneous nerve supply area.
There was three centimetres of wasting in the right calf. Quite severe femuro- atellar crepitus in the right knee caused, as the doctor considered, by injury at the time of the fall. Mr Keane had lost fifteen degrees of dorsi-flexion and a few degrees of plantar-flexion in his right ankle, which was deformed and swollen, and, the doctor thought, obviously becoming arthritic. Mr Keane complained of chronic low back pain at the site of the fractures in the lumbosacral area and that he was unable to sit for long or stand for long. He claimed that he could not lift or bend although he was able to walk. He had a weakness in his right knee due to the quadrisects wasting. The fracture of his coccyx made it very difficult for Mr Keane to sit-down and he complained of vertigo and dizziness. Dr Seaton considered that, together with the chronic anxiety of which Mr Keane complained, his weak right leg, his back problem and his dizziness made him unsuitable for any form of employment which would be likely to continue into the future. Dr Seaton noted that CT scans carried out on the lower discs in the lumbar spine in March 1994 confirmed disc bulging at
L3/4 and L4/5 levels spondylo-arthritic changes in the facet joints at these levels.

I will return to the issue of Mr Keane's head injury later.

The defendants relied on a number of medical reports and evidence. For this purpose it is unnecessary to distinguish between them. Professor Fields, a consultant surgeon examined Mr Keane in September 1992 and again in April
He noted as at the last report that Mr Keane's anal sphincter repair was reasonably satisfactory "for such a procedure" although he had some difficulty with leakage after defecation and has to change his underpants every day. He noted that Mr Keane had to take a spare pair of underpants with him when he went out and that although he can control wind and distinguish between solid and fluid he has to be very careful. He noted that Mr Keane's micturition had returned to normal and he regained potency. He noted complaints of continuing recurrent low back pain, pain between his shoulders and going into the left shoulder and left side of the neck. Mr Keane told him that he took exercise by walking his dog and walking on the beach and that his hobby was greyhound racing and gambling. He noted that his right elbow had completely recovered.
There is no complaint made, apparently, about either elbow or knee and
Professor Fields noted that Mr Keane walked without a limp, could stand on his toes and squat and straight leg raising went to 90 degrees on both sides.
Professor Fields concluded that, as a result of injuries to Mr Keane's pelvis and anal sphincter, he had suffered some permanent impairment of his whole person which he assessed at 10 per cent. He noted that there was a possibility that Mr Keane might require further abdominal surgery in the future as there was always a possibility of recurrence after a repair of an incisional hernia and also a recurrence of intestinal obstruction due to adhesions.

Dr Fowler, a specialist surgeon examined Mr Keane in late August 1992. I note that his listing of injuries, apparently taken from the hospital records (to which I have already referred) mentions that he received "a closed head injury".

The doctor opined that Mr Keane had suffered significant injuries from his fall from which he made good recovery. He thought that the problems Mr Keane still suffered in relation to his perineal injuries were quite acceptable and noted that the incisional hernia on the abdomen was not an uncommon complication of abdominal incisions. He had noted symptoms of numbness in the fingers of the right hand which he considered to be a sequel of the dislocation of his elbow due to an ulna nerve neurapathy and he thought that the aching of the elbow was an acceptable sequel of the injury. He accepted also that the condition of the right knee was most likely the result either of the sprain or local soft tissue contusions (as I read his report suffered in the accident) and he accepted that there had been some damage to the lateral ligament of Mr Keane's right ankle following a sprain which left him with a slightly unstable joint. Again, I think, that the doctor attributed this to the accident. He thought that Mr Keane's back condition resulted from his pelvic and sacral injuries and were only to be expected, as were the leg cramps of which he complained. He thought that the dizziness and headaches mentioned by Mr Keane "could be the result of concussion" but he thought that
Dr O'Neil would be better placed to give an opinion about this point. Dr
Fowler considered that of his various injuries, that the perineal injuries and back complaints were the only ones that constituted "real or significant impairment". Dr Fowler estimated that the impairment from the perineal injuries constituted a 20 per cent impairment of the anorectal region whilst the back impairment was 15 per cent of that structure. He found no evidence of functional overlay or attempts to exaggerate his problems. Dr Fowler thought that Mr Keane could engage in his pre-injury self-employed occupation in the clothing business. Dr Fowler saw Mr Keane again in early April 1995 and found him much the same as he was on the earlier examination. In relation to Mr
Keane's back, he noted that x-rays showed degenerative changes from L3 to L5 which may have been accelerated by the injuries caused by the accident. He accepted that there was a considerable degree of embarrassment caused by intermittent leakage of fluid or faecal bowel content even though Mr Keane had reasonably good control of his bowels. He noted continuing dizziness though he thought this appeared to be slowly improving. His figures for impairment were unchanged although he added a 5 per cent impairment of the anterior abdominal wall by virtue of the repaired incisional hernia. He thought that there would be no further improvement in his condition. He said that, in relation to employment, he thought Mr Keane could return to some form of light work in the clothing industry providing that he did not have to do much travelling or was constantly on his feet in the clothing store. He thought that he could work in his own self-employed business, preferably close to home or even better still work from home where he could attend easily to problems with his anal incontinence.

The defendants also called two medical practitioners to give evidence on their behalf. The first of these was Doctor John O'Neill of St. Vincent's Clinic, a consultant neurologist. He saw Mr. Keane initially in consultation on 27
August 1990 at the request of Doctor O'Connor, the colo-rectal surgeon to whom
I have already referred and, subsequently, on 4 June 1993 at the request of
Mr. Keane's solicitors to give a medico legal report. That report, dated 4
June 1993 was tendered without objection. Doctor O'Neill said that he had been asked to see him by Doctor O'Connor because of complaints of vertigo which would last for twenty to thirty seconds associated with a brief feeling of nausea. Mr. Keane also complained to Doctor O'Neill of episodic headaches that could last for one to two hours at a time but did not require medication. He was also aware of a patch of numbness of the distal right anterolateral thigh just above the right knee and also of some tingling in the right little and ring fingers although that particular symptom was improving. Doctor O'Neill thought that the headaches and postural dizziness were symptoms of a post concussion syndrome, the vertigo resulting from a peripheral disturbance of balance function. When he saw Mr. Keane on 4 June 1993 Doctor O'Neill obtained the history that the headaches only had improved and were now very occasional, not requiring any medication. His vertigo had improved but could still occur briefly for five to ten seconds with a sudden change of head posture although he no longer needed to reach out for support and the symptoms were not associated with nausea; Mr. Keane complained of numbness of the thigh but no longer had any sensory disturbance in the fingers of the right hand. Doctor
O'Neill noted that Mr. Keane was more concerned with the development of aching stiffness in the low back which was mainly present first thing in the morning, together with cramps in his legs and feet. Doctor O'Neill was surprised at the continued complaint of postural vertigo but did not suggest that Mr. Keane's complaint of this was not reliable; the mechanical low back pain was not associated with neurological symptoms and Doctor O'Neill could not explain the complaint of cramp pain. He thought that the numbness in the thigh resulted from trauma to the lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh which was presumably injured as a consequence of the pelvic fractures and thought this complaint would persist as a nuisance symptom. He considered that Mr. Keane had no further neurological problems arising from the accident. Doctor O'Neill said that when he originally saw Mr. Keane in August 1990 he told him that he had fractured his nose and sustained black eyes. He said that in coming to his diagnoses relating to the vertigo he accepted that there was a head injury, relying on what Mr. Keane had told him about his nose fracture and black eyes and that his conscious state had waxed and waned for some hours after admission together with the symptoms of the kind of headache complained of and, specifically, the vertigo which he thought was "absolutely typical of a head injury or post concussion situation". In doing so, the doctor had borne in mind that the hospital notes stated that Mr. Keane was alert in answering appropriately to questions on arrival at the hospital so that he thought that perhaps the head injury may not have been of major significance. It appears that Mr. Keane probably made no complaint to Doctor O'Neill of any loss of memory or concentration although the doctor was uncertain whether he had asked a question designed to have elicited any such complaint; nor was there a complaint of personality change or irritability. So far as the back pain was concerned it was painless until Mr. Keane reached extreme flexion or extension and the symptoms of pain ceased when he resumed a normal position. Doctor
O'Neill accepted that back pain of the kind Mr. Keane described might well result from the extensive pelvic and low back injuries that he sustained.
Despite the doctor's surprise at the continuing symptoms of vertigo he thought that it was reasonably possible that such symptoms could continue although he would have thought that it should have settled by the time he saw Mr. Keane.

Doctor John Matheson, a consultant neurosurgeon, saw Mr. Keane in June 1996.
He obtained a history of headaches and postural dizziness. Mr. Keane had told him that he was doing sales work prior to his accident on a self-employed basis. He noted that Mr. Keane thought his main continuing problem was low back pain in the lumbar region which, he said, prevented him from doing things like gardening. Doctor Matheson noted a small patch of sensory loss just above the knee anterolaterally. Doctor Matheson thought that Mr. Keane had, amongst other things, suffered a minor concussive injury with no evidence of brain damage with a chronic disability relating to ongoing lumbar pain which he thought was reasonable in the circumstances. He thought that from a physical point of view he was fit to resume his pre-accident employment. The permanent impairment which he saw related to sacral and pelvic pain and anal dysfunction. He thought the permanent impairment of these organs would amount to twenty percent. He considered that there was a considerable functional overlay which was affecting his claim to a great degree and that, otherwise, he would be back at work. He thought Mr. Keane capable of engaging in his pre- injury occupation of self-employment in the clothing business. Doctor Matheson was, I think, very much influenced by a perception that Mr. Keane had denied improvement over time in respect of his headaches and postural dizziness. I find this a little odd since he seems to have frankly acknowledged significant improvement in these respects to every other doctor. He concluded, in fact, that Mr. Keane was fabricating his symptoms. Naturally, I did not see Mr.
Keane in the circumstances of this consultation and I have no doubt that
Doctor Matheson's view was conscientiously arrived at. However, I did not find this opinion of assistance in my own assessment of the plaintiff's reliability.

Mr. Keane, in his evidence, complained that he still gets headaches which are not as painful nor as frequent as they once were but that his response to them is to lie down and take a disprin and that he gets them four or five times a week. I find this difficult to accept in light of his failure to complain of such headaches to his general practitioner Doctor. Vago whose reports in 1993 and 1995 are otherwise very detailed. At the same time, as I have noted Mr.
Keane did complain of headaches to Doctor Fowler and Doctor O'Neill but at a significantly lesser degree of severity and frequency. The question whether the plaintiff suffered brain damage was the subject of some controversy, which in part was complicated by the content of the hospital records to which I have already adverted. Doctor Middleton, a specialist in rehabilitative medicine thought (I think largely relying upon a note in the hospital record) that Mr.
Keane had suffered a significant closed head injury and from ongoing symptoms suggesting a residual post-traumatic brain damage effects. Whilst Doctor
Middleton noted that Mr. Keane reported significant alteration in mood emotions and personality (although not concentration) I think that the failure to mention these factors as part of his history to other doctors in the course of extensive medical examinations must raise a degree of scepticism about the cause of Mr. Keane's perception of these problems. I am prepared to accept, having evaluated him in the witness box, that he believes that there have been such changes; I think they have occurred over time, I do not consider their objective manifestations to be anything more than occasional and I am extremely sceptical that they result from any brain damage. I say this having given very careful attention to the careful evidence given by Mr. Gubbay, a clinical psychologist. Mr. Gubbay thought that Mr. Keane appeared to have suffered a head injury of mild severity, considering that Mr. Keane displayed executive dysfunction with mild verbal and visual memory impairment; he thought this resulted from the accident, based on Mr. Keane's history. He also accepted that Mr. Keane suffered significant emotional disturbance, in particular symptoms suggestive of panic attacks associated with episodes of dizziness. I have not yet mentioned although it will be necessary to do so when dealing with the issue of economic loss, that Mr. Keane was a heavy gambler which he used, in part, to support himself and his family. Mr. Gubbay noted that (as obviously came from the history that Mr. Keane gave him) Mr.
Keane appeared to be a successful gambler and that the neuropsychological impairments noted by Mr. Gubbay did not appear to have affected his judgment or ability to gamble successfully. This was at odds with Mr. Keane's evidence in this regard. Mr. Gubbay also thought that the relationship between Mr.
Keane and his wife broke down as a result of personality changes resulting from the accident. Also tendered on Mr. Keane's behalf were reports from
Doctor Stephen Buckley, consultant in rehabilitation medicine, who reviewed a significant volume of medical reports. However, I do not think that Doctor
Buckley's report takes the plaintiff's case much further and I am sceptical about the reliability of the history given to Doctor Buckley as to the extent of memory, personality, cognitive and concentration changes reported by Mr.
Keane. Doctor Metcalf, a psychiatrist consulted by Mr. Keane for the purposes of this case thought that Mr. Keane had suffered head injury and accepted his complaints of altered personality and chronic anxiety (not elsewhere mentioned). However, Doctor Metcalf noted that Mr. Keane did not claim to have any cognitive problems though this was often found, he said, in people suffering from brain damage, an attitude which is seen as compensatory or a denial of any cognitive loss. However, he noted that Mr. Keane claimed to live "by his wits and skill at gambling". Such a claim, if true, is objective evidence inconsistent with cognitive problems. Doctor Bleasel, a neurosurgeon, thought that Mr. Keane did have continuing problems resulting from his head injury, in the form of headaches and vertigo and change of personality, including poor concentration poor attention and memory. He thought this might have been due to some frontal lobe damage.

I have mentioned that the plaintiff gave evidence of continuing headaches and vertigo although the latter only occurs about six times a week but usually only when he gets up after lying down so that he needs to ease himself to his feet carefully. It does not prevent him from driving. He has pain in his upper back usually lasting only a couple of hours but sometimes three or four days together with difficulty in turning his neck, which gives him pins and needles. He complains of pain in his lower back into the buttocks and continual stiffness. The pain is allayed by movement. He gets them four or five times a week. They come, it seems, in spasms and will last up to an hour or so when he is walking around but are relieved if he lies down. His right knee mildly aches in cold weather and his right ankle swells up when he walks.
Although he had a lot of discomfort earlier, this is far less at the present time. Of course, Mr. Keane suffered very extensive scarring from his pubic area up to his chest, which causes embarrassment when he goes to the beach.
Although he complained of concentration and memory loss I thought his descriptions of these aspects did not show any significant difficulty in excess of occasional annoyance. He complained of lack of patience and easy irritability perhaps once a week. His reasons for not working involved his head-spins, his headaches and his back, combined with his difficulties in concentrating and headache when he reads too long. I should say that I accept his evidence of vertigo and consider that it would be difficult for him to undertake manual work which involved significant movement of his head and neck. I also accept that he has continuing symptoms of pain in his back which would further limit his ability to undertake work of this kind. Mr. Keane linked his lack of concentration to the fact that he gets headaches after concentrating for a lengthy period but this does not have any medical support and, in the light of the varying histories and the exiguous evidence of brain damage I do not think that, even if I accepted to some extent his complaints in this regard, these symptoms more probably than not result from the accident.

I have already mentioned Mr. Keane's problems with incontinence and I accept that this condition not only creates a significant degree of personal embarrassment but also inhibits to some, not trivial, extent his freedom of movement. There are occasions when he has completely lost control, perhaps six times in eight months although it only happened twice in the year before his action came on for hearing. He finds that he needs to go three or four times a day to the toilet and every day he suffers from stains on his underwear.

I accept that the plaintiff's back injury, whilst sufficient to prevent him from engaging in labouring or heavy work, is not sufficient by itself to prevent him from engaging in commercial work such as that of a clerk, salesman or shop assistant. I consider that this deficit is for relevant purposes a consequence of the injuries that Mr. Keane suffered when he had his accident.

In their written submissions the first and second defendants (quite reasonably) do not dispute that the plaintiff was significantly disabled throughout 1989 and 1990 until the end of 1991. It is from November 1991 that they submit that the plaintiff has been much less disabled than he asserts and has been capable of work subject to the qualification that on 11 November 1993 his incisional hernia and adhesions were repaired by Doctor O'Connor. However,
I am of the view, taking the evidence as a whole and bearing in mind the significant question mark about credibility which attends the plaintiff's evidence, that the plaintiff does suffer to a degree I would place between slight and moderate from continuing disabilities resulting from the injuries that he received. His headaches were only occasional and I find it difficult on the basis of any medical evidence to conclude, even more probably than not, that they were a result of his injuries. However, I accept that he does suffer from head-spins which occasionally require him to reach out for support. They are only brief, lasting some seconds and mostly brought on by a sudden change of head posture. Even so, the fact that the head-spins continue and that it is necessary for the plaintiff to keep a constant watch on his posture seems to me to be a not insignificant disability productive of some anxiety; it is also associated with brief feelings akin to nausea. I also accept that the plaintiff suffers slightly from the cognitive problems referred to by Mr.
Gubbay but I do not think that this significantly affects his ability to cope with the kind of work which in my opinion is realistically available to him. I put aside the question of gambling for later discussion. I do not accept that there is any real difficulty with the plaintiff's memory. I am of the view that the plaintiff does suffer significantly from pain in his lower back. He also suffers from the inconvenience and embarrassment of minor but continuous incontinence. Taken as a whole (as I think I should) this constellation of disabilities I have no doubt constitute a significant handicap in terms of employment and employability. I accept that the plaintiff would suffer real embarrassment from the scars resulting from his surgery. He said that he would not go to the beach because he was too embarrassed at first but that although he now does go to the beach he still fees embarrassment. The plaintiff made much in his case of agitation and irritability. I simply do not accept this evidence as reliable and, accordingly, put it out of account. The plaintiff claimed that his injury and the effects were significant factors in his marriage break-up. The evidence in relation to this matter is left so uncertain and so unconvincing having regard to his lifestyle prior to the injury that, at the end of the day, I remain unconvinced to the necessary standard about this aspect of his claim. On the other hand I have no doubt that whilst he was suffering from the most distressful symptoms and was being cared for by his wife he found it difficult to cope with the mutual give and take of the marriage situation and this was an element in the total environment of unpleasantness which he was suffering at the time.

As to the plaintiff's capacity for work, both his history of work and his present case were the subject of substantial controversy. He left school in fifth year before completing the Leaving Certificate in about 1964 and his first full time job was as a tally clerk on the waterfront where he was for about two years until he became nineteen. He worked as a wharf labourer then for about eight years for the first six years or so of which he was in Sydney and for the last two years at Port Kembla. When he was about twenty eight years old he finished on the waterfront and, according to him, made his living from gambling on greyhounds. As at the date of trial he had a step-daughter, daughters sixteen and eleven and a son eight years old. Tragically, the plaintiff and his wife lost two children, one his step-son and the other his son killed in accidents. It is clear that Mr. Keane is still very much affected by these dreadful losses.

The plaintiff said that he continued to earn money from gambling until 1985 when the family moved to the Gold Coast, returning to Sydney about two years later. He said at this time that he started a party plan scheme to sell clothing. In essence this meant arranging for women to invite others to their homes to look at and purchase clothes. He said this business was attended to by him regularly until August 1989 when it ceased. The plaintiff said that, through his acquaintance with a Mr. Galea, a manufacturer and retailer of women's clothing, the plaintiff had decided to enter into a partnership with
Mr. Galea to take over an existing business and for that purpose had arranged to borrow fifty thousand dollars to invest. However, this did not eventuate because, in October 1989 the plaintiff suffered his serious accident. He said that since the accident so far as his gambling is concerned he has probably had one or two runs of luck but on the whole was on the "debit side". He said that he does not believe he can make a living as he once did from gambling since he does not have sufficient confidence in his judgment.

One of the very great difficulties with assessing economic loss in this case is that the plaintiff himself did not, except for the tendering of two taxation returns, attempt in his case in chief to quantify let alone verify the income earned from gambling. His reasons rarely got any more specific than the following, from the cross examination of Mr. Hoeben QC 
Q. What sort of living were you getting from your gambling up to 1985 before you went to the Gold 
Coast? A. Oh, I'd - I lived all right, good. I lived, well, good, yes.

Q. Well, can you give us an indication, sir? What sort or money were you earning over a twelve month period when you were working full time as a gambler up to about 1985? A. See it varies. I don't know. I didn't actually count it. I won and I spent the money and - I don't know. I had a 
Mercedes Benz car at one stage. At another stage - actually, the tax investigated me at one stage for that reason. I was living above my means, they thought, which I explained one day. They accepted my explanation; but as far as a figure, I can't put an exact figure on it.

In answer to some further questions from me relating to the twelve months period to December 1984 he said "probably at least fifty thousand dollars" but that this was just an educated opinion. He was then asked - 
Q. That is a net sum, that is to say you, lost some and you won some but you won at least fifty thousand dollars more than you lost? 
A. That would be -at least be possible, yes.

The evidence never got really any better than this. There was other evidence from acquaintances of the plaintiff who supported his case that he was a gambler and, occasionally, in large sums. But, not surprisingly, they were unable to give any evidence about his net success. There was a period which perhaps went for some months after the accident when he had very considerable success as a gambler but even the plaintiff describes this as a run of good luck and it depended not upon his own skills but upon information he was getting from the father of a close friend. Very extensive questioning was devoted to this issue but, in the end, I am left in the situation where I cannot conclude to the relevant standard that the plaintiff made any significant earnings from gambling, still less that he would but for the accident have been able to make a significant income from gambling. It seems to me that the lack of financial records together with the plaintiff's own unreliable and uncertain evidence in this regard must lead to the conclusion that even if he had the occasional lucky streak this does not provide a basis for the assessment of his loss following the accident. I think it far more likely that, if there was a loss of opportunity of gambling, it was rather the loss of an opportunity to lose income rather than gather income. At all events, the evidence is in such a state that I do not see how I could conclude that there was any realistic chance that, had it not been for the accident, the plaintiff would have made a living from gambling. After all, objectively he had decided to take up an alternative, and somewhat more conventional, means of earning an income.

It is difficult to value the possible income that may have been available to him from the proposed partnership with Mr. Galea. Mr. Galea gave evidence and
I thought that he was an honest and reliable witness. He thought that the business which he proposed with Mr. Keane would have been very profitable. So far as the party plan was concerned, he thought that the plaintiff was making perhaps a thousand or twelve hundred dollars or perhaps less a week after costs. However this is considerably in excess of the sum put forward by the plaintiff by way of his Income Tax Returns as the income he was earning. The plaintiff submits that I should infer from the fact Mr. Galea believed the business to be very profitable that Mr. Keane would have been likely to earn more than average weekly earnings. However I do not think that I should proceed upon reasoning of this kind. It seems to me to be purely speculative.
The plaintiff did not seek to ascertain what income would or may have been generated from the business and it is not for me, as I see it, to guess what
Mr. Galea meant by his description "very profitable". At the end of the day, this evidence does not leave me with any material from which I can in any justice and avoiding inappropriate speculation assay an amount which can with any degree of reasonable confidence be said to constitute what the plaintiff lost as a result of his accident. Mr. Galea said that he would have taken the plaintiff on to work in one of his retail outlets as a sales manager if the business did not go ahead. Again, there is no evidence of what earnings might have been expected from a person in such a position although it does seem to me that I could accept that it would be likely to be at or above the average earnings of adult male shop assistants.

Before the accident the plaintiff played sport and undertook a regular regime of physical training involving attendance at the Newtown Police Boys' Club three nights a week and running three nights a week, involving about two hours a day. It is obvious that the plaintiff enjoyed this physical exercise very much and that he now cannot undertake it.

GENERAL DAMAGES 
So far as general damages is concerned, the plaintiff undoubtedly suffered severe injuries associated with humiliating and embarrassing treatment and very great pain and suffering which went on intensely for the first two years following the accident and significantly for the next year. It is true that his recovery to his present state of health has been quite remarkable but nevertheless he suffers from not insignificant continuing disabilities. In my view an appropriate amount for general damages is $120,000 of which $80,000 should be attributed to the past and $40,000 for future.

OUT OF POCKET EXPENSES (PAST) 
As I understand it these have been paid and it is agreed that they are not to be taken into account.

OUT OF POCKET EXPENSES (FUTURE) 
This is more difficult to assess but, doing the best I can, I think that an allowance of $4,000 should be given under this head.

PAST ECONOMIC LOSS 
I accept that the plaintiff was for all practical purposes totally incapacitated until his recovery from the laparotomy performed by Doctor
O'Connor in November 1993. In doing so I bear in mind the constellation of difficulties facing the plaintiff up to that time and I do not think that it would be fair or reasonable to consider him fit for employment or able to undertake any real level of regular employment during that period. This is, therefore, four years and two months. I consider that it is reasonable to assess his loss at this period at a net $25,000 a year and I thus allow under this head $108,200. I think that the plaintiff's residual disabilities make him fit for a wide range of semiskilled work so that from January 1994 to date, he is entitled to the value of the loss of capacity which I accept that the plaintiff's injuries have produced. He is at a real disadvantage on the open labour market for the type of work which he can undertake. In the nature of things, this cannot be reduced to a mere mathematical exercise. I think that an appropriate allowance in this respect is $300 net per week. This comes to an amount of $40200.

FUTURE ECONOMIC LOSS 
In my view, the appropriate allowance under this head is $300 net per week.
Applying the 3% tables and 15% for vicissitudes to 16.5 years results in an amount of $173,719.

GRIFFITHS versus KERKEMEYER (PAST) 
The claim in respect of care provided by the plaintiff's wife up to 2 October is not the subject of significant controversy, although I accept that, on balance, the evidence shows that the plaintiff had a somewhat greater degree of independent action than that asserted by Mrs. Keane. I do not think that, in light of the domestic arrangements, an amount for gardening should be allowed, except minimally. The sum I propose under this head is $30,000.

GRIFFITHS versus KERKEMEYER (FUTURE) 
I do consider there is some, though slight basis for an allowance under this head. I assess it at $5,000.

INTEREST 
I propose to assess this element after submissions following publication of my judgment and reasons.

CONTRIBUTION 
I have already discussed the mode by which, in my view, each of the defendants are liable to the plaintiffs. Having regard to the particular professional duty of the 3rd defendant, I consider that the appropriate reflection of its responsibility for the damage suffered by Mr Keane to be 75% of the total, with the 1st and 2nd defendants equally responsible for the remaining 25%.

COSTS 
The defendants must pay the plaintiffs' costs.

I should refer by way of addendum to my assessment of the evidence of Mrs.
Keane. Because she was not available for cross-examination, it is difficult to arrive with any real degree of satisfaction at a concluded view of her reliability. However, I accept her evidence as reliable, in the main, although somewhat affected by the passage of time and, I think, by her own personal problems. I have arrived at my conclusions without needing to place significant weight on Mrs. Keane's evidence.
 * [1] Per Dixon CJ at 79 [2] 1962-1963 110 CLR at 80 [3] 1962-1963 110 CLR at 83 [4] 1962-1963 110 CLR AT 84-85 <case>; [[1932] AC 562] [6] Per Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson, Toohey, McHugh JJ at <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 376] at pp 383-384; Papatonakis versus Australian Telecommunications
Commission (1985) 156 CLR at p 36; Weber versus Land Agent Board [(1986) 40 SASR ]
at p 316; Lewis versus Tressider Andrews Associates Pty Limited [[1987] 2 Qd R ]
at p 542 [8]See eg Florida Hotels Pty Limited versus Mayo (1965)113 CLR 588 at pp 593, 601.
 <case>; <case>; [32 ALR 251] at 273 [12] 1962-1963 110 CLR at 96-97 [13] [[1953] 2 All ER 1185] [14] [[1941] 1 KB 688] [15] [1941] 2KB 343 [16] [[1945] KB 174] [17] [1961] AC at p 879 [18] 1962-1963 110 CLR at 100.
 [19] Voli versus Inglewood Shire Council [1962-1963] 110 CLR per Windeyer J at 95 [20] [[1976] 1 NSWLR 388] [21] 1976 1 NSWLR at 395 [22] See 1976 1 NSWLR at 394 [[1958] 2 QB 245] at 250 [24] [1976] 1 NSWLR at 402 * * * 
