

Kodak (Australasia) P/L versus Cochan and Ors [1996] NSWSC 120 (10 May 1996) 
Kodak (Australasia) Pty Ltd versus Cochran & Ors /96 
Tuesday, 30 April 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The first defendant, Mr Cochran, controls each of the second, third, fourth, fifth and seventh defendants. He also has a controlling interest in the sixth defendant, which is presently under voluntary administration. 
Since 1993 the third and fourth defendants have been purchasing photographic products from the plaintiff, Kodak. In early February 1996 there was discussion between officers of Kodak and Mr Cochran in relation to moneys outstanding to Kodak for products supplied to the third and fourth defendants, and in relation to the terms on which Kodak would continue to supply those products to those companies. In consequence of those discussions, Kodak received from Mr Cochran prior to 13 February 1996 a form of guarantee dated 6
February 1996, executed by Mr Cochran, of payment to Kodak for all goods supplied or to be supplied by Kodak; secondly, a document dated 8 February addressed to Mr Robins, an officer of Kodak, stating: "As per our conversation of 7/2/96 upon settlement of the sale of HAS Computer
Software in the United States, the proceeds will be deposited in the Olan
Mills Studio account and of these proceeds the sum of $110,000.00 will be applied to pay off the outstanding balance of account. This letter is notice that you are entitled to any rights and property owned personally by Tom
Cochran including any land in his possession, more particularly land in the
United States currently valued at $US816,000.00 so described as being in the
State of Illinois, County of Madison, sub-division of Camelot, tract 4 through , which is hereby given to you as security for payment of current debt owed to Kodak by Olan Mills Studio and Portrait Express.

I hereby agree that in the event of default by Olan Mills Studio or Portrait
Express in payment of the current balance of account to Kodak, that Kodak may take and apply the property and rights referred to above for the payment of the debt owed by Olan Mills Studio or Portrait Express to Kodak. This agreement shall be valid until we resume normal credit terms next month ." 
Thirdly, Kodak received from Mr Cochran a cheque post dated 16 February 1996 in Kodak's favour in an amount of $110,000.00 drawn on the account of the third defendant, on the top of which was written an endorsement in the following terms: "This cheque shall be invalid and unpresentable until settlement shall occur between Tom Cochran and the other computer company currently underway." 
The sale of HAS Computer Software referred to in the document of 8 February and the transaction referred to in the endorsement on the cheque were references to a proposed sale to a Mr G J Edney of shares apparently beneficially owned by the third defendant in a company called Hospital
Administration Software Solutions Pty Ltd. That sale was formalised in an agreement, to which Mr Cochran was a party, dated 6 March 1996, pursuant to which amounts totalling $400,000.00 were deposited into the third defendant's bank account between 8 March and 22 March 1996 in payment of the purchase price. No notice of receipt of these payments was given to Kodak.

On or about 29 February 1996 Mr Cochran arranged to stop payment on the cheque for $110,000.00 and when that cheque was later presented by Kodak it was dishonoured by the bank on which it was drawn. Mr Cochran claims that he took these steps in response to what he says was believed by him to be repudiation by Kodak of the arrangement of early February 1996 whereby Kodak was to continue to supply photographic products to the third and fourth defendants.
If so, Mr Cochran neglected to inform Kodak of that belief or that he regarded the arrangements as having been brought to an end in that or any other way.

Mr Cochran is an American national, although his wife and young child are
Australian citizens. Mr Cochran has lived mainly in Australia for a number of years, but in the last few months has been preparing to move his residence to the United States. It appears that he has a new business interest in the
United States in the form of a majority interest in a company called Clinsoft
Inc, which was incorporated in the State of Georgia in January 1996 for the purpose of developing and marketing specialist computer software. He was to leave Australia on 28 March 1996 but was restrained by an order of the Court which was continued in effect from time to time until 18 April 1996.

Mr Cochran has, it appears, already invested approximately $200,000.00 in the establishment of the business of Clinsoft. A budget prepared for that company records that it is anticipated that the company will have a negative cash flow until October 1996 aggregating approximately $US670,000.00, and one assumes that this will have to be funded from some source. There is every reason to infer that Mr Cochran has in mind that at least some funds for that venture will be provided out of funds under the control of the third defendant. The evidence reveals that as of 30 September 1995 amounts totalling approximately $500,000.00 had been advanced by the third defendant to the fifth defendant as trustee of a trust called the Bomeric Trust and then on-lent by that trust to
Mr Cochran, who, it appears, is not a beneficiary under the trust, although relatives of his are.

By 31 March 1996 a further $175,000.00 had been advanced by the third defendant to that trust and presumably on-lent to Mr Cochran in the same way.
Those loans may well be irrecoverable.

The inference is well open that over the years Mr Cochran has been funding his own activities of one kind and another from moneys advanced by the third defendant to the trust and then on lent to him. The inference is also well open that the accounting procedures of all the defendant companies are unreliable and inaccurate, and there is evidence that the accounting figures may have been in some respects manipulated by Mr Cochran. At the very least they do not inspire confidence in any independent control of the movement of funds or other assets within those companies.

The evidence also reveals that the land in the United States which was proffered as security in the document of 8 February 1996, is not in fact owned by Mr Cochran and one may readily infer that the value of that security is nil.

On 1 March 1996 Kodak served statutory demands on each of the third defendant claiming $63,966.16 and the fourth defendant claiming $199,920.65. It has been conceded that there is a prima facie case that these sums are in fact owing.
It has been claimed in these proceedings that in fact a greater sum is owing, but there is no evidence from which a conclusion may be reliably drawn that that is in fact so.

In the present proceedings, Kodak is suing Mr Cochran for recovery of these and additional amounts under the guarantee of 6 February 1996. It also seeks relief relating to the document of 8 February 1996 but no reliance has been placed on any legal rights arising from that document for the purpose of the present application. Before the matter came before me various Mareva injunctions and ancillary orders requiring, amongst other things, the disclosure of assets by Mr Cochran and the defendant companies were made by
Brownie J. In response to those orders, various affidavits have been made by
Mr Cochran, the sufficiency of the earlier of which were challenged, and Mr
Cochran was cross-examined both before Brownie J and also before me. A Mareva injunction substantially in the form which was granted by Brownie J remains in force until further order. The question is whether such an injunction should continue after today, and if so, on what terms? 
It is impossible within the ambit of this judgment to deal with all the evidence that has been placed before me, which is quite voluminous, but on a consideration of that evidence I have reached the conclusion that there is a substantial danger that insofar as Mr Cochran's assets in Australia are now represented solely by his interests in the defendant companies, he is likely to cause the value of those assets, and in particular such value as remains in the third and fourth defendants, to be substantially diminished by seeking to utilise available funds outside Australia so as to frustrate the enforcement of any judgment obtained by Kodak in these proceedings.

I have also reached the conclusion that the danger to which I have referred is sufficiently great to justify some form of continuing Mareva relief. I should add, however, that I am not satisfied that Mr Cochran's move to the United
States was made with the object of defeating creditors in Australia. I do not accept the evidence, principally that of or emanating from Mr Pfitzner, suggesting otherwise. On the evidence before me, I would conclude that it has been Mr Cochran's intention to retain business interests in Australia and to return to Australia from time to time, if not ultimately permanently, with his family.

As I have said, I think that some limited form of continuing Mareva relief is justified, but not in the wide form of the injunction currently in force. The
Court must always be careful when granting relief of this kind to take such steps as it can take to ensure that in restraining what would, in effect, be an abuse of the Court's process, it does not restrain legitimate activity or paralyse the business operations of a defendant or otherwise prejudice in an unfair manner the interests of a defendant.

With these considerations in mind I propose to continue an injunction only as against Mr Cochran and the third and fourth defendants and their holding company, the second defendant. I do not think it is reasonable to affect by the continuing injunction any assets outside Australia. Because the form of injunction which I propose is not a form which the parties have had any opportunity of considering, since the plaintiff primarily sought a continuation of the existing wide form and the defendants primarily submitted that there should be no injunction at all, I will reserve leave after I have made these orders for any party to apply to have their terms adjusted or varied in point of detail.

The form of order which I propose is as follows. Upon the plaintiff by its counsel giving to the Court the usual undertaking as to damages: 
A order that until the final determination of these proceedings or further order the first defendant be restrained from, without the leave of the Court: causing or permitting any funds or other assets of the third defendant or of the fourth defendant to be: directly or indirectly transferred outside Australia; transferred to any other company controlled by the first defendant, or dealt with otherwise than in the ordinary course of the business of the third defendant or the fourth defendant respectively; causing or permitting the second defendant to deal with its shares in the third defendant or the fourth defendant or to otherwise relinquish control of either of those companies; dealing with his shares in the second defendant or otherwise relinquishing control of the second defendant.

B order that until the final determination of these proceedings or further order each of the second, third and fourth defendants be restrained from, without the leave of the Court, causing or permitting any funds or other assets of any of them to be: directly or indirectly transferred outside Australia; transferred to any other company controlled by the first defendant, or dealt with otherwise than in the ordinary course of the business of the second, third and fourth defendants respectively.

Those are the orders I propose. I make orders in those terms subject to the plaintiff giving the usual undertaking as to damages.
 [Mr Nicholas gave that undertaking] 
I will have the matter listed on some near future date that is convenient to the parties so there can be any fine tuning that may be required to those orders and secondly, to deal with the question of costs relating to the application which I heard. I will direct it be listed at 9.30 am on Thursday of next week.

Kodak (Australasia) Pty Ltd versus Cochran & Or /96 
Friday, 10 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT (costs only) 
HIS HONOUR: There remains for decision the question of the incidence of costs in respect of the applications for Mareva injunctions and ancillary orders which came before Brownie J on 28 and 29 March 1996 and 4 April 1996, and before me on 15, 16, 17, 18 and 30 April 1996 and 9 May 1996. All parties have asked me to deal with the costs of the proceedings both before Brownie J and myself.

It seems to me that the various orders made by Brownie J were, subject to one qualification, based on a proposition which I have now held to be unsustained, namely that on 28 March 1996 Mr Cochran was in the process of leaving
Australia for the United States with the object of defeating the claims of creditors in Australia. The qualification is that certain of the orders made by his Honour on 4 April 1996 were based on the additional circumstance that his Honour considered that affidavits made by Mr Cochran and his accountant in response to the order of 28 March 1996 "at least on a prima facie level ...
leave unanswered, or answered in what may turn out to be an unsatisfactory way, some of the questions", on which basis his Honour permitted cross- examination of Mr Cochran and his accountant on those affidavits, following which his Honour came to the view that the disclosure pursuant to the earlier order was inadequate.

In my opinion, in respect of the hearings before Brownie J the justice of the case requires that Kodak bear its own costs of the application made on 28
March 1996 which was an ex parte application, that Mr Cochran have his costs against Kodak of the application heard on 29 March 1996, and that each party bear his or its own costs of the hearing on 4 April 1996.

It is necessary to bear in mind that the orders of 28 March 1996 and 29 March were made in proceedings 1674/96 in which Portrait Express (Sales) Pty
Ltd was the plaintiff and Kodak was the defendant and in which Mr Cochran was the respondent to a notice of motion filed by Kodak. All subsequent orders were made in proceedings 1750/96 which were commenced by summons filed on 29
March 1996, and subsequent references in this judgment to the plaintiff and the defendants are intended to denote the plaintiff and the defendants in proceedings 1750/96.

On the first day of the hearing before me, that is 15 April 1996, the defendants made an open offer to the plaintiff in writing (which had been orally foreshadowed on 10 April 1996) to provide specific security to the plaintiff in respect of the debts, recovery of which was claimed by the plaintiff in the proceedings. The terms of that offer and supporting documentation were later received into evidence as exhibits DX4 and DX5, an associated document being exhibit PX6. That offer was not accepted by the plaintiff. It remained open (with one minor qualification) until the closing submissions for the defendants on 18 April 1996, when it was withdrawn. The acceptance of that security in lieu of the Mareva injunction may well have posed some risks for the plaintiff as its counsel has maintained, but a Mareva injunction does not avoid risk of unavailability of assets to satisfy a judgment. The plaintiff's decision not to accept the offer of security or to negotiate alterations to its terms was no doubt a commercial one which it was entitled to make. But it does not follow that that decision has no influence on the question of costs. Applications for Mareva injunctions (and applications ancillary thereto) raise issues which go well beyond issues for determination at a final hearing of proceedings of this kind. The interlocutory ventilation of those issues, extraneous to the ultimate determination of the proceedings, can, and in this case did, consume a very considerable amount of time and expense. It must always be remembered that
Mareva injunctions are an extraordinary form of relief, which are certainly not obtainable as of course. The plaintiff was entitled to press for Mareva injunctive relief which, following withdrawal of the offer of security, was ultimately obtained, albeit in a substantially more limited form than had been claimed. However, I think that the plaintiff's non-acceptance of the offer of security should in the circumstances attract some adverse costs consequences.

Although I ultimately made no order against the fifth, sixth and seventh defendants, and it is agreed that they now be removed as defendants from the proceedings, there is no suggestion that those defendants incurred any costs additional to the costs incurred by the first, second, third and fourth defendants, and it is unnecessary to make separate provision for the costs of those parties.

The conclusion I have reached on the question of costs of the applications heard before me is (1) that the plaintiff's costs of the hearing on 15 April , and of 30 April 1996, should, as against the first, second, third and fourth defendants, be costs in the cause; (2) that the plaintiff should pay to the first, second, third and fourth defendants their costs of 16 and 17 April ; and (3) that otherwise each party should bear his or its own costs to date of the interlocutory applications.
 * * * 
