

Regina versus Walters Matter No 70031/96 [1998] NSWSC 345 (24 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 September 1998 
REGINA versus SCOTT WARREN WALTERS /96 March 1998 
Black AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Scott Warren Walters is indicted for manslaughter the particulars being that on the 22nd April 1995 at Bidwell in the State of New South Wales he did feloniously slay Rikki-Lee Walters. He elected trial by judge alone to which the Director of Public Prosecutions consented. I am satisfied pursuant to [section 32(1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s32.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) that before he made the election he sought and received advice in relation to that election from his barrister and/or his solicitor. 
Rikki-Lee Walters was born on the 23rd of January 1995 at the Nepean Hospital.
Her mother was Karen Hoenstok and her father was the accused. The accused was present at the birth.

Dr Paul Appleton of the Nepean Hospital attended Karen Hoenstok during the birth. Karen was given intravenous antibiotics prior to delivery in respect of recurrent urinary tract infections and maternal genital tract group B strep colonisation. He described delivery as normal and said the baby was found on initial, and on subsequent routine examinations at the hospital, to be normal.
It was noted that the baby was bottle fed and discharged with the mother from the maternity unit on the 24th of January 1995. He could find nothing medical in the baby's antenatal or perinatal history that would have contributed to her death.

Nurse Susan Ulanas was also present at the birth of Rikki-Lee. Pursuant to authorisation from Dr Appleton and with consent from the mother, she administered an injection of vitamin K to Rikki-Lee about two hours after
Rikki-Lee's birth.

At the age of eleven days Rikki-Lee presented to Dr Sternberg the local GP used by her parents with an infection of the umbilical stump. An antibiotic was administered. No further details are in evidence about this and Dr
Sternberg was not called as a witness because he is overseas.

A number of witnesses gave evidence about the relationship between the accused and Rikki-Lee. Barbara Stewart, the accused's stepmother, said he was "an excellent dad" and "he was more of a mother to Rikki-Lee than what Karen was" and "he certainly did adore her, yes". Candy Stone, a friend of Barbara
Stewart, described the accused's reaction to the birth of Rikki-Lee as follows: "Scott was stoked. He could not believe that he actually had a baby and she was beautiful. He was ecstatic." 
She said he was "an excellent father" and "I have seen him be her mother, that is more what Scott was, her mother and father all in one". Yvonne Hoenstok, the mother of Karen, described the accused as "a very affectionate father" and "very attached to Rikki-Lee". In her view the allegation that the accused had violently shaken Rikki-Lee probably while in a rage was not in keeping with her understanding of the relationship between Scott and Rikki-Lee. Karen
Hoenstok said of the accused "He was always very good with Rikki-Lee, he used to do a lot for her, he used to change nappies for her and feed her and he did all of them quite well". As a result of what was said to her immediately after
Rikki-Lee's death she was under the impression that somebody had hit Rikki-Lee in the head with a blunt object. She did not think that the accused had done such a thing. She said that the accused probably did more for Rikki-Lee than she did. It was she who terminated the relationship between herself and the accused. The accused did not want to. She still regards the accused as a good friend, although she no longer loves him.

I observed those witnesses closely while they were giving the above evidence and there was no indication, nor indeed has anyone suggested, that in some way they had agreed together to give evidence favourable to the accused. Having regard to the different relationships each of those witnesses had with the accused I am satisfied, quite apart from what the accused himself said, that he was a devoted and caring father to Rikki-Lee.

Various questions were also asked of the above witnesses and the accused to ascertain whether there was any strain in the relationship or other circumstances giving rise to stress in the relationship. Both the parents of
Rikki-Lee were unemployed at the time but they were living in perfectly adequate accommodation which the photographs illustrate to have been well cared for. Yvonne Hoenstok said she was in a position to make financial provision to assist if necessary but it had not been necessary. While there had been the occasional disagreement between the couple, there is no suggestion there had been anything out of the ordinary in their relationship and they had no intention of parting. It was the accused's first child but on the above evidence he appears to have coped extremely well.

According to the accused, there was an occasion in early April 1995 when he and Rikki-Lee were at a petrol station. Having put petrol in his vehicle and having paid for it he collided with another male person as a result of which
Rikki-Lee whom he was carrying at the time was knocked from his grasp and fell to the floor. He was able to grab her and avoid any significant impact occurring between Rikki-Lee and the floor. He said the other person did not apologise and would not discuss the incident with him as a result of which he became angry, handed Rikki-Lee to a female bystander and followed the person who had collided with him, remonstrated with that person and exchanged some blows. This incident is not put forward by the defence as having any relevance to the matters disclosed on the post-mortem examination, nor to the death of
Rikki-Lee. It was not put forward by the accused as an explanation or an excuse. When Senior Constable Anne Thoms asked Karen Hoenstok and the accused a series of questions after Rikki-Lee had been pronounced dead at the hospital, one of those questions was "Did Rikki-Lee have any falls or any trauma of any kind recently?". Karen Hoenstok told the officer about the garage incident at which she was not present but of which she had been told by the accused. Detective Senior Constable Brett Guyatt became aware of this and raised it with the accused at the Mount Druitt Police Station in the early hours of the 23rd of April 1995. It is necessary to deal with this incident because the Crown says that if it happened it shows that the accused was capable of snapping and shaking Rikki-Lee in the way alleged. The Crown raises the issue as to whether the incident did in fact occur because two witnesses from the garage in question who were working there on the 1st of April 1995 said they were unaware of any incident similar to that described by the accused occurring. A number of other witnesses confirmed that they had been told of the incident by either the accused and/or Karen. I accept the accused's evidence that the incident did in fact occur as described by him and the nature of the incident was not such in my judgment that it must inevitably have been apparent to any employee present at the time. I turn then to the second aspect put forward by the Crown, namely that I should infer that because of his actions as described by him the accused was therefore capable of harming Rikki-Lee. In my judgment his description of his reaction to the incident would not warrant any such finding. He was angered and no doubt frightened by what had happened and acted in defence of his daughter. For my [part
I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/index.html#p1) do not see how that could indicate he would act to her detriment.

For completeness, I should say that according to Karen Hoenstok there was an occasion about two weeks before Rikki-Lee's death when she was at Barbara
Stewart's house with a number of friends and Rikki-Lee was lying on the floor in the lounge room a person called Craig Findlay walked past Rikki-Lee and accidentally kicked her in the head. He was wearing a pair of boots of some kind. She examined Rikki-Lee and there was no sign of any mark and she did not attach any further significance to the incident. It is not suggested by anybody that that incident is of any relevance in assessing the medical evidence to which I shall come later.

On the 19th of April 1995 Senior Nurse White injected Rikki-Lee intramuscularly with a number of vaccinations which included triple-antigen, hibtiter, hepatitis B and polio syrup. She removed most of Rikki-Lee's clothing in order to be able to inject the vaccination into both of her thighs and in to the upper outer quadrant of her buttock. When she removed the clothing she had a good view of the child's body and there were no signs of injury. Rikki-Lee had been seen by Dr Sternberg prior to Nurse White administering the injections. As I have already said, Dr Sternberg is overseas and was not available to be called. If there was any issue raised about the child having a cold or illness it was the doctor's decision as to whether or not the vaccinations should be administered. The triple-antigen vaccination included anti-whooping cough namely petussis vaccine. She used vaccines provided by the Medical Centre. The vaccination should have been carried out two months after Rikki-Lee's birth, namely in March. Although Rikki-Lee was some weeks late in being vaccinated, she does not recollect any explanation being given as to why this delay had occurred. She did not do a full examination of the baby. Karen Hoenstok said she had delayed taking Rikki-Lee because Rikki-Lee had a cold. According to Karen Hoenstok, Rikki-Lee had a bit of irritation on her arm where she had the needles and a slight fever which lasted for about twenty four hours. She and the accused both administered baby
Panadol available from the chemist to Rikki-Lee after her vaccination.

As far as Rikki-Lee's feeding habits are concerned, Karen Hoenstok said that
Rikki-Lee was bottle fed from the outset and she had changed the type of formula more than once because Rikki-Lee used to vomit a lot when she was bringing up wind. Rikki-Lee was still bringing up the last formula she was on.
She was still being sick more than regularly in large amounts and Karen was going to switch to another formula. Karen Hoenstok had some apprehension of what may be described as the authorities in connection with children because of some incident that had occurred to one of her other children which she had drawn to the attention of the appropriate persons but for which she considered she had been punished. Also, she appears to have lost a custody dispute between herself and the father of another daughter. I am confident, having seen her however, that in the case of Rikki-Lee if she had believed herself there was a serious problem, she would have sought appropriate medical treatment and, in particular, I have no doubt that if she had ever seen, or had reason to believe, that the accused had behaved inappropriately towards
Rikki-Lee, she would have said so.

On the 22nd of April 1995 there was a family get-together in Bathurst to which
Karen and others decided they would go. The accused decided that he would not go but would remain and look after Rikki-Lee. The Bathurst party appears to have left about midday, arriving in Bathurst about 3 o'clock. They were in two cars and there appears to have been trouble with the cars either on the way back or both on the way there and on the way back. According to Barbara
Stewart they returned to her home in Sydney about 11 o'clock in the evening of the 22nd. There had been a somewhat loose arrangement between Karen and the accused that Karen expected to be back about 8 o'clock that evening and that the accused would come over to Barbara Stewart's house to collect Karen around that time. According to the accused, he stayed at Barbara Stewart's house until about 3.00 pm that afternoon and three other people were also there. He remembers Rikki-Lee being fine, quiet and asleep. At one stage she woke up to be fed and he fed her. She did not take very much of that feed and went back to sleep. Barry White gave evidence that he was present at this time and
Rikki-Lee appeared normal to him. He would have remembered it if anything unusual had occurred in relation to Rikki-Lee. After the accused got back to the home at Bidwell he put Rikki-Lee in the capsule in the lounge room and then did some washing and cleaning up for about one and a half to two hours.
Rikki-Lee remained asleep until he woke her to feed her again around 6 o'clock. She took between a quarter and half a bottle of formula which he had prepared. After he had fed her he burped her, changed her nappy and put her to bed on the double waterbed upstairs in the main bedroom. After he had put
Rikki-Lee down to sleep he went downstairs, laid down and dozed off until about 10 o'clock or some time after. He awoke between 10 and 10.30 and went up to Rikki-Lee. When he went back up he saw her lying face down. He said "oh no, oh no" and picked her up "She just felt real loose, her head just dropped back", she had no pulse and there was no breathing and he started first-aid resuscitation. He breathed into her mouth, mouth to mouth, and pressed her chest. He said he was in shock. He said he spent about five minutes trying to recover her then he picked her up, raced downstairs and across the road to ring the ambulance. He denied having shaken her at all that night. He was asked whether he shook her violently and he said "No, there is no way in the world I would do something like that to her". He was then asked "Is it possible that you shook her and you just do not recall having done it?". To which he replied "Could be possible, but". He said he had no reason to be angry with Rikki-Lee and she was not crying or screaming. According to the
Ambulance Service Treatment Report the ambulance was called at 22:49 hours on the 22nd of April. The ambulance arrived at 22:55 hours and departed for the hospital at 23:30, arriving at 23:40.

Brian Hanrahan lived across the road from the home of Karen and the accused.
He said that just before 11.00 pm on Saturday the 22nd of April he heard some screaming coming from across the road and soon after this the accused came into his yard. He walked up to the front of the house and said "Excuse me, excuse me, my baby isn't breathing". Mr Hanrahan said the accused seemed really upset. He let the accused in and rang for the ambulance. While waiting for the ambulance the accused attempted some resuscitation and the ambulance then arrived and the officers took over. After the ambulance had departed for the hospital, Karen arrived and he told her that the accused and the baby were at the hospital at Mount Druitt.

Luciana Astorga was at Mr Hanrahan's house that evening. He heard the sounds of someone screaming, saw someone jump over the front fence and bang on the front door of the house. It was the accused and he had a baby in his arms. The accused said "Help me, help me, my baby's stopped breathing, call an ambulance or something". The accused came into the house and put the baby on the floor.
He then started to attempt resuscitation. Mr Astorga tried to take the baby's pulse at the neck. He could feel something and said "She's got a pulse but she's not breathing". Attempts at resuscitation continued and then the ambulance officers arrived and set up their equipment and started to work on the baby. He said the accused was extremely distressed and panic-stricken; the less the baby responded the more the accused panicked.

Melissa Ann Horrex was also at Mr Hanrahan's home that evening. She heard the sound of a man screaming and then the accused arrived at the front door and entered the house with a baby in his arms. She noticed that the baby was floppy and did not look very much alive. She too described attempts by the accused to resuscitate the child and the subsequent arrival of the ambulance officers. After the officers arrived she heard the accused say "I hope the baby doesn't die, she will blame me for it". She went on to say that if she had been looking after the child she would say the same thing. I do not attach any significance to that remark. It was not put forward as amounting to any admission of guilt and, indeed, it is clear from the evidence of Karen
Hoenstok that she did not blame the accused. Miss Horrex agreed that the accused was panic-stricken.

Darrell Smith and Allan Hawkings were the two ambulance officers who initially responded to the call. On examination of Rikki-Lee Mr Smith said there was no pulse, no respiration, the pupils were dilated and fixed. Mr Hawkings commenced resuscitation and Mr Smith called for the paramedics. He then assisted in attempts at resuscitation until the arrival of the paramedics. His initial observations of Rikki-Lee were that she was pale in colour, still warm to the touch and still flexible in the limbs and joints. He recalled, on arrival, that somebody, he's not sure who, was attempting resuscitation of the baby. The treatment he was involved in included the insertion of a Gadell's
Airway and the use of a Ledell resuscitation bag.

Allan Hawkings said that, on arrival, he saw a male person who he was later told to be the father of the child, attempting mouth to mouth resuscitation.
He moved that male person away from the baby. In relation to one of the post- mortem photographs, marked "AH" on the back, illustrating the condition of
Rikki-Lee's nose, he said what was shown in the photograph could have been caused by the equipment they used. He agreed that the accused was extremely upset and he had to drag the accused from Rikki-Lee. He did not smell alcohol on the breath of the accused.

Ian Dwyer is a paramedic and he attended Mr Hanrahan's house, together with fellow officer Lexey Quinn. When they took over from the two ambulance officers they connected their own cardiac monitor and intubated the baby. He could not find a pulse, nor could he hear a heartbeat. Although electrical complexes were showing on the cardiac monitor screen, that did not necessarily mean that the heart was beating. He then administered various drugs to attempt to restart the heart muscle. The baby was placed in the ambulance and taken to
Mount Druitt Hospital and at the hospital the baby was examined by a paediatric doctor who declared the baby dead. When he first saw the baby she was pale in colour and warm to touch. In his view, death must have occurred within less than half an hour because of the electrical complexes showing on the monitor. He had arrived on location at 23:04 hours. In his view the bruise on Rikki-Lee's right knee, the two bruises on the top of Rikki-Lee's head and a bruise on Rikki-Lee's right arm were not caused by anything he could think of in the course of resuscitation. In cross-examination, however, he accepted that inserting an intraosseous cannula into the right leg may have resulted in some bruising.

Lexey Quinn recollected that whilst he was at Mr Hanrahan's premises, the accused kept coming in and out of the room where they were treating the baby and he heard the accused say something like "Can you do something to save her?" and also "What's happening?".

Robert Ingram was staying at the granny flat out the back of Yvonne Hoenstok premises and, at some stage, on the night of the 22nd of April he was woken up by the accused knocking on the door and calling out the names of Mr Ingram and
Mr Ingram's girlfriend. Mr Ingram answered the door and saw the accused standing at the door. He was "freaking out and was in tears". The accused said
Rikki-Lee was at the hospital where she had stopped breathing and Mrs Hoenstok came on the scene and they all went to the hospital.

Senior Constable Anne Thoms attended the Mount Druitt Hospital in connection with this matter about 2.20 am on the 23rd of April 1995. After speaking with the nursing sister of the Accident and Emergency section, she went to a room where she saw Karen Hoenstok, the accused and the deceased Rikki-Lee. She asked him a number of questions, including "What happened tonight?". The accused replied "I gave Rikki half a bottle of milk formula about 6.30 pm, I put her in the water bed and went downstairs, and fell asleep. I woke up at .30 pm. Went upstairs and found her face down on the bed, her head flopped and she wasn't breathing. I gave her mouth to mouth and ran across the road with the baby. I asked them to ring the ambulance. I kept doing mouth to mouth. I worked on the baby, and ran back to the house and got the bag from the house." She agreed that when she first saw the accused at the hospital he appeared upset; he was very quiet and withdrawn.

Detective Senior Constable Guyatt became involved in this matter in the early hours of Sunday the 23rd of April. In his initial conversation with the accused he asked for an account of what happened after the accused returned home on the afternoon of the Saturday and in relation to the events from about o'clock onwards the accused gave substantially the same account as he had already given to Constable Thoms. However, the Detective Constable asked the accused the following question: "Did you hear anything from the baby after you went downstairs?". The accused replied "No, nothing." 
Detective Constable Guyatt subsequently had a conversation with Dr Little, the forensic pathologist, and shortly after 10.00 pm on Monday the 24th of April an electronically recorded record of interview was conducted with the accused at Mount Druitt Police Station. The accused confirmed the correctness of the officer's record of conversation initially held with him to which I have already referred. After confirming the accuracy of the officer's record of a subsequent conversation, principally relating to the garage incident earlier in April, the accused was asked to go through the circumstances of what happened on Saturday the 22nd of April. According to the accused, the last formula with which Rikki-Lee was being fed was better for her than the previous formula in that she wasn't bringing it up much. He went on to describe putting Rikki-Lee to bed on the double water bed on her side and tucking her in a bit with a quilt. He said in answer to questions 125 and following "that after placing her in the bed I went downstairs, I was just fixing up a little bit, I laid down watching telly and fell asleep". He fell asleep about 8 o'clock. He was asleep for about three hours. He then said he laid down at 7 o'clock and woke about twenty past ten, something like that.
When he woke up he realised he had to go and pick up Karen; he went upstairs to check on Rikki-Lee and saw her face down on the bed. He said he picked her up, "I checked her to see if she was breathing and her pulse - there was nothing". He gave her mouth to mouth, she didn't come through so he has gone straight across the road. He then described how he was giving her mouth to mouth. He said he was in shock. He went straight across the road and, while the ambulance was coming, he was giving her mouth to mouth.

Starting at question 223, various questions were asked by Detective Nagy. He asked the accused whether Rikki-Lee was awake when he put her to bed and the accused said she was. The officer then asked "Was she crying at the time". The accused answered: "For awhile and then she stopped, 'cause I went back up there." He went on to say it was after he left Rikki-Lee that she started crying. He was asked at question 235: "How long was she crying for?" The answer the accused gave "She was, sometimes she cries up till about half an hour but not even that." Question: "So you could say it was about half an hour that she was?". Answer: "Yeah." 
Detective Senior Constable Guyatt agreed that the accused was giving a rough estimate as to the time at which he woke up on the Saturday night.

I have already mentioned some of the accused's evidence relating to the night in question and I now proceed to deal with further aspects of his evidence before me. In cross-examination he was asked if Rikki-Lee ever cried for longer than a couple of seconds and he said "No." He was further asked "On this Saturday did she cry for longer than that, when you put her down at 7.30 did she cry at all?" Answer: "She would have had a little cry and then stopped and dozed off." Question: "When you say a little cry and then she stopped, do you have any idea, are we talking about minutes or seconds?" Answer: "It could have been seconds, I am not sure." Question: "What about half an hour, could it have been an half an hour she was crying?" Answer: "No, she could not have." He was asked later in cross-examination about the passage in the record of interview to which I have already referred. After a number of further questions he was asked this question: "Mr Walters, now that I have pointed out to you what is recorded as being the conversation you had with the police officers and bearing in mind that you have told his Honour when your barrister was asking you questions that it was a few seconds, up to a minute maybe, what do you say now as to how long it could have been that she was crying?" Answer: "I'm giving a rough idea, may have been a couple of minutes up to half an hour, between then." The accused went on to say that that night Rikki-Lee cried for longer than normal.

The accused was asked a number of questions in cross-examination about the answer to his counsel in evidence-in-chief when he said it could be possible that he shook her and that he did not remember he did it. The effect of those further questions on this topic and his answers was that he was saying he did not accept he might have shaken Rikki-Lee in the way described by the doctors and he confirmed that in an answer given to me at the end of his evidence.

The accused said that when he picked Rikki-Lee up from the bed, he was not supporting her head fully and that is why he describes her head as just flopping.

He was then asked a series of questions in relation to the time between the time he woke up and the ambulance being summonsed.

The accused was also asked in cross-examination as to why he had told the police initially that he did not hear anything further of her, whereas in his evidence before me he had said that because she was still crying he eventually went back up and patted her to sleep. He said he had made a mistake about that.

I have dealt with these matters at some length because the Crown has submitted that three issues arise from this area of evidence which should be determined adversely to the accused. Firstly, the Crown says there is a significant gap in the timing between the accused waking up and arriving at Mr Hanrahan's house to ask that the ambulance be summonsed. In my view, as indeed was acknowledged by Detective Senior Constable Guyatt, there was no precision being attached by the accused nor by the interviewing police officers as to time. There is clear evidence that the accused was in a state of panic; such a state would not, in my judgment, be solely consistent with guilt or knowledge that he the accused had done something wrong. The state of panic may well account for any apparent gap in the timing if indeed there is one of any significance. At the end of the day, in my judgment, even if there is a gap to be filled in, that would not inevitably point to guilt. Secondly, the Crown says that the accused changed his story in the witness box about Rikki-Lee crying because of the evidence given by the doctors as to how a crying baby could provoke even a loving parent into losing control. I do not consider that the accused deliberately changed his story in the witness box: The record of interview shows he had initially said he didn't hear any more from Rikki-Lee and much later in the recorded interview he said she did cry after he put her down and he went back up to her. It is not clear from those subsequent questions as to for precisely how long she may have cried. Thirdly, in relation to what he said about possibly having shaken her, the Crown suggested in his closing address that that was practically an admission of guilt. I do not agree and did not so regard it when the accused was giving evidence about the matter. The Crown further said on the basis of the above three matters that I should therefore conclude that the accused had fabricated his account of the events of that night, presumably fabricated by omitting acts or actions that he had done. By reason of my views on the various matters put forward in support of that assertion, it follows I do not reach that conclusion.

I now turn to consider the medical evidence.

Dr Little is a forensic pathologist who has been working in pathology since and in forensic pathology since 1984. She carried out the post-mortem on
Rikki-Lee on the 24th of April 1995. Her report consisting of seven pages is
Exhibit "AC". She says that in her opinion the cause of death was subdural haemorrhage. I summarise the contents of that report as follows:- 
On page 2 she lists under the heading "Injuries" seven separate matters. It is not necessary to refer further to items 4 to 7; nor to item 1 as it was accepted that those injuries, namely, to the nose and around the mouth probably resulted from resuscitation attempts. Injury number 2 is described as a 6 mm diameter rounded brown bruise on the flexible aspect of the upper right arm, 45 mm below the tip of shoulder. Injury number 3 is described as an irregularly 15 mm diameter purple coloured bruise over the medial aspect of the right knee.

Internal examination of the head revealed two bruises on the scalp, 6 mm and mm diameter respectively, with no bruising seen on the overlying skin relating thereto. There were no fractures of the skull, subdural haemorrhage was present diffusely across the superior surface of the right cerebral hemisphere.

There was no evidence of bruising of the neck. There were no fractures of the rib cage.

No digested food was seen in the intestine and there was minimal faecal material within the colon.

An x-ray skeletal survey was performed and no evidence of old or recent trauma or other bony disease was seen.

Macroscopic examination of the brain revealed the subdural blood clot and subarachnoid haemorrhage.

Examination of the fixed eyes noted haemorrhages around both sides of the optic nerve and diffuse retinal haemorrhages.

Microscopic examination showed haemorrhage within the dura and on its subdural surface scattered microscopic perivascular haemorrhages were present in the tegmentum of the pons. Subarachnoid haemorrhage was present over the pons and confirmed where it was seen macroscopically. The presence of cytomegalovirus was confirmed in the lungs. There was laryngo-pharyngitis. There was moderate microvesicular steatosis present in the liver.

In relation to the scalp, the appearances were those of an ante-mortem bruise.
In relation to the right knee, the appearances were those of an ante-mortem bruise. In relation to the anterior fontanelle, the appearances were those of an ante-mortem injury.

Cytomegalovirus was isolated from a nasal swab.

She said that cytomegalovirus was a viral pneumonia which she would not expect to cause death but would expect to cause something like a bad cold, maybe bronchitis. Once the subdural haemorrhage formed she would expect a child to show some degree of irritability. Other symptoms may or may not be present; eventually the child would lose consciousness. She is not able to put a more precise time as it depends on how fast the bleeding was. The microscopic examination of the subdural haemorrhage told her that the haemorrhage occurred within around twelve hours prior to Rikki-Lee's death. The bruise on the right arm was consistent with having been caused around the time of death. The knee bruise was older than the arm bruise. In her view, the haemorrhages in the retinas and optic nerves occurred around the time of death because of the relative lack of inflamation in response to the haemorrhage. In her view, the two bruises on the skull were caused by a small to a medium impact; very firm pressure could cause them. They could possibly have been caused simultaneously.

Dr Little was asked the following questions and gave the following answers: "Q: In relation to the subdural haemorrhage in a baby such as this, what are the possible causes of such an injury as you located here in this child?" 
A: It depends on other injuries that are present as to what is going to be the most common cause in any one particular case or the more most likely cause.

Overall, most of the subdural haemorrhages that we see are as a result of blunt trauma, frequently from severe falls or car accidents where the head is impacted with something or something impacts the head. In order of frequency, probably the second most common thing we see is children who have been shaken.
Then there are a number of much more rare causes related to things such as coagulant problems in the child and that is probably the other most common thing.

Q. In relation to this child, and as a result of your examination, what did you determine was the most likely cause of the subdural haemorrhage? 
A. I could see no evidence of significant blunt force impact to her head.
There were only the two small bruises on the top of the head; that in conjunction with the haemorrhages in the eyes and around the optic nerves would make me feel that the most likely cause in this case is due to shaking of the child." 
She was asked about the force necessary to generate the injuries in this case from shaking. She said it was difficult to quantify but one requirement is that the child's head has to be moving freely in a flapping type of motion, a whiplash type of motion. She said "But it would appear that it is relatively easy, even with a small number of shakes, to generate sufficient force that it will rupture the blood vessels in the child's brain." 
She said the child appeared to be well nourished.

She did not relate the two bruises on the scalp or on the arm or on the leg to any shaking activity.

She said to have an isolated haemorrhage in the head and the eyes would be an extremely unlikely manifestation of a coagulation disorder.

She said haemorrhage causes intercranial pressure.

The bruise on the arm could "possibly be consistent with one of the paramedics inserting a cannula into the right hand.

She was not able to say how long Rikki-Lee had been suffering from viral pneumonia.

In cross-examination these questions and answers occurred:- "Q: And first of all it is the case is it not that there is some controversy within the medical profession about this whole issue of shaking baby syndrome? 
A: Yes.

Q: There are those who would debunk the whole idea completely? 
A: There are certain people that say that shaking alone is insufficient to cause injuries that there must be impact as well and there are others that say that the shaking is sufficient." 
Dr Little further said this: "Part of the problem with shaking baby syndrome is that a lot of people do not realise that a shaking baby can cause such severe injury which is part of the reason why there has been some media publicity to that effect. It is a reaction that people can sometimes have to an annoying, crying child to shake it and try and make it stop. It is possible to have an isolated episode of shaking which is not related to continued abuse of the child." 
I should say that I find this answer, particularly where it refers to people's realisation difficult to reconcile with the vigorous and forceful demonstration given by Dr Tait and the description by Professor Harper of the force required to cause the injuries; and I also doubt whether it establishes an essential element of the crime with which the accused is charges namely the realisation that he was exposing Rikki-Lee to an appreciable risk of serious injury. However, for reasons which will appear it is not necessary for me to consider this further.

Dr Little said you cannot test blood after death to determine whether there might have been a coagulation problem. She again said that in her opinion it was highly unlikely that Rikki-Lee was suffering from any sort of coagulation disorder and, further, that it was a disorder that girls rarely had. She said the medical literature generally recommends that a child who is suffering from any illness should not be vaccinated.

In relation to steatosis, she said this "It is a very common response in babies to an insult to them, particularly infections, so I would not be surprised to see that given that she had the pneumonitis, the cytomegalovirus." "Q: You did not consider it (steatosis) might have been a problem that could have affected coagulation? 
A: No. It wasn't that severe." 
Dr Tait is a paediatrician and his report is Exhibit "AD".

In his report Dr Tait says "The clinical and pathological findings are almost certainly the result of a violent shaking injury to the child in the short time prior to her death." Slightly later in his report he says this: "The only other possible explanation for a spontaneous haemorrhage into the brain would be some form of haemorrhagic disease such as vitamin K deficiency in the neonatal period. I understand that she did receive her vitamin K injection and this would virtually rule out this possibility." 
He says that the presence of cytomegalovirus would not be a contra indication for immunising the child. He said the current advice is that immunisation should be done unless there is a particularly serious illness.

In the course of his evidence this passage occurred: "Q: Would you agree that notwithstanding the prophylactic vitamin K injection at birth there have been instances where newborn children have suffered haemorrhagic illness as a result of vitamin K deficiency? 
A: I understand that's correct yes. Sometimes the preparations of vitamin K have been badly stored or some other reason, yes.

Q: Is it the case that often the vitamin K deficiency bleeding occurs very suddenly without any warning signs? 
A: That's what I understand yes." 
He said the shaking required to cause the haemorrhage observed in this case would range from vigorous and violent to and fro shaking to rapid repetition over several seconds.

He said this: "I know there is a debate about whether you could have the extensive brain injuries in infants by merely shaking to and fro without some impact and there are some studies that show that the more severe outcomes where impact has been demonstrated so they are more likely to die or have severe neurological damage as a result of that severe impact as well as the shaking".
 "Q: I take it you don't agree with those particular findings? 
A: No, I think I agree with it but I think that is still possible and it still seems just looking at the information available that it is still possible to generate a considerable degree of injury without a direct impact." 
In relation to the microvesicular steatosis found by Dr Little he did not refer to it in his report. He said in relation to it: "It is not something I think I could comment on but I think I was concentrating largely on the injuries that were documented but it is obviously it is important in the context." "Q: When you say you cannot comment on it are you saying you cannot comment on microvesicular steatosis? 
A: Yes I would have to be told what that is. I don't know what that is." 
I am surprised, in view of those answers, that Dr Tait felt able to be as positive in his conclusions as he was.

Dr Tait in the witness box gave a demonstration of the very vigorous rapid shaking required to cause the injuries. Having given his demonstration which was certainly vigorous he said: "It is even more forceful than that. The idea of the head of the baby being unsupported, the person holding the child around the upper thoracic area, upper arms and chest and then violently shaking to and fro over several seconds and the head is unsupported and flops backwards and forwards." 
In relation to retinal haemorrhages he said this: "There has been a lot of debate about whether it results from cardiopulmonary resuscitation causing pressure in the cerebral circulation and a lot of debate about that. Again there are good studies which have tended to minimise that as the cause of retinal haemorrhages." 
If in attempting to resuscitate the child the accused applied too much pressure to the chest it is possible that that may have caused raised intracranial pressure.

He was not aware that the child had been vaccinated about three days before her death.

In the course of his evidence Dr Tait had said that he felt strongly about his position and I asked him to clarify what he meant by that. He said it was not because he was trying to make out that he was zealous about the matter it was just that because of the range of injuries within the brain he felt it was consistent with violent shaking way out ahead of any other possibility; in terms of percentages something like 99 percent, something like that.

I was told by the Crown Prosecutor, with the consent of the defence at the conclusion of the evidence in this case, that in relation to Dr Tait "It had been agreed that so far as Dr Tait was concerned he having spoken to others and done some more research, that he would concede that the steatosis was a possibility in terms of bleeding problems when combined with large amounts of
Panadol as the liver would already have been under stress and that with a food-deprived infant in those circumstances, with the liver disorder and the
Panadol, that intracerebral bleeding may occur following minor trauma but he maintained his view that that did not fit in with the clinical findings within the clinical circumstances." 
Professor Harper is a neuro pathologist and has been doing forensic neuro pathology regularly since 1974. He examined a number of photographs and pathological samples and was provided with Dr Little's report. In addition, all of the histological sections taken from the brain and eyes were available for his examination. He said in his report that the child had not suffered a severe impact head injury and "The presence of subdural haemorrhage together with retinal haemorrhages, diffuse subarachnoid haemorrhage, perivascular intra cerebral haemorrhages and intra ventricular haemorrhage would be consistent with the child having been shaken wherein in damage to the brain is caused by the impact of the brain against the skull." 
He said in evidence that without evidence of any blunt trauma to the head, the only available means of causing the injuries was shaking. In relation to the physical movement required, he said it is a little difficult to know what forces are at play "As you know, there is a lot of experimental work but just the physical movement like that is thought by many people to be enough to create the damage we have seen here although there is some work by the group in Philadelphia which suggests that there does have to be an impact. If an impact has occurred then that creates much greater force, like fifty times the force by the impact. The movement, I believe, can create damage but if there is an impact, in this child there were some small haemorrhages shown which shows that at least at some time a minor impact occurred which would have greatly put the child at much greater risk because of this impact." 
If the child was shaken after death, either with or without impact, he would not expect to find the amount of haemorrhaging that was in fact located.

He said, as far as he was aware, there was no cause for a bleeding problem having reviewed the report of Dr Little as to what she found in the bone marrow.

He was asked: "Would it be possible for a child to have received these injuries and to appear normal to a number of adults over a period of hours? A:
Yes." When asked to put a time frame on this he said "The injuries could have happened twenty four to forty eight hours prior to the arrival of the ambulance on the Saturday night. Equally, the child could lose consciousness immediately. He thought it highly probable, or very likely, that the child would have a problem with consciousness almost from the time of the insult.

The injuries, namely the various haemorrhages, are often seen as occurring in a single situation from one insult.

In relation to the steatosis of the liver he considered the question of Reyes
Syndrome but discounted it because that syndrome does not cause the type of haemorrhagic lesions he saw in this case.

He was unaware that the child had been vaccinated three days prior to death.
The type of brain problem caused by vaccination of which he is aware is not present in this case.

He noted the presence of cytomegalovirus but that did not cause him any concern, nor did he see any relationship between that and the vaccination.

He did not consider whether scurvy was a problem and said "Scurvy is a diagnosis that again I am no expert on the clinical aspects of vitamin deficiencies than I am on the vitamin aspects of brain problems but scurvy does not normally cause any brain pathology." 
He said very commonly the severe rise of intra cranial pressure will give rise to haemorrhages in the pons.

As far as the movement necessary he said, based on experimental data, it is a very violent motion, it is not just a gentle shake.

Archivides Kalokerinos is a registered medical practitioner, having obtained an MB BS from the University of Sydney in 1951. He is a Fellow of the Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and in 1973 published a book entitled "Every
Second Child" dealing with his experiences with aboriginal infants dying suddenly and mysteriously in the Western districts of New South Wales. He was the Medical Officer for that area from 1976 until 1982 and in respect of his research into Aboriginal infant deaths, he was awarded the Australian Medal of
Merit in 1978. He said he is regarded as an expert in the relationship between deaths of indigenous children of Australia and overseas and vitamin C deficiency.

He said a possible cause of Rikki-Lee's death was "Scurvy haemorrhages precipitated by Petussis vaccine." 
He said from his own experience and from the research he had done, haemorrhages can occur in scurvy. The haemorrhages noted by Dr Little could all have been caused by scurvy. The vitamin deficiencies and problems arising therefrom are far more common amongst Aboriginal and part Aboriginal children than amongst Caucasian people.

In his view, the precipitating factor giving rise to scurvy is the endotoxin contained in Petussis vaccine and the amount of endotoxin varies tremendously from one batch to another. In addition, endotoxin is more likely to be stimulated in production because bottle-fed babies do not have normal bowel flora. Also the administration of antibiotics can stimulate the production of excessive amounts of endotoxin. Vitamin C neutralises the effects of endotoxin; however, infants exposed to endotoxin can develop a sensitivity which can precipitate extremely acute and even fatal symptoms occurring without warning.

The presence of a viral infection means more utilisation of vitamin C and probably causes the production of endotoxin in the gut. All the factors necessary for the production of scurvy haemorrhages are present in this case.

He says in the present case the vitamin C deficiency was a very likely possibility "Much more likely than any other possibility." 
He disagreed with Professor Harper's evidence that scurvy did not normally cause any brain pathology.

It will be remembered that Professor Harper had disclaimed any expertise in vitamin deficiency. Further the Professor had not said that scurvy could not cause any brain pathology, the words he used were "does not normally cause".
Accordingly I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that scurvy cannot cause brain pathology.

He said the brain contains far more vitamin C and utilises far more vitamin C than any other organ in the body "So it is to be expected that if there is an acute problem that the brain would be one of the first organs to suffer. That is, of course, theoretical but it would be expected." 
The Petussis vaccine can affect vitamin C to the point of causing loss of consciousness between almost immediately up to several weeks. He has personally been associated with quite a few infants that have received the vaccine and have died and, in some instances, the administration of a vitamin
C injection has reversed the problem dramatically.

He personally has conducted approximately 200 post mortems. He had not found in any post mortem he conducted haemorrhages such as in this case without there being external injury consistent with trauma.

In answer to a question from me, he said that endotoxins were capable of producing haemorrhages by their action on the blood vessels.

It is convenient to note here that the accused's evidence was that he was
Aboriginal.

Dr Mark Donohoe is a registered medical practitioner having acquired an MB and
BS from Sydney University in 1980. His report is Exhibit "2" and his curriculum vitae Exhibit "3". I ruled over objection by the Crown that his evidence was admissible in this case.

In summary, his report focuses on the moderate microvesicular steatosis present in the liver found by Dr Little. He says this condition arises from an inherited or acquired disorder of hepatic mitochondrial function. This was either inherited by Rikki-Lee from her mother or caused by a toxic drug reaction. This type of hepatic damage would be expected to cause coagulation and bleeding disorders. In his view the administration of an antibiotic when
Rikki-Lee was eleven days old the presence of the cytomegalovirus infection, the administration of the vaccines, the administration of Panadol and possible vitamin deficiencies all combine to the possible sudden onset of spontaneous bruising and bleeding in a previously apparently healthy child.

He disagreed with Dr Little's evidence that the steatosis of the liver was consistent with viral infection from the cytomegalovirus. He said the literature and research in the last five years had been fairly definitive that microvesicular steatosis is a mitochondrial disorder.

I have considered Dr Little's evidence about this carefully and on this issue
I am not satisfied that Dr Donohoe is wrong.

He said that if a child has a bleeding disorder then simple handling of the child not in circumstances of excess trauma would cause a bleeding disorder to manifest itself.

It is appropriate to mention here that during cross-examination the accused said that he may have bumped Rikki-Lee's head when he picked her up from the capsule on the Saturday evening before putting her to bed.

In his reading of Dr Little's report there is a time differential between the occurrence of the subdural haemorrhage and of the retinal haemorrhage.

He said that it is impossible to come to a conclusion one way or the other about the bleeding disorder the child may have suffered in the absence of blood having been taken and analysed before death.

The report from Dr Raisanen dated the 10th of May 1996 is Exhibit "4". Dr
Raisanen is a neuropathologist who could not be called because he was overseas. He examined tissues from Rikki-Lee and also received Dr Little's report. It is only necessary to quote the following passage from that report: "Subdural haemorrhage in infants is caused by trauma or metabolic abnormalities that affect coagulation. Retinal haemorrhage is caused by trauma and has also been observed in patients with metabolic abnormalities that affect coagulation. Retinal haemorrhage has also been observed in patients with leukaemia, bacterial endocarditis and intra cerebral aneurisms. Retinal haemorrhage has been observed in patients subjected to cardio pulmonary resuscitation. Both subdural haemorrhage and retinal haemorrhage have been observed after delivery." "Retinal and subdural haemorrhages without surface head injury in infants, may occur in the setting of severe acceleration/deceleration. Determination of the cause of the haemorrhages, in this patient, depends on the clinical setting." 
It is now necessary for me to refer to various matters of law upon which I have directed myself.

The burden of proof of the guilt of the accused is upon the Crown. The Crown must prove beyond reasonable doubt each ingredient in the charge. There is no onus of proof on the accused at all. It is not for the accused to establish his innocence but for the Crown to prove his guilt and to prove it beyond reasonable doubt. The Crown must satisfy me of that guilt beyond reasonable doubt.

The charge against the accused is one of manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act. For the accused to be guilty of such manslaughter the circumstances must be such that a reasonable person in the accused's position would have realised that he or she was exposing Rikki-Lee to an appreciable risk of serious injury by doing what is alleged namely, on the Crown's case, violently shaking Rikki-Lee.

In my view, this is a case of circumstantial evidence and, accordingly, in order to convict the accused I have to be satisfied not only that the circumstances are consistent with the accused having committed the crime but also that the facts are such as to be inconsistent with any other rational conclusion. Before drawing an inference on the accused's guilt from circumstantial evidence, it is essential for me to be sure that there are no other coexisting circumstances which would weaken or destroy the inference.

Applying the above principles to the present case it means that in order to convict the accused I would have to be satisfied first of all that the subdural haemorrhage found in Rikki-Lee was caused by the accused violently shaking Rikki-Lee in a way that a reasonable person in his position would have realised that by doing so Rikki-Lee was being exposed to an appreciable or significant risk of serious injury and that no other reasonably possible explanation for her death exists. That would involve amongst other things my finding beyond a reasonable doubt that the possibilities put forward by Dr
Kalokerinos and/or Dr Donohoe were not reasonable.

In relation to those two doctors, I had the opportunity of seeing them both give their evidence and be carefully and comprehensively cross-examined in the witness box. I have also paid attention to the written submissions provided to me by the respective counsel. I did not form the view that either of those doctors was putting forward a fanciful untenable proposition. Perhaps putting the burden the correct way I am not satisfied that their evidence should be rejected as unreliable nor am I satisfied that their propositions are unreasonable.

In addition, I have already referred to the evidence of the various witnesses quite properly called by the Crown who spoke as to the accused's attitude and care of Rikki-Lee in a highly favourable way. There was nothing in his evidence nor in the way in which he gave it to cause me to disbelieve him. He has throughout denied doing any unlawful act which may have caused the death of Rikki-Lee. I respect and acknowledge the learning and experience of the doctors called on behalf of the Crown, and as I have already said, I accord the like respect to the doctors called on behalf of the defence.

While there are other matters in the evidence that I could comment upon, in my judgment it is unnecessary and probably inappropriate for me to do so in the light of what I have already said. Suffice it then to say in this case, having regard to all the evidence before me including in particular that given by witnesses who I have seen, my verdict is that the accused is not guilty.
 * * * 
