

Regina versus David Ian Duncombe [1997] NSWSC 128 (11 April 1997) 
REGINA versus David Ian DUNCOMBE /96 
Friday 11 April 1997 
Simpson J, Hidden J 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - Accessory after the fact of larceny m/v, receiving property stolen outside state - car stealing racket - seriousness, prevalence of offences - fulltime custodial sentence, notwithstanding favourable subjective case - appeal dismissed.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
SIMPSON J: I agree with the orders proposed by Justice Hidden and with his reasons therefor.

HIDDEN J: In August 1996, the trial of the applicant and one Maxwell Gregory
Dalton on an indictment alleging a number of offences relating to what might be described as a car stealing racket commenced before his Honour Judge Grogan in the District Court. After about three weeks the applicant pleaded guilty to three of the counts against him. The jury returned verdicts of guilty accordingly and were discharged as to the remaining counts against the applicant, and all of the counts against Dalton. The other counts against the applicant have since been "no billed" and Dalton has not yet been retried.

The applicant pleaded guilty to two charges of accessory after the fact of larceny of a motor vehicle (s 347 of the Crimes Act), and one charge of possessing property stolen outside the state (s 189A of the Crimes Act). The offences under <case> carry maximum terms of penal servitude for 5 years (see s ), and the offence under <case> carries a maximum term of 10 years penal servitude. (It seems that the charges of accessory after the fact were laid under <case>, rather than under <case> whereby they would have carried maximum terms of 10 years.) On the charge under <case>, his Honour sentenced the applicant to penal servitude for 2 years and 3 months, comprising a minimum term of 12 months to commence on 3 September 1996, the date he went into custody, and an additional term of 15 months. On the other two charges he was sentenced to fixed terms of penal servitude for 9 months, to be served concurrently with the minimum term to which I have referred. The applicant seeks leave to appeal against those sentences.

Facts.
 
The following account of the facts is derived from a comprehensive statement of facts prepared by Det Snr Const R F Manitta, which was before his
Honour in the sentence proceedings.

During the year 1992 and part of 1993, the applicant was a partner in a business trading as D & D Panelworks. He and Maxwell Gregory Dalton owned and operated the business from a small shed on the Pacific Highway, Tyagarah, then from larger premises in Banksia Drive, Byron Bay. The business could be described as a panel beating, spray painting workshop.

The workshop was situated next to the Tyagarah Service Station owned and operated by Peter Neil de Ruyter. De Ruyter also hired vehicles from the service station, including two Toyota Corollas, New South Wales registered numbers RGL-841 and PUM-304. Both these vehicles were painted white at the time they were used by Mr de Ruyter. Between 9th June and 12th June 1992, both vehicles were parked beside the Tyagarah Service Station when they were stolen. They were conveyed to the Sunshine Coast of Queensland.

Stolen Corolla RGL-841 (s 347): 
On 12th June 1992, two men, believed to be the prisoner and another, purchased an engine block number 4A9082824 from South Murwillumbah Wreckers. The receipt was made out in the name of M Dalton of 32 Smith Street, Mooloolaba. On 16th
June 1992, two men again attended the wreckers, believed to be the prisoner and another, and purchased a vehicle chassis number 6T154AE9209506881. The receipt was in the name of M Doulton (sic) of 42 Meta Street, Mooloolaba.

While on the Sunshine coast, the identifications numbers, being the chassis and engine number, of the Corolla were changed by means firstly of grinding back the engine number and cutting out the plate with the chassis number stamped on it. The engine number obtained from the block at South Murwillumbah
Wreckers was stamped onto the motor and the chassis number from the Corolla chassis, bought at South Murwillumbah Wreckers, was welded into the stolen
Corolla. This vehicle was then registered by the applicant, giving an address of 42 Meta Street, Mooloolaba, which corresponded to the address given on the receipt for the wreck purchased at South Murwillumbah Wreckers. This vehicle was then sold by a Vicki Dalton, who was an associate of the applicant at the time and wife of Maxwell Gregory Dalton. The money from this sale, being $8,500, was deposited into the account of D & D Panelworks.

On 21st October 1993, police scientific officer Day examined the vehicle at
Broadbeach, Queensland, and found that the chassis number had been welded into the vehicle and that the engine number was not factory original. The engine number also exhibited grinding marks consistent with a removal of the original engine number.

Stolen Corolla PUM-304 (s 347): 
After the theft of the two Corollas, both were conveyed to the Sunshine coast.
Mr David McDonald of Japanese Auto Wreckers at Maroochydore sold a wreck of a grey Toyota Corolla with chassis number 6T154AE940950244 to two men who gave the name, together, of David Dalton. Around this time the applicant contacted
Brenton Bell of Buderim Auto Renovators. Bell had been a previous employer of the applicant. The applicant spray painted a Corolla at Mr Bell's business premises.

The vehicle was returned to New South Wales and Vicki Dalton, who has been charged and convicted in relation to this vehicle, stated that it was one of the stolen Corollas and was painted gun metal grey. Mr Geoffrey Danks of Pro-
Stripe placed new stripes on the car. Mr George Mead, a mechanic, worked on a grey Corolla at the home of Vicki and Max Dalton which he described as being the same model as those of Mr de Ruyter's Corollas. He had previously worked on these vehicles.

The applicant attempted to sell a grey Corolla to Glen Arnison of Leemak Auto of Ballina. Mr Anthony Hayes saw a grey Corolla at the business premises of D & D Panelworks at Tyagarah. Mr George Nacsa provided a roadworthy certificate for a Corolla with the same chassis number as that purchased from
Japanese Auto Wreckers. Mr Nacsa associates the applicant with this vehicle.

This vehicle was finally sold by the applicant and Max Dalton for $9,000 to Mr
Des Perkins, who was a friend of the applicant's family, having worked with the applicant's father.

On 24th March 1994, police scientific officer Day examined the vehicle at
Lismore and revealed that the original colour of the vehicle had been white.
He found that the chassis number had been welded into the vehicle and that the engine was original but was not consistent with other numbering on the vehicle.

Stolen Mitsubishi Triton Utility (s 189A): 
Around May 1992, Mr John Cullen became interested in the purchase of a
Mitsubishi Triton utility from D & D Panelworks at Tyagarah. His initial enquiries were with Maxwell Gregory Dalton. Cullen eventually paid Dalton a $3,000 deposit for the vehicle. At the request of Max Dalton, Vicki Dalton rang vehicle hire outlets on the Gold Coast in order to find a vehicle similar to Cullen's requirements, in order to steal it.

The applicant in fact attended the Caltex Service Station, Kirra, in order to hire such a vehicle, but only residents of the immediate area were permitted to do so. Vehicle 198-BNZ was eventually stolen from the Caltex Service
Station, Kirra, on 19th August 1992 and delivered to D & D Panelworks,
Tyagarah. This vehicle was the property of Trevor and Jannette Neal, directors of Dekagold Pty Ltd.

On 25th August 1992, the wreck of a Mitsubishi Triton, chassis number
JMFNG3MZOKJ001432 and engine number M561T03056, was sold to D & D
Panelworks for $850. Mr Ian Jacobsen of Mitsubishi Wrecking recalled a male named David inquiring about the wreck prior to purchase.

In August 1992, a Mitsubishi Triton Utility bearing the engine number and chassis number purchased from Mitsubishi Wrecking was sold by Max Dalton to
John Cullen. Cullen paid an additional $4,000 making the purchase price $7,000.

On 21st September 1993 and 12th February 1994, police scientific officer Det
Day conducted an examination of the vehicle, identifying it as being the stolen vehicle belonging to Mr Neal stolen from Kirra Caltex Service Station.

The applicant was interviewed by way of electronic record of interview at
Byron Bay Police Station on 3rd February 1993, where he denied knowledge of these matters.

With good reason, the learned sentencing judge viewed the offences seriously.
His Honour commented, as he was entitled to, on the prevalence of crimes involving the theft of motor vehicles and the disguising of their particulars so as to enable them to be re-registered and sold to unsuspecting purchasers.
He observed that the offences involved a degree of planning and that the applicant drew upon his skill and experience in the motor trade in committing them. On the other hand, while characterising the applicant as a willing participant in the offences, his Honour accepted that Maxwell Dalton was the dominant personality in the partnership and likely to be the initiator "of particular ideas".

The applicant's motive was to obtain money to support the business of D &
D Panelworks, which at the relevant time was not thriving. The business had obtained a bank loan of about $8,000 in respect of which his parents had made themselves available as guarantors.

Subjective Case.
 
The applicant is now 34 years old. He has a minor criminal record of no significance for present purposes. His mother, whom his Honour considered an impressive witness, gave evidence in the sentence proceedings. From that evidence it emerged that the applicant had severed his connection with the business early in 1994, prior to his arrest, and had moved in with his parents in Brisbane. From then until his appearing for his trial, he had worked continuously and paid off the business debt which his parents had guaranteed.
There were before his Honour a number of favourable testimonials, including material attesting to the applicant's honesty and reliability as an employee.

He formed a defacto relationship with a married woman, separated from her husband, who has three children. That woman also gave evidence, from which it appears that the relationship is an enduring one and the children are fond of him.

The Application.
 
Before us, Mr Waterstreet of counsel, who did not appear in the District
Court, challenged the effective sentence on a number of bases. His arguments were directed to the proposition that, in the circumstances of this case, a fulltime custodial sentence was not called for.

He submitted that the effective sentence was manifestly excessive in the light of Judicial Commission sentencing statistics for the relevant offences and some authority of this Court. Broadly summarised, the statistics show that fulltime custodial sentences for offences of receiving property stolen outside the state, and accessory after the fact of larceny of a motor vehicle, are the exception rather than the rule. Frankly, the figures are of little use as they are based on a small sample of cases and tell us nothing of the circumstances of them. Both offences embrace a wide variety of activities and frequently do not involve the type of calculated dishonesty characteristic of the applicant's crimes.

The cases to which we were referred (as was his Honour) are the related decisions of this Court in Reg versus Wawrzyniak and Reg versus Morrison both unreported, 5 October 1993. These cases involved offences similar to those with which we are dealing, although the stolen motor vehicles were recovered.
Fulltime custodial sentences were quashed and sentences by way of periodic detention were substituted although, according to Mahoney JA who delivered the leading judgments, not without considerable hesitation. Each appellant had made out a favourable subjective case but, in addition, had provided assistance to the authorities calling for the application of <case> of the
Crimes Act. In the case of Wawrzyniak, Mahoney JA described that assistance as "substantial", and it would seem that the assistance provided by Morrison was of similar significance. It was particularly in the light of that assistance to the authorities that Judge Grogan distinguished those two cases, in my view rightly, when dealing with the applicant.

Mr Waterstreet further submitted that the effective sentence failed to give adequate weight to the applicant's favourable subjective case and, in particular, to the rehabilitation achieved over the period of about two years prior to his trial. Indeed, Mr Waterstreet went so far as to submit that the applicant had completed his rehabilitation during that period so that an extended additional term was not called for. However, a reading of the quite lengthy remarks on sentence reveals that his Honour was fully conscious of the creditable aspects of the applicant's background and of his behaviour in the period prior to the trial. What his Honour determined was that, notwithstanding those matters, the seriousness and prevalence of the offences and the need for general deterrence called for a fulltime custodial sentence.

There is indeed much to the applicant's credit in the evidence led on his behalf, and one can only feel a measure of sympathy for him. Nevertheless, I can see no error in his Honour's determination that a fulltime custodial sentence of the order which he passed was required. Nor can I see any error in his Honour's determination that there were special circumstances warranting a longer than usual additional term. His Honour referred to the fact that this would be the applicant's first custodial sentence and that he had made considerable progress towards rehabilitation, concluding that his achievement of a satisfactory lifestyle upon his release would be fostered by an extended period of supervision. Again, I can see no error in his Honour's approach to this matter.

Finally, Mr Waterstreet submitted that the marked disparity between the sentence imposed upon the applicant and the way in which Vicki Dalton was dealt with for her part in those offences demonstrates a miscarriage of justice. Vicki Dalton pleaded guilty before Judge Mitchelmore to two charges of larceny of a motor vehicle, being the Toyota Corolla sedans the subject of the charges against the applicant of accessory after the fact, and asked his
Honour to take into account four further charges on a Form 2. They were three charges of receiving other motor vehicles and the same charge of receiving a vehicle stolen outside the state as that faced by the applicant. Judge
Mitchelmore's remarks on sentence were before Judge Grogan when he dealt with the applicant. Judge Mitchelmore deferred passing sentence upon her entering into a recognizance to be of good behaviour for two years.

It is unnecessary to examine in detail Vicki Dalton's involvement in each of these offences. Judge Grogan saw her position as entirely different from that of the applicant, for sound reasons. She co-operated in the scheme largely because of the coercion of her husband, Maxwell Dalton. She made full admissions of her involvement and pleaded guilty at the outset. She co- operated with the police and, it would seem, assisted them extensively in their investigation of the matters. At the time she was sentenced she had already given evidence against some of the others involved, and had provided a written undertaking to furnish further assistance. She had two children and was on a supporting mother's benefit.

Again, I can see no error in his Honour's approach. In the light of the unusual circumstances of Vicki Dalton's case, a comparison of her disposition with that of the applicant could not leave him with any justifiable sense of grievance: cf Lowe versus The Queen <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 606.] 
It is appropriate that leave to appeal be granted but, for these reasons, I consider that the appeal should be dismissed.
 * * * 
