

Lee versus Sharpe Matter No 300062/96 [1998] NSWSC 90 (9 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 21 April 1998 
HEATHER ELAINE LEE versus AMY SHARPE /96 April 1998 
Howie AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal from a decision of a Master giving leave under [s 52(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) to the respondent to commence proceedings against the appellant by filing a statement of claim. He ordered the respondent to pay the costs of the summons. It was a matter in which he found the scales to be finely balanced between the competing submissions, but his ultimate conclusion was that justice was best served between the parties if the application for leave were granted. This was a discretionary judgment and I would only interfere with that determination if the appellant has shown that the discretion miscarried because the Master's decision was infected with error of a relevant type - that is: for failing to take into account a relevant consideration; for taking into account an irrelevant consideration; or if it evidenced an error of principle. 
The grounds set out in the notice of appeal are:
That the Master erred in granting the plaintiff leave to commence proceedings pursuant to [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) having found that delay has been left unexplained.
The Master in basing his decision to grant the plaintiff leave to proceed pursuant to [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) upon a finding that the plaintiff's explanation for delay amount to less than required by the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).
The Master erred in failing to take into account the plaintiff's receipt of workers compensation benefits in considering the question of prejudice.
The Master erred in failing to properly consider all matters relevant to the exercise of his discretion.
The Master erred in refusing to order that the defendant's costs of the summons be paid on an indemnity basis.

The accident in respect of which the claim arose occurred on 15 April 1991.
The respondent was employed as a clerk for a company trading under the name of
Pure Water Products. She was directing a motor vehicle in the dispatch area when the driver, the appellant in these proceedings, depressed the accelerator rather than the brake. As a result the respondent was pinned between the vehicle and some shelving. She suffered a number of injuries most of which were of a minor nature and from which she quickly recovered. However, she continued to suffer pain to the shoulder and an x-ray taken in June 1991 showed what appeared to be a post-traumatic osteolysis of the left clavicle.
She returned to work in July 1991 on light duties but was unable to continue working after September 1991. For about 12 months she received voluntary workers' compensation payments.

The respondent was referred to a solicitor, Mr Mantach, in September 1991. He advised her to report the matter to the police which she did in October of that year. There appears to have been some discussion between the respondent and her solicitor as to the appropriate course for the respondent to take and it seems the decision was made on the advice of Mr Mantach that she would pursue workers' compensation rather than sue for damages. Proceedings were commenced in 1992. During discussions with her barrister in 1994, when settlement of her compensation claim was being negotiated, the possibility of a claim under the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) was raised with the respondent. She shortly thereafter instructed her solicitor to commence a claim under the Act and steps were taken to commence proceedings.
The respondent again went to the police to report the accident in July 1994 as her earlier attempt had been unsuccessful. In August of that year a claim form under the Act was sent to the appellant and her insurer but the form was not properly completed. In September of that year the workers' compensation proceedings were settled and the respondent was paid a lump sum. In November a further claim was sent to the appellant's insurer. The period during which a claim could be made having expired on 15 October 1994, proceedings could not be commenced without leave of the court.

A summons dated 12 July 1995 seeking leave to commence proceedings was heard by Master Greenwood and dismissed by him on 9 October 1995. The respondent was advised to change her solicitor and she saw Mr Caddie. He indicated to her that her options included an appeal against the decision of the Master, to sue
Mr Mantach, or to make a further application to the Supreme Court. Senior
Counsel was briefed to advise and in March 1996 it was determined that a fresh application should be made. These proceedings came before Master Malpass who considered the matter afresh and granted leave. The difference between the fate of the two applications appears to have been a successful attempt by the respondent to explain the delay that had occurred between the accident and the steps taken to lodge a claim. More evidence was placed before the Court by the respondent on the second application than had been before the Court in the first proceedings.

There were in effect two reasons put forward to explain the delay in commencing proceedings in this matter. The first was the nature of the respondent's medical condition. After the respondent was released from hospital on 18 April 1991 she was still complaining of a painful left shoulder and was seen by Dr Gillespie. He believed that there was a possibility that she was suffering from post-traumatic osteolysis. However, this was a rare complaint, especially for a woman. In March 1992 Dr Gillespie advised that it was premature to issue a disability assessment of the respondent at that time because the symptoms of such an injury settle over 6 to 18 months. In May 1992 the respondent saw Dr Plowman. He was of the view that her disabilities were not in a permanent or stable condition. He advised that any assessment should be deferred for a period of 12 months. The respondent did not see Dr Plowman again until February 1994.

In August 1993 Dr Sonnabend reported that the respondent was still experiencing difficulties with almost all shoulder activities. He recommended that the joint of the shoulder be examined under anaesthetic but this was not followed up by the respondent. On 15 February 1994 the respondent again saw Dr
Plowman and he reported that she was still having trouble with her neck and left shoulder. His prognosis was that she was gong to be left with a significant degree of permanent disability. In May of that year Dr Ghabrial reported that the respondent was likely to remain permanently disabled in her left shoulder. The respondent in an affidavit said that until February 1994 she thought her injuries would improve and that she would have no residual disability. Mr Mantach stated in his affidavit that, until an assessment could be made by the medical practitioners as to the degree of impairment suffered by the respondent, he could not give her advice as to what course she should take.

The second matter relied upon to explain the delay in commencing proceedings for damages was the conduct of Mr Mantach. The respondent's evidence was that she had placed the matter into the hands of her solicitor and was guided by him. She says that she was unaware of her rights under the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) until the conversation with her barrister in June 1994. Although shortly after she first saw Mr Mantach he mentioned that she had the alternatives of seeking damages or workers' compensation, she says she did not fully understand the difference between the options. Mr Mantach accepts that it was his advice that she pursue her workers' compensation rights as he considered it to be in her best interests. When the barrister briefed to appear in the Compensation Court spoke to the respondent about a claim under the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), Mr
Mantach then pursued such a claim. After Master Greenwood declined the respondent leave, it was though appropriate that she seek other legal advice.
She saw her new solicitor on 28 November 1995. As I have already indicated, it was not until the end of April 1996 that a fresh application for leave was brought before the Court.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s43.html) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) as it applied to the proceedings provides that a claim must be made within 6 months of the date of the accident. [Section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s43a.html) of the Act provides: 
A claim may be made more than 6 months after the relevant date for the claim under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s43.html) (in this section called "a late claim") if the claimant provides a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in making the claim. The explanation is to be provided in the first instance to the third-party insurer concerned (if there is one) or to the Nominal Defendant.

Evidence as to any delay in the onset of symptoms relating to the injury suffered by the injured person as a result of the motor accident may be given in any such explanation.
 ......

A court may strike out proceedings commenced in respect of a late claim if the court is satisfied that the claimant does not have a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in making the claim.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) of the Act as it applied is relevantly as follows: 
A claimant is not entitled to commence court proceedings against another person in respect of a claim until 6 months have elapsed since the notice of the claim was given to the other person and (if required by [s43(4))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s43.html) to the other person's insurer.
 ......
 ......

A claimant is not entitled to commence proceedings in respect of a claim more than 3 years after the date on which the claim must be made in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s43.html) except with the leave of the Court in which the proceedings are to be taken.

The [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) does not apply to or in respect of proceedings in respect of this claim." 
The first two grounds of appeal relate to the Master's findings as to whether the respondent had given a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in making the claim. The Master referred to the importance of the explanation for delay and the legislature's use of the terms "full" and "satisfactory". He was of the view that there had been a lack of diligence on the part of both the respondent and certain of her legal advisers and found that substantially the blame rested with her former solicitors. He stated: "A considerable body of material has now been placed before the Court in an endeavour to explain that delay. Despite the volume of the material, legitimate criticism may be made concerning the sufficiency of the explanation provided by it. Despite these inadequacies, by and large, at the end of the day, I feel that the delay has been explained to a significant degree." 
The submission to me was that the justifiable criticisms made by the Master of the explanation for the delay ought to have led to the application being dismissed. It is said that his finding in the last line of the passage quoted above is inconsistent with his direction to himself as to the importance of there being a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in making the claim.

Although the Master was correct to recognise the importance of the delay and any explanation for it when considering the discretion under [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s52.html), there was no requirement that leave be refused unless the applicant satisfied the court that there was a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay: see Henricks versus Agnew (CA, 23 October 1997, unreported). Section
A(4) provides a discretion to the court to strike out proceedings which have been commenced, but only where the court is satisfied that the claimant does not have a full and satisfactory explanation for delay in making the claim.
Although that section does not on its face have anything to do with the exercise of discretion to grant leave to commence proceedings, counsel for the respondent relied upon that section as a basis upon which leave ought to have been refused. In this regard he referred to the decision in Salido versus Nominal
Defendant [(1993) 32 NSWLR 524] and, in particular, statements made by the Chief Justice when indicating guidelines for the exercise of the discretion under [s (4).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s52.html) 
The third of those guidelines indicates that diligence or lack of diligence by a plaintiff or a plaintiff's representative in ascertaining and/or asserting his or her rights will ordinarily be a material factor to the exercise of the discretion as will the extent of the delay and the reasons for it. The fifth guideline is as follows: "5. Leave under [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s52.html) may be refused if it would be plainly futile to grant it, and in that connection an applicant's willingness and ability to give a full and satisfactory explanation of any delays in reporting to police, notifying claims and commencing proceedings will be material." (at 532-533) 
The submission was that because there was no full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in making the claim, it was futile for the Master to grant leave because the proceedings would inevitably be struck out under <case>.

When the Chief Justice suggested the fifth of his guidelines he no doubt had in mind the provisions of [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s42.html) and [52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s52.html) of the Act as they were at the time of the decision under review by the Court of
Appeal. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s42.html) was concerned with the obligation of the injured party to notify the police of the accident within 28 days of the accident. The section contained a provision requiring a person who had commenced proceeding without fulfilling the obligation to report the accident to give to the court a full and satisfactory explanation for that failure. The court could allow the proceedings to continue if it were satisfied that sufficient cause to justify the delay in making the report. [Section (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s52.html) provided that if a claimant commenced proceedings more than 12 months after the claim was to be made in accordance with the Act, the claimant was to provide a full and satisfactory explanation to the court for the delay.

Although [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s42.html) remained in substantially the same terms after the decision in Salido, [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s52.html) has been repealed and <case> has been inserted into the Act. These amendments have an impact upon the operation of the fifth of the Chief Justice's guideline, at least so far as any delay in making a complaint or commencing proceedings is concerned. Unlike the provisions considered by the Chief
Justice, the power under <case> to strike out proceedings for unexplained delay is merely discretionary. Further, that power can only be exercised where the court is positively satisfied that there is no full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in making the claim. The onus to satisfy the court that there is no such explanation would appear to be upon the person seeking to have the proceedings struck out.

Therefore, in this case the failure of the applicant to provide the court with a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay in making the claim or commencing proceedings did not require that leave be refused. The failure to give a full and satisfactory explanation did not mean that it would be futile to allow the proceedings to be commenced as would have be the case by reason of the repealed [s (3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s52.html)
It was enough that the Master took the delay and any reason for it into account when considering whether leave should be granted and this he did.

But in any event whether or not delay has been fully and satisfactorily explained is a matter of fact. I could only interfere with the Master's findings of fact in very limited circumstances. I am not persuaded that there is any reason for me to overturn this finding. What the Master did was to look at the delay in broad terms and to see whether it was, generally speaking, explained fully and satisfactorily. I do not see that he was necessarily wrong by taking this approach. Even in the fullest explanation of delay there will almost inevitably be some period which cannot be satisfactorily explained.
Sometimes it may be no more than a day or two. In other cases it may be longer. Clearly attention must be paid to the requirement that the explanation be "full and satisfactory", but whether or not the absence of explanation for some part of the delay results in a failure ultimately to provide a full and satisfactory explanation for the delay is a matter of degree and impression.

The next two grounds of appeal raise the issue of whether the Master had proper regard to relevant considerations in the exercise of his discretion.
The Master concluded that there was no real prejudice occasioned to the appellant by reason of the delay in giving notice of the claim, but he was prepared to infer some prejudice to the respondent by reason of the substantial delay which had taken place. Whether or not there was any actual prejudice suffered by the appellant was a matter of fact for the Master to determine, and he was clearly entitled to infer prejudice by reason of the delay: Brisbane South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 541] per Dawson J at 544, per McHugh J at 555. After considering prejudice to the appellant by delay, the Master went on to state: "If leave is refused, the plaintiff will suffer the hardship of being deprived of the benefit of commencing legal proceedings in respect of her claim. She may have a substantial claim. If the application is granted, the defendant will be deprived of the benefit of the limitation defence.

Some reference has been made to other discretionary considerations. It is said that the plaintiff has received significant benefits by way of compensation. It is said that the plaintiff has a good alternative remedy against her solicitors.

In the circumstances of this case, I do not regard the receipt of workers' compensation benefits as material. It may be that the plaintiff does have a good cause of action against her legal advisers. The authorities demonstrate that such a matter may be a relevant circumstance in applications of this nature. Those authorities also demonstrate that it is a matter to which the court should not give great weight (Morrison versus Judd (Court of Appeal, unreported, 10 October 1995)).

This is an application which has occasioned some considerable difficulty in my mind. It seems to me, it is a case in which the scales are finely balanced.

After some hesitation, I have come to the view that, in the circumstances of this case, justice is best served between the parties if the application is granted." 
Complaint is made that the Master ought to have taken into account, in the balancing of the prejudice to the respondent against that suffered by the appellant set out in the first paragraph above, the fact that the respondent had received a substantial amount by way of workers' compensation. Although the Master came to the view that the receipt of workers' compensation was not material in this case, he does not indicate why he came to that view. If the prejudice flowing to the respondent by refusing leave was a relevant matter to be taken into account, then in my view the extent and nature of that prejudice had to be considered. Any mitigation of the loss that would flow to the respondent from a refusal of leave must be a material matter, whether that mitigation be due to the fact that compensation for the injury suffered had been provided from another source, or because there was available to the applicant some other cause of action which might compensate her, such as an action against her solicitor. The Master accepted that the latter was relevant but not the former. What weight should be attached to such matters would depend upon all the circumstances and it may be that generally they will carry little weight in the exercise of the discretion. But I fail to see how the
Master could conclude that the respondent's receipt of compensation was immaterial to the balancing exercise he was performing.

However, a real question arises as to whether it was appropriate for the
Master to attempt to balance the prejudice to the respondent as against that to the appellant in the way that he did. In Brisbane South Regional Health
Authority versus Taylor, above at 549-550, Toohey and Gummow JJ when discussing the question of prejudice to the parties said: "In this regard we have difficulty with the notion of weighing prejudice to an applicant against prejudice to the respondent. In one sense the prejudice to the present respondent is absolute if her application is refused. She can never litigate her claim. But that cannot be enough itself to warrant an extension of time; in truth there would be no discretion to be exercised. For that reason we do not accept the respondent's argument that the District Court fell into error in failing to balance the prejudice to the appellant against the prejudice against the respondent. It may be appropriate to temper that approach and to say that because the respondent has satisfied that par (b) of subs (2), there is therefore evidence to establish her right of action. Even then a weighing process is not called for. The real question is whether the delay has made the chances of a fair trial unlikely. If it has not there is no reason why the discretion would not be exercised in favour of the respondent." 
McHugh J, with whom Dawson J agreed, concentrated upon the prejudice to the defendant to an application for leave and the onus upon the plaintiff to demonstrate that the justice of the case required that leave be granted. After referring to the rationale for the legislature enacting provisions imposing limitation periods and the effect of those periods upon the liability of potential defendants, Justice McHugh said at 555: "But once the potential liability of the defendant had ended, its capacity to obtain a fair trial, if an extension of time were granted, was relevant and important. To subject a defendant once again to a potential liability that has expired may often be a lesser evil than to deprive a plaintiff of the right to reinstate the lost action. This will often be the case where the plaintiff is without fault and no actual prejudice to the defendant is readily apparent.
But the justice of a plaintiff's claim is seldom likely to be strong enough to warrant a court reinstating a right of action against a defendant who, by reason of delay in commencing the action, is unable to fairly defend itself or is otherwise prejudiced in fact and who is not guilty of fraud, deception or concealment in respect of the existence of the action." 
The decision of the High Court was applied by the Court of Appeal in
Commonwealth of Australia versus McLean (CA, 28 July 1997, unreported).
The case was concerned with the provisions of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/). It was held that [s
G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s60g.html), which provides that the court may extend the limitation period "if [the court] decides that it is just and reasonable" to do so, did not involve a "weighing of prejudices". It was held that the trial judge in that case erred when he weighed the competing prejudices to be suffered by the plaintiff and the defendant and found that the impact of the prejudice upon the plaintiff (if leave were not granted) would be considerably greater than the impact of the prejudice on the defendant (if leave were granted).

In McAndrew versus Wyoming Nursing Home (unreported 5 December 1997) Sperling J applied both Taylor and Commonwealth versus McLean in his determination whether to grant leave in an application under <case> of the Workers'
Compensation Act. That was an appeal against the decision of a Master, and, because the Master had taken into account what his Honour found to be an irrelevant consideration (being the loss to the plaintiff of her claim if leave was refused), his Honour found that the Master had erred.

The decision of the High Court was most recently considered in Council of the City of Sydney versus Zegarac (CA, 26 February 1998, unreported). This case was concerned with the provisions of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), and the majority of the Court was of the opinion that the judge erred when balancing the competing prejudices of the plaintiff and the defendant and determining that "the greater evil would be to deny the plaintiff his day in court against the Council of the City of Sydney" and thus granting leave. Mason P at 12 was of the view that that a reference to "balancing prejudice" was unsupported by the legislation, unhelpful and potentially misleading. Powell
JA at p33 also indicted that this was an impermissible approach.

The decisions to which I have referred so far were concerned with provisions different from that with which I am concerned but they indicate the general approach to be adopted to applications under limitation provisions. However, there is authority which suggests that the approach taken by the Master in the present matter was not correct. In Henricks versus Agnew (CA, 23 October , unreported) the Acting District Court Judge in granting leave under [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s52.html) exercised his discretion on the basis of his "overriding concern" being "the extent to which an injustice might be done to a plaintiff in circumstances of this kind, if too much importance is attached to the defendant's prejudice." The Court of Appeal held that his discretion had miscarried in that he had misstated the test to be applied and misapplied the onus of proof.

In my view the Master in the present case erred in his approach to the discretion under the section by balancing the competing prejudices to be suffered by the respondent and the appellant. If he were correct in that approach, then he was in error in finding that the workers' compensation payments made to the appellant were irrelevant. As a consequence I must exercise the discretion under the section anew on the material before the
Master. As a result of the decision in Taylor and considering the guidelines laid down in Salido, I understand that I am to exercise the discretion as follows: 
The overall question is whether the applicant for leave has shown that it is fair and just that leave be granted; 
The primary consideration is whether the delay has caused any significant prejudice to the defendant such that a fair trial is unlikely; 
The prejudice may be actual in that material before the court indicates that such a prejudice exists or it may be presumed by reason of the delay; 
Generally if it is unlikely that the defendant can have a have a fair trial, leave will not be granted; 
If there is no significant prejudice to the defendant, such that there is no impairment to a fair trial, other matters can be considered to determine whether in all the circumstances it would be just to grant leave. Such matters may include: the conduct of the claimant or those acting for him or her in respect of the claim; the nature of the delay and the explanation for it; the availability of any other recourse open to the applicant, such as an action against a solicitor; or whether the applicant has received or has available any other source of compensation; the futility of leave in view of other sections of the Act.

It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the Master erred in finding that there was no actual prejudice to the appellant by reason of the delay. It was not suggested before the Master, or before me, that there was any issue arising as to the liability of the appellant, or the existence and extent of the respondent's present injuries. But in any event material relating to these matters has been, and still is, available to the appellant's insurer because of the workers' compensation claim. However, it was said that the appellant's insurer had been prejudiced because it had been deprived of the opportunity to be involved in the rehabilitation of the respondent.

The evidence before the Master was that appellant's insurer, the NRMA, knew that the respondent was likely to have a permanent injury by early 1992. The respondent had been assessed by the NRMA as to her prospects of rehabilitation for the purposes of workers' compensation. However it was claimed that the two branches of the NRMA, that is the workers' compensation branch and the motor accidents claim branch, dealt with the prospects of rehabilitation differently. It was said that the motor accidents claim branch took a more active role in attempts to have the plaintiff return to active employment or, at least, it undertook a more through investigation of what work the claimant could do. It was suggested that the reports held by the workers' compensation branch did not assist the motor accidents claim branch in determining whether a more active participation should have been taken in attempting to have the respondent engage in alternative work. Even at the time of the hearing before the Master, the NRMA was not actively involved in the respondent's rehabilitation because in its view it had not received a proper claim form and because of the delay since the accident.

I do not believe that this evidence reveals any significant prejudice to the fair trial of this action if it were permitted to proceed. I accept that prejudice is not restricted to matters concerning liability or proof of injury although these are clearly the most significant matters whereby a putative defendant might be prejudiced by delay. However, the mere denial of an opportunity for the appellant's insurer to take part in the plaintiff's rehabilitation or management does not seem to me, in all the circumstances of this case, to be a matter which by itself would result in significant injustice to the respondent if leave were granted. Although the Master was prepared to infer some prejudice by reason of the delay, and I will do the same, on the facts of this case I find it difficult to perceive where that prejudice might actually manifest itself. Such prejudice would not in my view be significant or likely to affect a fair trial.

It does not follow from the conclusion that the appellant will not be deprived of a fair trial that the application for leave should necessarily succeed. I am still to determine whether in all the circumstances it would be just and fair to allow the respondent to bring these proceedings notwithstanding that she is out of time. The matter which no doubt troubled the Master is that there appears in this case to have been a conscious decision made by the respondent to proceed with her entitlement for workers' compensation rather than to seek damages. On the view of the facts most favourable to the respondent she was aware, shortly after she first approached Mr Mantach in , that these two options were open to her. True it is that she may not have had a full understanding of the differences between these two methods of obtaining compensation, but she does not appear to be an unintelligent, unsophisticated, illiterate or under-privileged person, incapable of ascertaining or protecting her own rights and interests. Quite to the contrary, in respect of her claim for workers' compensation she determined that she would accept a lump sum rather than weekly payments. This was a decision which surprised her solicitor but one which she thought was in her best interests.

However, the plaintiff's uncontradicted evidence was that until 1994 she was not aware that her injury was permanent. Until she saw Dr Plowman in that year she thought that her injury would recover. It 1992 Dr Gillespie had indicated that the injury would take up to 18 months to settle and, until it did, no final view could be taken of her condition. The decision to seek workers' compensation rather than damages has to be seen in that light. The unsettled nature of the injury was probably why Mr Mantach determined that it was in her best interest to seek workers' compensation. It was in 1994 that the question arose as to a claim under the Act. In July of that year steps were taken to commence proceedings for damages by the respondent reporting the matter to the police.

The real matter telling against the grant of leave is the fact that after the decision was made to seek damages under the Act there seems to have been a lack of diligence shown by the legal representatives of the respondent and scant regard to the requirements of the Act. However, I do not believe that this conduct is sufficient in all the circumstances of this case to require that the discretion be exercised against granting leave. This is so notwithstanding that, if leave were refused, the respondent may not be without redress or some compensation for her injury.

Although there was a ground of appeal that the Master erred in not awarding costs on an indemnity basis in favour of the appellant, this ground was not argued either orally or in the written submissions. I see no reason why I should interfere with the general discretion the Master exercised in relation to costs.

The appeal is dismissed. The appellant is to pay the respondent's costs of the appeal.
 * * * 
