

Regina versus Mark Anthony Rose [1997] NSWSC 244 (28 June 1997) 
REGINA versus Mark Anthony ROSE /96 
Thursday 23 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, HULME J, DOWD J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is a Crown appeal against sentence imposed by his Honour Judge PJ Phelan in the District Court at Port Macquarie on 29 November 1995. On that day the respondent pleaded guilty to two offences. Both offences occurred on 13 November 1994 and in each case the victim of the offence was a young girl aged nine, whom I shall call the complainant.

The first offence was that the respondent assaulted the complainant and committed an act of indecency upon her contrary to s61M(2) of the Crimes
Act. The second offence was that, on the same day he incited the complainant to commit an act of indecency with him contrary to s61O(2).

In respect of each matter his Honour deferred passing sentence upon the respondent entering into a recognisance to be of good behaviour for five years from the date of the sentence. His Honour imposed conditions of the recognisance on the respondent, the conditions being that the respondent place himself under the supervision and guidance of the New South Wales Probation
Service; that he undertake medical, psychiatric and/or psychological examination; that he pay a fine of $4,000 by instalments and that he not approach the victim or any member of her family.

By notice dated 22 February 1996 the Director of Public Prosecutions gave notice that he desired to appeal against those sentences on the ground that they were inadequate. The delay between the date of the sentence and the date of the notice of intention to appeal is lengthy and unexplained. This Court has said on a number of occasions that delay of that kind can be a discretionary reason for refusing to entertain a Crown appeal. On the other hand, whether the Court reaches such a conclusion depends, amongst other things, upon the view the Court takes of the instant case and the seriousness of any error in the original sentencing.

In the present case, for the reasons that I shall give, there was a gross inadequacy of the sentence imposed at first instance, and in those circumstances the Court should not, in the exercise of its discretion, decline to intervene in the matter notwithstanding the unacceptable delay.

On the other hand, I would accept a submission made by senior counsel for the respondent that the Court should reflect the delay in any sentence the Court imposes.

For that reason I intend to propose that the commencement date of the sentence to which the respondent should be subjected will be 29 December 1995, that is to say, one month after the date of the sentencing at first instance.

Senior Counsel for the respondent has also submitted, correctly, that when resentencing a respondent on a successful Crown appeal this Court gives weight to the circumstances of double jeopardy involved in a Crown appeal by imposing a sentence that is the least sentence that could properly have been imposed upon the respondent at first instance.

The sentence that I intend to propose in the present case is for that reason somewhat less than what I would have thought would have been a proper sentence at first instance.

The facts in the matter shortly stated are as follows: The respondent was living in a caravan park in South West Rocks on the north coast of New South
Wales. He had some business dealings with the complainant's mother. The complainant, the respondent and the complainant's mother had lunch together on November 1994 and after lunch the complainant and the respondent went for a swim in the ocean. After the swim the respondent suggested that the complainant accompany him to have a shower. He took her to the male shower in the nearby amenities block. The complainant and the respondent removed their clothes and got in the shower together. Under the shower the respondent took the opportunity to rub the victim's vagina in an inappropriate and sexual manner with the soap and subsequently had the victim wash him in an area around his penis.

When, later in the day, this conduct came to the attention of the complainant's mother she reported the matter to the police and the respondent was arrested.

One of the most important aspects of the sentencing exercise was that the respondent, who was 34 at the time of sentence, had a criminal record. He had two convictions in February 1991 for indecent assault and sexual intercourse with a child under ten years. In respect of the first of those offences he had been subjected to a fixed term of imprisonment of one year and in respect of the second a minimum term of three years and an additional term of one year.

The essence of the second offence appears to have involved the respondent putting either his tongue or his finger into the vagina of a five year old girl. He had not long concluded his parole in respect of the second offence when he committed the offences, the subject of the present proceedings.

There was no evidence before Phelan DCJ to suggest that psychological or psychiatric counselling might constitute an adequate measure of protection of the community against predatory sexual behaviour of the kind in which the respondent had indulged in the past and in which he indulged on the present occasion.

The fundamental object of sentencing is the protection of the community.

In view of the history of the respondent, and in the absence of any evidence that notwithstanding his past criminal record and his evident propensity for sexual misconduct towards young children, the imposition of a bond with a condition of psychiatric counselling would be sufficient, the case was one in which the protection of the community clearly required that the respondent should be subjected to a substantial term of full time custody. Nothing in his
Honour's reasons contains an adequate explanation of why that course was not followed.

In my view this is a proper case for appellate intervention. The Crown appeal should be allowed. The sentence imposed by Phelan DCJ should be quashed. In lieu thereof the respondent should be sentenced on each count concurrently to terms of imprisonment involving a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months.

In each case the sentence should commence on 29 December 1995. The minimum term in each case will expire on 28 June 1997 on which date the respondent is to be released to parole.

The reason why the sentence is to commence on 29 December 1995 was stated at the outset of these reasons. The sentences which I propose are imposed in full knowledge of the circumstance that between 29 December 1995 and the present time the respondent has not been in custody. Nevertheless, that period will count towards his sentence. That aspect of the matter results from the Crown's inappropriate delay.

HULME J: I agree with the reason and the order proposed by the Chief Judge.

DOWD J: I also agree with the orders proposed and the reasons therefor.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as stated.
 
SENTENCING - CROWN APPEAL 
The respondent, who had previous convictions for similar offences, including one against a five year old girl which resulted in a term of imprisonment for three years, pleaded guilty to two offences of indecency involving a young girl. He was fined $4,000 and placed on a bond involving a condition that he subject to psychiatric counselling. There was no evidence that this was likely to alter his propensities - 
HELD - Having regard to the respondent's history of offending, and the need to protect the community, the sentence was manifestly inadequate and the Crown appeal should be allowed.

O R D E R S Crown appeal allowed.
 Sentence quashed.
 In lieu thereof the respondent sentenced, concurrently on each count, to imprisonment for a minimum term of 18 months and an additional term of 6 months.
 * * * 
