

Re Rgc Limited (No. 2) Matter No 4081/98 [1998] NSWSC 587 (13 November )

Last Updated: 8 December 1998 
RE RGC LIMITED (No. 2) /98 November 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for directions because of a problem that has arisen after the Court has ordered a meeting to be convened to consider a scheme of arrangement. The whole scenario envisages not only a scheme meeting but also an extraordinary general meeting to reduce capital. There is an unfortunate typographical error in the notice convening the extraordinary general meeting in that the gremlins have inserted 10.30 p.m. instead of 10.30 a.m., though it should be pointed out that the meeting is convened for that time "or as soon as the Court ordered Meeting in relation to the Scheme of Arrangement is concluded or adjourned". As the main focus will be on the meeting to consider the scheme of arrangement which convenes at 10 a.m. the great probabilities are that no one will be misled by the notice or that if they have any doubt they will get in touch with the company. However, the notice of meeting is ambiguous and it is for that reason that the company seeks directions. 
The application is made under <case> of the Corporations Law. It seems to me that that section is limited to giving ancillary or consequential directions in relation to the meeting that the Court orders to be convened and not directions about ancillary meetings. It is strange that in <case>, the section which excuses irregularities, there is power to extend the period for doing an act but apart from the power to abridge a period for sending out a completely new notice of meeting, there is no power under s 1322 to make orders that a meeting already convened may have been validly convened until after the meeting has actually been held and the Court can see that no substantial injustice has actually been caused.

My present view is that in all the circumstances, provided (a) that the letter is given to members in accordance with the document annexed to the further submissions of Mr Hutley SC, which I have initialled and dated; (b) in the advertisements to be published under my earlier order an intimation is given that despite the misprint in the notice of meeting, the meeting is to be held at 10.30 a.m.; and (c) the company has an officer present at the meeting room at 10.30 p.m. who is able in due course to make a report that either no one turned up or no one was prejudiced, when the second stage of this matter is before the Court the Court should make an order under s 1322.
 * * * 
