

Denhope Constructions P/L and Ors versus Parramatta City Council [1997] NSWSC (7 April 1997) 
DENHOPE CONSTRUCTIONS P/L & ORS versus PARRAMATTA CITY COUNCIL /96, LEC 40066/95 
Monday, 7 April 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
SHELLER JA, POWELL JA, DUNFORD AJA 
CATCHWORDS: LOCAL GOVERNMENT - rates - application for postponement of rates - unoccupied, dilapidated buildings - unfit for human habitation - whether "adapted for use ... for habitation" - Local Government Act 1919 s160C, [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) [s585.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s585.html) 
WORDS AND PHRASES - dwelling - single dwelling - adapted for use ... for habitation.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
The owners of three old, unoccupied, dilapidated buildings which had formerly been occupied as dwelling houses applied for a postponement of rates pursuant to Local Government Act 1919 s160C, and later [Local Government Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) [s585.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s585.html)
Each of the buildings was unfit for human habitation, in one case the roof had been removed and doors and windows broken and in another there had been a substantial fire. In two cases development applications had been lodged for commercial development and there were no plans to restore any of the existing buildings for residential purposes.

Held: 
The buildings did not qualify for the relief as they were not "single dwellings" because: as they were unoccupied they were not "dwellings", i.e. places where people dwell; they were not "adapted for use ... for habitation" because they were not fit for habitation; it was immaterial that they had formerly been used as dwelling houses in the past and they had not subsequently been used for any other purpose.

ORDER 
Appeal be dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
DUNFORD AJA: This appeal from a decision of the Land & Environment Court (Talbot J) concerns the proper construction of 160C(2) of the Local Government Act 1919 since repealed, and [s.585](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s585.html) of the [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/), and in particular whether old, unoccupied, dilapidated, derelict houses are within their terms. Those sections provide relief to ratepayers in respect of dwelling houses in cases where, because of a rezoning of land so as to permit its use for commercial, industrial or residential flat purposes, the rates payable would otherwise be substantially greater; and this is done by providing a mechanism for a postponement year by year of the difference between the rates payable on the land as zoned and what would have been payable if the land had been zoned for single dwelling houses; such postponed rates are recoverable if the use of the land is changed within five years of the postponement.

The relevant sections, so far as material, are as follows: 
Local Government Act 1919 
C(1) In this section ...
 `Single dwelling-house' means a dwelling used or adapted for use solely for habitation by not more than one family and includes a dwelling in a row of 2 or more dwellings attached to each other such as are commonly known as semi- detached or terrace buildings, but does not include a flat; 
Where - a single dwelling-house is erected on a parcel of land (not being land to which paragraph (b) or (c) applies) which is, under a planning instrument, zoned or otherwise designated for use for the purpose of industry, commerce or the erection of residential flat buildings as defined in section 304 ...
 the rateable person in respect of the land may apply to the council for relief from payment of part of the rates levied on the land in the current rating year.

If, on receipt of an application pursuant to subsection (2), the council is satisfied that - in relation to land referred to in subsection 2(a) ... the requirements of subsection 2(a) ... have been met and the land is used or occupied solely as the site of a single dwelling-house; ...
 it shall require the Valuer-General shall furnish his determination to the council.

For the purposes of this section, the attributable part is - in relation to the land value of land referred to in subsection (a) ... that part, if any, by which that value exceeds what it would have been if it were determined on the assumption that the land may be used only as the site of a single dwelling-house ..." [Local Government Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) The rateable person for land described in any of the following paragraphs may apply to the council for a postponement of rates payable for the land in the current or following rating year (or in both years): a parcel of land on which there is a single dwelling-house used or occupied as such and which is zoned or otherwise designated for use under an environmental planning instrument for the purposes of industry, commerce or the erection of residential flat buildings ...
 (1) The attributable part of the land value of land described in [section (a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s585.html) ... is determined by deducting from the land value the value that the land would have if the land could be used only as the site of a single dwelling- house.
 single dwelling-house, in Division 2 of [Part 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/index.html#p8) of Chapter 15, means a dwelling used or adapted for use solely for habitation by not more than one family and includes a dwelling in a row of 2 or more dwellings attached to each other such as are commonly known as semi-detached or terrace buildings, but does not include a flat." 
Each of the appellants is respectively the registered proprietor of one of the properties in question: 183 Macquarie Street, Parramatta (Denhope
Constructions Pty Ltd), 12 Kendall Street, Parramatta (Hynwish Pty Ltd) and 1
Valentine Street, Parramatta (Allan Hugh Williams). Mr Williams is a director of each of the other two appellant companies. The properties are each zoned commercial but contain buildings which were formerly occupied as dwelling- houses by single families, and for some years the appellants applied for, and were granted, relief under s.160C of the 1919 Act. However further applications by each of the appellants dated 21 April 1992 were refused by the council (8 September 1992) following an inspection by council officers.
Following a request on behalf of the appellants for reconsideration further inspections were carried out on 13 November 1992 and the applications again formally refused on 16 March 1993. Further applications in respect of the next years' rates dated 16 July 1993 and 8 February 1994 were similarly refused following further inspections. The appellants thereupon commenced these proceedings in the Land and Environment Court.

There is no statutory right of appeal against a council's determination of an application made pursuant to the relevant section, and so it was not the function of the primary judge to substitute his own decisions for those of the council, but he could only review those decisions in accordance with the principles set out by Mason J in Minister for Aboriginal Affairs & Anor v. Peko Wallsend Ltd & Ors <case>; [(1986-87) 162 CLR 24] at 40-41. The appellants therefore needed to show that the Council acted on an incorrect principle, applied an incorrect test or came to decisions not reasonably open to it.

Before any decisions were made on behalf of the council, its officers carried out a number of inspections of the premises and, according to council records in evidence and letters to appellants, such inspections revealed the properties to be unoccupied, unfit for home habitation, in states of disrepair and dilapidated. In cross-examination, Mr Williams conceded: Valentine Street, Parramatta - Since 1985 the premises have been vacant.
 - The roof has been removed and since then it has been incapable of being occupied for residential purposes.
 - The property has been vandalised.
 - The windows and doors were broken; - He had no immediate plans for restoration of the building, was not using it at present for any purpose and could not tell the Court what plans he had for it except that it was not intended to renovate the building to make it fit for residential purposes.
 Kendall Street, Harris Park.
 - The premises have been vacant since 1989; - There had been a substantial fire in the premises in 1993; - The premises were unlivable for some years; - Services are disconnected and the premises vandalised; - The premises were not capable of being used for habitation since 1989; - He could not identify any present use of the premises; - The premises were not used for any purpose in each of the years, 1991, 1992 and 1993 and in 1990 the company used the premises for the storage of furniture; - There had been a development application made to Council in respect of the premises for a commercial redevelopment; - In August, 1994 the owner agreed with Council to board up and secure the building, and then demolish or renovate it if a development application was not approved within 18 months of that date.
 Macquarie Street, Parramatta.
 - The premises have been vacant since 1985; - The premises have been damaged and vandalised; - The premises were boarded up in 1992; - Services have been disconnected; - The premises have not been capable of being used for habitation since 1992; - He could not identify any present use of the premises; - The premises were not used for any purpose in each of the years 1992 and following other than to `...mow the lawns and keep the place boarded up.' - There had been a development application made to Council in respect of the premises for a commercial redevelopment; - In 1988 the owner advised the Council that due to non availability of funds commencement of the commercial redevelopment of the land would be delayed; - In 1993 the company had proposed a residential and commercial redevelopment of a cost of $1 million and made a development application to Council accordingly; - Throughout 1993 and 1994 the company intended to leave the premises without any form of use pending the clarification of the terms upon which Council may permit commercial and residential redevelopment of the land.

Photographs in evidence of the various properties confirmed the oral evidence concerning their condition. His Honour held that the Council clearly found that the structures on the land were unoccupied, not habitable and in a state of disrepair; and the issues on this appeal, as before His Honour, are whether those were proper considerations for the Council to take into account and whether the Council's decisions were reasonably open to it.

Section 160C only applies when there is erected on the land "a single dwelling" (subs. (2)) i.e. "a dwelling used or adapted for use solely for habitation by not more than one family" (subs. (1)). The ordinary meaning of a "dwelling" is a place where people dwell, and a building can hardly be said to be "used ... for habitation" if it is unoccupied and therefore not used for anything at all.

The concept of a dwelling being used for habitation does not necessarily involve a requirement of continuous user, and a building would not cease to be a dwelling because of a gap in occupation between successive owners or tenants, or whilst the occupier was away on holidays or the premises were undergoing renovations; but where, as here, the buildings have been unoccupied for a number of years, they are in dilapidated condition, with the windows boarded up, in one case without any roof, the services have been disconnected and there is no present intention that they be re-occupied for residence in the future, it cannot be said that they are being used for habitation.

Likewise, it cannot be said that the buildings are "adapted for use ... for habitation" if they are not fit for habitation. "Adapted" ordinarily means "made suitable to requirements" (Macquarie Dictionary 1981, at p.64) or "made suitable for a purpose" (Concise Oxford Dictionary 8th ed., at p.13) and buildings without roofs, with windows boarded up and without services are clearly not suitable for the requirements or purposes of human habitation.

In Ex parte Belling; re the Council of the Municipality of Woollahra (1946) S.R. 166, a case under the National Security (War Service Moratorium)
Regulations, it was held that a Magistrate was not in error in finding that a former family mansion at all times equipped as a dwelling house which had not been used as such for some years but had in the meantime been used for a time for the holding of social functions and later as defence barracks did not constitute a "dwelling-house".

It was however submitted on behalf of the appellant that each of the premises were "adapted for use for habitation as a single dwelling house" because there was on each of the parcels of land buildings which had been erected as single dwelling houses and which had actually been used as such in the past and which had not been adapted for or used for any other purpose; and therefore the parcels of land on which they stood were used or occupied as the sites of single dwelling houses, and reference was made to the wording of s.160C(3)(a) which was described as the "operative provision". In effect this submission would mean that once there was a single dwelling on the land, it remained so, and entitled to the postponement of rates, unless and until there was evidence that the buildings were used or adapted for use for some other purpose, even though they were no longer used or adapted for use for habitation.

In my view, there is nothing in the Act to justify such a construction. The section only applies to premises which satisfy the definition of "single dwelling-house" in subs. (1). If they do not satisfy that definition at the time of the application referred to in subs. (2), the section has no application irrespective of what the former use of the premises may have been or whether they can at the time be categorised as being used or adapted for use for any other purpose.

Whether each of the premises came within the definition of "single dwelling- house" were a questions of fact and degree for the Council to determine and I am satisfied that in taking into account that each of the premises were unoccupied, not habitable and in states of disrepair, Council took into account only relevant considerations, and there was ample evidence to justify its conclusions, as Talbot J. found.

I therefore propose that the appeal be dismissed with costs.

SHELLER JA: I agree with Dunford AJA.

POWELL JA: I agree with Dunford AJA.
 * * * 
