

Regina versus Radford Matter No Cca 60424/97 [1998] NSWSC 54 (4 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 7 April 1998 
REGINA versus BRETT STUART RADFORD /97 March 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Sheller JA, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA versus Brett Stuart RADFORD 
SENTENCING - SEXUAL INTERCOURSE WITHOUT CONSENT -Crimes Act s61(I) - plea of guilty - sentence involving minimum term of three and a half years and additional term of one and a half years - HELD - not excessive. 
ORDERS Leave to appeal granted.
 Appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus Brett Stuart RADFORD 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: On 16 June 1997 the appellant came for trial before his Honour Judge Freeman and a jury in the District Court on a charge of sexual intercourse without consent contrary to section 61(I) of the Crimes Act. On the morning fixed for trial the appellant entered a plea of guilty. He was sentenced by Freeman DCJ on 14 August 1997. The maximum penalty for the offence to which the appellant pleaded guilty was penal servitude for fourteen years. Freeman DCJ sentenced the appellant to penal servitude for five years involving a minimum term of three and a half years and an additional term of one and a half years. The appellant seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence. 
The appellant was born in March 1970. He has a criminal record involving some offences of violence, and some of dishonesty, but he had never previously been sentenced to any significant custodial sentence.

There was a good deal of information before Freeman DCJ as to the appellant's somewhat disturbed personal background and history. It is not argued, however, that the learned judge failed to take into account any of the subjective features relied upon in mitigation. Rather, the argument that has been advanced on behalf of the appellant is that the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive, having regard to the objective features of the case and bearing in mind that the case involved a plea of guilty, albeit one that was belated.

Freeman DCJ, in his remarks on sentence, said that he was extending some leniency to the appellant on account of the plea of guilty. It was appropriate for his Honour to do so, but the extent of the leniency had to be measured bearing in mind that this was a case in which the appellant was known to and readily recognised by the victim of the offence and in which, as will appear from the following description of the objective circumstances of the case, it would have been virtually impossible for any plausible defence of consent to have been made out.

It is argued by counsel for the appellant that, when regard is had to information obtained from the Judicial Commission of New South Wales concerning sentences imposed in other cases, it appears that the sentence imposed in the present case is in line with the kind of sentence that might have been expected in the case of a plea of not guilty.

Having regard to the way in which the argument for the appellant has been put, it is necessary to refer in a little detail to the objective features of the case, because it is those features which lead to the submission that the sentence reflected what must have been an exaggerated view of the seriousness of the crime to which the appellant pleaded guilty.

On the evening of Friday 2 June 1995, the victim, a young married woman, went to a pizza shop at Tumut to buy some food. She was driving a motor vehicle that belonged to her husband. She parked the car, walked into the shop and obtained the food she had ordered. She saw the appellant standing near the store. He was not well-known to her, but he was a person whom she had seen in the neighbourhood on a number of occasions. She knew him by his nickname. As she left the store, the appellant engaged her in conversation and asked her to give him a lift. He was heading in the same direction as she was. She agreed to do so. As they were driving to the place where the victim intended to drop the appellant, the appellant began to behave in a manner that caused her some concern. Finally, when they were nearing their destination but before the car had actually stopped, the appellant leapt from the passenger seat on top of the victim, who was still in the driver's seat and trying to bring the vehicle to a halt. The victim managed to open her door. The appellant took hold of part of her clothing. The victim started to drag herself out of the vehicle as it was rolling backwards. She fell onto the ground and the appellant also emerged from the vehicle. The victim got up and tried to run towards a nearby house. The appellant grabbed her with both hands near her shoulders holding her top. He pulled her top off leaving her wearing only a bra. The victim was screaming as loudly as she could. She was so terrified she lost control of her bladder. She again attempted to run towards a nearby house and the appellant grabbed her from behind around the waist and forced her to the ground near a metal fence. The victim struggled vigorously whilst the appellant tried to stop her escaping. As she screamed the appellant said to her, "Shut up bitch."
She continued to scream and struggle. The two of them were rolling on the ground near the driveway. The appellant tried to remove the victim's track suit pants. She tried to hold her pants up with one hand and struggle with the other. The appellant succeeded in pulling her pants down partially. He put his hand down the front of her pants and inserted one or more fingers into her vagina. The victim responded with a surge of strength and forced the appellant off her. She leapt to her feet and ran into a nearby house. She beat violently on the walls of the house and screamed. The owners of the house let her in.
The appellant ran off.

Later that evening the appellant was located by the victim's husband, and thrashed. In due course, he was arrested.

In evaluating the objective circumstances of the case, Freeman DCJ acknowledged that this was not a case that involved penile penetration, but he rightly pointed out that it involved a gross and terrifying invasion of the physical integrity of the victim.

In my view the objective seriousness of the case, including the nature of the attack upon the victim, the sustained violence that was displayed towards her, and the terror which was induced, was such that it cannot be said that the sentencing judge over-estimated the seriousness of the matter. The sentence, in my view, was within the range of the sentencing discretion properly available to the Judge. I consider that leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal is dismissed.

SHELLER JA: I agree. 
BARR J: I also agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the court is as I proposed. * * * 
