

Moon versus Mun [2012] NSWSC 973 (24 August 2012) 
Last Updated: 14 September 2012 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Moon versus Mun  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): July 2012  
Decision Date: August 2012  
Jurisdiction: 
Common Law  
Before: 
Schmidt J  
Decision:
The appeal is dismissed. 
Unless the parties approach to be heard within 14 days, the plaintiffs are to pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings, as agreed or assessed.  
Catchwords: 
APPEAL - leave to appeal and appeal from Local Court decision - whether judgment given on admissions - whether default judgments entered - whether his Honour erred in striking out the defence - whether judgment was wrongly given, on the admissions made - no error - appeal dismissed  
JUDGMENT IS THE JUDGMENT SUM OF $29,916.67 CENTS. A JUDGMENT INTEREST IS
CALCULATED FROM 26 JULY 2011."
Having in mind the respective cases which the parties had advanced, why his Honour struck out the defence is not clear. Ms Mun's application was for judgment in her favour on the basis of the admissions made in the defence. There was no application that the defence be struck out. There were submissions made by the parties in relation to the claims for damages advanced in the defence, which it was accepted for Mr Moon and Mrs Lim had not been adequately pleaded and ought to have been brought by way of a cross-claim. The inadequacy of the pleading of those claims was accepted by his Honour. That may explain the order striking out the defence, his Honour thereby rejecting the application made for Mr Moon and Ms Lim, that the claims which they ought technically to have advanced by way of a properly pleaded cross-claim, should nevertheless be heard and determined on the basis of the claims advanced in the defence, the absence of a cross-claim being treated on a technicality. 
In the circumstances, his Honour was clearly entitled to reject that application. The way in which the defence was pleaded could not be overlooked, given the requirements of the Rules as to the way in which claims which ought to be advanced by way of cross-claim must be pleaded. The necessary particulars of those claims were not provided. The claimed additional terms were not even specified. 
Judgment was given on admissions
On appeal it was, nevertheless, urged that it would be concluded that the orders made were orders for default judgment under [Part 16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/index.html#p16) of the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/), which required that there be an affidavit in support satisfying the requirements of [Rule 16.2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s16.2.html) (see Gregory's Transport). That submission may not be accepted. 
Firstly, it may not be overlooked that there was no such application made below. None of the parties nor his Honour referred to such an application. While the defence was struck out, his Honour did not make any order for entry of default judgment. It is apparent from the cases which the parties respectively advanced and the conclusions which his Honour reached, that he intended to give judgment for Ms Mun on the basis of the admissions made in the defence and to refuse Mr Moon and Ms Lim's application that their claims be dealt with, notwithstanding the absence of a properly pleaded cross-claim. 
While no reference was made by the parties to [Rule 17.7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s17.7.html), the application pressed was clearly an application for judgment on admissions made in the pleadings. The case put for Mr Moon and Ms Lim accepted that various admissions had been made, and made further admissions, but urged that their claims for damages for breach of contract should be heard, notwithstanding the 'technicality', that they had not brought any cross-claim. 
In those circumstances there can be no question that his Honour had power to enter judgment, if the relevant admissions had been made. Under [Rule 17.7(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s17.7.html) that discretion was available to be exercised, even if his Honour had taken the view that other questions lying between the parties in the proceedings had not be determined. He also had to determine whether or not Mr Moon and Ms Lim's claims could be heard, in the circumstances which had arisen for consideration at the hearing, namely that they had not advanced any cross-claim in relation to the breaches of the contract which they alleged.
His Honour clearly did not accept that the failure to put on a cross-claim was a mere technicality, which could be overlooked. While his reasons were shortly given, it is also apparent that his Honour accepted the case advanced for Ms Mun as to judgment in her favour on admissions. 
Having outlined the claims advanced in the statement of claim and what was pleaded in the defence, including by way of admission, his Honour took the view that the claims sought to be advanced by the defendants by their defence, were inadequately pleaded, so as to give rise to a lack of procedural fairness for Ms Mun, if the application made for Mr Moon and Ms Lim were to be accepted. He concluded that the defence did not plead anything which Ms Mun should be required to answer. That conclusion rested on his view that the defence did not stipulate the asserted implied oral and implied terms on which the defendants relied and that refusal to pay the $29,000 claimed, rested on a claimed breach of fundamental terms of the contract, particulars of which had not been provided.
His Honour also noted that the defence did not plead either any discharge of the obligation to pay the money due under the contract, or the termination of the contract. It was on that basis that he came to the conclusion that judgment should be entered for Ms Mun. In the circumstances confronting his Honour, these conclusions were clearly open. 
His Honour accepted the case advanced for Ms Mun, that in those circumstances she was entitled to judgment on admissions. It follows that the submission that his Honour made an order for default judgment, may not be accepted, notwithstanding that he ordered the defence to be struck out.

The admissions
There were plainly admissions made in the defence on which Ms Mun was entitled to rely. That was not disputed below for Mr Moon and Ms Lim, in the submissions advanced on their behalf. To the contrary, there were further admissions made in those submissions, even though the defence claimed that Mr Moon and Ms Lim were not indebted as Ms Mun alleged. 
The written contract for the sale of the business was admitted. The pleaded defence and the submissions advanced below made it clear that it was not in issue that the agreed price was $70,000; that the contract required payment of parts of the sale price on specified dates; that Mr Moon and Ms Lim had entered into occupation of the premises and later conducted a restaurant business there; that part of the purchase price had been paid; and that the amount claimed remained outstanding; Mr Moon and Ms Lim having refused to make the payments due.
The defence claimed that Ms Mun had breached implied and oral terms of the contract. It did not plead that those breaches amounted to a repudiation of the contract, which Mr Moon and Ms Lim had accepted, thereby bringing the contract to an end. Instead, what was pursued was damages for alleged breaches of unspecified implied and oral terms. By that claim it was conceded that the contract remained on foot. 
On appeal reliance was placed on what was observed in Arnold. That was a case concerned with default judgment entered after a defence was struck out and a cross-claim dismissed. It was not concerned with judgment entered on admissions. There it was observed: "57 It may be that if the statement of claim had pleaded that the respondents had fulfilled their promise and that the promise was the quid pro quo for the appellant's obligation to pay a specified amount, the respondents' claim would have been for a liquidated sum. This is consistent with the principles to which I have referred ([46]-[47] above). It is also consistent with the general principle applicable to contracts for the purchase of land that: "on the failure or refusal of a purchaser to complete an executory contract for the purchase of land the vendor is not entitled to sue for the purchase money as a debt. He is entitled merely to sue for specific performance or for damages for the loss of his bargain. It is only when the contract has been completed by the execution and acceptance of a conveyance that unpaid purchase money may become a debt and can be recovered accordingly." 
McDonald versus Dennys Lascelles Ltd  <case>; [48
CLR 457], at 473, per Dixon J (citing Sir John Salmond). The same principle applies to the sale of goods: McDonald versus Dennys Lascelles, at 473-474.
 However, the statement of claim does not plead that the respondents' promise was the quid pro quo for the appellant's obligation to pay an agreed sum of money. More importantly, it does not plead that the respondents fulfilled their promise, thus enlivening the appellant's obligation. In these circumstances, the statement of claim does not plead a claim for a debt or liquidated sum within the meaning of UCPR r 16.6(1)."
The contract in question in Arnold did not provide for payment to be made on specified dates or for specified amounts. It was an agreement by which a partnership was dissolved, which provided for how the parties' interests and liabilities in the partnership would be divided and the payments which would be made between them. Sackville J considered the claims advanced in the statement of claim in question, from [48], observing that: "... specification of a precise amount does not convert what is otherwise a claim for unliquidated damages into a liquidated claim: Environmental Systems
Pty Ltd versus Peerless Holdings Pty Ltd <case>; <case>. It is therefore necessary to examine the appellant's statement of claim to determine whether it can be characterised as pleading a claim for a debt or liquidated claim so as to satisfy r 16.6(1)."
For reasons which his Honour explained, he concluded at [54] - [55] that: "54 Mr Horowitz sought to obtain comfort from the fact that the appellant's defence (which was subsequently struck out) appeared to demonstrate an understanding of how the amount claimed in the statement of claim had been calculated. It can be accepted that the appellant was able to follow how the respondents had arrived at the figure included in the statement of claim. But that does not establish that the pleaded claim was for a liquidated amount.
 It follows from what I have said that the respondents' statement of claim should be read as alleging that the appellant incurred a binding obligation under the Separation Agreement to pay the respondents $203,459.31 if and when he acquired the interests referred to in sub-para 3(b). It follows that his obligation to pay this sum, as pleaded in the statement of claim, was dependent upon the respondents taking the steps necessary to assign or otherwise vest the relevant interests in the appellant."
Issues of this kind did not arise in this case. There was here no issue between the parties that Ms Mun claimed the balance outstanding of the $70,000 purchase price, which was due to be paid on dates fixed in the written contract. There were no steps taken by Mr Moon and Ms Lim to terminate the contract, notwithstanding Ms Mun's alleged fundamental breaches of the agreement. Instead, on their own admissions, Mr Moon and Ms Lim went into possession and conducted a restaurant business there. In the circumstances there is no question that Ms Mun's claim was for a liquidated sum. Contrary to the circumstances dealt with in Arnold, the claim advanced in the statement of claim here in question was clearly a claim that Mr Moon and Ms Lim had a binding obligation to pay Ms Mun a total of some $29,916.67 under the express and implied terms of the written contract, as to the final part of the purchase price, on a specified date and in relation to the rent, in respect of the period that Mr Moon and Ms Lim went into occupation of the premises. By their defence and the submissions advanced at the hearing, they admitted that the payments had not been made, even though they had gone into occupation and operated the business. 
As was explained below for Mr Moon and Ms Lim, what they sought to do by their defence was to avoid the payment of all of the amount in issue, by advancing other claims for unspecified damages in respect of alleged breaches of other oral and implied terms of the agreement. The defence did not allege that there had been a total failure of consideration, nor was that advanced below. It was only in oral submissions in reply on appeal, that it was submitted for the first time that there had been such a failure and that the defence should be so understood.
That submission was advanced in order to meet the submission that Mr Moon and Ms Lim had not pleaded a total failure of consideration which could only be advanced in respect of a contract discharged for breach or failure (see Peisley versus Maddrell Management Pty Limited and Ors <case> As there discussed by Johnson J, such a claim is usually precluded when part of the agreed return has been received. 
Not only was this not an argument advanced below, it clearly cannot be accepted on the facts, which were not in dispute below. The written contract expressly required payment of parts of the purchase price on specified dates. Payment due was not made even though Mr Moon and Ms Lim went into possession in respect of a period of time for which Ms Mun claimed she had paid rent for which they were liable. This was not denied and so by operation of [Rule 14.26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s14.26.html) was taken to be admitted. Their claims that other unwritten terms of the contract had been breached by Ms Mun, did not relieve them of the obligation to make the payments due under the contract.

Mr Moon and Mrs Lim were not entitled to pursue a claim for damages by way of the defence filed
It was also complained for Mr Moon and Ms Lim that their defence ought not to have been struck out.
There was power to strike out the defence under [Rule 14.28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/s14.28.html), as disclosing no defence to Ms Mun's claims, if it had a tendency to cause prejudice or delay the proceedings, or if it was otherwise an abuse of process. That was not an application made for Ms Mun, who rather sought judgment in her favour on the basis of the admissions there made. Mr Moon and Ms Lim complained that his Honour's order had the result that they were deprived of a hearing in relation to the claims which they sought to advance by way of the defence, as to Ms Mun's alleged breach of her obligations under the contract,
Under [s 22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s22.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) they were entitled to bring a cross-claim in the proceedings, in relation to the claims they wished to advance as to Ms Mun's alleged breaches of their agreement. Under the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/), as was submitted for Ms Mun below, such claims could not be advanced by way of a defence, they had to be pursued by way of cross-claim. No error has been shown in his Honour's refusal to deal with the claims advanced in the defence. They were not adequately pleaded, as the Rules required. This was not a mere technicality which his Honour was obliged to ignore. 
Even when the order striking out the defence was made, it was possible for Mr Moon and Ms Lim to seek leave to file a cross-claim and to have the judgment entered in favour of Ms Mun stayed. There was no such application. In the circumstances it is apparent that even if his Honour erred in striking out the defence, it has not been shown that his error vitiated the decision. It has not been shown that the judgment was wrongly given in favour of Ms Mun, given the admissions made. It follows that the appeal must be dismissed.
The usual order as to costs is that they follow the event, with the result that an order should made in favour of Ms Mun, as agreed or assessed. Unless the parties approach within 14 days, this will be the Court's order. 
Order
The appeal is dismissed.
Unless the parties approach to be heard within 14 days, the plaintiffs are to pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings, as agreed or assessed.
 * * * 
