

Laljichudasama and Anor versus Consumer Claims Tribunal and Ors Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 715 (30 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 `LALJICHUDASAMA & ANOR versus CONSUMER CLAIMS TRIBUNAL & ORS` `30032/97` `30 July 1998` `Carruthers AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The Court assembled this afternoon to deal with a question of costs arising out of my judgment in these proceedings on 22 July 1998. 
Very briefly stated, the circumstances giving rise to the litigation which culminated in my judgment of that date are as follows. Mr and Mrs
Laljichudasama commenced proceedings in the Consumer Claims Tribunal against one, Mr Frasca, a consulting engineer, claiming that he had overcharged them in relation to consultation fees concerning structural defects in their home which was erected at 3 Glover Avenue, Quakers Hill. Mr Frasca's services had been obtained by the present plaintiffs to support disputes which they had against a company which had negligently erected their home. After taking evidence and hearing submissions in the Consumer Claims Tribunal, the referee,
Mr Miner, reserved his decision. Prior to handing down his decision, the plaintiffs obtained access for the first time to certain photographs which they believed would have assisted their claim in the Tribunal had they had access to them at the time of the hearing. As laypersons, it would have been difficult for them to have determined what the appropriate procedure was to deal with this situation.

I interpose here to say that the Consumer Claims Tribunal is set up and conducts its hearings to the intent that persons have access to an economical and expeditious tribunal without the intervention of lawyers to deal with their disputes.

The course which the plaintiffs adopted was, one might think from a layperson's point of view, a sensible one. They wrote a letter to the senior referee of the Tribunal enclosing a copy of the photographs together with a letter which was related to those photographs, requesting that the additional material be brought to the attention of the referee, Mr Miner. The letter concluded: "Should it not be possible for this evidence to be considered without the other party being present - informed about, we request a further hearing to be listed to show and discuss those photos." 
They received no response from the Tribunal to this letter but shortly after, having written the letter, they were informed that the referee, Mr Miner, had dismissed their claim. They were provided with the reasons formulated by Mr
Miner for dismissing the claim.

The plaintiffs were understandably very upset by the fact that they had received no response from the Tribunal to their letter and the reasons of Mr
Miner made no reference to these photographs. They sought an explanation from an employee of the Tribunal as to how the situation arose and from their point of view, that explanation was unsatisfactory. It is not necessary for me to expand upon that. They decided that the only course available to them then was to invoke the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court on the basis that they had been denied natural justice.

At all times prior to the matter coming on for hearing before me, they had represented themselves but for the hearing they retained Mr Epstein of counsel.

The case was not a simple one, by reason (inter alia) of the specific terms of the Consumer Claims Tribunal Act which limited very much the right of this
Court to interfere in the conduct of proceedings before the Tribunal. However eventually ( as can be seen from my judgment of 22 July 1998) the matter fell to be resolved by the fact that I was completely satisfied, having considered all relevant matters, that if these photographs had been drawn to the attention of the referee, Mr Miner, and he had decided that he would take them into consideration as part of the evidence before him, they would not in any way have affected the decision to which he ultimately came, namely that Mr
Frasca was entitled to his fees in full. However, as can be seen from my judgment, I did find as a fact that on the probabilities the letter had been received by the Tribunal and for reasons which I will never know, the letter was not drawn to the attention of the referee, Mr Miner, for his decision as to what he should do about it, bearing in mind that the procedure, as to a matter before him, was solely within his prerogative so long as he adhered to the principles of natural justice.

Even though I found in favour of the defendants, I was troubled about the question of costs. I held a prima facie view that there were special circumstances as explained by the Court of Appeal in Morosi versus Mirror
Newspapers [(1997) 2 NSWLR 749] at 808, to disturb the prima facie rule that a successful party should get his or her costs. However, as I had not had the benefit of argument in relation to the question of costs, I indicated to the parties that my view about costs was conditional and if the Minister wished to argue that costs should follow the event, then I would relist the matter for hearing. This I have done and I have had the benefit of argument this afternoon by counsel, Ms Guilfoyle, for the
Minister, and Mr Epstein for the plaintiffs.

It is always difficult for any judge who has a prima facie view to dismiss that prima facie view from his or her mind when dealing with any issue.
However I have made a positive approach to that problem and I am dealing with this matter purely as one principle. Ms Guilfoyle has referred me to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Ritter versus Godfrey [(1920) KB 47] and the principles enunciated there, principles which are very helpful to a court when seeking instruction as to whether the prima facie rule as to costs following the event should be disturbed. Although those principles are not binding on this Court, it is helpful to consider them. At p 60 Lord Atkin put the position thus: "In the case of a wholly successful defendant, in my opinion the judge must give the defendant his costs unless there is evidence that the defendant (1) brought about the litigation or (2) has done something connected with the institution or the conduct of the suit calculated to occasion unnecessary litigation and expense, or (3) has done some wrongful act in the course of the transaction of which the plaintiff complains." 
I think this case conveniently falls within the second of those principles in that the Tribunal, by not replying to the plaintiffs' letter, set in train the events which brought the matter into this Court. Thus I think the failure by the Tribunal to respond to that letter had a material bearing upon the institution of these proceedings and, albeit the plaintiffs were unsuccessful, it was a special circumstance that took this case outside the general rule. I say that whether one looks at the situation as explained by the Court of
Appeal in Morosi's case or whether one applies the second of the principles enunciated by Lord Justice Atkin.

Accordingly I confirm the prima facie order which I made on 22 July 1998 that each party pay their own costs. The costs of the proceedings this afternoon will be borne by the parties themselves.
 * * * 
