

Environment Protection Authority versus Leaghur Holdings Pty Limited No. 60070 of 1995 Criminal Law and Procedure - Environmental Law [1995] NSWSC 14 (29
August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE FULL COURT OF THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
ALLEN(1), SULLY(2) AND JAMES(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 29 May 1995 #DATE 26:6:1995 #ADD 29:8:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:    S J Rushton 
Solicitors for the Appellant:
Environment Protection Authority 
Counsel for the Respondent:    J A Ayling 
Solicitors for the Respondent:  Button
Hawdon and McMahon
ORDER
Appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
ALLEN J: This is a case stated from the Land and Environment Court pursuant to [s 5A(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5a.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). The case was stated at the request of the appellant ("the Authority").
It relates to the dismissal by that Court, constituted by Bannon J, of proceedings brought by the Authority against the respondent ("the company") for an alleged offence under the [Clean Waters Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/). The offence charged was that the company had without reasonable cause failed to comply with a direction to it under [s 27A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s27a.html) as the occupier of certain lots of land to "remove all tyres, .. concrete, building material, rock .. and other foreign material presently visible on the said premises and the waters adjacent" thereto. So far as relevant [s 27A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s27a.html) provides: "(1) The Authority may, by a written notice, direct .. an occupier of premises on or in which any waters have been or are polluted or from which the pollution of any waters has been caused .. to take such measures to remove .. the pollution as are specified in the notice ...

A person who, without reasonable excuse, does not comply with any direction in a notice under this section and served on the person is guilty of an offence against the Environmental Offences and Penalties
Act 1989 ... " "Occupier" is defined (in <case>) as meaning, in relation to any premises, "the person in occupation or control of the premises and, in relation to any premises where different parts are occupied or controlled by different persons, means, in relation to any such part, the person in occupation or control of that part."
The pollution relied upon by the Authority before his Honour was the construction, on part of the lands of which it was stated in the notice that the company was an occupier, of motor tyres chained together as a groyne for protection from the sea. It would appear from his Honour's reasons for judgment that the Authority placed some reliance also upon the construction on part of the lands of a concrete and rubble retaining wall, maintaining that that wall also was pollution of the waters. The case as stated is directed to the groyne as being the relevant pollution. It does not advert to the retaining wall as pollution. On the hearing of the appeal to this Court the
Authority nonetheless seeks to rely upon that retaining wall as being relevant pollution. As hereafter will appear, however, it does not affect the result of this appeal whether or not the stated case is to be understood as extending to the retaining wall being pollution.
The essential facts as found by his Honour, or which were common ground before him, are within a short compass.
In 1981 the company became the registered proprietor of a number of lots in a subdivision of land at Batemans Bay. It was an old subdivision. A survey in 1883 showed that the lots in the subdivision acquired by the company then were comprised in two rows. The front row was separated from the waters of
Batemans Bay by a reserve 100 feet wide. Behind that row was a public road,
Wharf Road. Behind Wharf Road was the second row of lots. Two later surveys, one done in 1988 and the other in 1993, were in evidence. These showed that there had been extensive loss of the land to the waters of Batemans Bay. All of the front row of lots were lost. The groyne was in the waters of Batemans
Bay, partly where the front row of lots had been and partly further out into the Bay. Wharf Road, where it had separated the first row of lots and the second row, had gone. Much of the second row of lots also was under water.
This included the retaining wall, which at some stage had been erected along the frontage of some of the second row lots to Wharf Road as well as extending further along the frontage of some adjoining land under different ownership.
Other than the groyne and the retaining wall there were not upon the lands which had been acquired by the company in 1981 structures of any sort. There were no jetties, no wharves, no buildings built over the water or any other indicia of occupation or control.
His Honour found that the groyne had not been constructed by the company but by a Mr Saunders who referred to the land in the vicinity of where the groyne was erected as being his and who stated his intention as being to reclaim his land from the water. It is not argued on this appeal that it was not open to his
Honour to find that in constructing the groyne Mr Saunders did not act as the agent of the company.
His Honour further found: "Equally, I am not satisfied that there is any satisfactory evidence that either Mr Saunders or Leaghur (the company) caused any other material, the subject of the charges, to be placed on the premises alleged in the charges or in the waters adjacent to those premises." It follows that he was not satisfied that the company constructed the retaining wall. There was no "satisfactory evidence" as to that.
Before his Honour, and before this Court, the Authority has prayed in aid s 27(2) of the Pollution Control Act which provides: "In any legal proceedings by the Authority, no proof shall be required (until evidence is given to the contrary) of the fact that a person is, or at any relevant time, was the occupier of any land to which the proceedings relate."
Its argument is that no evidence was given to the contrary that at the time of the giving of the notice the company was the occupier of the relevant lands. Indeed, it points out, the Authority itself adduced evidence that the legal title was in the company.
There being no evidence to the contrary as to the occupation of the lands the Authority was not required, it asserts, to prove that they were occupied at the relevant time by the company.
It is to be noted that <case> refers to evidence to the contrary being given, not proof to the contrary. What the section imposed upon the company was an evidentiary burden, not an onus of proof.
As is stated in Howard's
Criminal Law, 5th Edition, at 20: "The effect of the evidentiary burden on D is that he cannot raise frivolous defences. He does not necessarily have to produce evidence in support of his arguments himself: if he can point to facts disclosed in P's evidence which support his argument, this is sufficient; but there has to be some evidence. It must be stressed that although this rule is now generally known as the evidentiary burden of proof it does not require D to prove anything in the sense of undertaking a significant quantum of proof. In a sense D is saddled with a low quantum of proof in that he has to produce or point to evidence which is cogent enough to be reasonably capable of bearing the construction that he wishes put upon it, but this minimum requirement of plausibility is far removed from the normal content of the word 'proof'."
It is well-known in the criminal law for such an evidentiary burden to be placed upon an accused. Examples are self-defence, automatism and provocation.
In some instances the evidentiary burden is imposed by statute. For example, [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s23.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) provides, so far as relevant: "(4) Where, on the trial of a person for murder, there is any evidence that the act causing death was an act done or omitted under provocation the onus is on the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the act or omission causing death was not an act done or omitted under provocation"
Section 27(2) of the Pollution Control
Act is legislation proceeding on the same principle. Until there is the "evidence" it is not incumbent upon the prosecution to prove the element in question of the offence. If it becomes incumbent upon the prosecution to do so it must prove it to the ordinary criminal standard - that is, beyond reasonable doubt.
It is helpful to examine more fully the extent of the evidentiary burden upon the accused (or defendant). In Youssef [(1990) 50 A Crim R 1], Hunt J (with whom the other members of the Court of Criminal Appeal agreed) reviewed the authorities and concluded that most Australian authorities, in accordance with principle and logic, established that "there must be evidence from which it could be inferred that there is the reasonable possibility" that the fact was that required (at 3). His Honour was there dealing with automatism. He went on to state: "If the accused is able to point to or to produce evidence from which it could be inferred that there is at least a reasonable possibility that his act was involuntary as a result of a state of automatism, the Crown in effect bears the onus of removing the reasonable doubt thereby raised, by establishing that the act was voluntary." (at 4).
His
Honour's analysis is consistent with what later fell from the High
Court in The Queen versus Falconer <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 30.]
The task of Bannon J accordingly was to determine whether from evidence pointed to or adduced by the company it could be inferred that there was at least a reasonable possibility that it was not the occupier of the lands at the relevant time.
The Authority relies upon Oliver versus The Queen [(127 D.L.R. (3d) 257)], a unanimous decision of the Supreme Court of Canada. Nine judges constituted the
Court for that case. The Court considered the effect of a provision of the
Narcotic Control Act 1970 pursuant to which the certificate of an analyst as to the nature of a substance, in that case heroin, was proof of that statement "in the absence of evidence to the contrary". The judgment of the Court stated: "'Evidence to the contrary' is any evidence which tends to put in doubt the probative value Parliament has legislatively conferred upon the statements contained in a s. 9 certificate ... Section 9 has been enacted to dispense with the calling of experts to testify in cases where the nature of the suspect substance is not really in issue ... 'Evidence to the contrary', as regards in analyst's conclusions set out in a certificate, as those words are meant in s. 9, is any evidence upon which a trier of fact could as a matter of law rest a reasonable doubt as to that analyst's conclusions had he testified as an expert witness in Court." (at 265).
The law as stated in Oliver is in harmony with the law as settled by authority in this country.
Was there any evidence before his Honour from which it could be inferred that there was a reasonable possibility that the company in fact was not the occupier? I accept that the demonstration of such a reasonable possibility had to take into account, in the present case, that the company was the registered proprietor of the lots. That, clearly, was common ground. There was no physical sign, linked to the company, that it occupied the land. The Authority argues, however, the mere ownership of land is evidence of occupation by the owner. So it is. It is more likely that land is occupied by a person if he is the owner of it than if he is not. The only evidence accordingly, it is argued for the Authority, was that the company indeed was the occupier: and there was no evidence to the contrary.
I have no doubt that his Honour was correct in holding that there was evidence to the contrary.
It was that the relevant land had been lost to the sea, becoming part of the bed of the sea. This evidence raised as a reasonable possibility that the company, albeit registered as proprietor, did not own the land so taken back by the sea. His Honour found as a fact that the land lost to the sea was lost by erosion which was "gradual and imperceptible within the meaning of those terms as explained by Lord Wilberforce in Southern Centre of
Theosophy Incorporated versus State of South Australia [(1982) AC 706] at 720" and that the ownership of it reverted, accordingly, to the Crown. He held, further, that the reversion of ownership to the
Crown ensued notwithstanding the provisions of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). The correctness of the law in that regard, as stated by his Honour, is not challenged. What the Authority argues is that in the absence of evidence that the land was taken by the sea by such gradual and imperceptible erosion (as distinct from sudden avulsion, or a number of sudden avulsions) there was no evidence of loss of ownership and hence no evidence to the contrary of occupation by the company. That argument is untenable. The very loss of lands to the sea ordinarily raises as a reasonable possibility that the loss has been occasioned by gradual and imperceptible erosion. No doubt there would be circumstances in which it would not raise that as a reasonable possibility. For example, it might be common ground that the land indeed was lost by avulsion. But it is manifest in the present case that the reasonable possibility of loss by gradual and imperceptible erosion was raised by the evidence of the loss of the lands.
That possibility raised by the evidence was one on which reasonable doubt could be rested as to whether the company was the occupier of the land lost to the sea. The requirement of <case> of the
Pollution Control Act 1970 of evidence having been given "to the contrary" in respect of occupation was satisfied, casting upon the Authority the burden of proving occupation to the criminal standard. The fallacy in the argument for the Authority is perhaps better understood by taking an analogy from a more familiar set of assumed facts than those relevant to reversion of ownership to the Crown following upon loss of land to the sea. It may be helpful to consider a drug analyst's certificate to which the provision considered by the
Canadian Supreme Court in Oliver applied.
Assume the following facts. The certificate identifies the drug as being a prohibited drug. The accused, however, points to or adduces evidence that in the laboratory in which the analyst was employed every test for that drug was made by the use of a pre-packaged kit. When the analysis in question was made there were on the shelves, from which the analysts took a kit for the test they were about to do, not only kits in good order but also a substantial number of kits which had come from a batch which later were found to be defective and likely to give false results. There is nothing in the analyst's certificate in question to indicate which of the kits he took from the shelf and used for the analysis. It is beyond argument that on those assumed facts there would be evidence "which tends to put in doubt the probative value Parliament has legislatively conferred upon the statements contained" in the certificate (Oliver at 265). In short there would be "evidence to the contrary" as to the accuracy of the analysis. If the argument for the Authority in the present case were correct the accused would have to go further. He would have to point to or adduce evidence not only raising a reasonable possibility that the analyst used a defective kit but pointing to the likelihood that he did so.
That would be a perversion of the obvious intention of the statutory requirement. Evidence pointing to the real possibility that the analyst may have used a defective kit clearly would be evidence tending to put in doubt the reliability of the certificate. No more would be needed. Likewise in the present case, as ownership of the land as evinced by the registered title was the only matter relevantly connecting the company to the land, evidence tending to put in doubt the fact of ownership tended to put in doubt also the fact of occupation, hence satisfying the requirement of <case> of the
Pollution Control Act 1970.
Section 27(2) having been satisfied the Authority had to establish to the criminal standard of proof that the company was at the relevant time an occupier of the relevant land. As it relied upon ownership of the land it had to establish that the ownership had not reverted to the Crown notwithstanding the state of the register as to title. The loss of the lands to the sea raised that as a relevant issue of fact. The Authority could not succeed unless it established that the relevant lands were lost by avulsion or a number of avulsions as distinct from slow and imperceptible erosion. The evidence adduced did not suffice to discharge that onus. Indeed his Honour found, on balance of probability, that it was by slow and imperceptible erosion that the land was lost. It was unnecessary for him to make any finding as to that. So sparse was the evidence that the determinant factor in any finding of the fact well might have turned upon who bore the onus of proof. It was not borne by the company. It was borne by the Authority, borne indeed to proof to the criminal standard. The question for his Honour's decision was not whether it was proven that the land had been lost by slow and imperceptible erosion. The question rather was whether it had been proven that the loss of the land had been caused otherwise than by slow and imperceptible erosion. That being so there is no occasion for this
Court to consider whether the evidence gave a sufficient basis for his Honour's finding that the loss was by slow and imperceptible erosion.
What could be described as a fall-back position is argued for the
Authority. The argument is based upon the fact that the 1988 and 1993 surveys showed that not all of the land in the lots in the second row had been lost to the sea. As to the land not lost the evidence was that the company, being the registered proprietor, was the owner and there was no evidence to the contrary that it was the occupier. That being so, the Authority argues, the further evidence before his Honour established that the company did commit the offence of failure to comply, without reasonable excuse, with the <case> notice. This is so, it is argued, notwithstanding that when the notice was given the retaining wall was in the submerged parts of those lots fronting onto Wharf
Road (which itself was lost to the sea). The additional evidence relied upon is that the survey of 1993, made not long after service of the notice, depicts on part of the remaining land of one of the blocks what is noted as being "concrete stock pile". It is to be inferred, so the argument runs, that the retaining wall was built using concrete taken from that stock pile. The notice pursuant to <case> followed the provisions of that section in giving the direction to remove the pollution from the waters to the company as "occupier of premises ... from which the pollution ... has been caused". The argument proceeds that the retaining wall was pollution of the waters of the sea which was caused from the land still occupied by the company when the notice was given. It was so caused, it is argued, because concrete from the "concrete stock pile" shown on the survey would have been used in the wall construction and the stock pile was on land still occupied by the company. The argument does not lack sophistication. What it lacks is substance.
Section 27(2) of the Pollution Control Act 1970 is of no assistance to the Authority in this fall-back argument. Accepting, for the moment, that the argument is sound in law, <case> did not relieve the Authority from the burden of proving beyond reasonable doubt that the retaining wall was constructed with material drawn from the stock pile. His Honour made no such finding of fact. Indeed he found: "I am not satisfied that there is any satisfactory evidence that .. Leaghur (the company) caused any other material (that is material other than the groyne) the subject of the charges, to be placed on the premises alleged in the charges or in waters adjacent to those premises." His Honour continued: "There is some evidence associating a Mr
Coburn with the building of a rubble wall, but as he is the subject of pending charges, I make no finding about that." The 1993 survey does show a rubble retaining wall situated on land shown in the survey as being owned by Mr
Coburn. If any inference were to be drawn that material from the concrete stock pile was used in the construction of the retaining wall on the land of which the company was registered as proprietor the inference would be that the company, as owner, itself so used it. His Honour expressly declined to draw that inference. Clearly he was justified in declining to draw it. The evidence was sparse in the extreme. There were many possible explanations for the existence on the land of a concrete stock pile in 1993 apart from material from it having been used for the construction, at some unspecified time of the retaining wall: and the burden of proof on the Authority was proof beyond reasonable doubt.
It is strongly arguable that there is a further answer to the fall-back argument advanced for the Authority. The Authority failed to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the retaining wall was not erected upon land which at that time was not lost to the sea but was, indeed, above the reach of tidal waters. That founds an argument that if the retaining wall was so erected, then not only was it not then "pollution" within the meaning of the [Clean
Waters Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/) but also it did not become pollution when the forward march of the sea by erosion of land overtook it. It is necessary to turn to the definition of "pollute" [(s 5).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cwa1970131/s5.html) It is a lengthy definition, dealing with three categories of pollutants. But there is the common requirement that to pollute means "to place in or on, or otherwise introduce into or on to, the waters (whether through an act or omission)" the offending material.
Manifestly the construction of a solid retaining wall on dry land, out of the reach of tidal waters, was not pollution. The Act (s ) specifically provides that "pollution" has a corresponding interpretation to "pollute". What was the effect, however, of the subsequent loss of the retaining wall to the sea? It is strongly arguable that the encroachment of the sea did not render the wall "pollution" within the meaning of the Act. If it were pollution it would be only because it was offending material which was "introduced" into the waters of the sea. The primary meaning of the word "introduce" is, as its Latin origin indicates, "to lead or bring into a place" (Oxford Shorter Dictionary).
When the sea encroached upon and overtook the wall, the wall was not being led or brought into the sea.
It remained where it was. The movement was the other way around. The sea moved upon it. I refrain from expressing any concluded opinion on the question of construction implicit in this line of reasoning. I refrain from doing so as this question was not raised in argument and the
Court, accordingly, has not had the benefit of submissions concerning it.
A further criticism advanced by the Authority of his Honour's reasons for judgment is directed to an observation by his Honour to the effect that occupation of the lands at the relevant time by Mr Saunders, as he found to be the case, precluded a finding that the company was the occupier within the meaning of the Act. In the context of the judgment as a whole, however, it would seem likely that what his Honour said was intended to amount to no more than that the occupation by Mr Saunders was in assertion of the right to exclusive occupation by him, thereby precluding any joint occupation by him and the company. The point, however, is peripheral and not determinant: and no further attention to it by this Court is appropriate on the hearing of this appeal.
In my opinion the Court should answer the case as follows: "The Land and Environment Court was not in error in holding that within the meaning of <case> of the Pollution Control Act there was evidence given to the contrary of occupation by the respondent of the relevant lands at the relevant time, that the appellant had failed to prove such occupation and that the summons accordingly should be dismissed."
There should be no order as to costs. Pursuant to [s 5A(1A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5a.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) the proceedings in this Court are required to be dealt with as if it were an appeal under <case> of the Act (as applied by s
AB).
Accordingly it is an "appeal" which is to be "by way of rehearing on the evidence given" in the Court below. Section 17(1) provides: "On the hearing or determination of an appeal .. no costs shall be allowed on either side." In an appeal under <case>, <case> precludes the awarding of costs (J and A Brown and
Abermaine Seham Collieries versus Robertson [(1980) 1 NSWLR 622.] It may be considered anomalous that costs cannot be awarded in this Court notwithstanding the jurisdiction of the Land and Environment to award costs in the proceedings before it. The like anomaly was considered by the Court of
Criminal Appeal in J and A Brown and
Abermaine Seham Collieries versus Robertson in respect of an appeal against a conviction by the Supreme Court in its summary jurisdiction.
That anomaly was not allowed to override the clear intent of the legislation. The Court considered that the situation was "extraordinary" but that it was a matter for correction, if that be thought fit, by the legislature (at 626).
JUDGE2
SULLY J: I agree with Allen
J.
JUDGE3
JAMES J: I agree with Allen J.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/14.html  
