

Stenlake versus Whipps (No. 2) [2016] NSWSC 1520 (28 October 2016) 
Last Updated: 28 October 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Order the defendants/cross-claimants to pay interest under [Civil Procedure
Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s100.html) on the sum of $80,000 from 29 January 2013 to 24 August 2016. Order the defendants/cross-claimants to pay two thirds of the plaintiff's costs of these proceedings.  
Catchwords: 
INTEREST AND COSTS - Court orders - equitable charge in the sum of $100,000 over defendant's/cross-claimant's property - cross-claimant succeeds in order for return of Mercedes Benz motor vehicle to estate - whether interest up to judgment should be awarded on the sum of $100,000 - what costs order should be made.  
JUDGMENT
This is the Court's second judgment in these proceedings. The Court gave its first judgment on 6 June 2016: Stenlake versus Whipps <case> The Court's first judgment found that the plaintiff, Mr Stenlake, was successful in his claim to an equitable charge in the sum of $100,000 over certain real estate he had improved known in the proceedings as "the Coraki property".
The defendants/cross-claimants ("the Whipps parties") were successful in the first judgment in their claim that the estate of the late Lola Whipps is the legal owner of a Mercedes Benz motor vehicle, which Mr Stenlake had given to the deceased as a gift. Mr Stenlake was also successful in arguing for the dismissal of the remainder of the cross-claimant's claims for particular personal property and effects of the deceased, apart from a number of specific items that the plaintiff/cross-defendant, Mr Stenlake, agreed to return to the cross-claimants. Most of the specific items agreed to be returned have now been returned.
But a number of issues were left unresolved by the first judgment. This second judgment now deals with them. The Court reserved for further consideration at a relief and costs hearing, whether any interest was due on the $100,000 due to the plaintiff and whether an order for judicial sale of the Coraki property were required. The Court also directed in relation to the cross-claim, that if the parties could not otherwise agree and if the Mercedes Benz vehicle were not returned, the Court would hear submissions as to: (1) its market value and (2) whether there was any continuing dispute concerning the benefit to the plaintiff of the motor vehicle's use since the deceased's death; and (3) whether there was any continuing dispute about the costs of its upkeep. Finally the parties were given liberty to advance submissions about questions of costs.
The proceedings were listed for submissions on these issues on 24 August 2016. On that occasion the parties dealt with the issues of interest and costs, which are the subject of this judgment. The parties also reached a consensus on 24 August about a procedure for the return of the Mercedes Benz motor vehicle. But the process of returning the vehicle could not be completed until mid-September 2016. So the Court reserved to the Whipps parties an opportunity to bring a further motion in relation to who should bear the costs of re-registering the motor vehicle and putting it in running order after its return. But if no such application were made by 30 September, the Court indicated it would reserve judgment on that date and give judgment only on the issues of costs and interest.
But if a motion were filed by 30 September the Court indicated it would hear argument on any additional issues raised in the motion and reserve judgment thereafter. Procedural steps were taken in this order because of the possibility that the Court's overall costs discretion could potentially be effected by any decision which the Court made in relation to any motion about the Mercedes Benz filed by 30 September 2016.
The Court made the following orders on 24 August 2016: "1. DIRECT judgment for the plaintiff against the second defendant in his capacity as Executor of the Estate of the late Lola Denise Whipps in the sum of $100,000 exclusive of interest.  . RESERVE for further consideration and decision the question of what orders if any in relation to interest up to judgment on the said judgment sum of $100,000 should be made.  . GRANT liberty to the plaintiff to apply for an order for the judicial sale of the Coraki property and ancillary relief if the judgment entered against the second defendant pursuant to paragraph 1 is not paid before 24
October 2016.  . ORDER that the time for the plaintiff/cross defendant to deliver up to the second defendant/cross claimant the Mercedes Benz vehicle referred to in
Order 2 made on 6 June 2016 be limited to 14 September 2016.  . DIRECT that the plaintiff/cross defendant is to bear the costs of such delivery of the said vehicle.  . DIRECT that the second defendant/cross claimant's solicitors notify the plaintiff/cross defendant's solicitors in writing by 31 August 2016 of the address to which the said vehicle is required to be delivered.  . ORDER that in the event that the plaintiff/cross defendant does not deliver the said vehicle by 14 September 2016 then the second defendant/cross claimant shall be at liberty to apply for an assessment of the quantum of damages payable by the plaintiff/cross defendant in respect of the detention of the said vehicle.  . The second defendant has liberty to apply until 30 September 2016 by motion, if so advised, for orders arising out of the issues reserved for further consideration by the Court in paragraph 95 of the Court's judgment of June 2016."  . Note that the parties have filed a list of the items returned by the cross defendant to the cross claimants in accordance with Order 3 of the
Court's judgment of 6 June 2016, which list has been initialled by the Court, and dated today.  . RESERVE on 30 September 2016 for decision all issues of costs and interest, if the second defendant does not file a motion pursuant to Order 8 hereof."
Mr Ireland QC of counsel continues to appear for the plaintiff. Ms Winfield of counsel continues to appear for the defendant/cross-claimant. These reasons should be read with the Court's first judgment.
A motion about the expenses related to the Mercedes Benz was filed pursuant to the liberty granted by Order 8 of the orders made on 24 August 2016. So the Court did not reserve judgment on that date. Instead the motion filed on 30 September was listed for argument today, 28 October. But the parties informed the Court on 27 October that the motion was resolved by consent. That motion was resolved on the following terms: "BY CONSENT
NOTE that without admissions the plaintiff has agreed to pay the second defendant a sum of $20,000 in respect of the defendant's use and custody between January 2013 and September 2016 of the Mercedes Benz motor vehicle referred to in order 2 made on 6 June 2016 in the proceedings.
NOTE that the judgment for $100,000 entered under Order 1 made in these proceedings on 24 August 2016 is agreed by the parties to have been partially satisfied by the second defendant as to a sum of $20,000.
DIRECT that the time provided by order 3 made on 24 August 2016 in these proceedings for payment of the balance of the said judgment namely the sum of $80,000 is extended up to and including 28 October 2016.
ORDER that the defendants' notice of motion filed on 12 October 2016 be otherwise dismissed with no order as to costs."
The Court now only has to decide in this second judgment the issues that remain: the issues of interest up to judgment and costs.

Interest up to Judgment
The plaintiff claims interest up to judgment under [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), [s 100](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s100.html) for the period from 29 January 2013 (the date of the deceased's death) to 24 August 2016 (the date of the entry of a money judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $100,000). The total interest claimed for this period, as calculated by the plaintiff is $16,979.53. The plaintiff says that this amount of interest should be added to the existing judgment in his favour for $100,000.
The Whipps parties oppose the payment of any interest on the sum of $100,000. They submit that it would be inequitable for the Court to exercise its discretion to award interest under [Civil Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), [s 100](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s100.html) on the $100,000 for the same period of time the plaintiff has also retained the Mercedes Benz motor vehicle, which had a market value of $90,000. The Whipps parties argue that the plaintiff's retention of an asset of virtually equivalent value to the $100,000 found due to the plaintiff neutralises the plaintiff's claim for interest. Moreover the Whipps parties submit that the set off is complete because the motor vehicle was retained for no less a period that the $100,000 was due.
The argument about interest is complicated by other issues. Ms Winfield submitted that the Mercedes Benz was included in the deceased's probate at an estimated value of $90,000. She submitted that she had not understood there was any issue that its market value was at least that amount, particularly as it had been purchased in 2010 for $170,000. Mr Ireland QC did not concede that this was an agreed figure.
But Ms Winfield submitted that an agreement was made during the hearing that the parties accepted a market value of $70,000 for the Mercedes Benz for the purposes of their contest. I accept Ms Winfield's submission as to the agreed valuation for the vehicle. The parties did agree on the second day of the hearing, as is recorded at page 158 of the transcript, that the vehicle was worth $70,000. They will be held to that agreement.
But a potential complicating factor in relation to the interest claim is in relation to the maintenance expenses of the vehicle and the benefit to the plaintiff of using the vehicle during the period since the deceased's death. Although the motion filed before 30 September 2016 has been resolved, part of the payment of $20,000 made on the resolution of this motion represents compensation to the Whipps parties for Mr Stenlake's use of the vehicle.
The purpose of the Court's discretion to award interest up to judgment under [Civil Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), [s 100](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s100.html) is properly to compensate a successful party for the practical loss the party has suffered: Screenco Pty Ltd versus RL Dew Pty Ltd <case>; [[2003] 58 NSWLR 720.] at 644. Consistent with the principle that the award of interest is compensatory, the plaintiff here arguably should only be compensated for the net amount due to him after proper account is taken of the agreed market value of the Mercedes Benz that he withheld from the Whipps parties for a virtually identical period to that during which the $100,000 was owing to the plaintiff.
But for the settlement of the motion, which itself gives the estate some compensation for being deprived of the value of the Mercedes Benz, the course which would suggest itself is for the Court to set off the interest on the value of the vehicle which was wrongfully retained by the plaintiff against the interest of the value of the $100,000 owing to the plaintiff on account of his long-standing improvements to the Coraki property. Given the Court's findings on the claim and on the cross-claim, it would have been unjust to allow an award of interest on one of these amounts without allowing an interest set-off on the other amount. This would have suggested a result in which the Court allowed interest on the sum of $30,000 (being $100,000 minus $70,000) from 29 January 2013 to 24 August 2016.
But in my view an issue of double dipping arises here by reason of the settlement of the 30 September 2016 motion. The $20,000 which the estate has received on that settlement represents some compensation for the money which the estate could have received by turning possession of the Mercedes Benz to profitable account: it represents compensation for Mr Stenlake's use of the vehicle in the period that it was in his hands. In my view it would be overcompensation for the estate to receive the benefit (by way of set-off) of interest on the $70,000 capital value of the Mercedes Benz of which it was deprived as well as compensation for loss of use of the Mercedes Benz during that period. Both represent a measure of compensation for the estate's loss of use of the value of the capital value of the vehicle.
A number of uncertainties cloud the picture. The $20,000 paid in settlement of the motion also no doubt represents a compromise on issues such as legal costs and maintenance of the vehicle. But in my view it would not be unjust in this case to either party to award interest to the plaintiff Mr Stenlake only upon the net amount which is due to him of $80,000 after deduction of the $20,000 from the judgment entered on 24 August 2016. The $80,000 is the net amount to which he is entitled after the estate has been compensated for loss of use of the vehicle. That is the course which the Court will take.
The parties should agree upon the result of this interest calculation and provide it to the Court. The Court will then enter judgment in chambers for the additional interest.

Costs
The Whipps parties' principal submission on costs was that Mr Stenlake should pay the whole of their costs of his claim and the cross-claim. In the alternative, the Whipps parties seek orders that Mr Stenlake pay his own costs and pay their costs of the cross-claim, on which the Whipps parties were successful. Further in the alternative, the Whipps parties seek orders that each party pay his or her costs of the proceedings on the basis that: (1) each party had a measure of success, or alternatively (2) that this is one of that class of cases on which principle infers that each party should bear his or her own costs. The Whipps parties relied upon the affidavit of Glenda Anne Whipps of 10 August 2016 in support of their costs application.
Mr Stenlake opposes these proposed costs orders. He submits that the plaintiff has "overwhelmingly succeeded" in the proceedings and should have his costs, discounted only slightly for the Whipps parties' potential success on the cross-claim.
The parties developed their arguments in oral submissions. It is convenient to deal with the parties' written and oral submissions by reference to the principal issues that each raised and answered on the question of costs.
The Course of Proceedings. The Whipps parties submit that Mr Stenlake was not successful on his pleaded and particularised Statement of Claim. The Whipps parties submit the plaintiff was slow to crystalise the claim that he really made and when the claim was finally crystalised parts of it were said either to have been abandoned by Mr Stenlake or ultimately not contested by the Whipps parties.
The Whipps parties further submit that this case is analogous to one which the plaintiffs' success is attributable only to matters raised in a late amendment. They say that no admissible evidence was served upon them until the week before the hearing and that the Whipps parties were entitled to take the view that the plaintiffs' claim therefore could not succeed and that opportunities to resolve the proceedings early were therefore lost. As a result, they submit Mr Stenlake is not entitled now to recover his costs.
This argument is a criticism of the way that Mr Stenlake filed his evidence pre-hearing. The Whipps parties contend that Mr Stenlake's first affidavit in the proceedings of February 2014 contained no detail and indeed no admissible evidence as to the expenditure that was being relied upon to found the equitable charge claimed over the Coraki property. Moreover, the Whipps parties point out that having commenced proceedings in February 2014 and having the final March 2015 hearing set down in September 2014, Mr Stenlake filed his only admissible evidence in relation to his expenditure as late as 2 March 2015, a mere seven days before the commencement of the hearing. The Whipps parties contend that because of the lack of admissible evidence they were entitled to take the view that Mr Stenlake's claim would not succeed. But more importantly they say that they were in no position to consider a possible compromise of the proceedings.
It is true that Mr Stenlake's early affidavits contained little detail as to the quantum of his claim. But I doubt that the early service of evidence quantifying the plaintiff's expenditure would have made a great deal of difference to the question that was ultimately contested of whether the second defendant's conscience was bound as the executor of Lola's estate by knowledge of Mr Stenlake's improvements to the Coraki property. In my view that issue was always going to be contested between these respective parties.
But it is likely that some cost reduction would have occurred, if the plaintiff's admissible quantum evidence had been served in a timely way. As it was, the parties managed to agree with the assistance of their expert valuers, on the increase on the value of the real estate at the Coraki property at $100,000 by reason of Mr Stenlake's improvements. The figure ultimately reached was a sum equivalent to the enhanced capital value of the Coraki property in consequence of Mr Stenlake's expenditure. But in order even for that figure to be reached it was still necessary to take steps to quantify the expenditure undertaken and then consider whether the increase in capital value of the Coraki property was less than Mr Stenlake's expenditure on the property. The consensus which was ultimately reached really needed to go through the various steps of adducing detailed evidence as to the expenditure and then as to the valuation of the property. Such costs reductions as would have occurred due to earlier service of Mr Stenlake's quantum evidence would have been relatively minor.
Successful Return of the Mercedes Benz. The Whipps parties submit that they were wholly successful in respect of the Mercedes Benz motor vehicle and should therefore have an order for their costs of the cross-claim. In reply Mr Stenlake submits that the Whipps parties were unsuccessful on large parts of the cross-claim, and principally in relation to the return of the deceased's goods and chattels.
Mr Stenlake argues that the major factual and legal questions that arose in the proceedings and upon which he succeeded are the following: Glenda Whipps' knowledge of the renovations and the basis on which Mr Stenlake agreed to pay for them; Lola's intention to create equity in the Coraki property in favour of Mr Stenlake in exchange for the renovations; the estate's claim to an equity in Mr Stenlake's pharmacy business; the estate's claim to the return of chattels beyond those which Mr Stenlake voluntarily surrendered in the course of the hearing; the exercise of inspecting the evidence at the storage facility was essentially a waste of costs, including the unnecessary fourth hearing day on the 9th of June 2015 and did not result in additional relief in favour of the Whipps parties; and, Ms Glenda Whipps never had a tenable cross-claim of any kind against Mr Stenlake, the arguable cross-claims being those on behalf of the estate represented by the second defendant, Mr Ian Whipps, in relation to the Mercedes Benz motor vehicle.
Mr Stenlake submits that to the extent that the Whipps parties have been successful in relation to the Mercedes Benz motor vehicle that it is a sufficiently small part of the cross-claim that at best Mr Stenlake's costs should be discounted by no more than 10 per cent on account of this issue.
To the extent that Mr Stenlake's submissions separate out the position of each of the Whipps parties and seek to look at their individual prospects of success, whilst such separation is a useful tool of analysis, the making of separate costs orders in respect of Glenda Whipps and Ian Whipps is not appropriate. Both defendants had the same legal representation and it is to be expected that their costs are largely undivided.
In my view some credit must be given for the estate's success on the cross-claim. It does warrant a discount from the costs orders which in my view should otherwise be made in Mr Stenlake's favour. The issues concerning alleged gift of the Mercedes Benz motor vehicle were more substantial and time consuming than Mr Stenlake concedes in his submissions. He stoutly resisted the Whipps parties' contention that the Mercedes Benz was a gift to the deceased. For example consideration of the issue is recorded in the first judgment at paragraphs [63] to [75], a not unsubstantial part of the judgment.
But that being said, a greater amount of hearing time and resources was expended on the issues related to the claimed equitable charge, on which Mr Stenlake was successful. And some claims were abandoned by the Whipps parties before trial, such as the claim to an equity in Ms Stenlake's pharmacy business, which would have involved the expenditure of resources. Moreover, the Whipps parties' success with respect to the Mercedes Benz motor vehicle and in gaining the return of some chattels of the deceased retained by Mr Stenlake is to a degree attenuated by their failure on or abandonment of their claims to other chattels of the deceased.
Mr Stenlake's Pre-Trial Conduct. The Whipps parties submit that Mr Stenlake's pre-trial conduct in relation to the estate justifies the making of a costs order against him. The Whipps parties submit that much of the controversy that followed in the proceedings resulted from Mr Stenlake's wrongful interference in the property of the estate and its administration.
But Mr Stenlake's pre-trial conduct is not of particular relevance to issues of costs, unless it can be said that he was responsible for generating the disputes that occupied the Court's time in the proceedings. The Court certainly did make findings about the insensitivity and provocative nature of some of Mr Stenlake's conduct.
But that conduct in my view neither occasioned or particularly lengthened these proceedings. Quite apart from Mr Stenlake's poor behaviour in relation to the particular items of personal property and his gaining access to the Coraki property, the Whipps parties strongly contested his contention that he was entitled to any charge over the Coraki property for the work that he had performed to improve it. In my view, even if he had behaved with less insensitivity towards Lola's relatives, these proceedings were very likely to have taken place in much the same way that they did.
Judgment within Local Court Jurisdictional Limits. The Whipps parties submit that the amount awarded does not exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Local Court even before allowance is made for a set off for the Whipps parties' successful cross-claim.
The Whipps parties claim the benefit of [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) ("UCPR"), r 42.30(2) that where the amount awarded did not exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Local Court that "unless a Court otherwise orders" a successful plaintiff is not entitled to payment of his or her costs of the proceedings: see also Kardos versus Sarbett (No. 2)  <case> The Whipps parties say that this is an appropriate case for the application of the principle.
But in my view there is a threshold problem with this part of the Whipps parties' costs submission. UCPR, r 42.30 only applies to proceedings under the [Property (Relationships) Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984298/), a form of proceeding which could have been brought in either the District Court or the Supreme Court. This Court's jurisdiction under [Property (Relationships) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984298/) is virtually now defunct. All new proceedings brought under the [Property (Relationships) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984298/) have since March 2009 been required to be brought in the Family Court of Australia. The present proceedings are not proceedings brought under the [Property (Relationships) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984298/). No relief under that Act was sought. Rather the parties invoked the Court's equitable and common law jurisdiction.
But there is nevertheless a quantum related limitation on costs orders in the Supreme Court contained within UCPR, r 42.34, a rule on which the Whipps parties also rely and that Mr Stenlake addresses in his submissions. UCPR, r 42.34 provides as follows: "42.34 Costs order not to be made in proceedings in Supreme Court unless
Court satisfied proceedings in appropriate court 
This rule applies if:  in proceedings in the Supreme Court, other than defamation proceedings, a plaintiff has obtained a judgment against the defendant or, if more than one defendant, against all the defendants, in an amount of less than $500,000, and  the plaintiff would, apart from this rule, be entitled to an order for costs against the defendant or defendants. 
An order for costs may be made, but will not ordinarily be made, unless the Supreme Court is satisfied the commencement and continuation of the proceedings in the Supreme Court, rather than the District Court, was warranted."
Mr Stenlake answers the Whipps parties' costs submission based on UCPR, r 42.34. He submits that although the net amount that he recovered is below $500,000, plus applicable interest, the limitation within UCPR, r 42.34 relating to the recovery of a sum less than $500,000 is not applicable. Mr Stenlake submits that this is not a case that the plaintiff could have brought in the District Court, which has no jurisdiction to grant relief by way of equitable charge, a form of relief which was the centrepiece of the plaintiff's case. The Whipps parties argue that such relief is available in the District Court through [District Court Act 1973](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/), [s 134(1)(h)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s134.html), which provides: "134 Jurisdiction in equity proceedings 
The Court shall have the same jurisdiction as the Supreme Court, and may exercise all the powers and authority of the Supreme Court, in proceedings for:  the foreclosure or redemption of a mortgage or the enforcing of any charge or lien where the amount owing in respect of the mortgage, charge or lien does not exceed $20,000, as determined by the Court,  the specific performance, rectification, delivery up or cancellation of any agreement for:  the sale or purchase of any property at a price not exceeding $20,000, or  the lease of any property the value of which does not exceed $20,000, as determined by the Court,  an order under section 3 of the Testator's Family Maintenance and [Guardianship of Infants Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/goia1916231/) (as in force immediately before that Act was amended by the [Succession Amendment
Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/saa2009325/) ) or a family provision order under Chapter 3 of the [Succession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sa2006138/) ,  relief against fraud or mistake where the damage sustained or the estate or fund in respect of which relief is sought does not exceed $20,000 in amount or value, as determined by the Court,  the execution of a trust or a declaration that a trust subsists, where the estate or fund subject or alleged to be subject to the trust does not exceed $20,000 in amount or value, as determined by the Court, or  the administration of the estate of a deceased person, where the estate does not exceed $20,000 in amount or value, as determined by the Court, or  any application under the [Property (Relationships) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984298/) , or  any equitable claim or demand for recovery of money or damages, whether liquidated or unliquidated (not being a claim or demand of a kind to which any other paragraph of this subsection applies), in an amount not exceeding the
Court's jurisdictional limit."
Mr Stenlake's submissions are persuasive on this issue. Even if the District Court has jurisdiction to determine equitable claims for the recovery of money within its jurisdictional limit of $750,000, this is a case where commencement and continuation of these proceedings in the Supreme Court rather than the District Court "was warranted". The complexity of the equitable issues in this case and the wisdom of avoiding jurisdictional arguments in the District Court about whether a claim for a declaration of an equitable charge comes within <case>(h), makes Mr Stenlake's decision to commence and continue proceedings in the Supreme Court entirely reasonable. UCPR, r 42.34 is not an obstacle for Mr Stenlake recovering an award of costs against the Whipps parties in this Court.
Overall Consideration. In my view it is not appropriate to make separate costs orders on the claim and the cross claim. Such an approach would contribute to a costly and protracted assessment of costs. This case calls for a global approach taking into account the respective parties' relative success and failures and the relative time and resources expended on those successes and failures.
Taking this approach in my view overall Mr Stenlake was more successful than the Whipps parties and should receive a costs order in his favour. But his costs should be discounted for the Whipps' parties success on their cross claim. In my view the proper result is that Mr Stenlake should recover two-thirds of his costs of these proceedings.

Conclusion and Orders
For the reasons given above the Court makes the following orders, with orders (1) to (4) being by consent: * (1) NOTE that without admissions the plaintiff has agreed to pay the second defendant a sum of $20,000 in respect of the defendant's use and custody between January 2013 and September 2016 of the Mercedes Benz motor vehicle referred to in order 2 made on 6 June 2016 in the proceedings.
* (2) NOTE that the judgment for $100,000 entered under Order 1 made in these proceedings on 24 August 2016 is agreed by the parties to have been partially satisfied by the second defendant as to a sum of $20,000.
* (3) DIRECT that the time provided by order 3 made on 24 August 2016 in these proceedings for payment of the balance of the said judgment namely the sum of $80,000 is extended up to and including 28 October 2016.
* (4) ORDER that the defendants' notice of motion filed on 12 October 2016 be otherwise dismissed with no order as to costs." * (5) ORDER the defendants/cross-claimants to pay two-thirds of the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.
* (6) ORDER that the defendants/cross-claimants pay the plaintiff interest under [Civil Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), [s 100](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s100.html) on the sum of $80,000 from 29 January 2013 up to 24 August 2016.
* (7) DIRECT the parties to provide an agreed calculation of the interest ordered pursuant to order (6) to my Associate by 5.00pm on 4 November 2016, so the Court can make final orders as to the quantum of interest in chambers.
 * * * 
