

Regina versus D P Maretta [2001] NSWSC 1262 (8 February 2001) 
REGINA versus ADRIAN PAUL MARETTA /95 
Wednesday 30 October 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: Adrian Paul Maretta pleaded guilty before his Honour Judge Solomon to a charge of armed robbery in circumstances of aggravation, such circumstances being specified in the charge as being armed with a dangerous weapon, namely, a firearm. The learned judge sentenced the applicant to a total sentence of six years but, having found special circumstances, his Honour fixed a minimum term of three years commencing on the date of the applicant's arrest, that is, 9 February 1995. His Honour then fixed an additional term of three years, the latter term of course to expire on 8 February 2001. The applicant now seeks to appeal against the sentence imposed. 
The content of the statement of facts tendered before his Honour and recited by his Honour in his remarks on sentence was as follows: "About 3.45am on Thursday 9 February 1995, the accused Maretta and Swain, wearing balaclavas, confronted the victim Eriksson in the rear yard of her premises at 72 Powderworks Road, Elanora Heights. At the time the accused
Maretta was armed with a knife and the accused Swain was armed with a double barrel sawn-off shotgun. The victim Eriksson was forced back into her house where her boyfriend, Glen Rowan, and another friend, Peter Whitelaw, were in the lounge room. The victim, Rowan, then had the gun placed against his face and neck.

The two accused demanded money from the victims and forced all three victims to lie on the floor. The premises were then ransacked by the two. The two accused made constant demands for money and jewellery.

The accused took two milk crates containing a large quantity of records, a hi- fi system, jewellery, money, clothing, shoes and two mobile phones from the victims. It is apparent that at least one of the other two accused (one juvenile Nathaniel Rybeltz being dealt with at the Children's Court) assisted with loading the proceeds into the vehicle. The victims had been ordered into the bathroom and told to remain there. The victims then heard a vehicle drive away.

About 4.20am (approximately half an hour later) police performing duties relative to another operation saw a blue Suzuki Vitara bearing no front number plate and a rear plate, TCZ-450, only partially affixed. This plate was stolen by the accused Maretta just before the robbery from a truck parked in the same street as the victims. He then took the correct number plates from the Vitara.

The police attempted to pull the vehicle over but a pursuit then took place.
Whilst travelling along Hayberry Street, Crows Nest, the accused Swain, who was seated in the front passenger seat, threw the shotgun out the driver's side window as his window did not work. As the shotgun hit the road it discharged one round.

The vehicle was subsequently stopped a short time later and the four accused (including the three accused mentioned and the juvenile Nathaniel Rybeltz who was driving) were arrested. The vehicle was searched and the property from the robbery was located.

All the accused were taken to the North Sydney Police Station and interviewed.
The accused Swain and Maretta made admissions to the robbery, Swain stating that he found the shotgun in the house of the victims. (The victims deny this and there is no evidence to support Swain's claim).

The correct number plates were also found in the rear of the Vitara, RBX-389.
The vehicle is owned by the accused Maretta.

The accused Pagliara makes a number of inculpatory admissions such as knowing where the victims lived and knowing what was going to happen. It is also alleged he helped with the loading of the vehicle with the proceeds of the property.

Police further located the gun wadding discharged when the firearm was thrown out of the window.

The victims have also identified all the property seized. The victims were not physically injured as a result of this robbery." 
This was a most serious offence and the legislature in the recent amendments to <case> of the Crimes Act which preceded the commission of this crime increased the maximum penalty for this category of crime from one of twenty years penal servitude to one of twenty-five years penal servitude.

Before considering the single ground of appeal argued I review briefly the subjective features in this case.

The applicant, who gave evidence before the sentencing judge, is a young man who was born on 7 October 1972. He had been placed on a recognisance for a period of twelve months in December 1993 for possession of a prohibited drug and in January 1994 he was sentenced to twenty-four hours imprisonment for an assault. Those were the only matters on the appellant's record at the time when he came before the District Court for sentence for the matter currently under consideration.

In his evidence the applicant said he had been employed by his father as a cabinet maker but was not in employment at the time of the commission of the offence. He said that he was taking steroids at the time and that this affected him. He expressed his stupidity for having been involved in this offence and his resolution that he would not offend again. The sentencing judge expressly took that utterance of contrition into account together with his age and his prior record. He also had regard to the plea of guilty. The judge also found that the applicant had family support and he took into account favourable references from friends.

A reading of his Honour's remarks on sentence discloses no error of principle or of fact and the sentence set was one within the range of the judge's sentencing discretion. However, the sentence has been challenged on one ground and that is the claimed disparity between the sentence which was passed for the co-offender Swain compared with the sentence that the applicant received.

It is submitted that in accordance with the principles in Lowe versus The Queen ((1984) <case>; [154 CLR 606)] the applicant has a justifiable sense of grievance in that he has been dealt with too severely compared with Swain, who was sentenced to a minimum term of two years, with an additional term of three years.

In the written submissions lodged on behalf of the applicant, reference was also made to the more lenient sentence received by a second offender by the name of Pagliara. However, as Mr Byrne has realistically acknowledged today,
Pagliara is really not comparable. To begin with, he pleaded guilty to an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act of robbery in company which, of course, attracts a lesser penalty than that attracted for an offence under s (2). His Honour found in the case against Pagliara that the Crown was unable to or had not proved that Pagliara ever left the motor vehicle used to go to the premises and to escape from them; furthermore that Pagliara was at all times asleep and did not assist in the carriage of goods from the property to the car. Further, he found that Pagliara was not aware that a firearm was going to be used.

Plainly, the applicant could have no justifiable sense of grievance that
Pagliara received a lesser sentence than the applicant. Pagliara's sentence was, in fact, a total sentence of four years with a minimum of two years and an additional term of two years. However, the applicant does complain about the disparity between his sentence and that of the offender Swain.

The facts that were presented against Swain differed from those against the applicant in that in the case against Swain it was not accepted that he took the shotgun onto the premises but rather that he picked it up inside.

The sentencing judge in his remarks on sentence said: "So far as the shotgun is concerned, I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the prisoner carried the shotgun onto the premises. I am satisfied, however, that he threatened the victims with the shotgun and, in particular the victim Rowan, who had the gun placed against his face and neck by the prisoner." 
It is of considerable significance that the feature of aggravation which was the necessary element in the offence for which the applicant was convicted is related to this shotgun about which his Honour made the finding to which I have just referred. The applicant was not sentenced upon the basis that he had ever at any time handled that weapon.

In the case of Swain, his Honour said of that offender: "He was not involved in any of the planning of it [the robbery] and in fact it was only for a short period of time prior to the commission of the offence that he became aware of the fact that the offence was to be committed." 
And later: "I don't regard his involvement as being as serious as his co-offender
Maretta. Maretta used his own vehicle in the matter. Maretta was involved in the planning and Maretta appears to be the ringleader of the incident." 
For the purposes of assessing the criminality of Swain it sufficed for his
Honour to indicate that Maretta appeared to be the ringleader. That, of course, was short of a finding beyond reasonable doubt that Maretta was the ringleader. What his Honour was concerned to record when dealing with Swain was that he did not approach the sentencing of Swain on the basis that Swain was the ringleader. However, nowhere in dealing with the applicant did his
Honour make a specific finding that Maretta was the ringleader.

When one looks at the sentencing remarks in the case of Swain his Honour was plainly impressed by the subjective features on which that offender relied.
That offender had no prior record. Evidence was introduced on which the learned judge commented that the prisoner was well thought of in the general community and had a credible association with the Police Boys Club
Association. He referred to that offender being a champion boxer with a promising boxing career.

When one looks at the subjective features of each case it is, I think, a fair summary that his Honour's assessment was that the subjective features in
Swain's case were more favourable to that offender than the subjective features in Maretta's case were to him and that is a circumstance which has to be weighed when considering this ground of appeal.

Nevertheless, it seems to me, when one considers the findings made by the learned judge concerning Swain's position, his use of the weapon, and the violence he employed, that this applicant would have a justifiable sense of grievance if the difference between his sentence and that of the offender
Swain was to remain undisturbed.

I am acutely mindful of the fact that it was the same judge who sentenced both of these offenders and that his Honour did address this question of parity when considering what sentence he ought to impose on Swain, having earlier sentenced Maretta.

Nevertheless, the principles in Lowe's case to my mind require this Court to intervene and to re-sentence the applicant Maretta. The Court has been provided with a report from the co-ordinator of the Drug and Alcohol
Industrial Training Centre which is favourable to the applicant. The author of the report has been in contact with the applicant since June 1996 and it would seem that the applicant is progressing in a satisfactory manner as he serves his sentence.

In re-sentencing the applicant this Court must be mindful of what view the judge who sentenced at first instance took of the subjective features in
Swain, but of course we must make our own assessment of the subjective features in this case of the applicant. In my opinion the appropriate result in all the circumstances here is for the sentence upon the applicant Maretta to be the same as the sentence upon Swain.

I would propose, therefore, that leave to appeal be granted, that the appeal be allowed and that the sentence imposed be quashed. In lieu thereof I would propose a total sentence of five years, consisting of a minimum term of two years to commence on 9 February 1995 and to expire on 8 February 1997 and an additional term of three years to commence on 9 February 1997. That would mean the first date upon which parole may be granted would be 9 February 1997.

HIDDEN J: I agree. 
STUDDERT J: The orders of the Court will be those that I have proposed. * * * 
