

Bonello versus Lotzof Matter No 11530/93 [1997] NSWSC 423 (23 September 1997) 
David Joseph Bonello by his tutor Waren Frank Bonello v Leonard Lotzof /93 September 1997 
Michael Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /93 - DAVID JOSEPH BONELLO by his tutor WARREN FRANK BONELLO versus LEONARD LOTZOF 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: David Bonello was born on 26 June 1978. He is tragically handicapped. Signs of his disability were not manifest in the first months of life and the first noticed untoward event was a fit which was observed at about 8.45pm on 7 November 1978. Previously on that day he had been taken by his parents to the general medical practice of the defendant where the second of an intended course of three triple antigen immunizations was administered. Triple antigen (DTP) consists of three vaccines to combat diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis (whooping cough). By statement of claim filed on 3 May 1993 David Bonello by a tutor sued the defendant claiming that his condition which was particularized in abbreviated form as brain damage was caused by negligent treatment in proceeding with the immunization on 7 November. In substance the plaintiff's case is that in the circumstances which are alleged to have been current, a reasonably skilful general medical practitioner would not have then administered DTP or, alternatively, would have given some warning of risks involved. 
There is a threshold and critical dispute about the relevant circumstances which pertained on 7 November. On 12 June 1997 application was made to a duty judge arising out of a prognosis that the defendant (who was retired from practice) would soon be unfit to give evidence as he entered the final stages of a terminal illness. On 19 June 1997 evidence was taken from the plaintiff's parents and from the defendant. The threshold issues are potentially determinative of the litigation. The hearing was resumed on 15 September when by consent I ordered the separate determination of: 
Whether the defendant was in breach of his duty of care to the plaintiff; and 
Whether the plaintiff's parent/s would have proceeded with the vaccination notwithstanding any breach of duty.

The above matters are recorded to explain the taking of the evidence of witnesses in a seemingly unconventional order and the legal representatives of the parties are to be commended for their cooperation in enabling the core issue to be segregated and addressed. It was inevitable that references be made from time to time to a background in which there existed an anti immunization view to which some people apparently adhere. The task of determination of the separated issues does not involve pronouncement upon any such view but lest omission to mention it lead to some mistaken inference being drawn, it should also be recorded that nothing in the evidence or the references has been persuasive against the proposition that the immunization of children against the diseases of diphtheria, tetanus and whooping cough is compellingly prudent and desirable.

Evidence on behalf of the plaintiff was that he was brought to the surgery because he had been sick for about two weeks and he was presented to the defendant with a cough and congestion. Mrs Bonello used the expression a little bit wheezy and her husband referred to flu like symptoms. Mrs Bonello and David attended for the actual consultation while Mr Bonello remained in the waiting room with their other sons, Michael (born 1970) and Warren (born ). Mrs Bonello described the events in the surgery in her evidence in chief as follows: "Q. To the best of your recollection when you went in to see Dr Lotzof with
David, what did you say to him? 
A. Well I told him David was sick for two weeks and he examined him and he said David had a chest infection and then I mentioned that David was overdue for his second triple antigen but that he couldn't have it because he wasn't well.

Q. Is this what you said? 
A. Yes, and he said, `Yes, he can have it' and I said, `Are you sure' and he told me to trust him.

Q. So what happened? 
A. Well he gave him the triple antigen.

Q. By way of injection? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did you see where he got the bottle from? 
A. No I didn't.

Q. He must have got a hypodermic needle from somewhere, is that right? 
A. Yes.

Q. And he injected David? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did he give him any treatment - did he say anything about this other illness - the cough? 
A. Oh, just told me to keep him off dairy products, that was all, because of his chest." 
Mr and Mrs Bonello placed the time of the visit at between 2 and 4 pm.

It is vital to any success in this litigation by the plaintiff that it be shown on the probabilities that the defendant gave the injection when the child was in a condition of which he knew or ought to have known and in which immunization was contra indicated. The defendant claims no specific recollection of the consultation. I find this hardly surprising particularly if it is observed that any focus that might have been provoked by commencement of these proceedings was so many years after the event. The defendant testified however that he would not give such an injection to any child who had symptoms of flu or a chest infection, in short and expressly he said that if a patient of David's age presented with the symptoms described in evidence by his mother he would not have administered the immunization. I accept the evidence of the defendant as to his practice and the evidence of Mrs Almond who was his nurse receptionist at the relevant time.

I find that when the plaintiff was brought to the surgery on 7 November 1978 he was not manifesting any symptoms which would contra indicate immunization nor were there any matters of history which the defendant ought to have elicited which would have created such a contraindication.

The rejection of the detail in the descriptions given by Mr and Mrs Bonello does not emerge from a finding that they have conspired or that individually they have wilfully sought to deceive. It is not necessary to decide what was the reason or the reasons for their giving incorrect evidence but I find that several circumstances and indications fortify the conclusion that they are wrong. One would be lacking in humanity not to sympathize with their situation and I could not and did not fail to notice their tender ministrations to the plaintiff who was in Court for part of the hearing. It is easy to recognize that events and detail may be blurred with the passage of years, that a desire to blame someone for the occurrence of tragedy even if subconscious may distort perception of events and that misconceptions can in time transcend into false memories but not only have Mr and Mrs Bonello failed to establish the correctness of their version, I am affirmatively persuaded that their version is incorrect.

I turn to some aspects which I find supported the credit worthiness of the defendant. I assessed his demeanour as that of a person genuinely seeking to respond to the questions addressed to him and not, as is sometimes seen in tort claims in this category, a person being stubbornly defensive of something which he had done. There was considerable exploration of available advice (in ) concerning contraindications and precautions when contemplating immunization. That advice was not all precisely uniform. A general medical practitioner might commonly have had available references to publications such as MIMS, The Prescription Proprietaries Guide and the Commonwealth Serum
Laboratories leaflet accompanying supplies of vaccine. At the time these variously read: 
MIMS (1977) 
Contraindications Concurrent illness or ill-health (including allergic disorders) in the child, familial neurological disease, history of convulsions or evidence of other abnormality of the central nervous system, a history of a severe constitutional reaction to a previous dose of pertussis-containing vaccine. (See under `Side Effects' for description of this type of reaction). 
It is important that an accurate and detailed history be sought about the child's reaction to a previous dose of Triple Antigen.

MIMS Annual (1978) 
Contraindications Pertussis containing vaccines should not be administered during the course of an acute febrile illness; if there is a history of convulsions or other evidence of neurological disease; if there has been a severe constitutional reaction (see Adverse Reactions) after a previous injection of the pertussis containing vaccine. (It is important that an accurate and detailed history be sought about the child's reaction to a previous dose of pertussis containing vaccine); to children over 2 years of age. 
Precautions. The container of the vaccine should be shaken vigorously before opening and the vaccine should be injected as soon as possible after the syringe is filled. 
PPG 
Precautions: The container of the vaccine should be shaken vigorously before opening and the vaccine should be injected as soon as possible after the syringe is filled. 
Contra-indications: Pertussis-containing vaccines should not be administered: during the course of an acute febrile illness, if there is a history of convulsions or other evidence of neurological disease, if there has been a severe general reaction after a previous injection of a pertussis-containing vaccine, to children over 2 years of age.

CSL Leaflet: 
Precautions 
Triple Antigen should not be given if there is any illness or ill-health (including allergic disorders) in the child. Other contra-indications are familial neurological disease, history of convulsions or evidence of other abnormality of the central nervous system, and a history of a severe constitutional reaction to a previous dose of pertussis-containing vaccine.
(See under `Side Effects' for description of this type of reaction).

It is important that an accurate and detailed history be sought about the child's reaction to a previous dose of Triple Antigen.

There is force in the comment of witnesses that these advisings emanating as they do from sources responsible for or connected with manufacture and distribution of the vaccine are extremely conservative and perceptibly may be designed to assist in establishing a defensive position in the event of any product liability claim.

The advice contained in Nelson's Textbook of Pediatrics (1975 Edn) is less rigid: "It is usually unwise to give any immunization during an acute illness, because the fever from the injection may confuse the picture of the illness.
Some children who have frequent upper respiratory tract infections may have long delays in completion of immunizations if this policy is over rigidly followed; mild convalescent or healing infections should not be an absolute contraindication to immunization." 
If he was seeking merely to defend his actions, it would have been simple enough for the defendant to acquire knowledge of the extant guidelines and without contradicting Mr and Mrs Bonello adopt the posture that even as claimed by them he worked within the guidelines. He did not. He testified that he adopted and adhered to the stricter guideline of not immunizing a child who was in any way ill. It might also be noted that he did so in the light of knowledge that there is recommendation now, with the benefit of considerable investigation and study since 1978, that immunization can be administered even if that child has symptoms of a cold.

It is convenient to refer to the published precaution that the vaccine be shaken vigorously before opening. The defendant demonstrated his method of placing the ampoule between his opposed hands and rubbing it quickly backwards and forwards. The transcript is less than elaborate and I can best describe the action as similar to manipulating a firestick in the traditional aboriginal method or perhaps rotating and contra rotating the spindle of an eastern prayer wheel. It was (somewhat faintly) suggested by counsel for the plaintiff that the action by the defendant did not meet a requirement to shake vigorously. I reject that suggestion. What the defendant did plainly would have the effect of shaking the contents of the container vigorously and it was not suggested that the aim was to shake the container as distinct from its contents.

Clinic card entries made from time to time are also not inconsistent with the defendant's testimony as to his practice. He said that if a patient had a cold, cough or wheeze he would note it. The Bonello family were recorded on a single card. There are many examples of endorsements of coughs and the like when the plaintiff and more often his brothers were brought for treatment. See for example the entries on 9 December 1977; 30 March 1978; 10 May 1978; 25
August 1978; 17 November 1978; 15 December 1978; 28 December 1978; 14 May .

It is therefore significant that the entry relating to 7 November 1978 simply reads: "David Asthmatic 2nd DTP and Isomil only." 
If the plaintiff had presented with a cough or cold I find it probable that the defendant would have noted it. Isomil is a soy milk product which the defendant recommended for children who were asthmatic. Mrs Bonello was familiar with this type of treatment. Both Michael and Warren were treated for childhood asthma. Dr Lotzof gave evidence that he had a particular interest in asthma having been a sufferer himself.

Another aspect is the consistency in the evidence of the defendant that it was his practice to administer only diphtheria and tetanus vaccine (CDT) if there was an adverse reaction following DTP administration. As, indisputably as a matter of chronology, the plaintiff had fitted after the immunization on 7
November, the defendant noted the card on the next visit (17 November) that the plaintiff then had a severe cough and (had had) fits and was to have only
CDT in future. CDT was given on 26 March 1979.

It should be observed that Mrs Bonello had possession of the relevant clinic cards. The matter was canvassed in her re-examination: "EVATT: Q. We have Dr Lotzof's cards. You actually had them? 
A. Yes.

Q. Could you just tell his Honour how they came into your possession? 
A. I went to his surgery and asked for them.

Q. When was that? 
A. It was, some doctor asked me to go and get his reports. I don't remember which doctor it was.

Q. Was this years later or? 
A. It was in the early stages. I went to his office. His secretary gave them to me and she asked me to return them and that is how I got possession of the cards.

Q. They are now returned, you can take it. ........." 
Records does not support the description of relevant events given by Mr and
Mrs Bonello and there are demonstrable instances of confusion in their purported recollections. It was common ground that the immunization on 7
November 1978 was the second of the intended series. The defendant endorsed the card accurately and accordingly and Mrs Bonello said that she had taken
David for his first injection when he was about two months old. This visit was as recommended and as she had done with her older sons. She recalled that
David had no adverse reaction to the first immunization. There is no record on the clinic card of the first administration but both Warren and David saw Dr
Elizabeth Bradfield (the defendant's then partner) on 15 August 1978 and the likelihood of the first immunization being then given was in fact explored by the plaintiff's counsel. I consider that this is the most likely time of first immunization. The only other consultation was on 25 August 1978 when David is recorded as having a wheeze in his chest and cough and if the defendant adhered to his practice, he would not then have injected. Even if he did (which I do not find) Mrs Bonello confirmed that there was no adverse reaction. There is an indication of unreliable memory in her evidence in that she did not think that she had ever seen Dr Bradfield in consultation. In cross examination she said that she was sure that she had not but in re- examination she conceded that it was possible that she could be wrong about this.

Mrs Bonello contended that she brought David to the surgery for a "check up" because he had been ill for about two weeks. No reason for the delay during that period was offered and if a child of four months were perceptibly ill one might have expected that he would be brought for examination and treatment more promptly. On the other hand she conceded that as at 7 November she knew that the second Triple Antigen was due (and overdue) and it is consistent with the clinic records that he was brought in simply for this purpose and not for the diagnosis of any apparent illness or treatment of symptoms. There is a discrepancy between the parents' timing of the visit between 2 and 4pm and a history given by Mr Bonello to the Blacktown District Hospital that the Triple
Antigen was given in the morning. For present purposes I do not need to resolve the matter although the explanation of Mr Bonello that he was a nervous wreck and could have said "any damn thing" (to a hospital seeking information about his then apparently fitting son) is less than convincing.

Although the gap of time between immunization and being brought to hospital may be up to twelve hours and the critical issue in the case is David's presentation at the time of immunization it would seem odd if he was better so far as symptoms were concerned at the later terminus of the span of time.
Important in my view is the difference between what the hospital notes record about David and his parents' assertions. On admission at about 9.30pm all of the checks performed on David revealed normality and the only observation otherwise was noted as "harsh cough". There is also a note "CNS (central nervous system) irritable" which is compatible with the reason he was brought into hospital that night apparently then fitting. Although Mrs Bonello mentioned a cough, she claimed that his symptoms earlier in the day at surgery were "just congested and a bit wheezy and he had a cough as well".
Specifically the hospital examination recorded nil adventitious sounds, that is his chest was clear and no sign of any congestion was found. Mr and Mrs
Bonello's recollections about David's temperature are also faulty. Mrs Bonello in particular said that at hospital David had a high fever and his temperature was going up and down and (the hospital staff) said it was because of "the chest infection". There was no record at hospital of a chest infection. The general observation chart shows David's temperature at 9.30pm as 36.6 degrees and 36.3 degrees at midnight when he was transferred to neurological observation. At 1am the next day his temperature was 36.4 degrees. Hourly readings that day contradict the assertion of fever. It is noted that the
Blacktown District Hospital's summary sheet is endorsed (apparently by a Dr
McCullough) with a diagnosis of "febrile convulsion due to pertussis vaccination". I do not presently deal with any issue of legal causation but I do not accept that the records support the adjective "febrile". The accumulated charts record twenty five temperature takings (no doubt by various members of staff on duty from time to time) and nothing higher than 37.6 degrees was ever recorded, indeed only four readings were noted at 37 degrees or more, the other twenty one readings all being in the 36 degree-37 degree range. Mr Bonello asserted that the hospital had to bathe David on arrival to get his temperature down because he was "very, very hot". The temperature on arrival at hospital is recorded at 37.5 degrees. There is entry of the administration of 6 mgs of Valium in casualty and the later undertaking of a lumbar puncture. There is nothing noting bathing or the like or anything about fever other than the use of the adjective mentioned above. It might also be mentioned that Mrs Bonello testified that David did not have a temperature when she took him to Dr Lotzof nor did he have one when she put him to bed in the evening.

It is also an indication of the frailty of Mrs Bonello's memory about the events of 1978-1979 that she had forgotten bringing David back to the defendant for a third injection when he was given CDT rather than DTP.

I am satisfied that the visit to the defendant on 7 November 1978 was for the routine (but late) administration of Triple Antigen; that the plaintiff was not presenting with any symptoms of illness and that Mrs Bonello did not give to the defendant any history that he was ill; that the defendant was sufficiently aware of the family history as their general medical practitioner for the purpose of deciding whether immunization should proceed (in any event, if he had made express enquiries he would have been told that David had no adverse reaction to his first DTP and that Michael and Warren had no adverse reaction to their full courses) and that the assessment that David was asthmatic was not a contraindication to immunization. The defendant's evidence on this topic and his comment that an asthmatic child who gets whooping cough is more likely to die because the lungs are already damaged was not challenged.

At the conclusion of the hearing of evidence on the separated issues, counsel for the plaintiff put the case in this way. He invited the adoption of the relevant ingredient of standard of care as articulated by the defendant himself, namely that he should refrain from immunizing a child showing any signs of illness and that, accepting the evidence of Mr and Mrs Bonello the defendant was therefore in breach of this standard. Accordingly the first issue should be resolved by finding that the defendant was in breach of his duty of care to the plaintiff. Approached in that fashion, the plaintiff must fail for the reason that I have found that the child did not present as ill nor would taking the history have revealed illness or any contraindication to proceeding and the defendant then was not in breach of the standards which he set for himself.

The applicable standard of care cannot be defined by reference to what the defendant himself chose to regard as appropriate. I suspect that the attraction for the submission by the plaintiff lay in a recognition that the standard to be expected of an ordinary person exercising and professing to have the special skills of a medical practitioner are not relevantly as high as those which the defendant set for himself. However in the present case these considerations are academic once the finding is made, as I have done, that David was not ill when brought to the surgery and therefore there was no contraindication to proceeding to immunize with DTP. Having regard to the literature (MIMS, PPG, CSL leaflet and Nelson) and to the opinions of the various medical experts called including Dr Gray, Dr Kalokerinos and the report of Dr Kelly, I do not consider that a general medical practitioner (in ) would be (relevant to a case such as the present) in breach of his duty of care unless he proceeded to administer immunization in the face of symptoms of febrile illness. Other possible contraindications such as reaction to previous administration and particular family history are irrelevant in the context of the evidence in these proceedings. But even if the above expression of the aspect of duty is too liberal (towards the practitioner) the defendant has not been shown to be in breach. Dr Kelly proposed that it was not the practice (in 1978) to inject a child with "a cold, running nose, cough and chest complaint without a temperature". I am unpersuaded that David had those symptoms and, as I have said, I am affirmatively satisfied that he did not. Dr
Gray's opinion that a reasonably prudent practitioner would delay was premised on the assumption that David had or was in the course of recovery from an upper respiratory tract infection. As he testified, if that were not so, he "shouldn't be here". It was not so. Dr Kalokerinos candidly revealed his admittedly minority views about immunizing at all and his proposals as to the ingredients of reasonable care should be guardedly assessed having regard to those seemingly idiosyncratic views, but again the history which he assumed is different from my findings and there is no basis to find that the examination which he suggests would have revealed any "problem" and the family history about which he theorizes is in fact known. There was nothing in the family history which would have contraindicated immunization.

There is one matter to which some reference is appropriate. As above discussed the only adverse symptom (save the irritability) recorded as detected when
David was brought to Blacktown District Hospital was "harsh cough". In the light of the unreliability as to the detail of what happened on 7 November in the testimony of Mr and Mrs Bonello I do not conclude that because that finding was made at about 8.45-9.30pm then that symptom was necessarily or even probably present when David presented to the defendant earlier in the day. But, even if it was, nothing in the evidence tendered identified such a symptom as a contraindication to immunization and I am unpersuaded that a reasonably skilful general medical practitioner (in 1978) would refrain from proceeding in the face of that single manifestation.

Counsel for the plaintiff expressly did not abandon a contention that the defendant was negligent in failing to warn the plaintiff (through a parent) of risks said to be involved in the administration of DTP. There was however an absence of material to overcome obstacles to a case mounted on this basis. The plaintiff must establish that he would not have had the vaccination when appropriate warning was given: Ellis versus Wallsend District Hospital [1989 17
NSWLR 553.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=1989%2017%20NSWLR%20553 "View LawCiteRecord" ) A parent would obviously have to act as an agent for the purpose but neither of them gave any evidence as to what they would do if "appropriately" warned:
O'Brien versus Wheeler CA unreported, 23 May 1997. The evidence is also silent on what the "appropriate" warning should have been. A warning that immunizing a sick child might lead to complications was not appropriate to the particular circumstances. The child was not sick. Several witnesses referred to extensive study undertaken as a result of "scares" particularly following media activity. Exhibit 10 (Whooping Cough Vaccination - Review of the Evidence on
Whooping Cough Vaccination by the Joint Committee on Vaccinations and
Immunization) is an example. Chapter III of that report addresses the topic of complications. However, as I have indicated no evidence was adduced as to what would have been an appropriate warning in this case. It is accepted that decision is for the patient (parent) not the attending medical practitioner:
Rogers versus Whittaker <case>; [1992 175 CLR 479], but I do not find that a reasonable general practitioner would have been shown to be in breach of any duty of care if he did not (in ) advise the parent of a child presented for immunization of risks which have been speculated upon in some of these studies.

Nothing was put to the defendant suggesting any warning that he ought to have given nor did Mr and Mrs Bonello give evidence that they sought any information from the defendant. They of course had the prior experience of their older sons and, indeed, Mrs Bonello said she had information (to the effect that a sick child should not be immunized) from discussions with other mothers. It was argued that the "therapeutic privilege" would apply because the risk of the disease was far greater than the risk (if any) of the vaccine.
This privilege has been described as the opportunity afforded to a doctor to prove that he reasonably believed that disclosure of a risk would prove damaging to a patient: Rogers @ 486. The evidence which I accept shows that the consequences of pertussis, not to mention the contagion of others are such that to run the risk of infection is so damaging (even though potential) that a doctor should not be found negligent for failing to inform the patient of remote serious risks of vaccination which remain, on the evidence, yet to be established as real. So far as the evidence reveals, demonstrable risks are limited to transient symptoms. However I refer to this matter in deference to the presentation of argument and note the defendant does not need to rely on the so-called therapeutic privilege; for reasons already given, the evidence on behalf of the plaintiff does not sustain a case on the basis of failure to give "appropriate" warning.

I find the defendant has not been shown to have breached his duty of care to the plaintiff. The second issue as stated, whether the plaintiff's parents would have proceeded with the vaccination notwithstanding any breach of duty, becomes hypothetical and it is unnecessary to answer the proposition.

It seems inevitable therefore that there must be judgment for the defendant but before proceeding to direct entry of judgment, I will hear any submissions which it is desired to make on behalf of the plaintiff as to any reason why I should refrain from so doing.
 * * * 
