

Morris versus Murphy and Anor Matter No 18490/93 [1997] NSWSC 300 (12 August )

Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Morris versus Murphy & Anor /93  August 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /93 - Morris versus Murphy & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 11 October 1993. The process named two defendants. It propounds a cause of action founded on assault. It is alleged that the defendants forcefully had sexual intercourse with the plaintiff without her consent on a day in September 1979. It is alleged that she suffered injury (which is particularised as "Borderline personality disorder"). A claim is made for damages. 
A Statement of Defence has been filed by the first defendant. He denies the allegations of assault. He pleads a defence pursuant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/s14.html) of the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), (the Act).

On 2 October 1996, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion. She seeks an order that the limitation period be extended. The application proceeds against the first defendant only. The first defendant says that he does not know of any person named Michael Murphy. The second defendant has not been served. The application is opposed.

The plaintiff relies on a number of affidavits (two of them have been sworn by the plaintiff herself and one by her father). Both the plaintiff and her father have been cross-examined. The first defendant relies on one affidavit.
It has been sworn by the first defendant himself. Exhibits have been tendered.
Following the granting of leave to reopen, supplementary oral evidence was given by the plaintiff and by Mr Orr (her former solicitor and husband).

I have closely observed the demeanour of the witnesses. In assessing credibility, I have had regard to both demeanour and evidence.

An attack has been made on the credibility of the plaintiff. It is not said that she has deliberately given false evidence. However, it is said that she is an unreliable witness.

It seems to me that there is some force in this submission. She was prone to adopt the role of an advocate in her cause. Many questions were given an unresponsive reply. Many questions elicited the reply "I don't remember" or "I can't remember". She gave inconsistent evidence. At times, she exhibited a confused and/or uncertain recollection. I formed the view that her evidence was unreliable in a number of respects. There are areas of her evidence that I do not accept.

I do not propose to recount the detail of the material that may be found in the affidavits and other evidence. I shall merely refer to some of the relevant matters.

The plaintiff is 34 years of age. Her mother committed suicide when the plaintiff was 20 months old. Her father remarried. In about 1978, her father and step-mother separated. In about August 1978, she left school. The material throws up the possibility of problems with her father and/or others (including questions of assault and/or sexual abuse).

In or about April 1979, she left home and commenced to live at Newstead House.
She was then 17 years of age. She has said that the multiple raping took place in or about September 1979. Material concerning these allegations has been placed before the Court. She has given evidence which demonstrates uncertainty and confusion as to matters pertaining to the rape.

She made a complaint to the police. She told the people at Newstead House what had happened. She was found to be pregnant. She had an abortion in Sydney. She sought treatment and was admitted to hospital (Psychiatric Unit). She was suffering from depression and feeling suicidal. There was a suicide attempt in
By 1980, a diagnosis of "borderline personality syndrome" had been made.

She told her father of the rape. He approached the police. Certain events took place which led to the plaintiff and her father identifying the first defendant (Tosh Murphy) as one of the persons who is said to have raped her.
The police spoke to the first defendant. He says that he has never raped anyone. No action was taken by the police.

There is evidence that, in about 1980, she was having fights with other members of her family. She alleges that her father was a violent man who assaulted her causing bruising. He has denied those allegations.

She became involved with members of the Heazlewood family. They were members of a religious group (they have been referred to as the Plymouth Brethren
Sect). She felt extremely depressed and angry about the rape and the failure of the police to take action. In 1981, she married Lloyd Heazlewood. There were two children of that marriage. She underwent three exorcisms.

In December 1983, she admitted herself to a Psychiatric Unit and came under the care of a specialist psychiatrist (Dr George). A diagnosis of a vulnerable personality with some borderline and histrionic traits was made.

In 1984, there was a fourth exorcism. She still suffered from, inter alia, depression. She admitted herself to hospital and again came under the care of
Dr George. On or about 24 February 1985, she again admitted herself to the
Psychiatric Unit and came under the care of Dr George. During 1985, the relationship with the Heazlewoods came to an end. There was a suicide attempt.

On 15 April 1987, she entered into her second marriage (with Mr Orr). She had a third child. There was a further suicide attempt. She continued to feel depressed, suicidal and ill-tempered. During 1988, she saw Dr Kerr (the
Director of the Psychiatric Department at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital) on about eight occasions. She said that he did not tell her that she was suffering from "a post traumatic stress disorder". She continued to feel depressed and suicidal. She cut here left wrist with a knife. She admitted herself to hospital and saw general practitioners. She obtained medication to treat her depression.

On 30 July 1989, she separated from her second husband (it seems that the relationship has continued on an "on and off" basis since then). On or about 5
September 1990, she sought assistance from Dr Churven (psychiatrist). She said that she saw him because she knew that something was wrong and she wanted to find out what it was. She also said that "it was because I kept losing my temper and smashing holes in walls and quite bad-tempered behaviour". She wanted some form of treatment to resolve her behavioural problems. She wanted to ascertain and understand the causes of her behavioural problems (see paragraph 97 of her affidavit). She was still, inter alia, "acutely depressed" and unable to remain in employment for any significant period.

On 16 October 1990, she divorced her second husband. In 1991, she commenced employment as a commercial sub-agent and private inquiry sub-agent. In or about 1992, she commenced her own business as a commercial sub-agent and private inquiry agent.

During 1992 and 1993, she saw Dr Isaacs. She underwent hypnotherapy because Dr
Churven had raised the possibility of sexual abuse by her father. She continued to consult with Dr Churven and undergo therapy. On or about 22 July , she sought legal advice from Mr Orr. Access was had to hospital notes from The Prince Charles Hospital (this material is annexed to an affidavit sworn by Mr Orr). In about September 1993, she was advised that she may have a cause of action related to her psychiatric history and the effect of the rape upon her. She instructed Mr Orr to commence proceedings against the perpetrators of the rape.

In or about June 1994, she was admitted to Eversham Private Hospital. She received treatment from a psychiatrist (Dr Klug). On 5 June 1994, she completed a declaration for the purposes of making an insurance claim (see
Exhibit 1). In the claim form she described her illness as "Psychiatric
Depression". It stated that she first became aware of having that illness on January 1994 and that she was first treated for the illness in January .

In or about 1994, the matter of the rape was raised again with the police. The records relating to the earlier investigation had been destroyed. Once more, no action was taken (Exhibit C).

In the first of her two affidavits, she deposed to the following:- "106. Shortly after the 14 October 1994, I read the psychiatric report of Dr P
Churven of that date. Upon reading the report it became obvious to me that I was suffering from a psychiatric disorder as a consequence of being raped and that this condition had been aggravated as a consequence of the behaviour of various members of the Redcliffe Christian Assembly including Dr Vernon
Heazlewood, Dr Melville Heazlewood and Roland Heazlewood particularly the accusations of demonic possession the subsequent performance of multiple exorcisms upon me. I then instructed my then solicitor to take all necessary steps to bring an action against the members of Redcliffe Christian Assembly for compensation for the damage sustained by me.' `108. In August 1996 I first saw a book entitled `Personality Disorders'. I purchased that book and took it to Dr Churvan. He advised me to read a particular portion of the book. For the first time I understand the nature of the condition that I suffer from." 
I shall now turn to the principal submissions made in support of the plaintiff's application for an extension of the limitation period. It is her case that, after reading the report from Dr Churven in or about October 1994, she became aware that she was suffering from a psychiatric disorder and made the connection between that disorder and the rape. It is further said that, after reading the book, she became aware of the seriousness of the condition.

The report commences with Dr Churven's understanding of the reasons for which the report was requested (certain proceedings) and his understanding of the reasons for the original consultation (to come to terms with her chaotic life and deal with the relationship problems had with her second husband). It sets out a history (including of "Childhood" and "Rape and Aftermath"). It has a description of the "Effects of abusive developmental experiences". This section of the report contains the following:- "Carla has suffered a series of on-going assaults on her sense of self and identity and her ability to form trusting and loving relationships with others.' `These multiple attacks on Carla's sense of self and ability to trust relationships were progressive, starting with the loss of the mother and culminating in the emotional and intellectual abuse she suffered in the sect." 
It contains the following summary:- "Carla has been subjected to a series of abuses as a child and as an adult as described and documented above. It is surprising in my opinion, that she has retained the drive, curiosity and social ability that she has. Nevertheless, she has been severely damaged and this damage in formal terms may be described as a combination of Borderline Personality disorder and Chronic Post-Traumatic
Stress syndrome. The disorders implied by these labels have made it impossible for her to develop her potential in either personal relationships or professional activities. They have severely disrupted her relationship with her children. While the loss of her mother and the emotional physical abuse at the hands of her father and step-mother obviously have contributed, Carla's personal decline in functioning followed the rape. This was significantly aggravated by having the notion of being infected or implanted with the devil added to her other traumas by the Plymouth Brethren." 
Elsewhere in the report, it is said that her state may be "deemed Borderline
Personality Disorder which is no more than a descriptive label for the events and results described". It is also said that the criteria for Chronic Post
Traumatic Stress Syndrome overlap with those of borderline personality.

The book has been tendered (Exhibit D). There has been no detailed reference to any of its contents.

The plaintiff's application for relief is made pursuant to sections 58 and/or
G of the Act. Both provisions confer a discretionary power. The approach to be adopted in dealing with applications for extension of limitation periods is that which has been expounded in recent times in Brisbane South Regional
Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866] and in BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7 March 1997). The onus rests with the applicant. In addition to the satisfying of the relevant threshold requirements, it must be shown that it is in the interests of justice to make an order.

The relevant provisions contained in section 58 are as follows:- 
Where, on application to a court by a person claiming to have a cause of action to which this section applies, it appears to the court that: any of the material facts of a decisive character relating to the cause of action was not within the means of knowledge of the applicant until a date after the commencement of the year preceding the expiration of the limitation period for the cause of action; and there is evidence to establish the cause of action, apart from any defence founded on the expiration of a limitation period, the court may order that the limitation period for the cause of action be extended so that it expires at the end of one year after that date and thereupon, for the purposes of an action on that cause of action brought by the applicant in that court, and for the purposes of paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of section 26, the limitation period is extended accordingly.

Under section 58, an order cannot be made until the threshold requirements set forth in (a) and (b) of subsection (2) are satisfied. In this case, there was no issue between the parties concerning the requirements of (b). As I understand the argument, the material facts relied on were the fact that the rape caused personal injury and the nature and extent of the personal injury so caused.

Section 60G(2) confers the discretionary power upon the Court to make an order extending the limitation period where it decides that it is just and reasonable to do so. The power cannot be exercised until the applicant first satisfies the threshold requirements set forth in section 60I(1). The decision as to whether or not it is just and reasonable to make an order is no formality when those threshold conditions are satisfied (CSR versus Rendell (Court of Appeal, 7 August 1996, unreported)).

Section 60I is in the following terms:- 
Matters to be considered by court 
I. (1) A court may not make an order under section 60G or 60H unless it is satisfied that: the plaintiff: did not know that personal injury had been suffered; or was unaware of the nature or extent of personal injury suffered; or was unaware of the connection between the personal injury and the defendant's act or omission, at the expiration of the relevant limitation period or at a time before that expiration when proceedings might reasonably have been instituted; and the application is made within 3 years after the plaintiff became aware (or ought to have become aware) of all 3 matters listed in paragraph (i)-(iii).

Subsections (2), (3) and (4) of section 60E apply, with any necessary adaptations, in relation to applications for orders under this Subdivision.

It was common ground that, in the circumstances of this case, the plaintiff had to satisfy the requirements of both subsection (1)(a) and (b). As I understand the argument, the plaintiff looked to the matters listed in (a)(ii) and (iii).

The matters of the satisfaction of the threshold requirements of each of the provisions was not argued in any detailed manner. It was dealt with in a general fashion only. Accordingly, I shall approach these questions in a similar manner.

The satisfaction of each of the relevant threshold requirements is a question to be resolved having regard to the facts of the particular case before the
Court. In the circumstances of this case, it is very much dependent on the evidence and the reliability of the evidence given by the plaintiff. In the light of the material placed before me, I am not satisfied that she has met the relevant threshold requirements.

It is conceded that she has been aware that she has had problems for many years. She has had problems since at least about 1980. There has been, inter alia, continuing depression and many suicide attempts. Whether it be a significant cause or merely one of the causes of her continuing problems, it seems to me that she has connected the rape with her problems for many years (probably since about 1980).

The problems have been of a serious nature. I am not satisfied that she has been unaware of the seriousness of her condition. The known signs and symptoms have been relatively constant over the years. They were known to be of a psychological nature. She looked, inter alia, to psychiatric help to alleviate her problems. She has been undergoing treatment (including psychiatric treatment) since about 1980 (Dr Churven is merely one of the treating psychiatrists and he has been treating her since 1990).

I am not satisfied that she was unaware of either the nature or at least the broad extent of her injury in the relevant sense. I am not satisfied that they were not within her means of knowledge in the relevant sense. It matters little that her reading of the book may have, in some sense, expanded her knowledge of the condition.

The Court is not concerned with the technical name or description of an injury (see CRA Limited versus Martignago & Ors [(1995) 39 NSWLR 13).] In the circumstances of this case, it does not matter whether or not she knew the technical name or description of the disorder diagnosed by Dr Churven. This case is distinguishable from cases such as Commonwealth of Australia v
Dinnison <case>; [(1995) 56 FCR 389.] In any event, I am not satisfied that she was unaware of the technical name or description until about October 1994.

These proceedings were commenced in 1993. Prior to that time, a decision had been made to commence proceedings founded on the rape claiming damages for injury which is described in the process as Borderline Personality Disorder.
She had read the hospital notes from The Prince Charles Hospital prior to that time. References to a disorder of that character appear in the notes. The plaintiff has said that she had heard the term "Borderline Personality
Disorder" used in relation to her condition, but could not recall when it had been first used. Her then solicitor was her former husband. It seems to me that she knew of the diagnosis and/or the "label" prior to the commencement of the proceedings. There is evidence that she regarded herself as being first treated for psychiatric depression in January 1984. At about that time, she was being treated by Dr George. I am not satisfied that she was unaware that she had a psychiatric disorder until October 1994. I do not consider that her affidavit evidence really founds the submission made to that effect on her behalf. This view finds further support in certain of her oral evidence.

The relevant evidence throws up some unhelpful material. There are the "I don't remember" answers. The terms of the report from Dr Churven convey the impression that it was prepared for the purposes of, inter alia, "other possible proceedings". It contains references to these existing proceedings.
There seems to be significance in certain of the language used by the plaintiff during her evidence. At times, the impression is conveyed that she has expressed herself in terms that were chosen with deliberation and care.
Paragraph 106 of her affidavit is of importance in the presentation of her case. It is curiously drafted. It uses the words "it became obvious to me" when she deposes to the knowledge acquired from her reading of the report from
Dr Churven. This expression seems to accord with the effect of certain answers given during cross-examination (her personality disorder "became extremely clear" to her at that time). As I understand the intended meaning of the paragraph, the reading of the report caused her to give instructions to commence other proceedings. The report provided the knowledge that her condition had been significantly aggravated as a result of the traumas of the
Plymouth Brethren Sect. After reading the report, she commenced the proceedings against the Heazlewoods. It may be that, subsequently, it was decided to use the report for the purposes of these proceedings as well. There is a largely unexplained delay of about two years between the reading of the report and the bringing of this application.

However, there is little point in dwelling on these threshold matters. Even if a different view was to be taken concerning them, I consider that the application is doomed to failure on other grounds.

The Court will not exercise the discretionary power in favour of the plaintiff unless it is satisfied that it is in the interests of justice to do so. In the exercise of the discretion, it has regard to the relevant circumstances of the case.

In this case, there has been gross delay which has not been satisfactorily explained. The delay has occasioned prejudice.

In addition to the presumptive prejudice (which is referred to in Taylor), there is actual prejudice (apart from the real possibility of significant prejudice). I am not satisfied that the first defendant will now be able to fairly defend himself. There is prejudice in the areas of both liability and quantum.

In Taylor at p 873, McHugh J said:- "The general rule that actions must be commenced within the limitation period should therefore prevail once the defendant has proved the fact or the real possibility of significant prejudice." 
It seems that, inevitably, potential witnesses will be faced with the problem of fading or lost recollection. This problem is well illustrated by the confused and unreliable recollection that the plaintiff now has for the circumstances of the assault.

The evidence throws up some specific matters of prejudice. There has been a destruction of police documentation relating to the original complaint. One potential witness has suffered a loss of recollection (Vicki Smails). It may be that the alleged other rapist cannot now be found. The reference to these matters is not intended to be exhaustive.

The task of isolating the effect of the rape on the plaintiff's condition would be a complex and difficult one. It is but one of many matters which may be relevant to that condition. The evidence suggests that she has been subjected to a series of abuses, both as a child and as an adult. The trail commences with her early childhood. The alleged rape took place about 18 years ago. The delay has seen the intervention of other abuses (including the traumas attributed to the Plymouth Brethren Sect which have been said to have significantly aggravated the situation).

In my view, the plaintiff has failed to satisfy the onus borne by her. I am not satisfied that an order should be made extending the limitation period.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
