

Hogan and Anor versus Baseden [1996] NSWSC 533 (7 November 1996) 
Hogan and Anor versus Baseden /96 November 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
COWDROY AJ 
By summons filed on the 14th May 1996 the plaintiff's seek certain equitable relief, namely a declaration that the defendant holds in trust for the plaintiff's as tenants in common the property known as 42 Samuel Street Ryde in the following shares; a) as to the defendant fifty undivided one hundred shares; b) as to the plaintiffs, fifty undivided one hundred shares, the plaintiff's holding between themselves their shares equally as joint tenants.

In addition, orders are sought concerning the sale of the property and the division of proceeds of sale, being fifty percent to the plaintiffs and fifty percent to the defendant.

A Statement of Claim was filed on the 2nd July 1996 which provides further particulars of the claim. The defendant has filed a defence and cross claim.
The defendant denies the claim of the plaintiff and further seeks a judgment for possession of the property and for an order that leave be granted for the cross claimant to issue a writ of possession forthwith.
 
The Facts 
The first named plaintiff, "Dennis", began to reside with the defendant, who is his aunt in the premises at 42 Samuel Street Ryde ("the property") in 1956 when he was three years of age. The defendant virtually raised the first named plaintiff although he did see his mother at weekends until he was seventeen years of age, when his mother died.

The defendant and her former husband purchased the property from the Director of War Service Homes in 1955. The defendant and her husband were divorced in , and in consequence she received his interest in the home which was still subject to a mortgage. It was discharged in 1992.

In January 1976 the defendant attended the Public Trustee Office in Parramatta to make a will. Pursuant to the terms of the will, she left her whole estate to Dennis, and she permitted Dennis to read a copy of her will. She says that she did not thereafter discuss its contents with him and she has not discussed such contents with the second named plaintiff.

In May 1989 Dennis met the second named plaintiff ("Elizabeth"). They became companions and thereafter, through their common interest in ballroom dancing, became dance partners. The plaintiffs often discussed the prospect of having their own dance floor where they could train and teach other people. At this stage, Elizabeth was living in her own home at Chippendale. She has been previously married, and has two children who are now adults.

In July 1991 the plaintiffs discussed the prospect of moving into the property and conceived the idea of building on to that home. As a consequence, Dennis, in about August 1991, spoke to the defendant and made the suggestion that they should construct a new floor on the upstairs of the cottage. The proposal was to include living accommodation and an area which could be used as a dance floor.

According to the defendant, she says Dennis commenced a defacto relationship with Elizabeth and that she slept on a mattress on the living room floor. At no stage was her permission asked as to whether Elizabeth could move in or whether the defendant minded her living at the property.

The defendant says that she was approached by Dennis in the first half of 1992 and he informed her that Elizabeth was thinking of selling her house. He requested "would you mind if we add a storey" according to Dennis, she says that he asked:- "how would you feel about Liz and I putting on an extension upstairs. The extension would include a dance floor. Obviously we would pay for it. Liz would put her house on the market and move in when it is sold." 
Irrespective of the specific request, the defendant acknowledges that she thought about the matter and then responded words to the effect:- "that will be allright. I don't mind if it is going to help you." 
Dennis says that he informed the defendant that he was "not real keen on living at Chippendale" and that he said:- "Since Liz would have to sell her property, would you be willing to sign over half of the house." 
He says that she said:- "I'll have to think about it. My estate is left to you anyway. I'll have to see how it effects my pension." 
The defendant does not dispute the affidavit evidence of this conversation as alleged by Dennis.

Subsequently some plans were shown to the defendant by both Dennis and
Elizabeth. The plans showed the proposal to construct stairs to an upstairs room. The defendant acknowledges that Dennis said to her:- "It won't cost you anything because Liz is selling her house." 
According to Dennis, he heard Gloria ask:- "that's fine, is it, about putting the extension on?" 
The defendant responded "yes, that's allright. I'm at the end of my days anyway" 
There were further discussions concerning the proposal and the defendant acknowledges that subsequently a man inspected the house and made suggestions for the extension. Such plans were shown to the defendant and the building work commenced. The defendant raised no objection either to the plans or to the commencement of the building work.

Dennis has deposed to a conversation that took place in about February 1992 after the final plans had been prepared and the cost of the extension was known. The plaintiffs then realised they would need to borrow money and accordingly Dennis had a conversation with the defendant to the following effect:- "it will cost Liz and I about $97,000.00 to build the extension. Liz will get about $77,000.00 from the sale of her house and is borrowing another $20,000.00." 
Again the defendant raised no objection to the proposal. She said in her oral evidence that she was trying to assist Dennis, who she believed had no money to live elsewhere. In her affidavits, she denies that she said to Dennis over the years words to the effect:- "I am leaving the whole of my estate including the house to you" 
But in her oral evidence she did not really deny that such, or similar words may have been said. She denies the assertion by the plaintiff that Dennis said words to the effect:- "Since Liz would have to sell her property, would you be willing to sign over half the house." 
There are other conversations in which there is a dispute over whether words were said by one party or the other, and accordingly it is necessary too have regard to the objective facts before considering whether such conversations, on the balance of probabilities, were had.

The unchallenged evidence discloses that there was no objection raised by the defendant to the construction. In April 1992, approximately three weeks before building work was due to commence, Elizabeth moved into the property. She had sold her house in Chippendale in April 1992 for the sum of $177,000.00 and received the net proceeds in the following month of $78,000.00. This sum, together with a personal loan which she arranged in the sum of $20,000.00 to cover the additional costs of the building work was paid to the builder.
Elizabeth also paid out a small mortgage on the property prior to the building work commencing.

On the 4th May 1992 each of the plaintiffs and the defendant signed a building contract. At that time Elizabeth said to the defendant:- "do you mind signing the contract as you are the owner of the property and it is required by council." 
The defendant raised no objection to signing the building contract as owner and accordingly work thereafter proceeded.

The building work was completed in about August 1992. In addition to the work undertaken by the builder, Dennis says that he spent many hours finishing the work such as sanding and painting of the walls and ceilings, filling, sanding, staining the staircase, window frames, skirting boards and doors and similar work. In all he estimates he spent approximately three hundred and eight hours doing the work. In addition, he maintained the property and its backyard and garden.

In April 1993 the plaintiffs made an application to the Sydney Electricity
Employees' Credit Union for a loan of $25,000.00 to pay out the loan standing in the name of Elizabeth with the Commonwealth Bank for $20,000.00, and to purchase a motor vehicle. At that time, the plaintiffs had a discussion with the defendant concerning the consolidation of their finances and lowering their weekly payments. The defendant witnessed the signatures of the plaintiffs in respect of the new loan application.

Although the relationship between the parties was harmonious throughout the building work in the year following, it appears the relationship between
Elizabeth and the defendant began to deteriorate during 1994.

By August 1995, Dennis became concerned with his position concerning his interest in the property, which was prompted as a result of the deaths of certain of his fellow employees. He had a conversation with the defendant in which he alleges that he said:- "there has been a few deaths at work. Remember that we still have to arrange half the house to be signed over." 
According to Dennis, the defendant replied:- "Why do you want that? The house is left to you anyway." 
The defendant admits that there was a conversation but she says that she responded:- "This is my house. I want all your stuff moved out of my lounge room. Yours is upstairs and I've got downstairs." 
Subsequently, relations between the two parties deteriorated to the point where the plaintiffs have instituted the current proceedings.

Against the above facts, the question arises as to whether by virtue of the construction work undertaken to the house, and the statements which are alleged to have been made by the defendant, a constructive trust rises in favour of the plaintiffs.

Although many of the conversations which are alleged to have taken place are denied by each party there are certain facts which suggest that the defendant did lead the plaintiffs into believing that any improvements to the house and any expenditure that they might make in improving the dwelling would be ultimately for their benefit. The defendant acknowledges that she had shown
Dennis her will in which she bequeathed the property to him. Further, I accept there were conversations took place in which the defendant did make statements to the effect that the property would become that of the first plaintiff in due course. Lastly, it is clear from the evidence that the defendant raised no objection to the construction work being undertaken to her house at the plaintiffs' expense. I also accept that the defendant was advised, prior to entry by the plaintiffs into the building contract, the second named plaintiff would be selling her house and applying the proceeds of the sale towards the costs of the extensions so as to allow the plaintiffs to reside on the upper level. The total cost of the renovations exceeds $100,000.00 and the house, before improvements, was valued at approximately $180,000.00 to $200,000.00.
Accordingly, irrespective of whether the defendant actually promised to transfer a half interest, the fact is that the plaintiffs spent a sum which is approximately equivalent to one half of the value of the house.

The defendant, who is aged seventy years, gave evidence which I have no doubt is honest and truthful to the best of her recollection. It is also apparent that at all times prior to the disagreements which have led to this litigation, she was anxious to ensure that she helped her nephew, Dennis, to the best of her ability.

Both Dennis and Elizabeth have sworn that, prior to entering into any building agreement, they asked the defendant if she had any objection to the proposals, and whether, if such work was undertaken, she would be prepared to transfer a one half interest in the property to them. Accordingly to each plaintiff, the defendant agreed to do so. At this stage, the relations of the parties was entirely cordial, and I conclude that words were said by the defendant which gave the plaintiffs to believe and understand that the defendant did not object to this course. Certain events had occurred since the early discussion which suggested that the defendant did not have a complete recollection of all her actions. For example, she said in her affidavit evidence that she did not sign the building contract when it was established, at the hearing, that she had signed it.

It was put to the plaintiffs that the allegation that the defendant had agreed to a transfer of one half of the house was in effect, a falsification. It was also suggested that the plaintiffs made no such allegation to their solicitor at the earliest meeting with him.

On the evidence, I accept that the plaintiffs were consistent in their assertions and that the defendant did make such a promise.

In these circumstances, I consider that a constructive trust has been created.
Such trust does not merely arise out of subjective views as to who should win, judicial discretion or good conscience (see Muschinsky versus Dodds <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 583] at 606). It arises from the belief engendered in the minds of the plaintiffs arising directly from the conduct of the defendant. Such conduct was an acknowledgment by her that the property was being left to
Dennis.

Even if the statement, which I find was made, to the effect that she would transfer a half interest in the property cannot be remembered by the defendant, the fact is that the improvements amount to approximately half the value of the property.

Accordingly I consider, having weighed the evidence, that the defendant did make statements to that effect and that in the absence of such statements, the plaintiffs would not have proceeded to build onto the home.

The plaintiffs submit that in these events, a constructive trust has been created; alternatively that the defendant is estopped from denying that the plaintiffs are entitled to a one half interest therein.

The plaintiffs, in the alternative, assert that the defendant is estopped from denying that the plaintiffs are entitled to a one half interest in the property in accordance with the principles established in Commonwealth of
Australia versus Verwayen (1990) 170 CLR 394; Waltons Stores Interstate Limited v
Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387.] 
Quite clearly upon the evidence, each of the plaintiffs intended, at the time of expenditure upon the property, that the defendant would continue to reside in the house in her lifetime, and that the plaintiffs would essentially occupy the first level. In my view that arrangement should bind the parties, despite the unfortunate differences which have occurred. It is to be hoped that with the resolution of these proceedings, the relationship between each of the plaintiffs and the defendant will be restored. After so many years of such a close and obviously loving relationship, it would be a tragedy if the parties were unable to overcome their differences.

I consider that due to the events which have happened the defendant, is by her conduct, estopped from denying that the plaintiffs have a one half entitlement in the property. She has permitted them to incur heavy expenditure on the property upon the factual premise that she would have no objection to the granting a one half interest therein to the plaintiffs. Having proceeded on such factual premise, it would be unconscionable for the defendant to now seek to claim the benefit of such expenditure without any recognition of the plaintiffs entitlement: In these circumstances, an estoppel by convention arises: see Amalgamated Investment and Property Company Ltd versus Texas Commerce
International Bank Limited [(1982) QB 84] at 122.

Although it is not essential for the plaintiffs claim, in view of the finding
I have already made, I find that it would be unconscionable, in view of the acquiescence of the defendant, for her to claim the benefit of the improvements in accordance with the principles established in Ramsden v
Dyson LR 1 HL 129 at 168; see also NSW Trotting Club Ltd versus Glebe Municipal
Council <case>; [(1937) 37 SR 288] at 308. In a sense, a constructive trust arises in consequence of the defendants conduct: in accordance with the principles referred to in Allen v
Snyder [(1977) 2 NSW LR 685.] A personal obligation arises on the part of the defendant in accordance with the principles referred to in Muschinski versus Dodds (supra).

As I have accepted on the evidence of the plaintiffs' that there was a discussion in which the defendant offered to transfer a one half interest in the property to the first named plaintiff and that the expenditure incurred by the plaintiffs would not have been incurred but for such statements, the defendant is obliged to adhere to her promise even though she does not remember it.

I am conscious that the defendant has limited means, and she is a pensioner.
In the circumstances, bearing in mind that she has lived in the house for so many years it would not be appropriate for her house to be sold.

During the course of the evidence, it became apparent that the house can be divided equally into two virtually self contained apartments. Accordingly, the orders I propose to make will preserve the half interest of the plaintiffs in the house and, at the same time, provide a home for the defendant for her lifetime. If there are continuing difficulties between the parties, either may approach the Court again for orders pursuant to the leave which I shall give.
Accordingly, the declaration and orders I make are:
I DECLARE that the plaintiffs are entitled to a one half interest in the property known as 42 Samuel Street Ryde, being the land contained in folio identifier 51/27143 subject to a life interest of the defendant
I DECLARE that the plaintiffs interest in the property known a 42 Samuel
Street Ryde is held as in the following shares a. As to the defendant, fifty undivided one hundredths shares; b. As to the plaintiffs, fifty undivided one hundredths shares, such plaintiffs holding as between themselves their shares equally as joint tenants.
ORDER that the defendant execute all such documents and take all such steps as are necessary to enable the plaintiffs to become the registered proprietors of their interest property to the extent of that reflected in declarations as set out in declarations 1 and 2 hereof.
I grant liberty to either party to apply in respect of any further order that may be required.
ORDER that the defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
