

The Nominal Defendant versus Heath Matter No Ca 40171/96 [1998] NSWSC 240 (9
June 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 
THE NOMINAL DEFENDANT versus BENJAMIN WILLIAM HEATH 
CA 40171/96; DC 49/94 June 1998 
Powell JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: DISTRICT COURT, LISMORE - GIBSON DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40171/96; DC 49/94 LISMORE 
DELIVERED: 9 June 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 18 May 1998 
PARTIES: THE NOMINAL DEFENDANT versus Benjamin William HEATH 
JUDGMENT OF: POWELL JA, BEAZLEY JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: R Bartlett SC/C P Crittle 
Respondent: D A Wheelahan QC/G M Radburn 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Abbott Tout 
Respondent: Trenches 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - failure to warn - insufficient evidence to find negligience 
EXTEMPORE/ RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 11 
THE NOMINAL DEFENDANT versus Benjamin William HEATH 
On 26 December 1992, the respondent was injured when the motor bike he was riding collided with an oncoming car. He had followed a number of cars around a bend in the road and as he came into view, he saw the car ahead braking heavily and the other cars stopped behind a slow moving tractor. In order to avoid a collision with the car ahead, the respondent swerved to the far side of the road and the collision occurred.

The driver of the tractor (the appellant) was found guilty of negligence causing personal injury. The respondent, who was driving in excess of the advisory speed was found to be guilty of contributory negligence to the extent of 10%. He was awarded $132,400.

On appeal: 
That the trial judge erred in finding that: the appellant was negligent; that in the particular factual circumstances there was a duty on the appellant to warn other road users that he was driving his tractor along the roadway.

Held: 
It was not open on the evidence to find the appellant negligent in failing to provide a warning vehicle or a warning sign on the side of the road.

Wyong Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1979-1980) 146 CLR 40] 
ORDERS 
Appeal allowed; 
Judgment and verdict to be set aside; 
In lieu thereof, judgment to be entered for the appellant; 
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and to have a certificate under the Suitor's Fund Act if otherwise entitled; 
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the trial.

THE NOMINAL DEFENDANT versus HEATH 
JUDGMENT 
POWELL JA: I agree with Stein JA. 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Stein JA. 
STEIN JA: This is an appeal from a judgment of Gibson DCJ given on 6 March in the District Court at Lismore. His Honour found that the driver of an unregistered tractor, Mr Foister, was guilty of negligence causing personal injury to Benjamin William Heath on 26 December 1992. The Nominal Defendant challenges the decision on liability and also the finding of 10% contributory negligence by Mr Heath.

The accident occurred in the following circumstances. The plaintiff (respondent to the appeal) was then 18 years of age and had a learner's permit to ride a motor cycle. He was riding his motor cycle at about 9.40am east along Wooyung Road, having turned off the Pacific Highway. He was following a line of four cars. The roadway accommodated one trafficable lane in each direction. Mr Foister and his son operated a fruit stall on the northern side of the road and owned adjacent land. In the direction of travel of the respondent, the road was straight for 350m and then went into a sharp left hand bend, described in the evidence as "blind". A 65 kph advisory speed sign for traffic travelling east into the bend was located prior to the curve.

The respondent was travelling at 70 or 75 kph behind a red motor vehicle. He lost sight of it after it entered the bend. When the respondent regained sight of that vehicle, he saw that it was braking heavily and that other cars in front of it had come to a stop because a slow moving tractor was on the road.
In order to avoid colliding with the red car, the respondent crossed to the incorrect side of the roadway and collided with an oncoming vehicle.

Evidence was given by a Mr Brunton. He was driving his motor vehicle east behind two cars. The red car was behind him and the respondent's motor cycle behind it. Mr Brunton entered the bend at about 55 to 60 kph. When he was 30 to 40m into the bend, the car in front of him braked heavily. Mr Brunton then braked and went to the left side of the road. He saw a tractor in front travelling very slowly. Mr Brunton heard the sound of impact behind him, the collision between the respondent and the oncoming vehicle.

The tractor driver, Mr Foister, said that when he entered the road from the side, he saw no vehicles. He was moving between one part of his land and another, and intending to travel a distance of about 1 km. He went as fast as he could around the bend and was only momentarily fully on the bitumen. Mr
Foister was unaware of the accident behind him. He was travelling at about mph (22kph) which was the top speed of his tractor. He did not use, nor ever had used, any warning procedure when moving the tractor along the public road.
Although uninsured, Mr Foister had a permit from the Roads and Traffic
Authority (RTA) permitting it to be driven on a public street between his properties.

In the finding on liability his Honour said: 
Mr Foister was aware, in my view, that the advisory sign suggested a speed of kilometres per hour, and obviously that being only an advisory sign there could be vehicles negotiating that corner at higher speeds, and whatever the top speed of the tractor was, the witness, when he said he went as fast as he could, indicated his awareness of, in my view, the danger inherent in proceeding round that bend when vision of drivers coming behind would be minimal and perhaps obscured. A reasonably prudent driver in those circumstances with the knowledge that the man Foister had of the area, should have realised that there was a real possibility of vehicles coming at speed in to that corner with a very real possibility because of the restricted view - and I find there was a restricted view - of an accident taking place. It would have been a simple matter in this instance for a warning vehicle to have been stationed before the beginning on the kerb during the short period of time needed to avoid the accident.

In my view, the driver of the uninsured vehicle was negligent in not having some warning sign on the roadway. [AB 125T-126K] 
The submission on behalf of the appellant is that there was no statutory requirement that Mr Foister use a warning vehicle when driving the tractor. No such requirement was imposed on the permit. Subject to one matter to be dealt with later, there was no expert evidence of the need for some warning system nor its likely effectiveness. Counsel for the appellant also relies on the limited distance of travel of the tractor, the practicability of providing a warning vehicle and whether it would have removed the danger or created a greater one. Moreover, it is submitted that it was not legally permissible for
Mr Foister to install a warning sign on the roadway.

The respondent's answer to the appellant's submission is that the findings were open to the trial judge on the evidence. Mr Wheelahan QC submits that the driver of the slow moving tractor owed a duty of care to other road users to put into place some warning sign on the roadway. This was particularly so when the tractor driver was aware of the advisory speed sign for the bend and the restricted view. Counsel relies upon Mr Brunton's evidence of appropriate "practice" of tractors having a warning vehicle travelling 50 to 100m behind with hazard lights flashing.

Over objection, Mr Brunton gave evidence that on prior occasions he had been involved in tractors being moved along public roads between properties. On these occasions, a warning vehicle travelled 50 to 100m behind with hazard lights activated. This had occurred on three occasions when he was 19 years of age. His Honour referred to, and it appears relied upon, this evidence in his judgment.

The appellant submits that this evidence ought not to have been admitted, either as expert evidence or on the basis of relevancy. Alternatively, if the evidence was admissible, it carried little or no weight. The response of the respondent is that the evidence was not expert but admissible as evidence of observation. I think that this is correct. The evidence was admissible as evidence of what Mr Brunton had seen in certain situations in the past. It could have been relevant to later expert evidence, if called. It was not, of itself, expert evidence. However, what is apparent is that it is wholly deficient in establishing any practice. In my opinion, its weight is very slight.

His Honour made alternative findings of negligence relating to a failure by Mr
Foister to give warning of his slow moving vehicle on the road. First, by the provision of a warning vehicle stationed before the beginning of the curve while the tractor was being driven on the road. Secondly, by the provision of a warning sign on the roadway. His Honour made it clear that there was nothing in the manner of driving the tractor by Mr Foister that was negligent.

In considering the issue of negligence it is well to remind ourselves of the principles spelt out by Mason J (as he then was) in Wyong Shire Council v
Shirt <case>; [(1979-1980) 146 CLR 40] at -48: 
In deciding whether there has been a breach of the duty of care the tribunal of fact must first ask itself whether a reasonable man in the defendant's position would have foreseen that his conduct involved a risk of injury to the plaintiff or to a class of persons including the plaintiff. If the answer be in the affirmative, it is then for the tribunal of fact to determine what a reasonable man would do by way of response to the risk. The perception of the reasonable man's response calls for a consideration of the magnitude of the risk and the degree of the probability of its occurrence, along with the expense, difficulty and inconvenience of taking alleviating action and any other conflicting responsibilities which the defendant may have. It is only when these matters are balanced out that the tribunal of fact can confidently assert what is the standard of response to be ascribed to the reasonable man placed in the defendant's position.

The considerations to which I have referred indicate that a risk of injury which is remote in the sense that it is extremely unlikely to occur may nevertheless constitute a foreseeable risk. A risk which is not far-fetched or fanciful is real and therefore foreseeable. But, as we have seen, the existence of a foreseeable risk of injury does not in itself dispose of the question of breach of duty. The magnitude of the risk and its degree of probability remain to be considered with other relevant factors.

In examining the subject case, the starting point is the finding that there was nothing inherently wrong in the manner in which Mr Foister drove his tractor along the roadway. He drove it at its maximum speed so that he would spend as little time as possible on the road. He had a permit from the RTA to do what he was doing. He was only to be on the roadway for a relatively short distance (around 1km) and indeed, was only briefly completely on the bitumen.
There was no evidence that he had anyone to help him or another vehicle available. Mr Foister had carried out this manoeuvre on regular occasions over a very extensive period of time. He had never used warning vehicles or warning signs when driving the tractor.

Moreover, there was an absence of any expert evidence as to the practicability of warning signs or their effectiveness. Accepting the absence of expert evidence, the respondent urges upon the court the application of common sense.
It is also submitted that Mr Brunton's "observations" of "practice" could be acted upon by his Honour. I have already mentioned that Mr Brunton's evidence was receivable as his observations but not as expert evidence. However, as I have said, its weight is slight. By itself, it takes the issue of negligence nowhere. To Mr Brunton's evidence, Mr Wheelahan would add Mr Foister's knowledge of the blind bend and the advisory speed sign.

It seems to me that these facts are insufficient to justify a finding of negligence. It is apparent that his Honour did not analyze, to any real extent, the elements identified by Mason J in Shirt.

An examination of his Honour's key findings and the evidence reveals this.
Assuming that a warning vehicle could be provided (and there was no analysis by his Honour of matters relevant to this), how would the system work? This was never explored in the evidence, and, as we have seen, there was no evidence of an expert nature. One of the difficulties is whether such a warning vehicle would have removed or reduced the risk of injury. If the warning vehicle was located in a stationary position prior to the curve while the tractor was negotiating the bend, that activity of itself might represent a danger to the road user.

If the warning vehicle was to follow the tractor, that also would pose a danger when it went out of view of the following traffic as it negotiated the bend. Then again, if a warning vehicle was needed, one would expect a restriction to be imposed on Mr Foister's permit to this effect.

I do not think that it was open to his Honour on the evidence to find that Mr
Foister was negligent in failing to have a warning vehicle stationed before the beginning of the bend. There is simply insufficient evidence to justify such a finding. This is not a situation where common sense can be substituted for evidence.

The second aspect of his Honour's finding on negligence was Mr Foister's failure to have some warning sign on the roadway. His Honour provided no discussion of such a warning sign. There was no evidence or finding of the type of sign, its wording, placement or effectiveness. Again, one would have expected such a sign to be the subject of expert evidence. The erection of a warning sign on a roadway also requires approval of the RTA and its erection is otherwise impermissible. Again, I cannot see how his Honour could conclude, on the basis of the evidence adduced at the trial, that Mr Foister was negligent in not having some warning sign erected on the roadway.

It follows from what I have said that I have concluded that the appeal should be allowed. His Honour erred in finding that Mr Foister was negligent.
Accordingly, it is unnecessary to consider the challenge to the finding on contributory negligence. I would, however, remark that the trial judge's reference to the issue is so sparse as to offend the strictures in Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Limited [(1987) 10 NSWLR 247] and
Mifsud versus Campbell [(1991) 21 NSWLR 725.] From what his Honour did say [AB 126 L-O], it is possible that he applied the incorrect test to the issue. Applying Pennington versus Norris <case>; [(1956) 96 CLR 10] at 16 requires the Court to arrive at a just and equitable apportionment between the parties having regard to their responsibility for the damage. Of necessity, this involves a comparison of culpability. If this is done, it is extraordinarily difficult to see how 10% could be an apportionment within the judge's discretion having regard to the facts. I would have thought that equal responsibility would have been the proper determination.

In my opinion, the following orders should be made:
Appeal allowed;
Judgment and verdict below be set aside;
In lieu thereof, judgment be entered for the appellant;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and to have a certificate under the Suitor's Fund Act if otherwise entitled.
The respondent is to pay the appellant's costs of the trial.
 * * * 
