

Westpac Property Investments P/L versus City West Apartments P/L [1996] NSWSC (8 November 1996) 
Westpac Property Investments P/L versus City West Apartments P/L (first def) 
JLW P/L (second defendant) 
City West Apartments Pty Limited (cross claimant) 
Westpac Property Investments Pty Limited (cross defendant) /96 November 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
COWDROY AJ 
By summons filed on the 2nd February 1996, the plaintiff sought an order pursuant to <case> MA of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) that a caveat lodged against the property known as 252 George Street Sydney be withdrawn by the first defendant. Subsequently a Statement of Claim was filed by the plaintiff which claims, as against the first defendant City West Apartments
Pty Ltd ("City West") the same relief as is contained in the summons. However, the Statement of Claim also joins JLW Pty Limited ("JLW") as second defendant. In relation to the second defendant, the plaintiff claims damages alleging breach of authority as an agent for sale and consequential damages.

Facts 
The properties known as 248-256 George Street, Sydney are owned by the plaintiff. The land known as 248-250 is a vacant parcel of land having a frontage to George Street Sydney. The land known as 252 George Street, Sydney has erected upon it a substantial but very old building formerly known as
George Patterson House (GPH"). Such land and building is bounded on its northern boundary in part by the land known as 248-250 George Street, and in part by Bridge Lane. On its southern boundary, it is bounded by an old laneway known as Abercrombie Lane and on its eastern boundary by Tank Stream Way. The premises to the south, namely 254-256 George street, Sydney, is vacant land.

A property consultant, Brian Ernest Vincent became aware of the sale of GPH in approximately July 1994. he formed the view that the building could be converted into a hotel. Following discussions with a quantity surveyor who was experienced in such conversions, he approached JLW for further information and was provided with documentation relating to the premises. On the 17th August following a conversation with Robert Harris of JLW, Mr Vincent supplied
JLW with a document described as Registration of Interests nominating City
West Apartments Pty Limited as the purchaser's name. The price offered in such document was $6,000,000.00 "plus profit share $3M for Primary Interest subject to final decision on sale of 248-250 George Street. Secondary Interest subject to negotiation." 
In or about the 1st September 1994, a conversation took place between Mr
Harris and Mr Vincent. In such conversation, Mr Vincent was informed that
Westpac would not agree to a conditional contract and that Westpac required ......tape blank here.......clear to Mr Harris that $8,000,000.00 was the lowest figure Westpac would accept.

On September 1st 1994 Mr Vincent, instructed by City West, wrote to Mr Harris offering a purchase price of $8,000,000.00, subject to final contract. City
West also requested that a special condition be inserted to enable settlement to be extended from December 1994 to March 1995 if required subject to the payment of monthly interest at the rate of ten per cent.

In response JLW by letter dated the 8th September 1994 sought details of the names and positions of the Directors of City West, and of other properties that City West had purchased. As discussed in the conversation between Mr
Harris and Mr Vincent, and as noted in the letter of JLW dated the 8th
September 1994 to Mr Vincent, Westpac was concerned to ensure that the proposed purchaser would be able to complete the contract and was of substance. By letter dated the 13th September 1994, certain details concerning the background of the directors were provided by Mr Vincent to JLW.

On the 18th October 1994 Mr Vincent had a conversation with a town planner at
Sydney City Council concerning the possible future use of GPH. In the conversation, Mr Vincent was informed that the council considered the building to have heritage significance and even though there was no conservation order relating to GPH, there were orders placed by the council on surrounding laneways. It was also explained to Mr Vincent that whilst property was not listed he was advised that an application for development would have to be placed before the Heritage Council, depending on the extent of any demolition.
He was further advised that if it was intended to gut the building, such application would have to be made to the Heritage Council. Mr Vincent was also advised that the significant matter was the pattern of surrounding laneways and the scale of surrounding buildings and that the council did not wish to have the laneways widened.

On the 21st October 1994 Mr Vincent attended a meeting at the Sydney City
Council and there met with two Town Planners and two Heritage Planners. A discussion took place concerning plans for the building. The building was in fact comprised of two sections. Building A. was known as that portion containing the seven stories in height and having a frontage to George Street.
Building B. was that portion of the building fronting Tank Stream Way and having approximately seven stories so that its overall height was lower than that of building A.

In the discussions, Mr Vincent informed the City Council officers that City
West wished to add additional floors to Building B., to install an arcade of retail shops at street level and to place a new concrete structure on building
B.. He was informed that the council's main objective was conservation of the building and an active use of the ground floor throughout.

According to Mr Vincent, at the conclusion of the meeting, the only issue unresolved was the height of the additions to building B. and, since City West was not then in the position to take the matter further, the matter was left in abeyance. Mr Vincent also says that one of the Town Planners said that they would try to give approval within forty to sixty days.

On the 25th October 1994 Mr Harris introduced Mr Vincent to Brian Baker, the representative having the carriage of the sale of 252 George Street. In a conversation, Mr Vincent informed Mr Baker that City West intended to submit a development application. In response, Mr Baker queried the proposal and expressed the view that he did not wish to proceed to exchange of contracts where there were any doubts about the development application being successful. Mr Vincent in reply explained that the building was not listed but that City West was prepared to prepare a Conservation Plan if required so as to give the impression of co-operation with the council. Mr Vincent also explained that the proposal, to be incorporated into the development application, ???? additions to the rear building for serviced apartments. Mr
Vincent requested that the time period for settlement in the contract be extended by three months.

Subsequently, on the 26th October, Mr Harris informed Mr Vincent that Mr Baker had agreed to a three months extension of time to complete the contract.

On the third of November 1994, exchange of contracts occurred. The contract was unconditional in the sense that it was not dependent upon the outcome of any development application.
 
Events subsequent to exchange of contracts 
On the 17th of November 1994, Mr Vincent met with the Town Planners of Sydney City Council and a councillor, and submitted a plan for development of GPH. In summary, it became apparent at that meeting that the Sydney City Council officers determined that the Heritage Council should be consulted. According to Mr Vincent, he telephoned Mr Harris and advised him that difficulties were likely to be experienced because of the possible Heritage Council involvement.

A site meeting was convened on the 15th December 1994 at which Mr Harris, together with council representatives and Heritage Council representatives and engineers attended. As a result of that meeting, a conversation took place between Mr Vincent and Mr Harris on the ensuing day. In discussion, Mr Harris informed Mr Vincent that he thought that the Heritage Council had made some" good comments". Mr Vincent responded that City West would require extra time.
Mr Vincent also informed Mr Harris that City West's architect would work through Christmas and prepare a Conservation Plan.

By letter dated the 16th December 1994 Tillyard Callanan, solicitors for City
West wrote to Westpac requesting that the time for completion of the contract be extended from 21st March 1995 to the 30th June 1995 in accordance with
Special Condition 28.1.

On the 6th February 1995 the development application was submitted to Sydney
City Council. By this date, Mr Keith Alan Grayson, the National Manager (Asset
Risk Management in the Property Finance Group of Westpac Banking Corporation) had assumed control of the sale in place of Mr Baker. He was contacted, prior to a lodgement of the development application, by Mr Vincent and requested to provide a letter of consent. This was done.

On the 13th February 1995 a meeting took place between Mr Grayson, Mr Vincent and Mr Harris. In the meeting, Mr Vincent explained that City West had experienced difficulties in respect of the development application. There were two areas of difficulty, namely the council would not permit an additional level to be built upon Building B., the use of which was designated for serviced apartments under the development application and in addition, certain windows on the northern side of GPH were required by the council to be filled in in anticipation of a development taking place on the adjoining land, namely number 248-250. It was also a requirement of the council that the facade of
GPH be maintained. Mr Vincent indicated that the settlement could not take place at the contract price if councils requirement concerning filling in the windows was enforced. Mr Vincent said:- "We cannot settle at the contract price because it takes $1.2M off the bottom line because we lose units and amenity." 
There is a conflict concerning other statements which are made at that meeting and for the present purposes, it is unnecessary to decide that conflict.

On the 21st February a further meeting took place between Mr Grayson and Mr
Vincent at which Mr Vincent indicated that it would be necessary to proceed to the Land and Environment Court in relation to the development application. He explained that there had been a meeting with the Heritage Council which was inconclusive and that the Sydney City Council were unco-operative. There was a discussion concerning the time that would be taken for such hearing. According to Mr Vincent he said:- "City West will not go ahead with this appeal unless you are going to give enough time to settle. City West will require an extension to the 30th
September. We have already got advice from about three barristers." 
This conversation is not denied but other portions of the conversation are in dispute. Again, those items are not of significant importance.

There was a discussion concerning the need to resolve an agreement concerning the height at which any building could be constructed on the adjoining land, namely 250 George Street so that any development on that site would not rise to a height at which any blocking of windows would be required on GPH.

On or about the 18th March 1995 the forty day time limit for Sydney City
Council to give a decision concerning City West's development application expired without any resolution. On the 23rd March 1995 Mr Vincent had a further meeting with Mr Grayson concerning the unresolved development application. Mr Vincent expressed the view that Sydney City Council and the
Heritage Council were working together. Mr Vincent said that City West was prepared to proceed with an appeal to the Land and Environment Court and incur the expense, but only on the basis that Westpac supported City West as it was in the interest of both parties. He indicated that the cost of the appeal would be approximately $30,000.00 and that the company had already spent hundreds of thousands of dollars on consultants. It would not proceed with the
Appeal unless "we're sure of getting what we need in time and financial viability". The financial viability depended upon gaining the additional height of Building B. since without the additional apartments it would not be viable as serviced apartments. He explained that City West would not proceed with the Land and Environment Court appeal and spending money without the support of Westpac.

In response Mr Grayson requested a copy of City West's legal opinion for consideration before Westpac could commit itself. He said "Westpac will not contribute to the costs because we will be waiting longer than anticipated".

There is a dispute concerning certain aspects of the conversation, but one undisputed portion is a statement by Mr Vincent that he explained to Mr
Grayson:- "We have to get up with the Development Application to justify your price of
M." 
There was a discussion that it might take three months for a decision and that thereafter at least two months would be required to document and arrange finance. Following the meeting, Mr Vincent forwarded to Mr Grayson a letter received from the council which indicated certain of the council's requirements concerning the development.

By letter dated the 3rd April 1995 Mr Vincent forwarded to Mr Grayson a copy of City West's solicitors advice concerning the prospects of a Land and
Environment Court appeal. The letter also requested the plaintiffs consent to an extension of three months for completion of the contract "to enable time for approval of the DA to be pursued in Court." The letter also requested that documentation concerning a restriction which had been discussed on the height of any building to be erected on the adjoining land at 248-250 George Street be finalised to resolve the difficulty.

Towards the middle of April 1995, since Mr Vincent had not had a response from the plaintiff, he arranged a meeting which took place on the 18th April with
Mr Grayson and with Mr Harris. In the conversation, Mr Vincent was informed that the plaintiff's solicitors were not as confident as City West's solicitors concerning the outcome of the proposed appeal to the Land and
Environment Court. Mr Grayson indicated that if an extension were granted, the bank would require an interest factor to apply because of the opportunity cost to Westpac. Mr Vincent, in response, indicated City West would not agree.

There is a conflict concerning some further statements that were made. It is alleged that Mr Grayson asked whether City West wished to call off the contract. Mr Grayson denies any such conversation and says that such indication from him, would have been quite consistent with the plaintiffs position. In any event, it is not necessary to resolve that factual dispute.
It does appear that Mr Vincent mentioned at such meeting his suspicion that
Sydney City Council were contemplating that a Permanent Conservation Order should be applied to GPH.

By letter dated the 21st April 1995, Messrs Allen Allen and Hemsley wrote to
City West's solicitors stating that an extension of time within which City
West was to complete the contract would be extended to the 30th September
The letter makes it clear that the change of a completion date to the th September was agreed to by the plaintiff:- "Solely to enable City West to seek development approval in respect of the
Property from the Sydney City Council or, failing such approval, the Land and
Environment Court." 
The letter continued that City West must still complete the purchase of the
Property on or before that date whether or not it had obtained development by that date and whether or not it obtained development approval but on terms that were not acceptable to City West. Ancillary matters, such as interest, was also stipulated, and it was requested that City West acknowledge such extension by affixing the common seal of the company to the letter and returning it to Westpac.

Mr Vincent spoke to Mr Harris on or about the 1st May 1995 complaining that the plaintiff had delayed the matter and that a month had been lost in the decision making process. Mr Harris suggested that the completion date be extended to the 31st October to which Mr Vincent indicated that was acceptable.

Thereafter correspondence passed between the solicitors for City West and the solicitors for the plaintiff. The appeal of City West to the Land and
Environment Court was lodged by letter dated the 2nd May 1995. The solicitors for City West responded to Allen Allen and Hemsley's letter which purported to extend the hearing date to the 31st October and seeking confirmation that there had been an agreement reached between the plaintiff and City West pursuant to which the plaintiff would impose a restrictive height covenant on the premises at 250 George Street Sydney. The letter also stated that City
West had affixed its seal to Messrs Allen Allen and Hemsley's letter of the st April 1995, as amended in accordance with their instructions.

By letter dated the 10th May 1995 Messrs Allen Allen and Hemsley confirmed that the date of the 31st October 1995 would be acceptable. In relation to the adjoining building, the plaintiff was not prepared to restrict development on the adjoining land below the level of RL 25,100. being the level at which development had previously existed.

Other matters were discussed, including a limit of damages comprising the aggregate of the deposit of $800,000.00 and interest calculated at the rate of ten per cent per annum on the balance of the purchase price payable under the contract in respect to the period from the 1st April 1995 and ending on the date of such rescission or termination.

In subsequent correspondence it was agreed that the height for construction of any building on number 250 George Street would be fixed by a diagram and not by datum. A draft deed was prepared by the solicitors for the plaintiff to reflect the alterations to the contract, as agreed in the correspondence.

Thereafter correspondence ensued between the solicitors concerning certain provisions of the deed and particularly the height restriction on number 250.
As a result, the plaintiff agreed to accept the height as indicated on the building ???? by way of previous construction. The deed was ultimately executed by the parties on the 11th August 1995. Meanwhile, Mr Grayson and Mr
Vincent had conversations concerning the appeal to the Land and Environment
Court.

On the 25th August 1995, in the process of discovery in the Land and
Environment Court proceedings, Mr Vincent found a letter from the Sydney City
Council to the minister which urged that a permanent conservation order be placed upon GPH. Such conduct was contradictory of the indication that had been provided to him in the meetings with Sydney City Council prior to exchange of contracts.

In consequence, he requested a meeting be held with Mr Grayson that took place on the same day. Mr Vincent explained that if a permanent conservation order were placed upon GPH it would be a major stumbling block. He informed Mr
Grayson that City West would not be able to settle on the 31st October because even if the appeal was in City West's favour, there would be insufficient time to prepare the funding documentation. Mr Cameron, a solicitor representing the plaintiff was present. It is apparent that no indication was provided either by Mr Grayson or Mr Cameron that any further concessions would be granted by way of extension of time to City West. The appeal to the Land and Environment
Court by City West was concluded by the 30th August 1995. Mr Vincent thereupon telephoned Mr Grayson informing him that a meeting was about to take place with an Assessor of the Land and Environment Court. Mr Vincent said that he needed Mr Grayson's assurance "that you are going to be practical and commercial about the settlement because Assessor Jensen has just told us he is going on a two months holiday". Mr Grayson enquired how long the delay might be and was informed by Mr Vincent that it would be the length of the holiday plus the time it takes to write his judgment, plus an additional two months.
Mr Vincent again requested Mr Grayson to be "commercial about the settlement because Assessor Jensen has just told us he is going on a two months holiday".
Mr Grayson enquired how long the delay might be and was informed by Mr Vincent that it would be the length of the holiday, plus two months. Mr Vincent again requested Mr Grayson to be "commercial and practical about settlement". Mr
Grayson responded that he would be "commercial and practical about settlement".

In passing, it is apparent that at this stage City West were endeavouring to seek a further and undefined concession from the plaintiff which it might ultimately use to overcome the strict requirements of the Deed.

On the 31st August 1995, Mr Ian Kevin Fox, the Manager (Asset Risk Manager) in the property finance group Westpac telephoned Mr Vincent upon learning of the decision of the Land and Environment Court. The approval granted was subject to the deletion from the rear building, Building B., of one floor. Mr Vincent said to Mr Fox:- "While there is an approval, one floor has been deleted from the building which hurts like Hell." 
On the 1st September 1995, the solicitors retained by City West related to the
Land and Environment Court proceedings, namely Messrs Pike Pike and Fenwick wrote to the Minister for Planning regarding the Permanent Conservation Order proposed by the Minister. The letters stated that City West was about to complete settlement of the building and seeking an assurance that in the light of the findings of the Land and Environment Court no Conservation Order would be placed on the building.

By the 12th September 1995, it became apparent that there was a difference of opinion between the officers of Sydney City Council and City West concerning the interpretation of the Assessor's judgment. A letter was allegedly sent by the solicitors for City West on that date to Messrs Allen Allen and Hemsley advising the latter of this difficulty and informing them that a meeting would take place with Heritage Council on the 1st June 1995 concerning a recommendation that the Minister place a Permanent Conservation Order over
GPH. The letter continued that settlement by 31st October 1995 "may become optimistic due to the unavoidable requirement to deal with any appeal and properly make representations to the Minister".

There is also a hand written note on the letter which purports to request
Allen Allen and Hemsley to seek the plaintiff's instruction to agree to an extension of time. It should be noted that such letter was never received by
Allen Allen and Hemsley.

On the 26th September 1995 another meeting took place between Mr Vincent and
Mr Grayson at which the dispute with Sydney City Council concerning the interpretation of the Land and Environment Court was discussed. Mr Vincent indicated that it would be necessary for the matter to return to court. There is a disputed conversation thereafter in which Mr Vincent alleges that settlement will be dependant on the imposition of a Permanent Conservation
Order. Mr Grayson denied that such conversation took place. I believe that if such conversation had occurred, Mr Grayson, who was mindful of the contractual obligations of the purchase, would have referred the matter immediately to the plaintiff's solicitors.

There is further conversation alleged concerning an alleged statement by Mr
Grayson that the plaintiff would have Allens write to the Minister.

On the 6th October 1995, City West's architects lodged with the Sydney City
Council a development application to change the use approved by the Land and
Environment Court to that of a hotel. Such application, by letter dated 11th
October 1995 was rejected upon several procedural grounds and deficiencies.

On the 13th October 1995 a meeting took place between Mr Vincent and his associate, Mr Jerry Kilby with Mr Ian Fox and Mr Harris. At the meeting, Mr
Vincent explained that the judgment of the Land and Environment Court left three issues to be resolved, namely the reduction of one level of the additions to Building A., the bricking up of the facade on the northern side of the building and the issue of access and services for the site. He explained that no progress had been made regarding the possible Permanent
Conservation Order and that City West was unable to settle with such impediment. Mr Vincent explained that City West could not settle with the threat of the Permanent Conservation Order and that in any event an additional two months would be required to arrange funding. At this meeting, it is apparent that City West were seeking a waver of the 31st October time limit for settlement. Mr Vincent expressed disappointment that City West had not taken any action to make representations to the Minister. The meeting broke up with no resolution and no concession by either Mr Fox or Mr Harris that
Westpac would extend the time for settlement.

By letter dated 17th October 1995 Mr Fox wrote to Mr Vincent noting the advice furnished in the meeting of City West's' inability to settle on or before the st October 1995. The letter concluded:- "Whilst Westpac always remains willing to consider a realistic commercial proposal nothing so far suggests the contract should not be completed on or before the 31.10.95. Should you wish to raise any matters prior to settlement please feel free to contact the undersigned." 
A copy of such letter was apparently forwarded to Mr Grayson and Mr Harris.

Mr Vincent alleges that on receipt of such letter he telephoned Mr Harris to ask what was Mr Fox "on about"?. In response Mr Harris is alleged to have said that Mr Fox was obliged to report to Mr Keith Grayson.

By letter dated the 24th October 1995 Mr Vincent responded to the letter of the 17th October 1995. The letter stated that the plaintiff was aware that both the Sydney City Council and the Heritage Council had advised the Minister that a Permanent Conservation Order should be placed on the building and that the plaintiff had advised that a practical approach "to settlement" would be adopted and that City West had acted accordingly. The letter also stated:- "As you are aware a period of two months is required and the norm for procedural documentation for this type of transaction and we now believe that subject to below that this procedure can be run concurrently." 
The letter then suggested a meeting to be held "at the earliest" to resolve "mutual problems". The letter suggested that items for discussion could include the current contract conditions and an extended settlement date to the st December 1995, a strategy requesting the consent authorities to withdraw the recommendations to the Minister, an indemnity by Westpac concerning the
Permanent Conservation Order and a revised purchase price.

On the same day, namely the 24th October, the solicitors for City West wrote to the plaintiff's solicitors requesting response to the requisitions on title. In the same letter, a memorandum of transfer, duly stamped, was forwarded.

By letter dated the 27th October, the plaintiff's solicitors required answers to requisitions and requested settlement figures for the 31st October 1995.

On the 30th October 1995 Mr Vincent telephoned Mr Harris to arrange a meeting with Mr Grayson. In response, Mr Harris informed him that Westpac required an agenda for such a meeting and Mr Vincent agreed to prepare one.

No settlement took place on the 31st October. The next event that occurred was a meeting between the parties on the 7th October 1995 between Mr Vincent, Mr
Harris and Mr Grayson.

At such meeting, Mr Vincent apparently indicated that City West would be in a position to settle by the 31st January 1996. Such indication was queried by Mr
Grayson. In response, Mr Vincent provided and explanation that he believed that City West had been encouraged in a recent meeting with the Council "in that we believe the PCO can be negotiated away". There was some discussion concerning a lower price for the property but Mr Grayson indicated that City
West would have to disclose the name of the financier and the source of the funds which City West will use to settle the purchase. In response Mr Vincent stated that there was a joint venture partner but that he would have to discuss it with City West.

By letter dated the 16th November 1995, Mr Harris wrote to Mr Fox enclosing a letter of City West's solicitors indicating an alternative proposal. It suggested that a price of $6.8M be accepted for the property on a "Worts (sic) and all" basis, provided that settlement occurred within "weeks within the date hereof". It indicated that City West had secured a joint venture partner and it was proposed to form a joint venture entity which would provide the cash. It claimed that City West was not in a position to disclose the identity of its joint venture partner "for reasons of confidentiality pending any announcement by that company to the Australian Stock Exchange and the Press subsequent to the exchange of parts of any new Contract for Sale with the joint venture entity." 
The letter suggested that "until exchange of parts of any further contract occurs, simultaneously with the recission of the contract dated the third
November 1994, our client understands that both the Vendor and our client continue to be subject to the terms and Conditions for the Contract for Sale dated 3rd November 1994 (as subsequently varied between the parties)".

The letter indicated that their client believed that the outstanding issue of a threat of the making of a Permanent Conservation Order, on the property "can be resolved to enable settlement of the current deal to take place on or before 31 January 1996." 
In response, by letter dated 17th November 1995, the plaintiff responded:- "Westpac has remained pragmatic throughout the contract period, accommodating
City West's request for a time extension as well as a covenant over adjoining land in order to assist with an Application for Development Consent.

The date for settlement, 31st October 1995, has now passed and the purchaser does not appear to be in a position to settle.

In view of the circumstances, Westpac will issue a "Notice to Complete" on
Monday 20th November 1995." 
By letter dated the 21st November 1995, the plaintiff's solicitors forwarded a
Notice to Complete to the solicitors for City West. It nominated 3pm on the th December 1995 for settlement, thereby allowing twenty one days for completion.

On the 22nd November 1995 a conversation took place between Mr Vincent and Mr
Harris. In the conversation, Mr Harris indicated that if the source of the finance for the purchase were disclosed, no new contract would be provided.
Later on the same day Mr Vincent handed a document described as a "Confidentiality Agreement". In a conversation with Mr Harris on this occasion, Mr Vincent said that Westpac should agree to pursue the removal of the PCO threat "as our preferred funder is in place".

On the 30th November 1995 Mr Vincent received from Mr Grayson a copy of the
Confidentiality Agreement, duly executed.

On the 5th December 1995 Mr Harris telephoned Mr Vincent and indicated to him that a definite settlement date would be required. Mr Vincent alleged that this conversation took place in the context of a settlement figure of seven million dollars. Such conversation is denied by Mr Harris.

On the 13th December 1995 Mr Harris telephoned Mr Vincent to request the identity of the joint venture partner. Mr Vincent responded "I'll disclose it at the meeting on Friday".

Mr Vincent alleges that a meeting was organised for the 15th with Mr Harris.
The bank has denied that any such meeting was scheduled.

There was no other communication, either oral or written, between the parties.
Settlement did not take place at 3pm on the 14th December 1995 as required by the Notice to Complete. Accordingly by letter dated the 19th December 1995 the plaintiff's solicitors served a Notice of Termination.

On the 9th January 1996, City West lodged a caveat against the title to the premises, being the land named in the Folio Identifier 1/81420, claiming an interest as purchaser in an estate in fee simple of the land.

Against this factual background these proceedings have been commenced. In view of the allegations by City West of its dealings with JLW, JLW has been joined as a second defendant upon the basis that such conduct was beyond the scope of the Agent's authority and in the event that City West's defence is successful,
JLW is liable for breach of its agency agreement with the plaintiff.

During the course of the proceedings, leave was granted to City West to file an amended Cross Claim. Its claim alleges that the plaintiff/cross defendant did not have grounds to issue the Notice to Complete dated the 21st November
It disputes that it was in breach of any terms and conditions of the contract, save and except to the extent to which compliance had been waived and excused by the cross defendant and that in the circumstances the Notice is void and is of no effect. Further, it is alleged that there was no unreasonable delay on the part of City West at the time the Notice to Complete was served.

I now turn to the detailed contentions of each of the parties.
 * * * 
