

Regina versus Maximo Pantoja No. 60718 of 1995 Criminal Law and Procedure [1996] NSWSC 57 (1 April 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ at CL(1), ABADEE(2) AND HIDDEN(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, October 1995 #DATE 6:2:1996 #ADD 1:4:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant   T A Game with M A Marty 
Solicitor for the Plaintiff
T A Murphy, Legal Aid Commission 
Counsel for the Respondent   W G Roser 
Solicitor for the Respondent  S E O'Connor,
Solicitor for Public
Prosecutions
ORDER
Appeal upheld, new trial ordered
JUDGE1
HUNT CJ at CL
The appellant (Maximo Pantoja) was charged with having intercourse with his sister-in-law Zenaida (his wife's sister) without her consent and in circumstances of aggravation, and of the murder of his wife
Felicitas a week later. The Supreme Court jury were unable to agree in relation to the sexual assault charged but found the appellant guilty of the murder charged. McInerney J imposed a total sentence of penal servitude for eighteen years, consisting of a minimum term of fourteen years and an additional term of four years.
Evidence was led at the trial of forensic testing performed on vaginal swabs taken from the appellant's sister-in-law and from a nightgown she was wearing at the relevant time which was found to be stained with semen - as relevant to the Crown case that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with her. It is that evidence, in particular the DNA testing and the data bases used in relation to that evidence, upon which this appeal turns.
The Crown has argued that this evidence was relevant only to the first of the charges, and not to the murder charge upon which the appellant was convicted. That was not how the trial was conducted. The Crown successfully resisted an application for separate trials of the two counts upon the basis that the two crimes were inextricably linked, to the extent that even in a separate trial of the murder charge it would lead evidence of the sexual intercourse between the appellant and his sister-in-law prior to his wife's murder as demonstrating the appellant's passion for her, which in turn was a motive for that murder. That is the way in which the case was in fact left to the jury in the summing up, the judge directing them that they had to look at "all the material" to determine the question of motive.
The jury's disagreement upon the sexual assault charge followed a request for further directions upon the issue of consent. There is therefore a reasonable possibility that they agreed that the appellant had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law, and thus had a passion for her and a motive to murder his wife, but they could not agree that the sexual intercourse was without consent. In those circumstances, any error in relation to the admissibility of this evidence or in relation to the directions given concerning it cannot be excluded as having affected their decision upon the murder charge.
The importance of the forensic testing to this issue of whether the appellant had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law arose out of the nature of the latter's evidence of the alleged sexual assault, and out of the circumstantial nature of the Crown case on the murder charge.
The appellant, his wife, their two children, her sister, his brother
Amancio, other relatives and a friend of the family all lived in the same premises at St Peters. They had come to Australia from Peru. They were
South
American Indians, and members of a sub-group known as Quechua Indians. Quechua was traditionally the language of the Inca people, and was one of the major languages spoken before the arrival of Christopher Columbus. All of the adult members of the family worked for a cleaning company, often on different shifts and at night.
On the evening when the sexual assault was alleged to have taken place, the appellant's sister-in-law was the only adult in the house, the others all being at work. She was wearing a nightdress and panties. The back door was unlocked. She said that the house lights went off (the implication being, it appears, that the fuse had been pulled), the front door bell rang and she was too afraid to answer it. Next, somebody came to her inside the house from behind and grabbed her, covered her mouth and asked why she had not answered the door. She had not heard any sounds which suggested that the man had broken into the house. He kept her mouth covered and pushed her into her sister's room and to the floor. She asked him not to do anything, and he replied that he would kill her if she spoke. He covered her mouth again and punched her about the head twice. She felt something sharp being pressed against her neck, and he repeated that he would kill her if she did anything.
He removed her panties, pulled up her nightdress and fondled her in the vagina with his finger. He then inserted his penis in her vagina, he moved it around and, she thought, he ejaculated. He slapped her in the face, took her necklace and bracelets and left.
He had been inside the house for about fifteen minutes.
The appellant's sister-in-law said that she was unable to give any physical description of the man who had sexually assaulted her because she could not see him. He had spoken to her with a harsh voice in English, with more or less an Australian accent. He spoke English well, and quickly.
Although she agreed that she had formed a sexual relationship with the appellant shortly after his wife's funeral, she said that she had never had sexual intercourse with him before that time. The two of them had always spoken to each other in Spanish. She had never heard him speak English with an
Australian accent. She said that she would have been able to recognize the appellant's voice whether he had spoken in Spanish or in English.
Some weeks later, she was informed by the police that the appellant had admitted to them that he had had sexual intercourse with her that evening, but that he had asserted that it was consensual. She had replied: "But I would have recognized him by his voice, I would have recognized him," and "I can't say why he did it if he has said that. I can't say anything because I didn't recognize the person". When told that the semen found on her nightdress appeared to be the appellant's she said that she could not believe it. She added: "He's always respected me, why would he do that? I can't believe that".
She agreed that she had been very surprised to hear that the appellant had made the admission. She said that, if it was the appellant who had spoken to her, he "maybe imitated" an Australian accent, and that, if he had not imitated (such an accent), she would have recognized him. She agreed that she had always said that she could not recognize the man who had sexually assaulted her or say who it was. ((1) The alleged admissions to the police were denied by the appellant at the trial.)
The forensic tests of which evidence was given were carried out on swabs taken from the vagina of the appellant's sister-in-law and on a semen stain on the nightdress which she had been wearing, as well as upon other items, for comparison with the appellant and with everyone else who was living at the St
Peters premises at the time. The Crown called evidence of the results of three such tests.
Mr Goetz (a forensic biologist) gave evidence of performing various blood substance tests upon a number of items - PGM, Hp, Gc and EAP. He said that PGM is the only one to be found in semen. The tests of the vaginal swabs showed the presence of semen but there was insufficient quantity to obtain any PGM reading. The test of the nightdress showed that the person whose semen had stained the nightdress had PGM matching that of the appellant, which was type -1+. The appellant's brother Amancio, who had previously had a sexual relationship with the appellant's sister-in-law, was excluded by the same PGM test as having stained the nightdress with his semen, his PGM type being 2+1+, and everyone else tested was excluded as well. Mr Goetz also tested some blood detected on the nightgown, and found it to match the sister-in-law's blood according to two standard tests,
PGM(1+) and Hp (2-1).
The remaining tests were performed by way of DNA profiling. Unlike the blood substance testing, which identifies a particular type or category with which a suspect may be positively matched or positively excluded, the DNA of the offender and of the suspect must usually be matched individually.
Dr Kessly (another forensic biologist) used a DNA procedure known as
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism - DNA(RFLP) - at two genetic markers at the sites of chromosomes 2 and 17 in relation to the vaginal swabs. He found a match between the appellant and the man who had ejaculated in the vagina of the appellant's sister-in-law in his test at chromosome 2, and "some suggestion" that there "might" have been a match at the chromosome 17, but he could not be sure and the result was inconclusive. He gave explanations for the inconclusive result based upon the similarity between the top bands of the
DNA of the appellant and of his sister-in-law and the small amount of DNA in a particular track. It was not suggested in his evidence that the inconclusive result meant that the appellant was excluded as the man who had ejaculated in his sister-in-law's vagina. The tests of the semen stain on the nightdress showed a match with the appellant.
Dr Gunn (a geneticist) used a DNA procedure known as Polymerase Chain
Reaction - DNA(PCR) - at a variable area of gene material known as DQ-Alpha at chromosome 6, where there are six different genetic markers. He did not conduct any tests of the vaginal swabs, which had not been sent to him.
The tests of the semen stain on the nightdress showed a match with the appellant.
The appellant called evidence of the results of a different DNA test. Dr
McDonald (another geneticist) used the procedure known as PCR, analysed by way of electrophoresis, but not DQ-Alpha. He agreed that the test on the vaginal swabs at chromosome 2 performed by Dr Kessly "could" show a match with the appellant, but he said that it was not conclusive. He was unable to demonstrate any match with the appellant in relation to the vaginal swabs at chromosome 17, where he would have expected to find corroboration for the other match. He had also tested the DNA on the vaginal swabs at eight different genetic markers at chromosomes 11 and 21, with a similar inability to detect any match with the appellant.
Accordingly, he excluded the appellant as the man who had ejaculated in his sister-in-law's vagina. Dr McDonald did not test the semen stain on the nightdress; he said that he had no difficulty at all with the testing which had been done by the other scientists in relation to the nightdress, although he said that he would prefer to express his opinion as being of the possibility of a match.
The appellant has attacked all of the Crown's evidence of forensic testing, in particular the DNA profile testing conducted by Dr Kessly. DNA testing has been accepted by the courts for some years as an acceptable scientific technique for the identification of the source of bodily tissues, in accordance with the approach to scientific evidence generally adopted by this Court in Regina v Gilmore. ((2) [(1977) 2 NSWLR 935] at 939-941.) It is unnecessary to describe the technique for DNA profiling yet again in this judgment. It is adequately described in a number of other cases. ((3) See, for example: Regina versus Lindsay Douglas Elliott (Hunt J, 6 April 1990, unreported) at 2-6; Regina v Tran [(1990) 50 A Crim R 233] at 362-364; Regina versus Wayne Green (CCA, 26 March 1993, unreported) at 6-8; Regina versus Jarrett <case>; [(1994) 73 A Crim R 160] at 163-165.)
The line of American authority stemming from Frye versus United States ((4) [(1923) 293 Fed 1013)]; [(1993) 125 L Ed (2d) ] at 479-480) but this has been because of the acceptance by the US Supreme
Court that the principle stated in Frye versus United States has been superseded by the Federal Rules of Evidence. There has not been a reversal of the principle which that case stated. I consider that the courts of this State should continue to adopt the approach accepted in Regina versus Gilmore until that decision has been further considered by this Court or the High Court. It was not challenged in the present case.
There was no challenge to the qualifications of any of the experts who gave evidence for the Crown in relation to the forensic testing. The attack was upon the way in which the
DNA testing was carried out, the methodology adopted, its reliability and the currency of the methods used - particularly the testing carried out by Dr Kessly. The significance of this attack upon Dr
Kessly is that he and Dr McDonald were in conflict in relation to the DNA testing carried out on the vaginal swabs, and Dr Gunn had not tested those swabs. Many of the points raised were no more than nit picks, to which reference need not be made, but one or two have sufficient substance as to warrant mention being made of them.
Before turning to those points, it is important to emphasize that a match obtained by any blood tests - DNA or otherwise - between the suspect and the offender does not establish that the two are the one and the same person. It establishes no more than that the accused could be the offender. ((6) Regina v
Wayne Green (at 9).) However, any blood test which positively excludes the suspect as the offender, if there is a reasonable possibility that the test is correct, must necessarily exclude the suspect completely notwithstanding that a match has been obtained by other blood tests. ((7) I have assumed that, in the particular case, it is necessary for the Crown to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was not excluded as the suspect, and that the probability of the match having occurred by chance or coincidence is very small. That is certainly what was required in the present case, in that this formed an indispensable intermediate step in this case in the reasoning process towards an inference of guilty: Shepherd versus The
Queen <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR ] at 579-580. It will not always be the case that these facts will have to be established beyond reasonable doubt, in which case the words in italics in the text will require modification.) That conclusion follows from the fact that each of the various blood substance tests and the DNA procedures operate quite differently from or independently of the others. A match may be obtained from (say) three of the tests but an exclusion from the fourth. That means that the accused must be excluded completely. The same would be the case where, in relation to DNA testing, there was a match at (say) three of the genetic markers but an exclusion at the fourth. An example may be seen in the present case in the exclusion of the appellant's brother Amancio by the PGM test. It would not matter if matches had been obtained between him and the offender by any of the other tests.
At one stage, it appeared to be the appellants argument that, because the tests performed by his expert (Dr McDonald) had excluded him as the man who had ejaculated in his sister-in-law's vagina, none of the Crown's evidence which showed that it could have been him was admissible. Such an argument was, however, correctly disclaimed. Conflicts between scientific witnesses - as with any other witnesses - are to be resolved by the jury, not by the trial judge or the appellate courts. ((8) Hocking versus Bell <case>; [(1945) 71 CLR 430] at 298, 303, ; Chamberlain versus The Queen <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 521] at 558, 598.) This was not a case in which the conflict in the expert testimony was such that a reasonable doubt raised by that conflict could not safely be eliminated. ((9) cf
Chamberlain versus The Queen (at 588-589).) There were many criticisms available in relation to
Dr McDonald's evidence - including what may be thought to have been the excessive caution which he exhibited in his interpretation of the results, and a wholly eccentric result he obtained at chromosome 21 - inconsistent with all of the non-scientific evidence in the case - by which he excluded the DNA of even the victim from the nightdress. Moreover, although
DNA profiling may produce an exclusion because the bands do not match, ((10)
Regina versus Wayne Green (at 5)) because the lack of such a match depends to some extent upon a subjective interpretation of the test results it is perhaps not an exclusion of the positive nature such as may be demonstrated by the blood substance tests, or (it seems) by the DNA(PCR) at DQ-Alpha. The conflicts were for the jury to resolve.
Dr McDonald claimed that the DNA(RFLP) procedure used by Dr Kessly had been in vogue approximately a decade earlier, but that it had been replaced by the DNA(PCR) procedure; and it had ceased to be used in the diagnostic laboratory which he ran at the Prince of Wales Hospital.
He claimed that, as a leader in what he said was the major DNA testing laboratory, he was aware that
PCR was the most widely used procedure for testing DNA. Dr Kessly, on the other hand, said that DNA(RFLP) was still being used in this State, in
Victoria, Western
Australia and Tasmania, by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation in the United States, by the Home Office in the United Kingdom, by laboratories in Europe and by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. The procedure therefore retains general acceptance in the particular scientific field in which it belongs. ((11) Frye versus United States (at 1014).)
Dr Kessly conceded some measure of imprecision in his procedures, in that he allowed a range of plus or minus 2.5% for matching the bands rather than require precisely adjacent positions - as is possible with DNA(PCR). Dr
McDonald pointed out that, whereas Dr Kessly tested at only two genetic markers, his own tests were routinely at eight such markers, thereby allowing for a greater possibility of finding that the suspect was excluded as the offender if in fact they were not the same person.
An argument was put by the appellant that both Dr Kessly and Dr
Gunn had conceded that the only absolute result which could be obtained by DNA(RFLP) was an exclusion; and that it permitted no more than a possibility that the samples are from the same source, whereas the same was not so in relation to the procedure used by Dr
McDonald. Their evidence (particularly that of Dr
Gunn) was, however, that this was true of all forensic blood testing, not just
DNA(RFLP); in other words, a match establishes no more than that the suspect could be the offender. As I have already said, that is an accepted proposition. It does not make the evidence inadmissible as establishing that the suspect cannot be excluded - that is, that he could be the offender.
Whilst it appears on the evidence in this case that the PCR procedures will produce greatly more sensitive results than the RFLP procedures, I do not accept that that fact, or the other matters to which reference has been made, singly or collectively required the rejection of Dr Kessly's evidence. These were all matters which, once raised, could be explained to the jury. It is not a case where Dr Kessly's evidence concerning his tests (as opposed to his evidence as to the significance of the results obtained) was liable so to overawe the jury that they would have given it greater weight than it deserved; ((12) The
Queen versus Duke [(1979) 22 SASR 46]; [(1987) 824
F 2d 1294] at 130-131; Regina versus John David (CCA, 10
October 1995, unreported) at 9.)
I would therefore reject the appellant's complaint that the evidence of the DNA testing (in particular, that of Dr Kessly) should have been rejected.
The first ground of appeal nevertheless went further, and complained that the statistical evidence tendered by the Crown on the basis of that testing should also have been rejected. That evidence very powerfully supported the Crown case.
Where a number of blood tests - each of them operating differently from or independently of the others - have established a match between the suspect and the offender (in the sense that they have not excluded the suspect as such), the inference is that the greater the number of such tests the less the chances are that the suspect is not the offender. Very little more could be gleaned from such matches alone. The significance of those matches becomes far greater where it is possible to calculate the probability of the match having occurred by chance or coincidence. Databases have been built up which are said to demonstrate the probability that another person would share the particular blood type or would match the DNA of the suspect at a particular genetic marker. The greater the number of such matches the greater the probability, so that the statistics are calculated by multiplying the probabilities for each match.
Thus, in the present case, Mr Goetz said that one in twelve of the population at large in Australia had the appellant's PGM type of 2-1+ which he found in the semen stain on the nightdress.
This figure was derived from a
Sydney Red Cross database of 2300 people. Dr Kessly said that one in 6000 of the population matched the DNA he obtained from the semen stain on the nightdress. This figure was derived from another Sydney Red Cross database of people. Dr Gunn said that one in eleven of the population matched the DNA he obtained from the same source. His database was compiled by the Silbase
Scientific Services Company from 256 people whom it had tested in disputed parentage cases. These three figures were then compounded to produce the statistic that only one person in approximately 792,000 in the general population would have the appellant's combination of types of blood and DNA demonstrated by the testing.
Such calculations have been the subject of much controversy ever since the first flush of enthusiasm for DNA testing dissipated. The controversy is described in a perceptive article "Doubts and Burdens: DNA Evidence,
Probabilities and the Courts", Redmayne, published at [(1995) Crim LR 464.] No evidence was led by the Crown in the present case to support the statistical validity of the databases used - in particular, of the databases used in relation to the DNA testing, which appear to be very small. Such evidence is available, as I recall it being given in Regina versus Lindsay Douglas Elliott (in ). A database of only 165 was said in that case to be too small for safety. In my view, until a general acceptance is accorded to the size of the
DNA databases used by the various Government laboratories and commercial testing organizations as has for a long time been accorded to the databases derived from blood substance testing such as Mr Goetz carried out, the Crown should lead such evidence where objection is taken - as it was here - to the admissibility of the statistics.
Where the probability that a match between the suspect and the offender has occurred through chance or coincidence is said to be as low as one in ,000, I would have to be satisfied that a database of only 256 (or even of only 500) people for one or two component parts of the equation is statistically valid, but no such evidence was given. A probability of a match by chance or coincidence of that nature gave extraordinarily powerful support to the Crown case. Without any greater knowledge as to the validity of the size of these databases, that evidence would have overawed the jury by the seemingly scientific garb in which it was presented, with the very real risk that they would have thought that it had greater weight than it may have been capable of bearing. ((14) cf
The Queen versus Duke (at 48).)
At the trial, however, the objection to the admissibility of the statistics went to another issue.
Because of the random nature of the databases used, there was no suggestion that they included DNA from South
American Indians (particularly of the sub-group known as Quechua Indians) of which racial group the appellant was one. Each of the Crown's expert witnesses accepted that there may be differences in the blood groupings from different races, although Dr Kessly said that - so far as DNA(RFLP) is concerned - there was very little difference. On the other hand, Dr Gunn said that there was quite a noticeable variation between races. The point which Dr Gunn was making, as I understand his evidence, is that the degree of variation depends upon the extent to which the race has been isolated throughout its evolution.
He instances the Aboriginal race as one which had been so isolated, and for which the blood groupings would be different from Australians of European stock. ((15) This was also his evidence in Regina v Lindsay Douglas Elliott.)
The Chechua Indians would appear from the evidence to have been similarly isolated. This Court, in Regina v Wayne Green, ((16) (at 9-10)) accepted that the validity of the statistical evidence could be affected by racial variations, but there was no particular examination of the issue in that case.
Much was also made of this issue on the hearing of the appeal, but to my mind the submissions proceeded upon the wrong assumption that it was the appellant's race which was important. That is wrong because it must be the offender's race, not the suspect's race, which dictates the validity of the database. If the evidence in a particular case is that the offender exhibited the physical characteristics of (say) an Aboriginal, then clearly the database must be one which takes that fact into account. ((17) That is all that this
Court said in Regina versus Wayne Green.) Often, this will be self-evident because of the nature of the evidence which the victim gives.
However, the racial characteristics of the man who had sexual intercourse with the appellant's sister-in-law (that is, the offender) in the present case are by no means self-evident.
Because of the darkness, she was unable to give any physical description of the man. All that she could say was that he spoke in
English, with more or less an Australian accent, and that although she would have recognized the appellant's voice whether he had spoken in Spanish or English she had not recognized the man's voice. Of course, the Crown case had a degree of ambiguity about this evidence. As it sought to establish that it was the appellant who had had sexual intercourse with her, and as her attempted explanation that it must have been the appellant imitating an
Australian accent is somewhat implausible, it would from a practical point of view have had to ask the jury to disbelieve her evidence that she did not recognize the appellant as that man.
Apart from the results of the forensic tests, the evidence against the appellant that he had had sexual intercourse with his sister-in-law was not strong.
There was the disputed confession that he had done so, but such a confession was not recorded during the subsequent electronically recorded interview. As the cleaning supervisor at the company where all the other adults in the St Peters household worked, the appellant had the ability to arrange their shifts so that only his sister-in-law would be at home that evening. It was the first time that he had asked the friend of the family living in the household to work. He had the opportunity himself to return to the premises that evening at the relevant time.
The appellant's brother Amancio (a suspect because of his previous sexual relationship with the appellant's sister-in-law) was excluded as a result of the blood substance testing carried out by Mr Goetz, as was every other adult who lived in the household. The inference was open that the person who did have sexual intercourse with her was familiar with the premises, and that she would have had some association with persons of the South American Indian race who lived elsewhere in
Sydney. Although there were only South American Indians living in these premises at St Peters, there was no evidence that other persons of that race lived in or frequented the St Peters area. That is the only evidence to suggest that it was a South American Indian who had had sexual intercourse with the appellant's sister-in-law.
In those circumstances, if the size of the databases used had otherwise been shown to be statistically valid, I would agree with the trial judge that the Crown was entitled to use the databases derived from the general population. It is simply not practicable to devise a database which took all the circumstances peculiar to this case into account. But the possibility that - by reason of her association with persons of the South American Indian race - the person who had sexual intercourse with the appellant's sister-in-law may have been of that race (which was unlikely to have been represented in the data bases used) required a direction to the jury that the chance or coincidence of a match thrown up by the use of such data bases would have to be reduced in order to take that possibility into account. Depending upon whether such a possibility was high or low (an issue which was not really examined at the trial), the reduction should be greater or less as the case may be. I do not believe that this would be mere speculation. Juries in personal injury claims are asked daily to adjust actuarial figures to take into account such vagaries as the vicissitudes of life. Notwithstanding the different onuses of proof, I see no relevant distinction, particularly where the jury is directed (as I think they should be) that they are not to approach the issue upon any strictly mathematical basis.
However, I am not satisfied by the evidence that the databases used in relation to the DNA testing were of sufficient statistical validity as to warrant the admission of the evidence derived from them. They should have been rejected.
As already indicated, this was not the basis upon which the objection was taken at the trial, and there was no examination of the issue there. This is unfortunate, but it appears that this part of the case was left to a junior member of the Bar who had only recently been admitted and who (we were informed) had never previously appeared in a criminal trial. If an objection were taken upon this basis at the time (as it should have been), it would have been open to the Crown to call evidence (if it could) as to the validity of the statistical material.
There was nevertheless an objection taken to the evidence, and normally the accused can support the inadmissibility of that evidence on appeal upon any basis - just as the Crown can support its admissibility on appeal upon any basis. In the circumstances of this case, it would constitute a miscarriage of justice not to permit the appellant to rely upon this point. ((18) Regina v
Abusafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531] at 536.) I might add that this is cold comfort to the trial judge, who was entitled to rely upon counsel for assistance but clearly did not receive it on this occasion. I would therefore uphold the first ground of appeal. By reason of the strength of the evidence wrongly admitted, and notwithstanding the strength of the remainder of the circumstantial evidence against the appellant, this is not a case in which it could be said that even without that evidence the result would inevitably have been the same; the proviso could not therefore be applied. ((19) Regina v
Zorad [(1990) 19 NSWLR 91] at 108.)
In those circumstances it is unnecessary to deal with the rem grounds of appeal. ((20) The ground of appeal that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory is not based upon an argument that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to the appellant's guilt, which if successful would have led to a judgment of acquittal; it was no more than an argument that, by reason of various errors alleged to have been made at the trial, there should be a new trial: Regina versus Clough [(1992) 28 NSWLR 396] at 407-408.) But it is appropriate nevertheless to say something in relation to two of them because they are associated with the issues which I have already discussed.
The appellant criticised a direction by the trial judge that, in considering the DNA evidence, the jury could consider its strength in the context of the other evidence in the case. I see nothing wrong with such a direction. Evidence upon any issue which appears at first to be of poor quality may gain strength from other evidence in the case.
That is a proposition of general application, and it applies also to evidence of identification. ((21) Chamberlain versus The Queen (at ); Sheppard versus The Queen <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 573] at 106-107;
Regina versus Neil Heuston (CCA, 20 June 1995, in the course of being reported) at -7.)
The significance of a match between the blood type or DNA of the offender and the suspect (or accused person) must be clearly explained to the jury: that (as
I said earlier) it establishes no more than that the accused could be the offender, whereas any blood test which positively excludes the accused as the offender - if there is a reasonable possibility that the test is correct - must necessarily exclude the accused completely notwithstanding that there is a match obtained by other blood tests which operate quite differently or independently, and however strong the other evidence in the case may be. ((22)
Again, I have assumed that the Crown had to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was not excluded as the suspect, and that the probability of the match having occurred by chance or coincidence is very small. See footnote 7.)
I propose that the appeal against conviction be upheld, the conviction be quashed and that an order be made that there is to be a new trial.
JUDGE2
ABADEE J This is the second time in recent years that this Court has dealt with the subject of DNA profile evidence and its admissibility.
 
Grounds 1 and 2
The factual background to these grounds are as follows. In October 1992 the appellant resided at 30 Sutherland Street, St Peters with his wife
Felicitas Pantoja and their two sons, a three year old and an eighteen month old. Also living in the house at the time was the alleged victim of the sexual assault count, Zenaida Trujillo (Felicitas's sister), Zenaida's cousins Sixto and Luciano Rosales, her uncle Odilon Carrasco and a friend of the family,
Alicia Teran. All occupants were originally from Peru. The appellant and the other adult occupants of the house worked as cleaners.
Zenaida gave evidence that on Thursday 15 October 1992 at about 7.30 pm she was the only adult at home, with her two children. The light went off and the doorbell rang. Zenaida did not answer the door. A man came from behind her and covered her mouth. He pushed her to the floor on her back. He then allegedly sexually assaulted her. Afterwards he left the room. Zenaida said she could not see the man because it was dark. She did not identify him at any time.
Zenaida was wearing a nightgown on that night. She gave evidence that it was clean when she had put it on. After the attack, there were blood and semen stains on it. A sample of the nightgown was sent to scientists for testing.
The murder occurred on the morning of Friday 23 October 1992. The appellant had left for work at 1.30 am with Teran and Odilion Carrasco. Sixto
Rosales left for work at 3.20 am with Zenaida Trujillo and Luciano
Rosales.
The Crown led evidence from other cleaners at the building where the appellant was working. Mr Carlos Paz saw him between 3.00 am and 3.10 am.
There were no more sightings until the appellant was seen coming into the building by Mr Baca-Flor between .20 am and 4.35 am. Mr Baca-Flor said the appellant had a fresh scratch on his face.
Sixto Rosales arrived back home after work at about 5.50 am. He was the first person home. He discovered the body of Felicitas lying on the floor. The post mortem report gave the cause of death as strangulation and blunt head trauma. There was substantial blood down the hallway and into the rear lounge room.
The funeral of Felicitas Pantoja was one week later. It was not in dispute that shortly after the funeral the appellant and Zenaida commenced a sexual relationship.
On the night of 15 October 1992 scientists took a sample from Zenaida's nightgown.
At 12.30 am on 16 October Zenaida herself underwent forensic testing at King George V Hospital. On 26 October 1995, after the murder, blood and hair samples were taken from all of the adult residents of the premises, including the appellant.
DNA testing was conducted on: vaginal swabs taken from Zenaida Trujillo on the night of the alleged assault; a piece of the stained night-gown alleged to have been worn by Zenaida at the time of the assault; a blood sample of the appellant; and a blood sample of Zenaida.
The statistical results were based on 3 different testing methods: 
Blood group substance typing PGM (Dr Goetz); 
Southern blotting using the DNA procedure called Restriction Fragment
Length Polymorphism (RFLP) (Dr
Kessly); and the DNA procedure Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) using a commercial kit to test six alleles of the DQ-alpha locus (Dr Gunn).
The specimens tested by all 3 methods were the blood samples from the
Zenaida and the appellant, and the staining on the night-dress. A DNA profile matched the semen stain on the nightgown with the appellant. On the Crown case the first method contributed a probability of 1/12, the second a probability of 1/6000, and the third 1/11. The probability here referred to is the probability that any person in the community at large would have the same blood group or DNA reading as the sample being tested.
These figures were combined to draw the statistic that only one person in 792,000 would have the same kind of DNA profile as the appellant and as found on the nightgown.
The appellant submits that the jury may well have reasoned towards conviction on the second count having regard to the evidence on the first.
They were directed that they may do so having regard to both "motive" and "modus operandi". He submits that the evidence in the rape was said to be relevant in relation to the murder to establish a sexual relationship between the appellant and his sister in law. Whilst this is disputed by the Crown, it is sufficient for me to say that
I accept this submission.
The appellant had a brother named Amancio Pantoja. He gave evidence that he was in a sexual relationship with Zenaida for at least 12 months. The last time he had sexual intercourse with Zenaida was on a long weekend in the beginning of October 1992. He said he attended a party at 30 Sutherland Street on 21 July 1992, but was never in the house between 21 July and 23 October .
The appellant gave evidence that he was born in Hauri in the Ancash province of Peru. Hauri is 800 km from the city of Lima. When he was at home as a small boy he spoke Quechua. He said that was the traditional language of the Inca
Indians. He learned Spanish at school. He is a member of the racial group Quechua Indian.
Dr Levy is a senior lecturer in
School of Spanish and American Studies at the University of New South Wales. He was called on the voir dire by the appellant. On the voir dire he gave evidence about the 1991 census which was the last census taken in Peru. According to the census, roughly 7 percent of the population identified themselves as Quechua, and roughly 32 percent identified themselves as Mestiso. Mestiso is a mixture of indigenous and
European blood. Dr Levy said that Quechua was traditionally the language of the Inca people, spoken before
Columbus' arrival. He said that today the
Quechua live in the sierra which is the rural area. Dr Levy did not give evidence at the trial.
At trial Drs Goetz, Kessly and Gunn gave expert evidence for the Crown, and Dr McDonald gave expert evidence for the appellant.
 
The evidence of Dr Goetz
PGM is a substance in the blood and everyone has one of the PGM types. Dr
Goetz, a forensic biologist, analysed the nightdress worn by Zenaida on night of alleged sexual assault and detected semen stains. He used PGM testing on the semen stain. The result was that the semen was PGM type (2-1+). The PGM type of the appellant is PGM type (2-1+).
The percentage of population at large in Australia with PGM reading (2-1+) is almost 8 per cent of population, ie one in twelve or thirteen.
Dr
Goetz derived this statistic from a Red Cross database of 2,300 persons. He agreed that the PGM readings are different for certain populations. There was no information as to ethnic make-up of the database. Dr Goetz did not know how many South American Peruvian
Indians were included in his database.
In relation to Amancio who was the brother of the appellant, his blood excluded him as a person who deposited semen stains on the nightdress.
Dr Goetz tested 3 swabs from Zenaida: high vaginal swab, low vaginal swab and vulval swab. He found semen present on the high vaginal swab and low vaginal swab. There was not enough semen in the vaginal swabs to be able to test for a PGM reading.
After testing, Dr Goetz sent the seminal stain to Dr Kessly and Dr Gunn.
 .
On the voir dire Dr Goetz said that a Peruvian Indian database would be used where there was an assumption that it was actually a Peruvian Indian who committed the crime. He said that a general population database is the best way of giving a result where anybody in the population could have committed that crime. He also said there was some variation in PGM analysis according to racial group, but it was not great.
 
The evidence of Dr Kessly
Dr Kessly is a Senior Forensic Biologist and officer in charge of the
Forensic
DNA laboratory. In November 1992 Dr Kessly received from Dr Goetz of the Forensic Science Laboratory four items. Firstly, a vial of blood said to have been taken from Zenaida Trujillo, secondly three swabs said to be high vaginal, low vaginal and vulval swabs taken from Zenaida Trujillo, thirdly a section of the semen stained nightgown from Zenaida Trujillo, and fourthly a vial containing blood taken from Maximo Pantoja, the appellant.
The DNA testing he performed is called RFLP, a system of testing used in
Victoria,
Tasmania, Western Australia, New South Wales, and used overseas by the FBI, by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, by the Home Office in England and in other European laboratories. Clearly on any view it is a reliable, well established, highly reputable procedure for DNA profiling.
Dr Kessly conducted Southern Blotting using two genetic loci or sites on different chromosomes, D2S44 and
D17S79. He found a match between the appellant's blood and the vaginal swab at D2S44. However there was no match between the appellant's blood and the vaginal swab at D17S79.
At D2S44 and D17S79 Dr Kessly matched appellant's blood and the stain on the nightgown.
Dr Kessly found that the semen stain on the nightgown matched the appellant's DNA to extent of one in 6,000 of the population.
Dr Kessly also said that the vaginal swab DNA which matched the appellant at D2S44 had a frequency of one person in eighty in the general population (ignoring the finding at D17S79).
He did a calculation to combine the significance of using the PGM test of
Dr Goetz, his own findings in relation to the nightgown and Dr Gunn's DNA testing of the nightgown. He concluded that only one person in 792,000 would have blood or semen of the kind found by Dr Goetz, by himself and Dr Gunn.
In formulating his calculations he used a database. At trial he gave evidence that there were 500 samples in his database, made up from 100 people donating blood per day from the Red Cross in Sydney. The 500 samples were taken from donors during one week at the Sydney City Blood Bank. No ethnic grouping was done or known in relation to database. He did not know if it included a single South American Indian or not.

Dr Kessly said that in DNA profiling the only absolute result is a mismatch. It excludes that person as a contributor. With a match there is the possibility the person is a contributor.
In respect of the vaginal swab, Dr Kessly found a match at D2S44, but no match elsewhere. Dr Kessly concedes there was not a match between the vaginal swab and appellant.
Dr Kessly did find that
DNA from the semen stained area of nightgown matched the DNA from the appellant's blood at two different sites on the DNA.
There is no contest as to his description.
When asked about the significance of the ethnic content of the database,
Dr Kessly said that if one uses an ethnic database, that automatically insinuates that the crime or the alleged crime was committed by a person who is a member of that particular ethnic group. He said in the instant case the crime was alleged to have been committed by a member of the general community.
That is why no attention was paid to the ethnic make up of the database.
In cross-examination at trial he said that there is very little difference between populations of different types as far as RFLP testing is concerned. He said this had been shown in a number of different types including Caucasians, Afro-Americans, people of middle eastern origin, and
Asian people.
In relation to the subject of database, Dr Kessly was questioned about the Lifecodes company which manufactures
DNA testing kits. When asked why they supply databases of different ethnic groupings, rather than just using any database, he said "You'd have to ask them I think." 
The evidence of Dr Gunn
Dr Gunn found that there was a match between the DNA of the appellant and the DNA on the nightgown. He did no testing of the vaginal swab.
He received a sample of the appellant Maximo Pantoja's blood, a sample of the blood of Zenaida Trujillo, and a vial containing a piece of nightgown stained with semen.
He did a
DNA test (known as PCR test) on the blood of the appellant and on the semen stain on the nightgown. His test, the PCR test, looks at a variable area of gene material known as DQ-Alpha. He was aware Dr Kessly did a different test, the RFLP test. As a result of his independent test the appellant's blood matched the semen stain on the nightgown.
His database was of 256 people chosen at random from the Australian population. Had no breakdown of ethnic grouping. The people were people who presented for parentage testing. There were no South Americans in the group.
He found that about one in eleven or 8 per cent of the population have that
DQ-Alpha at that particular gene. That is taken from the database.
He then made enquiries to ascertain if there are DNA databases for persons of part Indian part Spanish ethnicity from South America. At trial he said that there was a database for Mestiso Indians.
According to that database, approximately one person in thirty-three of the Mestiso would have that pattern. The appellant gave evidence that he was a Quechua Indian and not a Mestiso Indian.
He stated that it was appropriate to use a particular ethnic database if the crime had been committed in an isolated community where there was a strong likelihood that the culprit was of that ethnicity.
He said that when one is faced with the alternative that the true offender is either the suspect or some other person in the general community, then a general Australian database is more applicable. In the instant case blood and other samples were taken from the
Peruvian adult residents of the house in St Peters, Sydney.
 
Evidence of Dr McDonald
Dr McDonald was called by the defence.
He criticised the methodology in
DNA procedures employed by the Crown, their reliability and how up to date they were. He used PCR-Electrophoresis technology and tested the vaginal swabs and the female fraction of the stain on the night dress. He identified four genetic markers where it was possible to exclude the presence of DNA from the appellant in the vaginal swabs. He also identified one marker (D21S11) at which it was possible to exclude Zenaida as contributing to the female fraction of the semen stain on the nightgown. His findings were not put to the
Crown experts.
Dr McDonald positively excluded the appellant as a contributor to the DNA in the vagina.
In relation to the nightgown, Dr McDonald did no testing of the male fraction of the nightgown.
Dr McDonald had no problem at all in accepting the veracity of the testing by Drs Kessly, Gunn and Goetz in relation to the nightgown. However, he has done different tests and obtained different results.
Dr McDonald's criticism of Dr Kessly was that the type of testing he carried out to determine the presence of the appellant's DNA in the vagina (not on the nightdress) was out of date. He did not dispute the findings of Dr
Goetz.
Dr McDonald did not make any comment as to the restricted databases criticised by the defence. Dr McDonald's criticisms were reserved for testing of swabs from the vagina of Zenaida Trujillo by Dr Kessly.
 
Appellant's Submissions on Ground : The trial judge erred when he admitted
DNA evidence relied on by the Crown
At trial, the defence submission in support of the exclusion of the evidence was that: the procedure relied upon by the Crown expert Dr Kessly was outmoded and unreliable; and the jury would not be able to make a reasonable assessment of the competing opinions.
The appellant submits that the most damaging aspect of the evidence was the statistical data. No regard was paid to ethnicity or whether relatives were included in the databases. He submits that if a large number of relatives were included it would have had a dramatic effect on the distributions.
It is submitted that the statistics are unreliable because the ethnic composition of the databases would affect the results. The appellant also submits that at no time was the expertise of the Crown experts in the field of population genetics established.
The appellant points out the fact that Dr Kessly's match between the appellant's blood and the vaginal swab D2S44 was not corroborated by the testing undertaken at D17S79 (as one would have expected it to be if it were the same DNA). The match was also challenged by Dr McDonald.
The appellant criticises the Southern Blotting Technology. The prosecution were able to do no more than assert that their system was scientifically sound. It is submitted that reliance on outmoded and arbitrary
Southern Blotting procedures cannot be justified. Except in the case of an exclusion the results are unreliable and misleading.
It was further submitted that an insufficient number of loci were tested in this case, and an insufficient effort was made to exclude the appellant.
The appellant submits that the fact that one mismatch excludes what would otherwise be a match casts doubt on the use of statistics where insufficient testing is conducted.
The appellant also argued that in order for the statistics to mean anything at all it was necessary for the fact finder first to first be satisfied that the vaginal/seminal stains on the night dress were those of the victim and the offender and were placed there on the night of the offence. If they were not satisfied of this then the statistics meant nothing.
The experts agree the age of the stain could not be determined.
The appellant also notes that the exclusion of Zenaida from the nightgown meant that the alleged rape on her could not have been the source of the deposit.
The appellant submitted that there was no evidence that he was a Mestiso, or that the database applied to him. He submits that the Crown evidence was highly prejudicial and there are questionable assumptions in the Crown evidence before one gets to the statistics.
It was submitted that Amancio could have shared the D2 finding in the vagina - it has one in four chances of being Amancio. The Crown did not exclude the possibility on their evidence that Amancio was the person who provided the sample which appeared in the vagina. Amancio was Zenaida's lover.
A family member would himself or herself dramatically alter the statistics.
Amancio was not excluded on the vaginal swab. He was excluded on the nightgown.
It is submitted that in view of Regina versus Green (CCA 26 March 1993, unreported), the 1 in 792,000 evidence was inadmissible. Further, it is submitted that the direction at page 12 of that judgment should be followed.
Thus it was asserted if McDonald's evidence amounted to a reasonable possibility of exclusion, then the jury could not find that the appellant was the person who had intercourse. It is appropriate here to record that neither the Crown nor the appellant's counsel drew the trial judge's attention to the existence of this Court's decision in Green and what it decided. Clearly, had this decision been brought to his attention some of his rulings and directions issued would have been in accordance with it. His Honour was denied assistance by reference to Green, which had been decided 17 months before the trial.
This case permits the Court to provide an opportune reminder to counsel appearing at a trial. As was said by Barwick CJ in Sharman versus Evans <case>; [(1976-1977) CLR 563] at 565: "I think it is relevant to the decision of this appeal to remember that our system by which differences between citizens and, for that matter, between the state and the citizen are resolved is one of trial. It is not a system of resolution by appeal. Further the trial itself is an adversary process where each side of the record is free to choose the ground and manner upon and in which it will fight the case and contest its issues.
... I have said elsewhere, and I venture to repeat, that resolution of difference by trial, rather than by appeal is of great public benefit. It tends to early finality and greater certainty than would be the case if cases were chiefly decided on appeal".
These observations made in a civil trial context are equally valid in relation to a criminal trial. Had the Crown (with all its resources) and indeed the appellant, researched the issue of DNA evidence they would have become aware of this Court's decision in Green. Had the decision in Green been brought to the trial judge's attention (and it should have been) his directions would presumably not only have been different, but this appeal may presumably not have been before us.
I would thus take the opportunity of again reminding, particularly appellant's counsel that one purpose of the requirement of r 4 of the Criminal
Appeal Rules 1986 is to ensure that the trial judge receives the assistance from counsel to which he or she is entitled, see also Regina versus Abusafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531] at 536. A trial imposes great responsibility upon advocates who decide for their clients exactly how and upon what grounds the issues will be fought. The responsibility includes the bringing of appropriate case law to the trial judge's attention. In this case such did not occur.
 
Appellant's Submissions on Ground 2: The trial judge erred in his directions on the DNA evidence
In summing up, the trial judge said, in relation to the DNA evidence: "... you will look at that in the context of the other material that you find established in this case, just do not look at it in isolation, and examine it and see whether you believe one or the other." (SU47-48) 
Also: "Look at it in relation to the other material that is in the case and of course there is a lot of evidence given there." (SU 59)
The appellant submits that these directions were erroneous. In our view such directions of themselves were not erroneous and are properly to be seen in context.
His Honour also gave extensive directions as to how the jury should resolve disputes in relation to expert DNA evidence and carefully reviewed that evidence (SU 49-59). No re-directions were sought in relation to the directions given on the DNA evidence or in accordance with this Court's decision in
Green.
It is submitted that the trial judge's directions also failed to bring home to the jury the very real difficulty in placing any reliance upon the evidence of Dr Kessly.
In relation to the nightgown the appellant submits that the jury were not told that before they could place any reliance on the DNA evidence they had to be satisfied that the deposit was placed there by the appellant and the complainant on the night of the offence.
A further submission is that at no time were the jury informed of the consequence of accepting (even as a reasonable possibility) Dr McDonald's findings, and their effect on the DNA evidence.
The jury were given to understand there was a conflict between the experts. The jury could have accepted all the DNA evidence from both Crown and defence. The consequence would have been that the appellant would have been excluded from contributing any DNA to the vaginal swabs and the alleged victim would have been excluded as contributing to the stain on the night dress.
 
Crown's Submissions
The Crown submits that r 4 of the Criminal Appeal Rules applies.
It submits that the DNA evidence related to count 1 only. It is submitted that the DNA material was irrelevant and immaterial to count 2 and so any error by the trial judge did not cause a miscarriage of justice in respect of the murder count. We have already indicated our rejection of this submission.
 .
The Crown also submits that material was presented at trial that the appellant was part-Indian, part-Spanish (Mestiso). Based on the Mestiso database, the statistical ratio which his Honour directed the jury upon, namely, 1 in 792,000 was extremely favourable for the appellant, as the
Mestiso database showed the DNA as three times rarer.
Generally the Crown submits that the statistical information was admissible and relevant.
 
DNA evidence generally
Forensic experts use DNA profiling to aid in the identifying of the perpetrator of the crime.
The admissibility of DNA evidence in New South Wales is not doubted, although in a particular case there may be grounds for refusing to admit DNA evidence. In Green this Court did not doubt the admissibility or reliability of DNA evidence in general. It will be necessary to examine that decision in closer detail.
In Green's case there was no dispute about the admissibility of the first stage evidence (described in Green as the "eight steps"). The first stage process can be simply summarised as involving the laboratory creating a DNA print or profile and a qualified person determining whether the profiles of the two samples match ("matching of the bands"). Thus in seeking to prove identity by DNA profiling what is sought to be achieved at the first stage is a match essentially between two profiles ie the crime scene "samples" and for example, the accused's blood.
Unless there is a matching the second stage (the "ninth step" in Green) does not arise for consideration. If the samples do match, a population genetics formula is then used to determine the probability that the randomly selected individual would have possessed the same DNA sequences at what are called common polymorphic sites. Put in lay terms the second stage concerns the statistical evaluation of the match and this depends upon the number of bands which match and the frequency in the relevant population of such bands. The significance of the first stage match must be assessed through the calculation of a match probability. In Green there was no issue regarding the first stage results (the match). Green concerned the question firstly whether the first stage evidence was admissible in circumstances where the second stage database evidence was not and secondly, if the first stage evidence was admissible then what were the appropriate directions to be given to the jury. Green is not authority for any general proposition that second stage evidence is not admissible. Indeed in the ordinary case we consider that it is. However, Green shows that in particular cases second stage evidence may not be admissible.
Whether and when second stage DNA evidence should be excluded will need to be considered on a case by case basis. In Green no question was raised as to the reliability or admissibility of second stage DNA evidence generally, albeit in that case second stage statistical evidence was inadmissible in the circumstances.
The admissibility of DNA evidence in a general sense is also supported by single judge decisions referred to in Green (at 6). In Regina versus Elliott (6
April 1990, unreported)
Hunt J (as he then was) concluded that DNA profiling had become an acceptable scientific technique for the identification of bodily tissues. His Honour admitted evidence in relation to the DNA profiling (the first stage) but excluded evidence based on the testing laboratory's database (the second stage): see also Green in relation to the exclusion of the second stage evidence. Likewise in Regina v Tran [(1990) 50 A Crim R 233], McInerney J did not doubt the admissibility of DNA evidence on the grounds of reliability but excluded the first stage evidence in relation to profiling for a number of valid reasons. Thus in Tran the question of not admitting evidence of the second stage ie, the statistical evaluation or statistical probability evidence did not arise for consideration.
In relation to the matter of admissibility of DNA evidence (in civil paternity cases) generally and its reliability we would refer to the recent decision of the High Court in G versus H <case>; [(1993-1994) 181 CLR 387] (a case concerning the establishment of paternity). That case concerned the drawing of an inference of paternity from unreasonable failure to comply with a parentage testing under [ss 66W](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s66w.html) of the [Family Law Act 1975](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (Cth). The paternity testing procedure involved testing by Genetic Technologies Corporation in relation to
G, H and the child. Deane,
Dawson and Gaudron JJ (at 394) referred to the unchallenged evidence in that case that "the accuracy of" DNA fingerprinting, the technology to be used for the testing procedure, was of the order of 99.9 per cent or greater and that if error occurred "it would normally result in the person who was the father being shown as NOT being the father rather than the other way around". (emphasis added). This in some ways reflects an acceptance of the "exclusion" question discussed in Green. At 399 their
Honours referred to paternity being "determined easily and, for practical purposes, conclusively", and again at 400 they stated that technological advances "have made proof of parentage both simple and, for practical purposes, conclusive". Finally they referred to the "accuracy of the test" at .
We do not doubt that the DNA evidence generally is admissible as reliable, and otherwise meets the tests of admissibility: R versus Gilmore [(1977) 2
NSWLR 935]; see also R versus Tillott and Ors (CCA 1 September 1995, unreported).
Nevertheless the accuracy of DNA evidence can be assailed or brought into question in some cases in various ways. Firstly, there is the need to establish a match between the accused's sample and the crime sample (without which the accused is effectively excluded from complicity).
Secondly a question may arise in a particular case (see Green) in relation to the statistical evaluation of the found match against a database of the relevant section of the community to establish what proportion have the characteristics displayed in the samples.
Indeed in England the validity and value of
DNA evidence in general is not doubted: Regina versus Gordon [(1995) 1 Cr App R 290]
As to the situation in the USA, DNA identification evidence expressly or impliedly including "second stage" statistical calculations of band pattern frequency (although there are exceptions in some States) is ordinarily admissible in determining the perpetrator's identity on the grounds that the technique has been scientifically accepted as reliable, or that proof "is at least as probative as prejudicial": 29 Am Jur 2d "Evidence" at 639. In a particular case the testing laboratory's non compliance with appropriate standards may be shown as a ground for refusing to admit DNA profiling conclusions into evidence: see People versus Castro [545 NYS 2d 985] (where the Court held that DNA identification tests were admissible and were capable of producing reliable results); see also State v Schwartz [447 NW 2d 422.] In
Castro the DNA evidence in fact established or demonstrated an exclusion of the accused as the source of the blood on the crime scene sample. Because the evidence established an exclusion the second stage population genetics question did not really arise for consideration.
That DNA identification evidence is admissible as reliable in Canada is established by such cases as R versus Baptiste [(1994) 88 CCC (3d) 211, (British]
Columbia Court of Appeal) and by the Northern Territories Supreme Court in R v
Lafferty [(1992) 80 CCC (3d) 150.]
The basic procedure in relation to DNA profiling was explained in Green (as well as in Gordon). I turn to consider Green in greater detail. I can do no better than to repeat the brief and simplified account of Cripps JA: "DNA is short for Deoxyribonucleic
Acid. The DNA molecule is present in almost every cell in the body. There are none in red blood cells. The molecule stores genetic information inherited from both parents and accounts, inter alia, for the differences between individuals. When unwound the molecule has the appearance of a double helix. Each strand is connected by 'bases' (adenine, guanine, cytosine and thymine).
Although DNA is concerned with genetic functions, a part of the strand has no known functions. That part is referred to as 'junk' DNA.
Every human being has a unique set of DNA with the exception of identical twins who have the same. The variations making the molecule unique in any one individual are most pronounced in the 'junk' part of the strand. Laboratory profiling involves the unwinding of the molecular strand and the examination of the 'junk' part.

The laboratory protocol for DNA profiling was discussed at length in evidence by Dr Gunn and Dr McDonald. This Court on appeal is concerned primarily with what was described as the last or ninth step in the process. McDevitt DCJ admitted evidence of the first eight steps. He rejected evidence of the ninth step, being the one, as I have said, concerned with the statistical probability that, in this case, the appellant might not be the person responsible for the semen stains. I shall shortly outline the first eight steps.
First, the strand is isolated and purified. Next, it is treated by an enzyme which cuts the strand in the area of 'junk'
DNA. Step 3 involves electrophoresis, a process which results in columns (or lanes) of fragments of the strand positioned according to size. The fragments are then transferred to a membrane in single strands and washed in solution (step 4). The fifth step involves further washing of the membrane in a chemical solution containing molecules of synthetic radioactive
DNA ('probes') which become an exact replica of the 'junk' DNA originally taken from the body cell. The dried membrane is then placed in contact with an X-ray film and kept in the dark for such time as the case warrants. A small black line or 'band' appears on the X-ray film. When the film is developed it shows a series of 'bands' in lanes corresponding to the position where radioactivity has bound to its mate on the membrane. The film is called an autoradiograph or 'autorad'. That is the sixth step. The seventh and eighth steps can, for convenience, be described as the method whereby the samples are matched.
The position of the 'bands' on the 'autorad' are examined and if fragment sizes are shown to be within the standard deviation for the test there is said to be a 'match'." (Similar explanation is to be found in the English case of Deen and repeated in
Gordon.
Now two points are to be made immediately. In Green's case there was no real dispute about the testing procedures involved in the first eight steps nor as to the results (both of these matters being here in dispute). As I have said, this first stage seeks to prove identity by DNA profiling to achieve a match between two profiles, ie the crime scene samples and the accused's
DNA samples. In Green this Court held that there was no error in admitting the results of the tests. However, the Court said (at ): "That evidence being admitted, it became incumbent upon the trial judge to tell the jury that the evidence, if accepted, meant that the appellant could not be excluded and that, therefore, it was possible that he was the person responsible for the semen stains. That was the highest the Crown claimed it could use the evidence. It would follow that it would have to have been made clear to the jury that the "matching" results could not, in the absence of other evidence, prove beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was the person responsible for the semen stains."
Thus in Green's case it was what was said to be the ninth step which the trial judge refused to admit (a decision not questioned on appeal). Because it is said that unlike finger printing a DNA profiling match is not "unique", the second stage involves the statistical evaluation of the match which depends upon the number of bands which match and the frequency in the relevant population of such band matching: see Deen's case supra. As stated in relation to the ninth step (in Green) that step concerns the statistical probability that the results although "matched" might not be from the same person.
Cripps JA said (at 9-10): "Dr Gunn expressed the Crown case as follows: '... I was aware the offence had occurred in an area where there were a considerable number of Aborigines, I contacted the company Life codes in the United States and asked them if they could provide me with some figures relating to the small 
Aboriginal data base that they had constructed in North America.
This they did and the results of that analysis were that the chance of that pattern occurring by chance within that population was estimated to be approximately one in four million.
However, the number of individuals they had surveyed for that, to construct that data base was very small. I believe about individuals mainly full blooded Aboriginals of the
Northern Territory. Therefore, I did not report the number one in four million as I believe there was not statistically enough doubt about the accuracy of those statistics because of the small size of the data base. Instead, I calculated a confidence limited, a 99 percent confidence limited based on those statistics.
What that means is that accepting those numbers come from a small number of cases or a small number of observations there is a degree of statistical error or estimation associated with the statistics. My calculations based on that led me to the conclusion that although the raw number one in four million, I can 99 percent confident that the true frequency of that pattern within that Aboriginal population is less than one in 170,000. In other words, that is less common than one in 170,000.' 
Dr Gunn was not permitted to give the above evidence to the jury. I am of the opinion that McDevitt DCJ was correct in not permitting the evidence to be led. To have allowed it would have been to have placed material before the jury which the appellant could not have rebutted and which could not be tested. it is not necessary to determine whether the evidence should have been excluded because it was not probative or because, although probative, it was unduly prejudicial. It is sufficient to note that for whatever reason the evidence was correctly excluded."
The Court rejected the submission that because Dr
Gunn and Dr McDonald were both of the opinion that DNA profiling consisted of nine steps, eight steps only could not be put to the jury. Cripps JA said (at 12): "The circumstance that the ninth step is an indispensable part of profiling in non-forensic cases is irrelevant. It is a separate step from the laboratory step. The exclusion of the ninth step prevented the Crown from submitting to the jury the near certainty that the accused must have been responsible for the semen stains on the track suit pants. As I have said, the
Crown case and the learned judge's direction was that the only inference members of the jury could draw from the 'matching', if they accepted it, was that the appellant could not be excluded."
In the instant case there was a dispute between the experts as to whether there was a match at the first stage particularly in relation to whether there was a sufficient match between semen from Zenaida's vagina and the appellant's blood.
In my view where there is a dispute between the experts, including as to appropriate procedures or their suitability or adequacy, the question is essentially one of fact for the jury to determine, upon proper instructions from the judge. In Deen's case a new trial was ordered where there was dispute as to the number of matching bands to be found at the first stage and the judge inter alia had failed to draw the jury's attention to the possible significance of one non matching band on the suspect and crime scene profile.
However, the dispute in relation to expert conflict was apparently regarded as being one for the jury to resolve.
It seems to me that where there is a conflict of expert evidence the question is one for the jury (including whether proper techniques were employed, and whether procedures employed by the Crown at the first stage level were or were not adequate or appropriate, reliable or outmoded).
Likewise the assessment of the competing opinions, and which should or should not be accepted is for the jury. Indeed the later English decision in Gordon also supports such a view in the case of conflicting DNA evidence.
The acceptance or rejection of evidence (including in my view expert evidence) is a matter for the jury. It is for the jury to determine in case of conflict what evidence is truthful: Doney v
The Queen (1990) 171 CLR at 207.
It is for the jury to decide and resolve the conflict between the experts and to determine who should be believed. The rule is stated in Commissioner for
Government Transport versus Adamcik <case>; [(1961) 106 CLR 292] at 298: "Under our existing system it is, of course, within the exclusive province of the jury in cases such as the present to determine which of two conflicting bodies of expert evidence they will accept".
An expert opinion is only as persuasive as the facts upon which it is based. Thus the tribunal of fact may also turn to the evidence on the matter which they accept for the purpose of determining which conflicting expert opinion they accept. For an expert opinion to be of any value the facts on which it is based must be proved by admissible evidence: Ramsay versus Watson <case>; [(1961) 108 CLR 642] at 846. It was open to the jury to give such weight to each expert view as they thought fit:
Adamcik at 299. When experts are at issue about complex technical matters the tribunal of fact may determine credibility, reliability and acceptability by reference to its seeing and hearing them. The jury are entitled to have regard to credibility, reliability and demeanour in deciding their own assessment of the experts by reference to seeing them and hearing them: Wilsher versus Essex Area
Health Authority <case>; [(1988) AC 1074] per
Clarke JA at 299-300; The Public Trustee and Ors versus The Commonwealth of
Australia (CA 20 December 1995, unreported).
Thus in determining whether the conflicting expert evidence should be left to the jury, the issue is not whether the dispute between the experts must inevitably give rise to a reasonable doubt, or in this case a reasonable doubt as to whether the prosecution's testing procedures were accurate. In
Elliott Hunt J applying Chamberlain versus The Queen (No 2) <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 521], held that the impugned DNA match evidence was suitable for consideration provided its reception was accompanied by appropriate warnings and instructions that they should disregard opinion evidence offered by the Crown if they did not accept that the methodology upon which it was based was sufficiently reliable, accurate and dependable. In Gordon (where the English
Court of Appeal heard further evidence) a new trial was ordered inter alia on the ground that there was a dispute to be resolved as to whether or not there was a sufficient match between the crime samples and that of the appellant (as in the instant case). In the instant case the question whether or not the procedure relied upon by the Crown's expert Dr Kessly was outmoded and unreliable was one for the jury. That there were conflicting views is not to the point. The issue was for the jury to determine. The suggestion that the jury would not be able to make a reasonable assessment of the competing opinions should also be rejected. The adequacy and appropriateness of the procedure relied upon by the Crown was a matter for the jury: see Tillott and
Ors and Gilmore per Street CJ at 939-940.
In our view the first stage conflict in relation to whether or not there was a match or any match was properly one for the jury to determine.
Likewise so was the matter of reliability of the testing procedures for the jury to determine. The issue was therefore properly left to the jury, who were clearly entitled to reject the evidence of the defence expert, Dr McDonald. His Honour properly left it to the jury to resolve the conflict.
However, in a case such as the present where the question of a first stage match is in dispute a number of directions were required in accordance with this Court's decision in Green.
Firstly, the jury had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there was a "match" between the two profiles (thus if the jury accepted the opinion of the Crown expert witnesses and rejected the opinion of Dr McDonald they could have accepted that there was a match in this case on the nightgown.
However, Dr Kessly was of the view that there was a mismatch in the vaginal swab). Secondly, if on a comparison of the "two" profiles the jury concluded there was no match or a mismatch or a reasonable possibility of no match between the two profiles, they should be directed to treat the DNA evidence as excluding the accused from complicity. Thirdly, a direction in terms of Green (at 9) as follows was required: "That evidence being admitted, it became incumbent upon the trial judge to tell the jury that the evidence, if accepted, meant that the appellant could not be excluded and that, therefore, it was possible that he was the person responsible for the semen stains. That was the highest the Crown claimed it could use the evidence. It would follow that it would have to have been made clear to the jury that the "matching" results could not, in the absence of other evidence, prove beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was the person responsible for semen stains."
As I have said his
Honour's attention was not drawn to Green. Thus directions in accordance with the above or to that effect were not given.

The appellant submits that, even assuming that the first stage evidence was admissible in accordance with Green, in any event this was a case where the second stage evidence concerning the statistical evaluation of any found match should have been excluded in accordance with Green. As I have said, in some cases statistical calculations of band pattern frequency in the population have been excluded. In New South Wales this occurred in Green and earlier in Elliott. The problem did not arise in Tran. It arises in the present case where the evidence also shows that the appellant was a Quechua
Indian from Peru. The appellant argues that Green (an Australian
Aboriginal) likewise applies to the instant case. As I have said, there is nothing in
Green's case that would suggest that the statistical evidence is not ordinarily admissible.
I now turn to consider the matter of the argument addressed in relation to the second stage of the DNA exercise, that is the statistical evaluation stage. This stage (the ninth step in Green) was carefully considered by the
Court in Green. Once the match is declared the expert must make a decision as to the significance of the match by calculating the match probability.
Essentially this involves assessing the probability of the match having occurred by chance. Because it is possible for a match to occur by coincidence a decision must be taken as to the significance of the match and this is typically done.
The second stage is the final phase in the DNA profiling process. It involves the utilisation of population genetics to estimate the probability that a person picked randomly from the population would have a DNA profile identical to the DNA profile generated from the forensic sample. The frequency with which a particular DNA pattern will occur in a given population is predicted by determining the frequency with which that pattern occurs in database samples. Some commentators suggest that it is the probability favouring a random match that provides the telling and convincing evidence in the DNA testing exercise.
As I have observed there is scope for considerable argument in particular cases (Green and the present case are instances of such) as to the admissibility of the statistical calculation of band pattern frequency in the population. Although in the ordinary case such second stage evidence is admissible,, the debate continues as to the admissibility of the statistical evidence in some particular cases, and the instant case like Green is one such case. As to population genetics and statistics it is the application of these disciplines to what the scientists conclude are matching band results which allows the experts to calculate the odds against a match occurring by chance.
The development of this type of evidence requires initially the analysis of suitably large numbers of representative DNA samples in order to develop a statistical database. Thus in the pre trial hearings in the United States it has been asserted in some cases that the databases used have been too small or inappropriate (eg where the suspect is a member of a particular racial or ethnic group involved in a crime in a location essentially populated by a particular racial or ethnic group). In some cases there is scope for argument as to whether the database used is large enough to enable the jury to draw the appropriate statistical inferences: Phillips, "DNA Profiling - The Judge's
Perspective", The Judicial Review Vol. 1 September 1992 No. 1, p 1.
The second stage involving the conversion into statistical probabilities is said by some to be the most disputed step of the DNA profiling evidence:
See Janet
Hoeffel, "The Dark Side of DNA Profiling", Vol. 42 Stanford L R 465 (January, 1990) at 474 and 488-492.
The methods used to determine the statistical probability of a random match (the probability statistic) are likely to be disputed where the accused is perhaps a non Caucasian in the general community, or where the suspect is a member of a particular racial or ethnic group. Thus here questions arose in relation to the statistical probability as they did in Green where the accused was an Aborigine who allegedly committed a sexual offence in a remote and sparsely populated area, ie Walcha. In relation to the choice or appropriateness of the relevant population when determining the probability of a coincidental match and/or as to the sufficiency of the size of the database used, as was said by Hoeffel at 489: "In separating samples only by race, the laboratories are assuming that within each race the population is freely mixing and therefore homogenous in the distribution of alleles among its members. A freely mixing population is said to be in "Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium", and one uses the "Hardy-Weinberg equation" to determine the frequency of the alleles in such a population".
This matter is explored further in an article: Redmayne, "Doubts and
Burdens: DNA Evidence, Probability and the Courts" [(1995) Crim LR 464] (at -478) where the race issue is discussed in relation to "suspect population and match probability". The author refers to the argument as to whether or not the defendant's race is or is not relevant to the match probability calculation. (However in Green it was accepted by the trial judge and by this
Court that it was). Further, the same author makes the valid point that the suspect's ethnic sub-group may be relevant, citing in particular the case of
US versus Two Bulls [918 F 2d 56] (where a crime had been committed among members of a racial sub-group in a Native American reservation). The author observed that "the assumption that the Native American population is homogenous enough to justify a single general database is dubious".
 .
The view is also expressed made by Redmayne (and it is one with which I generally agree) that it is the perpetrator's race, rather than the suspect's which is important. Thus there is legitimate debate (including this case) as to whether therefore a specific database should be used in specific cases where it is possible that suspect and perpetrator as in (Green's case and this case) are both members of a particular ethnic or racial group. As Redmayne observed (at 477-478) "If the defendant belongs to a population with no claim to have an allele frequency greater than that of a general database then the question is largely irrelevant". A point that also emerges from Green and indeed from Redmayne's article is that if the accused testifies, or the evidence otherwise shows, that the accused is a member of a particular racial group, or has a particular racial ancestry, such will have to be taken into account by the expert witness, possibly necessitating the preparation of several different likelihood ratios. Indeed another factor which can have a sizeable impact on the DNA evidence is the possibility (raised in the instant case but excluded on the evidence) that a close relative committed the crime, which will impact in terms of reduction upon the likelihood ratio.
A further point made by Redmayne is that in some cases it may not be in the interests of the suspect to claim a specific racial ancestry. At p 478 the following footnote appears: "Robertson and Vignaux, op. cit., n. 4, argue that in some cases it will not be in the defendant's interest to make such a claim. If, for example, the defendant claims to be a Pitcairn
Islander and argues that it is possible that the perpetrator is also a Pitcairn Islander, the use of a specific Pitcairn
Islander database might be justified. However, if there are only 50 Pitcairn Islanders in the country where the crime was committed, then the prior odds are dramatically reduced and the impact of the DNA evidence may even be increased. ...".
It would seem to us that if the suspect belongs to a particular racial group or sub-group the preparation of a specific database rather than a general database may well be warranted. As we have said it may be that there will be a need to prepare several different likelihood ratios or databases.
Whilst in the instant case the Crown was seeking to assert that Zenaida had intercourse on 15 October 1992 with the appellant (despite her denial as to who raped her), it submitted that if she had intercourse on that evening then it could have been with anyone in the community. Therefore to use a data base based on the general community was said to be applicable and completely justified. In a way this submission picks up a point made in Redmayne's article (at 477) when he said: "But if the suspect is innocent there is no reason to believe that the person who left the DNA at the scene of the crime comes from the same racial sub-group: "there is no reason to suppose that the population of the suspect places a narrow constraint on the population of the culprit unless the suspect is guilty"."
A difficulty in the case is that whilst Zenaida did not identify the appellant as the rapist, and whilst it was foreshadowed at the voir dire stage that the appellant would say it was otherwise, nevertheless there was still the problem that the situation might be found to be otherwise, or that the accused might not give evidence at all. What might be anticipated could thus well not transpire at all. Further, in the instant case the DNA testing was done because he was a member of the household where Zenaida resided, and where the residents were all Peruvians. Hence the need perhaps for several different likelihood ratios to meet contingencies. His Honour recognised the difficulty with the database evidence when he said in his judgment on the voir dire (at ): "A further criticism is alleged that the evidence should not be admitted because of the lack of a database and there is no evidence that any Quechua speaking Indians were involved in the database. While this remains a problem, the accused now, it appears, disputes what the jury have heard by way of admissions and is going to deny having intercourse with Zenaida.
If, therefore, she did have intercourse, which seems not to be the case on her evidence, she did not have, or there was not penetration, a database, based on the general community, seems applicable because the accused case is that someone else has committed this offence. I should add that Mr Goetz also says that his finding excludes Amancio as a suspect."
I note in this last sentence the exclusion of the close relative
Amancio. However, the inclusion is a factor that might have a sizeable impact on the DNA evidence in terms of reduction of the likelihood ratio.
The need to prepare several different likelihood ratios or several different databases to meet the problem raised in this case has been particularly addressed in the Canadian decision of Lafferty; see also Baptiste supra.
In Lafferty the accused was a Canadian native belonging to the Dogrib
First Nation.
His racial subgroup comprised approximately 2,500 people. There were no statistics specifically relating to the Dogrib people.
The accused was charged with sexual assault. The Crown sought to lead evidence that DNA from semen removed from the victim had been matched on four "probes" to DNA extracted from a blood sample from the accused. The Crown also sought to lead evidence as to the statistical probability that the DNA could have come from a person other than the accused. The offence was committed in the small community. A point made in Lafferty was that if the racial group was a distinctively different one in a significantly isolated area the lack of any database of a reasonably similar group might make the racial group statistics unreliable.
In Baptiste the British Columbia Court of Appeal was concerned with the problem of an accused descendant from generations of native Indians of the interior of British Columbia. The database used by the expert included several distinct populations. The database did not include interior Indians. The expert testified that it was "extremely remote" that semen found on the deceased could have come from a person other than the accused, based on DNA analysis (Green would preclude this evidence).
In Baptiste it was argued that unless the samples were compared with a database of interior Indians the population of which the appellant was a member, there was no basis,, no scientific basis for estimating the chances of a match. In so far as the quantitative approach is concerned, the decision is similar to that in Green, the Court accepting evidence of the unreliability of the database to support results expressed in "guantitative" rather than "gualitative" (words) terms.
US versus Two Bulls was a case of rape of a 14 year old girl in an Indian
Reservation in South Carolina, involving the charging of the Indian suspect
Two Bulls. The United States Court of Appeals (Eighth Circuit) stated that the statistical probability that DNA prints match "is based on the probability that a random individual has the same DNA banding pattern as the sample". The evidence was that the statistical probability of someone other than Two Bulls providing a match was one in 177,000 based on a Native American population base. The Court in remanding the case to the trial court to hold an expanded pre trial hearing on the admissibility of DNA evidence directed that the trial court was inter alia to decide whether the statistics used to determine the probability of someone else having the same genetic characteristics are more probative than prejudicial under
Rule 403. The approach would suggest some disquiet or reservations about the admissibility of statistical evidence in the type of case there under consideration. The Court cited Schwartz which limited the use of population frequency statistics because "juries in criminal cases may give undue weight and deference to presented statistical evidence and we are reluctant to take that risk".
The Court also referred to State v
Joon Kyu Kim [398 NW 2d 544], 548 (Minn 1987) which suppressed statistical population frequency evidence because it may have "potentially exaggerated impact on the trier of fact". In Schwartz the Supreme Court of Minnesota went further than this Court did in Green adverting to the danger of statistics applying as much to inclusion as to exclusion. The Court in rejecting the admissibility of statistical evidence because of the dangers associated with it repeated the trial judge's homely illustration: "If a weather report predicts there is a 90 percent chance of sun, most of us will deduce that there is a ten percent chance of rain".
Green supports the exclusion approach but not both the inclusion/exclusion approach in Schwartz. Whilst Schwartz represents perhaps the high water mark of general exclusion of statistical evidence in the USA, for the reasons stated, it is a decision that also does not appear to support generally, the admissibility of second stage DNA evidence. Nevertheless,
Schwartz is not in the wide terms stated law in New South Wales and is in part (with the exception of the exclusion view) inconsistent with Green. However, it highlights the dangers of statistical probability evidence for reasons similar to those expressed in Gordon (at 296), a case which also supports the admissibility of statistical probability evidence in the general case.
As I have said the final statistic is usually expressed in terms of the odds of this match occurring at random in the relevant population. Thus the method used to determine the probability statistic may be the subject of significant contest, since once the declaration of the match is admitted in evidence, it is the statistical probability of the random match which the jury must consider to determine if the sample found at the scene is indeed that of the accused.
 .
Hence the importance of the choice and selection of the relevant population when determining the probability of a coincidental match.
The sufficiency of, and the type of database used is the source of debate: see
Hoeffel at 489-480 where the issue or controversy surrounding the use of population frequency database is discussed. In England in Gordon the Court of
Appeal expressly (in returning the case for a new trial) observed that the evidence raised arguable questions on whether the match probabilities put to the jury could be sustained. The accused in the rape case had been identified as being black and with short hair. Two vaginal swabs taken from the victim of the second rape contained semen from a male of blood group B who was a secretor. Some 15 per cent of the Afro-Caribbean population fell into the group. Apart from the issue as to whether there was or was not a match (if the latter the suspect would in any case have been excluded from complicity) a question arose as to the statistical database used to calculate the match probability.
Digressing for a moment in the instant case this was not a point canvassed at the trial in the same way as presented to this Court essentially because neither the Crown nor the accused were apparently aware of this
Court's decision in Green and hence did not give the trial judge the assistance which he was entitled to receive, including drawing attention to
Green, and putting submissions by reference to it.
In Gordon, it is to be remembered that further fresh evidence was admitted on appeal. The appellant's expert there considered that the measurements and the basis on which they were arrived at were insufficiently precise or secure to justify the use of a statistical database to calculate the match probability. The database (as explained at 295) was calculated by taking a sizeable number of persons of the relevant section of the community (here Afro-Caribbeans) and establishing what proportion had the band characteristics found in the critical samples, using as the criteria the same variation factor or "window" as for measuring the critical samples. The trial judge's directions involved putting figures before the jury as to match probability based upon the use of a database of "300 Afro-Caribbeans". In
Gordon it appears that where the suspect was a person from a particular racial group, a specific data base applicable to that group was used.
It also appears that the Court of Appeal held that the "fresh" evidence was sufficient to throw doubt on the second stage of the DNA exercise ie, the statistical evaluating stage and that the effect of the evidence was to raise some arguable questions on whether the match probabilities could be properly sustained. As the Court said (at 296): "Figures running into millions of the kind put before the jury have a dramatic quality which may well exert a strong influence upon them".
I generally agree with these observations. They emphasise as does
Schwartz (in the USA) and Green itself the general dangers of admitting statistical figures, and the need for care before such figures are admitted.
Having said this, in the ordinary case such evidence is admissible.
 
Conclusion
I am of the view that what I have called the second stage evidence concerning the statistical evaluation of any found match (the first stage) should have been excluded. Indeed, further in my opinion the Crown did not establish the statistical validity of the data base relied upon by the Crown experts. I expressly agree with the views of Hunt CJ at CL that if an objection had been taken on the basis that no evidence of statistical validity had been established by the Crown (as it should have been) it would have been open to the Crown to call such evidence (if it could) as to the validity of the statistical material. I also agree with his Honour's view that objection having been taken to the evidence, the accused is entitled to support the inadmissibility of that evidence upon any basis. Nevertheless, the exclusion of the second stage evidence did not affect the admissibility of the evidence of the first stage match: Green supra. Because there was evidentary dispute in relation to the first stage match a number of directions needed to be given in relation to such. I shall repeat them.
Firstly, the jury was required to be told that it had to be satisfied (beyond reasonable doubt) that there was a match between the two profiles. If they concluded that there was a match, then it would then have to be made clear to the jury that the only inference they could draw from such matching was that the appellant could not be excluded, and that therefore it was possible that he was responsible for the semen stains. Further, it would also need to have been made clear to the jury that the matching results could not in the absence of other evidence, prove beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was the person responsible for the stains.
Secondly, if upon such a comparison the jury concluded that there was a mismatch (or no match) or that there was a reasonable possibility of such mismatch (or no match) between the two profiles then the jury should have then been directed to treat the DNA evidence as excluding the accused from complicity.
Thus a direction in terms or similar in terms to that contained in Green was in effect required.
Such a direction would of course lent emphasise and further given effect to what I have said.
The failure of counsel at the trial to draw the trial judge's attention to Green's case and to the issues raised by it in relation to the statistical validity of data bases (the second stage) has significantly contributed to the situation where the appeal must succeed.
I agree with
Hunt CJ at CL that in the circumstances it is not necessary to deal with the remaining grounds of appeal.
I would propose that the appeal against conviction be upheld, the conviction be quashed and that an order be made that there is to a new trial.
JUDGE3
HIDDEN J I agree with the order proposed by Hunt CJ at CL for the reasons his
Honour has given.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/57.html  
