

Regina versus Muller Matter No 60255/97 [1997] NSWSC 287 (4 August 1997) 
Regina versus Ryan Derek MULLER /97 August 1997 
Smart J, McInerney J, Abadee J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Ryan Derek MULLER 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Ryan Derek Muller appeals against his conviction of supplying a prohibited drug, 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine. It was a deemed supply case. Muller was sentenced to a minimum term of nine months and an additional term of three months. 
On 3 July 1995, the appellant was a passenger in a car driven by Mark
Anderson. That car was pulled over at Bondi by the police. At the police's request Muller stepped out of the car. He was searched and in the pocket of his jacket a small resealable plastic bag, containing 12 whitish coloured tablets, was found. When asked what these tablets were, Muller replied, "I don't know". On Detective Newham saying, "You don't expect me to believe that.
They are in your pocket," Muller said, "I remember now. I guess they're
Eccies" (ecstasy tablets).

Muller was placed under arrest and cautioned. In response to police questions,
Muller stated that he obtained the tablets at a dance party in Alexandria last
Saturday night, that he had worn the same jacket to the party, that he had picked it up when he left home today and forgotten that they were in there.
That was why he had originally said he did not know what they were. Muller said that he had been to see a friend called Ray about some clothing labels, Ray being in the clothing trade. When asked by the police, Muller denied that he had purchased any drugs from Ray.

At the police station, Muller was searched. There was a wallet containing a sum of money. Both Muller and his sister, who was contacted independently by the police, stated that the money had come from her business and that Muller had it to pay bills of that business. The sister was able to account for the moneys to the police. Muller looked after the financial side of that business, including the books and paying the bills and the wages. The police accepted the explanation for Muller having the money. At the police station, Muller stated that there had originally been 15 tablets, that he had paid $50 for each tablet and that he had taken three of them. The tablets weighed 3.92 grams. Muller was aged 22.

In the ERISP, the police confirmed what had earlier happened and been said.
Ray's address was supplied. When the police asked Muller what he intended doing with these tablets he replied, "Having them. I've been depressed lately.
My brother died two and a half weeks ago and I just wanted to escape." He explained that he took a tablet when he thought about his brother too much and became depressed. It helped him to forget.

It emerged from Muller's evidence that two weeks prior to his purchase of the tablets his brother had suicided by jumping 20 storeys off the Otis Building at Hurstville. He said that he rebelled and did not want to face reality nor accept his brother's death. He purchased the drugs as a means of escape.

Muller said that by purchasing 15 tablets he received a discount of $10 per tablet. Initially he had only intended to buy 10 tablets. At the time of the offence, Muller had a sales position based on commission. He earned from $400 to $1300 per week. Muller stated in his evidence that he purchased the drugs from a man called "Wazza" at a dance party called Prodigy at Alexandria
Basketball Stadium. Muller said that he went to the dance party to find a drug dealer to buy a bulk lot of drugs and he took a wad of money with him. With his own earnings and moneys from his sister's business, Muller had access to several thousand dollars.

Muller said that he went to Ray Delfino's place to see about obtaining uniforms for his sister and her employees. Muller strongly denied that he bought the tablets from Delfino to on-sell them at a profit.

The Crown led no evidence that Delfino sold drugs or that he sold or supplied drugs to Muller. There was no evidence that Delfino was the person who supplied the drugs to Muller.

The trial was very short. The evidence of the police officer, the analyst and the accused lasted about one hour. The ERISP took about 12 minutes. Counsel for the Crown did not address in deference to the judge's view. Muller said that he was a working class man. It was not to his cause to want to supply drugs or to inflict the effects of any drug on others. The judge's summing-up took just over four pages. The jury retired at 11.55am and returned with their guilty verdict at 12.43pm.

In summing-up the judge told the jury that the prescribed quantity was 0.75 grams and that the Crown had to prove beyond reasonable doubt that: 
Muller had in his possession the substance; that the substance was ecstasy, and there was more than the prescribed quantity.

The judge continued that Muller agreed that on the relevant day (3 July 1995) he was in possession of more than the prescribed quantity of ecstasy. No complaint is made about those directions.

The judge proceeded to deal with the effect of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) which relevantly provides: "29. A person who has in his ... possession an amount of a prohibited drug which is not less than the trafficable quantity of the prohibited drug shall ... be deemed to have the prohibited drug in his ... possession for supply, unless: the person proves that he ... had the prohibited drug in his ...
possession otherwise than for supply ..." 
The trafficable quantity for the substance charged, which was very closely related to ecstasy, was 0.75 grams. The judge told the jury: "... the issue ... is if an accused person is proved to be in possession of such a substance being more than the prescribed quantity then he is to be found guilty unless he satisfies the jury that he had it in his possession for some purpose other than supply and that is the way this case has been conducted.
 ... What he effectively says to you and, indeed, having seen the video you can see from day one, at the time of his arrest, he claimed that he had it for his own personal use. When one comes to an issue such as that the onus on the accused person - the obligation or the burden on the accused person is not to prove it beyond reasonable doubt. The accused has an obligation to satisfy the jury, by evidence, that it is more likely than not that he had it in his possession for some purpose other than supply.

As I have already said this accused claims that he purchased the substance in question at the dance party intending it for his own use. One could easily say, I suppose, it comes down to whether or not you believe the accused in that regard. That probably is not totally accurate and I should put it more accurately to you. The law is that the onus is on the accused to satisfy you that he had it in his possession, if you are satisfied that he did have it in his possession for some purpose other than supply." 
The appellant complained that the judge erred in his directions to the jury relating to the appellant's defence. He submitted that the use of the words "by evidence" was erroneous in that it could have misled the jury into thinking that the appellant had to produce positive or specific evidence which demonstrated that the drugs were for his own use and not for sale.

It is trite that an accused does not have to give evidence or call evidence to prove that he had the prohibited drug in his possession otherwise than for supply. All the materials upon which the accused wishes or needs to rely may appear or be elicited from witnesses called or documents tendered in the Crown case. Sometimes such materials can be compelling and prove, on the balance of probabilities, that the accused did not have the drug in his possession for supply.

An accused may also rely on a combination of evidence elicited in the Crown case and his evidence. Sometimes he is also able to call evidence from other witnesses.

The judge told the jury, correctly, that the defendant's case was that he bought the tablets for his own personal use and that he had told the police this at the time of his arrest. That was the core of the appellant's case.

The direction that the accused had an obligation to satisfy the jury, by evidence, that it is more likely than not that he had "it" in his possession for some purpose other than supply was economic. A jury may have taken the view that this meant that the appellant had to satisfy them by his evidence or evidence which he called.

The explanation of the onus, which lay on the appellant, was also economic. A fuller explanation would have been helpful.

The appellant's address to the jury was inadequate and the kind of address to be expected from a working man representing himself. Given the inadequate address and the appellant being unrepresented, a fuller summing-up was required. The judge did not explain to the jury that the accused could prove, on the balance of probabilities, that he had the tablets in his possession for his own personal use by relying both on his own evidence and on the evidence led or elicited in the Crown case.

There was important material in the Crown case, including the accused's early statement of why he bought and was personally using the tablets. There was no evidence that he had bought the tablets from Ray Delfino. It was not open to the jury to draw any adverse inference from the money ($2,020) held by the appellant as the police had verified and accepted the explanation. The only evidence before the jury was that consequent upon his brother's death the appellant had been depressed, had gone to a party to buy drugs from a dealer and bought them there for his own use. It did not matter much where the appellant obtained the tablets. The question was: why did he obtain them, for his personal use or to supply others? 
There are two further problems. The jury may well have taken the view that initially the appellant told lies to the police and regarded that as significant even though the appellant attempted to explain his initial answer.
The jury may have been sceptical about that explanation although it was not challenged in cross- examination. The judge should have given the jury an appropriate direction as to the use which could be made of that evidence.

The jury would have deduced that the appellant came under surveillance. This was reinforced by the cross-examination, which established that the appellant had been to Delfino's Bondi unit. It did not establish that drugs were sold there to the appellant. The police were performing duties in the vicinity of that unit and, after receiving a message, followed a car.

The jury were not told that they could not draw any inference from the appellant coming under surveillance or being followed nor that those matters should be put out of mind especially as there was no evidence of the strongly suggested sale. In the light of the cross-examination, a direction was required in order to restore some balance.

The appellant appeared to have an arguable defence. The quantity of tablets possessed was not decisive. They could have been for sale or for personal use.
As nothing turned on the money held, and there was no evidence of any sale by
Delfino, the personal circumstances of Muller could carry great weight.

If adequate directions had been given, the appellant may have been acquitted.
No submissions were made on [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s66.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) .

The appellant submitted that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. The decisions in Regina versus Thomas, unreported, CCA 28 May 1996 and Regina v
Welsh, unreported, CCA 6 November 1996 point out that it would be an extremely rare case in which it could be established on appeal that a jury ought to have accepted a defence where the appellant bore the onus of proving that defence.
A possible example is where the primary facts are not in dispute, the expert medical evidence is all one way and the jury's verdict seems perverse and unable to be sustained on any reasonable or rational basis. The advantage which the jury has in seeing the witnesses, especially the accused give evidence, is often of considerable importance.

In Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] at 156
Glass JA, in a Workers' Compensation appeal, pointed out that the party saddled with the onus cannot assume in his favour that the evidence is or ought to be accepted as this trenches upon the liberty of the tribunal of fact to accept or reject any evidence. The position may not be quite so rigorous in the criminal law, where one would baulk at a seemingly perverse finding or conclusion being allowed to stand, especially if it leads to an unsafe or unsatisfactory verdict. At the very least, much caution is required.

This was a case where there was no dispute that the appellant had 3.9 grams of a prohibited drug closely akin to ecstasy in his possession, the trafficable quantity being 0.75 grams. It was well open to the jury not to be satisfied that the tablets were for the appellant's use. The appellant bought 15 tablets to obtain a discount, having originally intended to purchase 10 tablets. He regarded it as a bulk purchase and intended to make such a purchase. He had 12 tablets on his person when arrested. He had not left the tablets at home. At the time at which he claimed that he had purchased the tablets, he had a wad of money with him. His normal earnings were modest, although he did have access to larger sums of money.
Much would have depended on the jury's assessment of the appellant and his evidence.

The verdict was neither unsafe nor unsatisfactory.

However, the appeal should succeed on the basis of the unsatisfactory summing- up. The question remains whether there should be a new trial. I think that an order should be made for a new trial, and that it should be left to the prosecuting authorities to decide whether to hold a new trial. The applicant has already served nearly six months and there were mitigating factors. In these circumstances, the authorities may well consider that it would not be apt to put the appellant up on a further trial.

I would propose that the appeal be allowed, that the conviction and sentence be quashed and that there be an order that there be a new trial.
 
MCINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed by the presiding Judge and for the reasons he has advanced. 
ABADEE J: I also agree. * * * 
