

Regina versus Ricky Shane Hamlin [2004] NSWSC 1329 (3 July 2004) 
REGINA v. Ricky Shane HAMLIN /96 
Monday 5 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Ricky Shane Hamlin seeks leave to appeal against the severity of a sentence comprising a minimum term of eight years eight months and an additional term of three years. Effectively it was a minimum term of nine years, as the judge gave the applicant credit for four months pre-sentence custody. This sentence was imposed for the offence of armed robbery with wounding on a male victim. A concurrent fixed term of six years was imposed for the offence of armed robbery on the female victim. These sentences were imposed after a lengthy trial. 
The offences were of a grave kind, as is shown by this summary from the judge's sentencing remarks: "The victim Mr Smith was at the relevant time a seafood wholesaler and retailer with two shops at Blakehurst and one at Brighton-le-Sands. In the area in which you lived at Kogarah he and Miss McCloud resided in their then home ... with their 14 month old son. I have no doubt that you were aware of at least one of the businesses conducted by Mr Smith, found out where he lived, and a decision was reached whereby you and two others by the name of
Takaway and Jones, all appropriately disguised and you being armed with a sawn off point 22 rifle, went to their home with the intention of stealing therefrom what you hoped was a considerable quantity of money and any other goods that you could get.

There was in fact a safe in that home and the sum of $50,000 was mentioned.
The evidence discloses that there was not that kind of money in the home or in the safe.

Mr Smith and Miss McCloud were watching television in the lounge-room of their home. At about 10.30pm on 17 February 1994 Mr Smith decided to go to the bedroom in the upstairs section of the home and Miss McCloud remained in the lounge room watching television. The front door and the fly screen door there had not been locked. After Mr Smith had gone to bed Miss McCloud heard what she described as a shuffling noise at the front door. You and the other two men entered. You were holding the rifle. You pointed it at her and told her not to say anything. Then, while you had it pointed at the side of her head told her that in effect if she screamed or made any noise she would be `wasted'. I take this to mean, killed. In other words, you threatened her with death. This rifle had attached to it a magazine. It was semi-automatic. There were bullets in the magazine. If there was not already a bullet ready to be fired the gun only needed to be cocked for that to happen and thereafter the trigger pulled to fire a shot.

You then gestured to your co-offender Jones to go upstairs. Jones and you did that, leaving Takaway to guard Miss McCloud. While Takaway was guarding Miss
McCloud she heard banging and Mr Smith screaming and said to him; `why are they so violent?', and some other words. Takaway replied; `We want $50,000.
It`s in the safe'. Takaway called out `get the take'. She said: `There is a baby in the house. We haven't got $50,000. You can have my jewellery and any money that we have'. He got her watch. He then told her that she and he were going upstairs. On the way, she asked that the baby be not hurt. She and
Takaway then arrived at the bedroom where Mr Smith was. He had heard some muffled talking while he was in his bed. This did not concern him at the time because he had a son aged 17 years who occasionally came to the home and he thought that his son must have been with Miss McCloud. When Jones and you entered the bedroom he sat up. You pointed the rifle to the front of his face telling him that it was an armed hold up and that you wanted money. He said he had no money. He was wearing two gold chains around his neck. You said to
Jones `I want those chains' and they were torn from around his neck. Jones then jumped on top of Smith's shoulders and put his knees into them so that he could only move his legs. Jones, with you present with the rifle, punched
Smith in the face repeatedly. He tried to turn his head away, but still had the rifle pointed at him. Then he was asked for money. He estimates that he was hit about 20 times in the face and was fighting for consciousness.

Mr Smith had what he described as a unique Waltham divers watch made of gold with a black face. He had this in a case and you took it. You took items from the wardrobe in the bedroom. Jones put what Mr Smith described as a piece of wire around his head which Smith tried to remove. Jones tightened it and told
Mr Smith that he was going to strangle him. You saw a roll of tape under the bed and also black cord. You said to Jones: `Strangle him with this'. There was a bedside lamp and Jones hit Mr Smith with that 4 or 5 times around the head. He bled profusely from cuts in the head, his mouth and his nose. Quite clearly he feared for his life.

It was about this time that Ms McCloud and Takaway entered the bedroom.
Takaway was armed with what Mr Smith thought was a baton or a torch. He hit Mr
Smith to the ribs and stomach area on many occasions with this implement.
While this was going on, you have cocked the gun. Somehow or other, no doubt from some last reserves of energy, Mr Smith pushed Jones off him. He said to you to `waste him Rick'. This, according to Mr Smith, was repeated a few times. You then went to the side of where Mr Smith's head was and said `I am going to have to kill you'. Again, according to Mr Smith, Jones said `waste him Rick' and you said: `I have to get a clean shot at his head.' Mr Smith, who had considerable knowledge of rifles saw that, when it was cocked, a bullet came from the magazine into the chamber. Jones was apparently being held as something of a shield from you. Smith put a pillow in front of his head. Jones tried to pull the pillow off." 
It appears that the applicant only desisted and left because he realised via the scanner that the police had been alerted.

Mr Smith had suffered and, at the time of sentence, was suffering from a severe post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of the armed robbery and wounding. There has been continuing improvement in Mr Smith's condition but the judge thought that he would not return to his pre-robbery condition. Miss
McLoud was also affected but not so seriously.

The applicant was born on 20 July 1970. He was thus aged twenty-three at the time of the offence and twenty-six at the time of sentence. The judge noted that the applicant was not able to rely on contrition and a plea of guilty.

The applicant has a lengthy criminal record. He had, at the date of the offence, spent lengthy periods in gaol totalling about four years. At the time of the offences he was on parole and that parole did not end until 29 November
He had been released from gaol about 28 May 1993, a little over eight months prior to the commission of the subject offences.

The judge took the view that the applicant was not assisted in his quest for leniency by committing further offences in Queensland while on bail for the subject offences.

The judge took into account the applicant's personal background, including an unhappy childhood with a brutal father and a less than devoted mother. The applicant did not get much of a start in life. This was a pity as he had good mathematical ability.

There was also the problem of the applicant having been exposed to tuberculosis whilst in gaol and Dr Collins' view: "This man's main problem appears to be his having a small but significant problem of him developing active tuberculosis over the next ten to twenty years." 
The judge took this into account.

The judge was not satisfied that the applicant had good prospects for rehabilitation. The relevant recent history is as follows: /5/90 - 29/11/92 Two and a half years minimum term - break enter and steal offences.
 /11/92 - 29/5/93 Six months fixed term - failing to appear.
 /5/93 - 29/11/94 Serving additional term. The applicant remained out of gaol until 21/2/94.
 /2/94 Armed robbery offences.
 /2/94 Arrested on armed robbery offences.
 /2/94 - 22/6/94 In custody bail refused.
 /6/94 Bail granted.
 /1/95 Arrested in Queensland and charged with unlawful wounding and other offences.
 /1/95 - 19/1/96 In custody in Queensland serving sentence for unlawful wounding and three assault charges.
 /1/96 - 3/3/96 Serving sentence for breach of parole pursuant to order of
Parole Board of 17/11/94.
 /3/96 In custody on armed robbery offences. (The sentences commenced as from this date.) 
Taking into account the period of custody in Queensland, the applicant under the sentences imposed will be in continuous custody from 18 January 1995 to 3
November 2004, a period of nine years, nine months, sixteen days. His additional term is three years. That departs from the usual ratio.

It was urged on the trial judge and on us that the court should have asked itself what would be likely to have been the effective total sentence imposed if the applicant had committed all offences in the one jurisdiction and had been sentenced at the one time: Mill v. The Queen <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 59.] 
The judge, when requested to take that approach, rejected it as he did not have the requisite information about the Queensland offences. The materials available to the judge were sparse. However, we have been supplied with a copy of the reasons for judgment of the Queensland District Court. The Crown contended that Mill did not apply as the offences were unconnected and took place some eleven months apart.

Assuming this was a case where Mill applied, I do not think that there would be any practical difference of consequence. A judge contemplating sentencing the applicant for the subject offences of armed robbery with wounding and armed robbery and on a totally separate occasion eleven months later unlawful wounding, assault occasioning actual bodily harm whilst in company, unlawful assault and serious assault on a police officer was likely to think that there should be separate and cumulative sentences and head sentences totalling thirteen to fourteen years.

A judge sitting in New South Wales and carrying out the exercise contemplated by Mill would be inclined to impose a fixed term of twelve months for the offences in Queensland and, cumulatively, a sentence of twelve years comprising a minimum and an additional term for the offences the subject of this application.

The judge, although by a different route, came to the same result. The judge did not err in the actual head sentence which he fixed allowing for the principle of totality.

However, in fixing a minimum term, and irrespective of Mill, it was necessary to have regard to the continuous custody which the applicant had to serve. The usual ratio with an overall head sentence of thirteen years would yield an additional term of three years three months. The additional term, calculated in accordance with the usual ratio, would have to be deducted from the twelve year sentence.

The accumulation of sentences, with the departure from the usual ratio, amounts in all the circumstances to special circumstances entitling the court to intervene.

The age of the applicant was also capable of being a special circumstance. It was submitted that the improved prospects for rehabilitation with an extended period of supervision amounted to special circumstances. It does not necessarily follow that a longer period of supervision will lead to better prospects of rehabilitation and a period of three years is a long period of supervision.

If there is going to be rehabilitation, the bulk of it will take place during service of the lengthy minimum term. Much will depend on how the applicant uses his time and takes advantage of the opportunities available to him.

The judge limited his finding of special circumstances to the four months which the applicant spent in custody between February and June 1996. This constituted special circumstances. It is incorrect in the present case to so limit the special circumstances. It does not appear that the judge had regard to the accumulation argument. The accumulation, and the age of the applicant with his disadvantaged background constituted special circumstances.

Upon the applicant's release from gaol he will need continuing support.
Finding a job will be difficult. However, three years is a long period of supervision and it is unlikely that any further period will serve any useful purpose.

Having regard to the accumulation of the sentences, the usual ratio should in substance be applied. Mr Odgers put to us that we should go further and he relied particularly on the youth of the applicant, his personal background and the courses which he had undertaken whilst in custody.

However, the facts of this case are intractable. There should be an adjustment to reflect what is reasonably close to the usual ratio.

I propose that the following orders should be made.
Leave to appeal in respect of the sentence imposed for the offence of armed robbery with wounding (Mr Smith).
Appeal as to that sentence allowed in part.
Quash the sentence imposed for that offence and substitute in lieu thereof a minimum term of eight years four months starting on 4 March 1996 and ending on 3 July 2004, with an additional term of three years four months starting on July 2004.
Leave to appeal in respect of the concurrent sentence of a fixed term for six years for armed robbery (Miss McLoud) commencing on 4 March 1996 refused.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders will be as proposed.
 * * * 
