

Vincent, White and Associates Pty Ltd versus Vouris and Anor Matter No 1499/98 [1998] NSWSC 76 (1 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 April 1998 
VINCENT, WHITE & ASSOCIATES PTY LIMITED versus VOURIS & ANOR /98 April 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 19th December 1997, the first defendant (Mr. Vouris) was appointed administrator of the second defendant (City West) pursuant to Pt.5.3A of the Corporations Law. On or about 21st January 1998, the plaintiff (VWA) lodged with Mr. Vouris particulars of its claim for a debt of approximately $1,410,650.00, said to be owed to it by City West. 
On 11th February 1998, at an adjourned meeting of creditors of City West, Mr.
Vouris as chairperson determined that he would allow VWA to vote in respect of the amount of $422,577.00. When, in accordance with Regulation 5.2.21 of the
Corporations Regulations, a poll was taken concerning a resolution that a Deed of Company Arrangement be accepted, nine creditors voted for the resolution and two against; but since the value of the debts of the two against exceeded that of the debts of the nine for, and since Mr. Vouris did not exercise his casting vote, that resolution was not carried. When a poll was taken concerning a resolution that the company be wound up, the creditors voted similarly, Mr. Vouris exercised his casting vote in favour of the resolution, and accordingly the resolution was carried. The administration was thereby converted to a creditors' voluntary winding-up: see Corporations Law, ss.446A, , 494.

On 24th February 1998, VWA commenced these proceedings, seeking the following orders: . A declaration that the First Defendant as chairperson of the adjourned meeting of creditors of the Second Defendant held on 11 February 1998 was obliged to mark the Plaintiff's Proof of Debt as objected to in accordance with Regulation 5.6.26 Corporations Regulations.
 . An order setting aside the decision of the First Defendant as chairperon of the adjourned meeting of creditors of the Second Defendant held on the 11 February 1998 to reject the Plaintiff's Proof of Debt in the sum of $1,410,650.00.
 . A declaration that the Plaintiff's claim against the Second Defendant in the sum of $1,410,650.00 was entitled to be admitted for the purposes of voting at the meeting of creditors of the Second Defendant held on 11 February 1998.
 . A declaration that upon the Plaintiff's Proof of Debt being admitted in the sum of $1,410,650.00 then the creditors of the Second Defendant are to be taken to have resolved to execute a Deed of Company Arrangement in accordance with the proposal set out in the Administrator's Report of the Second Defendant dated 4 February 1998 circulated with the Notice of Meeting. . That the time within which the Second Defendant must execute the Deed of Company Arrangement pursuant to section 444B(2) be extended to a date not less than 21 days from the date of the Court's order.
 . A declaration that the purported resolution of creditors at the adjourned meeting of creditors of the Second Defendant on 11 February 1998 that "the Company be wound up" is void and of no effect.
 . Alternatively to paragraph 6, that upon making the orders and declarations herein sought, the winding up of the Second Defendant be terminated.
 . Alternatively to paragraph 6, that the winding up of the Second Defendant be stayed, save only so far as the steps undertaken by the Liquidator includes steps which would be undertaken by the Manager of the Deed of Company Arrangement.
 . Alternatively to paragraphs 6, 7 and 8, that pending determination of these proceedings, the winding up of the Second Defendant be stayed.
 . That the Plaintiff have leave to proceed against the Second Defendant in these proceedings pursuant to Section 471B Corporations Law.

STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
The creditors' meeting was one convened under s.439A of the Corporations Law, as to which s.439C provides as follows: 
C At a meeting convened under section 439A, the creditors may resolve: that the company execute a deed of company arrangement specified in the resolution (even if it differs from the proposed deed (if any) details of which accompanied the notice of meeting); or that the administration should end; or that the company be wound up.

Voting at this meeting was regulated inter alia by Regulations 5.6.21, 5.6.23, .6.26.
 .6.21(1) This regulation applies to a poll take at a meeting of creditors.

A resolution is carried if: a majority of the creditors voting (whether in person, by attorney or by proxy) vote in favour of the resolution; and the value of the debts owed by the corporation to those voting in favour of the resolution is more than half the total debts owed to all the creditors voting (whether in person, by proxy or by attorney).

A resolution is not carried if: a majority of creditors voting (whether in person, by proxy or by attorney) vote against the resolution; and the value of the debts owed by the corporation to those voting against the resolution is ore than half the total debts owed to all creditors voting (whether in person, by proxy or by attorney).

If no result is reached under subregulation (2) or (e), then: the person presiding at the meeting may exercise a casting vote in favour of the resolution, in which case the resolution is carried; or the person presiding at the meeting may exercise a casting vote against the resolution, in which case the resolution is not carried.

In this regulation, "creditor" includes a debenture holder.
 .6.23(1) A person is not entitled to vote as a creditor at a meeting of creditors unless: his or her debt or claim has been admitted wholly or in part by the liquidator or administrator of a company under administration or of a deed of company arrangement; or he or she has lodged, with the chairperson of the meeting or with the person named in the notice convening the meeting as the person who may receive particulars of the debt or claim: those particulars; or if required - a formal proof of debt or claim.
 .6.23(2) A creditor must not vote in respect of: an unliquidated debt; or a contingent debt; or an unliquidated or a contingent claim; or a debt the value of which is not established; unless a just estimate of its value has been made.
 .6.23(3) A creditor must not vote in respect of: a debt or a claim on or secured by: a bill of exchange; or a promissory note; or any other negotiable instrument or security; held by the creditor unless he or she is willing: to treat the liability to him or her on the instrument or security of a prescribed persons as a security in his or her hands; or to estimate its value; and for the purposes of voting (but not for the purposes of dividend), to deduct it from his or her debt or claim .6.26(1) The chairperson of a meeting has power to admit or reject a proof of debt or claim for the purposes of voting.
 .6.26(2) If the chairperson is in doubt whether a proof of debt or claim should be admitted or rejected, he or she must mark that proof as objected to and allow the creditor to vote, subject to the vote being declared invalid if the objection is sustained .6.26(3) A decision by the chairperson to admit or reject a proof of debt or claim for the purposes of voting may be appealed against to the Court within 14 days after the decision.

Section 447A gives the Court power to make such order as it thinks appropriate about how Pt.5.3A is to operate in relation to a particular company. Section
D authorises administrators to apply to the Court for directions. Section
C provides as follows: 
C A payment made, transaction entered into, or any other act or thing done, in good faith, by, or with the consent of, the administrator of a company under administration: is valid and effectual for the purposes of this Law; and is not liable to be set aside in a winding up of the company.

Section 482 gives the Court power to stay or terminate a winding up. Section provides for appeals from decisions of administrators, as follows: A person aggrieved by any act, omission or decision of: a person administering a compromise, arrangement or scheme referred to in Part 5.1; a receiver, or a receiver and manager, of property of a corporation; an administrator of a company; an administrator of a deed of company arrangement executed by a company; or a liquidator or provisional liquidator of a company; may appeal to the Court in respect of the act, omission or decision and the Court may confirm, reverse or modify the act or decision, or remedy the omission, as the case may be, and make such orders and give such directions as it thinks fit.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
VWA claimed that during 1994 to 1996, it provided to City West real estate consultancy services in relation to projects at 99 Jones Street, Ultimo and George Street, Sydney, in respect of which it is owed over $1.4 million.
The directors of VWA since July 1996 have been Brian Vincent and his son
Darren Vincent; and the directors of City West at material times have been
Darren Vincent and an accountant Gary Lissa, although it appears that the business affairs of City West have been conducted largely by Brian Vincent.

On 20th December 1996, Cowdrey, A.J. gave judgment in proceedings in which
City West sought specific performance against Westpac Property Investment Pty.
Limited (WPI) of a contract to purchase 252 George Street. Cowdrey, A.J.
dismissed City West's claim for specific performance, and ordered that the deposit of $800,000.00 be paid to WPI, and ordered City West to pay WPI's costs. An appeal has been brought from that decision, and not yet heard.

On 1st May 1997, Master Macready gave judgment in proceedings brought by City
West to set aside a statutory demand made by WPI seeking payment of $180,000.00. Master Macready set aside this statutory demand, referring in his judgment to evidence of solvency given by a director of City West. That evidence was in fact an affidavit dated 23rd April 1997 by Gary Lissa asserting liabilities of City West totalling $152,998.32 in addition to any liabilities to WPI. That affidavit referred to a debt of about $1.6 million owing by City West to a company called Investpac, which it said was set off against a liability of Investpac to City West in excess of $15 million.

On 1st September 1997, Master McLaughlin gave judgment in proceedings brought by City West to set aside a statutory demand made by Capital Concepts Pty.
Limited, seeking payment of $250,000.00 in relation to the 99 Jones Street,
Ultimo project. Master McLaughlin dismissed the proceedings. City West appealed, and the appeal was dismissed by Bryson, J. on 1st December 1997. In connection with these proceedings, a further affidavit was sworn by Gary
Lissa, annexing a balance sheet as at 10th September 1997. Apart from non- current liabilities of $150,000.00, the only liability shown in this balance sheet was $422,577.00. A note to the balance sheet indicated that this represented consulting fees due to VWA. In the affidavit, Mr. Lissa stated: 
The directors of VWA have undertaken that payment of that amount will not be called upon by VWA until settlement of the George Street, Sydney project has been finalised.

Between his appointment of 19th December 1997 and 5th February 1998, Mr.
Vouris received various documents concerning City West, including a trial balance of City West as at 30th June 1997: this showed VWA as a creditor in the sum of around $1.5 million, although the corresponding 30th June 1996 figure did not show VWA as a creditor. On 5th February 1998, Mr. Vouris received the affidavits of Mr. Lissa, to which I have referred, and he wrote the following letter to Mr. Lissa: 
I refer to the abovenamed administration.

I have just received a copy of your affidavit dated 12th September 1997. A number of matters contained therein require clarification: . You state that the amount due to Vincent White & Associates Pty. Limited ("VWA") was $422,577 as at 10th September 1997. The trial balance as at 30th June 1997 provided by you indicates that VWA is a creditor of the company to the extent of $1,474,527. VWA have (sic) lodged with me a proof of debt claiming to be creditors in the amount of $1,410,650 as at the date of my appointment.
 . Given the variations noted above you will appreciate that there is considerable confusion as to the amount due to VWA. Accordingly I request that you provide a detailed reconciliation of all the company's transactions with VWA together with copies of any documentation pursuant to which the debt was incurred.

Your affidavit also refers to "investors Subordinated Loans" in the amount of $150,000. Please provide documentation regarding such subordination.

Your urgent attention to this matter would be appreciated as the information provided will determine the ability of VWA to vote at the creditors meeting to be held on Wednesday 11th February 1998.

Mr. Lissa replied in a letter dated 10th February 1998, as follows: 
I refer to your letter of 5 February 1998 and respond as follows: . The variation of balances to which you refer came about for two reasons 
The claim that Vincent White & Associates was owed $1,410,650 was an estimate made by Brian Vincent at the commencement of the administration prior to him having access to all of the Company's records.

The lower balance outstanding of $422,527 which was referred to in my affidavit of 10 September 1997 was based upon the assumption that the personal guarantees of Messrs Vincent and Kilby were assigned as part of the Investpac Pty Limited debt acquisition. This has subsequently proved not to be the case and the Vincent White & Associates Pty. Limited debt should reflect the total amount owing in accordance with the annexed reconciliation.
 . Please refer attached annexure.
 . That part of my affidavit which relates to "Investors' Subordinated Loans" shown on the Balance Sheet dated 10 September 1997 for an amount of $150,000 is supported by a note to those accounts (Note 6) which states that these funds would not be repaid until the completion of the George Street project. No other documentation exists.
 *

CITY WEST APARTMENTS PTY LIMITED 
LOAN - VINCENT WHITE & ASSOCIATES PTY LIMITED 
INVOICE DATE 27.9.94 $391,702 
LES PAID -$15,000 18/10/94 -$15,000 19/10/94 -$6,000 11/11/94 .9.94 $246,875 .2.95 $159,600 .6.95 $219,300 .9.95 $ 63,000 .9.95 $ 52,500 .10 95 $ 54,750 .11.95 $ 42,000 .12.95 $ 49,500 .1.96 $108,000 .1.96 $ 28,000 .9.96 $ 94,500 $1,474,527 
Balance owing Debt purchase 10.97 -$6,000 $1,468,527 
By 11th February 1998, Mr. Vouris had received the judgments to which I have referred. The minutes of the meeting of 11th February are annexed to this judgment.

No evidence has been given in these proceedings by Mr. Lissa, although he is aware of the proceedings. Mr. Brian Vincent gave evidence, in which he sought to explain Mr. Lissa's letter of 10th February. The explanation was that most of the amount due to VWA was to be passed on by VWA to Mr. Brian Vincent and
Mr. Gerald Kilby, who in turn had guaranteed the debt of a subsidiary of
Investpac, which debt had been purchased by City West. Because of a mistaken belief that City West had purchased the guarantees of Brian Vincent and Gerald
Kilby, Mr. Lissa had set those guarantees off against the amount due to VWA, and thus had not recorded the full amount due to VWA.

Mr. Vouris gave evidence. He agreed that on 11th February 1998 he was in doubt whether a larger amount than $422,577.00 might be owing to VWA. However, he also said that he was on 11th February 1998 and at the present of the opinion that $422,577.00 was a just estimate of the value of VWA's debt for the purpose of voting, and that he was not in doubt about that.

SUBMISSIONS 
Mr. Simpkins submitted that because Mr. Vouris was in doubt as to the amount of the debt, Regulation 5.6.26(2) meant that he should have marked VWA's claim as objected to, and allowed VWA to vote for the amount claimed: Re Oriel
Homes Pty. Limited [(1997) 15 ACLC 564.] Acting bona fide and reasonably, Mr. Vouris should have been in doubt within the
Regulation: he could not have made a reasonable judgment on the material before him. There was not a proper basis for the amount selected as being a just estimate within Regulation 5.6.23(2). Alternatively, the Court should investigate the true position concerning the debt, on the basis of material presented to the Court, as was done in analogous bankruptcy situations: Re
McLean <case>; [(1992) 36 FCR 502]; Re Dingle [(1993) 47 FCR 448.] 
Mr. Eassie for the defendant provided a written outline of submissions which I will leave with the papers.

DECISION 
It is not completely clear from the summons whether these proceedings are an appeal from the decision of the chairperson under Regulation 5.6.26(3) or s.1321 of the Corporations Law; or proceedings for a declaration or order under s.447A or otherwise, or directions under s.447D; or both.

The two cases referred to me in which Regulations 5.6.23 and 5.6.26 have been considered were both proceedings for declarations, rather than appeals from the chairperson's decision.

The first of those cases, Re Zambina Pty. Limited [(1995) 13 ACLC ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281995%29%2013%20ACLC%201020 "View LawCiteRecord" ), was an application by the administrator for an order under s.447A or directions under s.447D, in circumstances where the administrator was in doubt as to how to treat the contingent debt of certain guarantors. Cohen, J. gave directions that the administrator would be justified in valuing the contingent debt of the guarantors at a nominal amount.

In the other case, Re Oriel Homes Pty. Limited [(1997) 15 ACLC 564], an administrator sought a declaration that the respondent was not a creditor and not entitled to vote. A meeting had already been held in which the creditor had not been permitted to vote: neither party challenged the result of that meeting, but rather both parties sought guidance for future meetings. Thomas,
J. held that the proper course in the circumstances would be to recognise the respondent as a contingent creditor, and estimate the value of the debt at the nominal value of $1.

In neither of those cases was there any challenge to any resolution passed as a result of the chairperson's decision; and those cases do not show that such a resolution can be challenged otherwise than through an appeal against the chairperson's decision. In fact, it seems to me that the normal procedure to be followed by a party who wishes to challenge a resolution on the ground that the chairperson's decision as to voting rights of creditors was incorrect, would be to appeal from the chairperson's decision. I do not say, however, that there could not be any case in which it was appropriate to challenge a resolution by proving, by evidence brought to the Court, that a creditor was not permitted to vote in respect of a debt which was in truth owing.

However, as I have said, in my opinion the normal procedure would be by way of appeal, and certainly the present proceedings can be regarded as an appeal from the chairperson's decision. When an appeal is brought from an administrator's decision, in my opinion the approach taken by Street, C.J. in
Eq. in Re Mineral Securities Australia [(1973) 2 NSWLR 207], especially at 231, is applicable. Accordingly, the ultimate question is whether the administrator's action "has such importance, and can be seen to have such defects, as to justify the court exercising its supervisory power".
An appeal under s.1321 (and indeed under Regulation 5.6.26(3)) focuses on the action of the administrator: here, relevantly, determining that he would allow
VWA to vote in respect of the amount of $422,577.00. Since the Court is asked to reverse or modify that act or decision, the Court should certainly have regard to the material available to the administrator. However, I do not say that the Court must be absolutely restricted to that material: there may be cases where the importance and defects of the administrator's action should be permitted to be demonstrated by material not available to the administrator.

In this case, undoubtedly the administrator's act had considerable importance: if he had allowed VWA to vote in respect of a debt of $1.4 million, the resolution for the Deed of Company Arrangement would have been passed, and the winding up avoided.

Mr. Simpkins submitted that his act had the defect that, since the administrator had a doubt as to the amount due, Regulation 5.6.26(2) required him to allow VWA to vote in the amount claimed. That contention may appear to have some support from the judgment of Thomas, J. in Re Oriel Homes, at p.565: 
I interpret the effect of these rules as follows. Under Reg.5.6.26(1) the power to admit includes the power to admit in part. If the position is clear, the chairperson should make a just estimate of the value of the debt. If, however, he or she is in genuine doubt, the claim must be allowed at the amount that the creditor has claimed and should thereupon be marked as "objected to". The creditor should then be allowed to vote at that value. Any error, and any effect that the error may have on the result, may be corrected in due course by an appeal to the Court under Reg.5.6.26(3).

However, I do not interpret Thomas, J. as saying that wherever there is genuine doubt as to the correct amount of the debt, the chairperson must allow the creditor to vote in the amount claimed.

Such a view would, in my opinion, be contrary to the intention of Pt.5.3A and the Regulations, and in particular to Regulation 5.6.23(2). As submitted by
Mr. Eassie, the object of Pt.5.3A is to provide a mechanism whereby an insolvent company might be permitted to continue in existence, or if that is not possible, whereby a better result may be obtained for creditors in a subsequent liquidation; and the provisions contained in Pt.5.3A contemplate the need for speedy resolutions of the various options which are given. This object would be promoted by provisions which ensured, so far as possible, that reasonable results be achieved at creditors' meetings, so that the possibility of later challenge and litigation is minimised. Those results would be achieved best, in cases where the values of debts are not established, by the creditors being permitted to vote on the basis of the best estimates of the values which the chairperson can make, using the information which is available.

In my opinion, this is precisely what the Regulations contemplate. Regulation .6.23(2) says that a creditors cannot vote in respect of a debt, the value of which is not established, unless a just estimate of its value has been made. I agree with the view expressed by Thomas, J. in Re Oriel Homes that the administrator has the ultimate responsibility to discharge in deciding what is a just estimate. I also agree with his view that Regulation 5.6.26(1) gives the chairperson power to admit a proof of debt or claim in part.

Now wherever the amount of a debt is not established, there will ipso facto be some doubt about its amount; and if Regulation 5.6.26(2) meant that wherever the chairperson was in doubt about the amount of a debt, he or she must allow the creditor to vote for the full amount claimed, this would render nugatory the requirement of a just estimate, as well as promoting unreasonable outcomes, delay, and litigation. In fact, the doubt referred to in Regulation .6.26(2) is not doubt as to the existence or amount of the debt, but doubt as to "whether a proof of debt or claim should be admitted or rejected". And in my opinion, in cases where the value of a debt is not established and a just estimate has been made, the doubt in question must be a doubt as to whether the creditor should be allowed to vote on the basis of the just estimate. If the chairperson has such a doubt, then the creditor should be allowed to vote on the basis of the just estimate, and the proof marked as objected to.
However, if no just estimate of the debt can be made at all, then in my opinion Regulation 5.6.23(2) requires that the creditor not be permitted to vote at all, and Regulation 5.6.26(2) has no application.

If and in so far as Thomas, J. suggests in Re Oriel Homes that Regulation .6.26(2) overrides Regulation 5.6.23(2), to the extent of requiring the chairperson to permit voting by a creditor the value of whose debt has not been established, even though a just estimate of its value cannot be made, I must respectfully disagree. As I have shown, the two provisions can stand together; and as interpreted in the way I suggest, they promote rather than prejudice the objectives of Pt.5.3A.

In this case, clearly the amount of VWA's debt was not established, and Mr.
Vouris made what purported to be a just estimate of it at $422,577.00. It follows from my discussion that the only possible complaints by VWA are that
Mr. Vouris, acting reasonably, should have made a more favourable just estimate; and perhaps that, on the basis of materials before the Court, it can now be seen that Mr. Vouris' just estimate should be set aside. In my opinion, neither complaint is made out.

Mr. Vouris had received an affidavit by one director of VWA to the effect that the debt was $422,577.00 (there being no material subsequent transactions), and an unsworn assertion by that director that this was a mistake, this assertion being supported by an incomprehensible explanation. The director's affidavit also asserted that, even as regards the $422,577.00, the directors of VWA had undertaken that payment would not be called upon by VWA until settlement of the George Street project was finalised. Mr. Vouris also had a
Supreme Court judgment refusing City West specific performance of its contract to acquire the George Street property, and confirming forfeiture of the deposit to the vendor. In those circumstances, in my opinion the just estimate made by Mr. Vouris was, if anything, highly generous to VWA.

Now the Court has some additional material, which makes the attempted explanation of the director's affidavit comprehensible, but still leaves it as highly unsatisfactory. The only evidence which has been tendered to show that the guarantees of Mr. Vincent and Mr. Kilby did not go along with the assignment of the debt are assertions by Mr. Vincent himself, and a letter dated 3rd November 1995 from Adelaide lawyers which is at best equivocal. The attempted explanation still does not begin to explain why an accountant would set off a debt owing to City West by two individuals against a debt owing by
City West to a company, on the plainly inadequate ground that the company would pass on whatever it received to those individuals. Nor does the explanation go anywhere towards overcoming the undertaking referred to in Mr.
Lissa's affidavit, in circumstances where no reason is given to think that the
George Street project will ever be finalised. Mr. Lissa himself has refrained from giving evidence in these proceedings. In those circumstances, on the material before me, I would still regard Mr. Vouris' just estimate as generous to VWA.

Mr. Simpkins has submitted that the resolution can be challenged, without an appeal from the administrator's action or decision, by collateral proceedings for a declaration or injunction. He referred to bankruptcy cases, in which it had been held that, when a resolution for a Deed of Arrangement or composition with creditors is challenged on the basis that a creditor was not permitted to vote, the role of the Court was to decide, as a matter of fact, the existence and amount of the creditor's debt: see Re McLean and Re Dingle.

In my opinion, these cases have no application. There was nothing in the applicable bankruptcy statute or regulations equivalent to Regulation .6.23(2) concerning just estimates, or equivalent to Regulation 5.6.26(3) or s.1321 of the Law in relation to appeal, or s.451C concerning validity of the administrator's actions. Furthermore, the resolutions and proceedings were not brought in the context of provisions like those of Pt.5.3A, which plainly contemplate the need for speedy and decisive resolution of options.

However, Mr. Simpkins sought an opportunity to put forward further material, to suggest that the Court should permit VWA to seek to have the actual amount of its debt litigated and determined in these proceedings, and I afforded VWA a limited opportunity to put forward such material, which I will consider.
However, unless on that material I consider that I should allow such a wider enquiry to be pursued in these proceedings, I propose to dismiss the summons.
The ordinary result will be that the plaintiff will be ordered to pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
