

Regina versus Francks Matter No 60110/97 [1998] NSWSC 212 (21 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 June 1998 
REGINA versus PETER CLARENCE FRANCKS /97 May 1998 
Newman J, Studdert J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant, Peter Clarence Francks, pleaded guilty before his Honour Judge Rummery of Queen's Counsel in relation to a number of sexual offences committed upon a stepdaughter, a daughter, a granddaughter and a step-granddaughter. In relation to the stepdaughter, the pleas of guilty were received on an indictment that charged the applicant with a count of carnal knowledge, a count of rape and a count of assault with act of indecency. The offence charged against the natural daughter was carnal knowledge. The offence charged in relation to the granddaughter was one of aggravated indecent assault, as was the offence charged in relation to the step-granddaughter. 
The learned judge imposed a total sentence of seven and a half years in respect of the count charging rape. His Honour imposed a minimum term of four years nine months and an additional term of two years nine months. On the remaining charges, his Honour imposed lesser terms to be served concurrently with the sentence for the rape. His Honour made it plain in his sentencing remarks that he structured the sentences having regard to the principle of totality and that this principle was reflected in the sentence imposed on the gravest of the charges; namely, that of rape.

The applicant now seeks leave to appeal against the various sentences imposed.

As his Honour observed, on the Crown case the context in which the admitted offences against the step-daughter fell for consideration were that the applicant sexually abused this victim over many years. The carnal knowledge charge was based on an incident that occurred between December 1970 and
February 1971. The applicant drove the complainant along a bush track at
Barnsley to a location where, after the complainant's pants were removed, he fondled her vagina and then in the back of the vehicle submitted her to a number of acts of indignity, including two acts of cunnilingus, acts of digital and penile penetration of her anus and penile-vaginal intercourse.
This child was only ten or eleven years of age at the time.

The events that prompted the rape charge took place in 1980, by which time the victim was a young woman. The applicant drove her to a grassed area outside
Merriwa where he caused her to masturbate him, he digitally penetrated her vagina, he performed acts of cunnilingus on her, he caused her to fellate him and eventually committed two acts of penile-vaginal sexual intercourse.

The third charge involving this complainant arose out of events that took place shortly after the rape. On this occasion he forced his step-daughter to fellate him.

The next charge involved an offence which the applicant committed upon his daughter in 1969. When she was thirteen years of age, and on the Crown case after a lengthy period during which the applicant committed a variety of acts of indecency upon her, the applicant took the child from her bed and to his bed where he ultimately digitally penetrated her vagina and then had penile- vaginal intercourse.

The applicant's step-granddaughter was twelve years of age on an occasion in when, whilst she was travelling with the applicant in a motor vehicle, he touched and stroked her right breast on top of her shirt for some two minutes.

The remaining charge concerned the applicant's granddaughter. In September , when she was only six years of age, the applicant removed her pants, knelt in front of her and rubbed his exposed penis on the outside of her vagina.

It is to be observed from that sordid narrative that the earliest of the offences was committed over twenty-seven years ago, but the most recent of them was in 1995. All the offences involved the sexual abuse of young relatives of the applicant and a most grave betrayal of the applicant's responsibility in the family structure. The facts as I have outlined them suffice to emphasise the gravity of the applicant's criminal behaviour. This is reflected by the penalties in force at the various times of the commission of the offences attracting sentence. The charge of rape attracted penal servitude for life; each charge of carnal knowledge, ten years penal servitude; and the other offences, terms of imprisonment ranging down from ten years to four years.

The applicant was born on 21 July 1938 so that he was fifty-eight years of age at the time of sentence and he is presently just short of sixty years of age.
The subjective circumstances, particularly the applicant's ill health, made the task of the learned sentencing judge a very difficult one, as the review I am about to undertake indicates.

The applicant had a hard childhood which was closely traced in a report of a psychologist, Ms Aldridge. That report was considered by his Honour and, of course, is in the material before this Court.

There was a deal of evidence introduced in the sentencing proceeding by way of references. It is to the applicant's credit that he was held in good regard by the authors of the many favourable references that were placed before the
Court.

It is also to the applicant's credit that he had a stable employment record until he took a redundancy package that brought his employment with the
Maritime Services Board to an end in February 1994. His decision to retire then was prompted by concerns for his health.

It is the applicant's health problems which gave rise to particular difficulty in the sentencing task. The judge had placed before him reports from Dr Avery, who was the applicant's general practitioner, and also from Dr Gibson, a respiratory physician. By the time the applicant came before the District
Court to be sentenced, he had severe restrictive airways disease and asthma.
This created difficulties of walking even short distances and the asthma was associated not only with breathlessness, but with headaches, loss of appetite, sweating and double vision. Dr Avery reported, concerning the effects of imprisonment: "It is obvious that incarceration would be severely detrimental to the general condition of Mr Francks. He has several physical problems. In particular the severe asthma and airways disease would deteriorate and cause continuous and long-term problems. The severity of the chest disorder precludes adequate and appropriate management in gaol." 
Dr Gibson provided a report placed before the judge bearing date 29 January in which the doctor wrote: "It is my opinion that the severity of Mr Francks' airways disease would pose a particular problem for him in the gaol environment. The main concerns I would have relate to the chronic breathlessness he experiences as a result of his airways disease and the likelihood that this will progress over time to the point of severe incapacity. Ultimately he will die from his airways disease. It is not possible to put a precise figure on this but the prognosis for life beyond five years is not good." 
In his comprehensive remarks on sentence, his Honour referred to the reports of both Dr Avery and Dr Gibson in some detail, as indeed he did to the report of the psychologist, Ms Aldridge.

In his sentencing remarks, the learned judge gave the applicant credit for his guilty pleas and he treated them also as affording some evidence of his contrition. His Honour's remarks make it plain that he had particular regard to the applicant's state of health and, indeed, he expressly stated that considerations of humanity compelled him to ameliorate, so far as he could, the risk of the applicant's life ending whilst he was in custody. His Honour went on to find special circumstances in the applicant's age and his very poor state of health, together with his above average prospects of rehabilitation.
Those factors accounted for the structure of the overall sentence.

I detect no error of principle in the remarks on sentence. In written submissions and again in oral submissions before this Court, Ms Burgess, on behalf of the applicant, who has put all that could possibly be put before the
Court on behalf of her client, has submitted that the length of the sentence, and in particular of the minimum term, demonstrates that the learned judge gave insufficient weight to the applicant's health because the minimum term was dangerously close to the life expectancy as expressed by Dr Gibson.

In addition this Court was asked to receive evidence in the form of an affidavit from a fellow inmate, affidavits from the solicitor with the conduct of the appeal, to which are annexed further reports from Dr Gibson, affidavit evidence from the applicant and his wife and a further statement from the applicant.

The circumstances in which this Court can receive evidence of the type now proffered are restricted. Ms Burgess invites receipt of the evidence so as to put in a new light, and to explain the full extent and implications of, the applicant's condition of health which existed at the time of sentence.

The Court was referred to R versus Smith [(1987) 44 SASR 587], R v
McKenna (unreported, CCA 16 October 1992) and R versus White (unreported, CCA 7
April 1997).

We have also been referred to decisions of this Court in R versus Vento (unreported, 6 July 1993) and R versus Dowe (unreported, 1 September 1995). I observe that in Vento it was not known at the time of sentence that the applicant was suffering from cancer. The consequences of the discovery and its significance were considered to be such as to warrant the intervention of this
Court. Likewise, in Dowe, where the development of cardio-respiratory failure after sentence was considered to warrant review. I observe that in
Dowe, the Crown consented to the receipt of the evidence before the Court of
Criminal Appeal and submitted that the appeal ought to be allowed.

The Crown has adopted no such attitude on the present appeal but has opposed the introduction of the evidence now tendered.

It is, of course, incumbent on this Court to consider the evidence for the purpose of determining whether it should be regarded as properly receivable under principles expressed in the authorities to which I have referred.

Central to the additional material are the further reports of Dr Gibson. Those further reports, dated 5 December 1997 and 18 May 1998, deal with the deterioration of the applicant's respiratory function. This deterioration has not been helped, apparently, by the applicant's increased smoking habit whilst he has been in custody. The affidavit which we are asked to receive from Mr
White who, coincidentally, is the "White" in the unreported judgment of this
Court to which I referred, gives a first-hand account, by way observation, of the applicant's difficulties in the prison environment.

It is plain that the applicant has most severe health problems and that such problems unquestionably render his life in prison more difficult than it otherwise might have been.

However, I am satisfied that his Honour was alert to such considerations and there is nothing in the additional material which this Court is now asked to consider which, on the application of relevant principles, in my opinion, renders it strictly admissible. Nor, in my view, would its receipt have justified the imposition of a lesser sentence than that imposed by the
District Court judge.

In my opinion, no cause has been shown for disturbing the sentence imposed by the learned sentencing judge. There was no error of approach and the sentence was altogether appropriate.

In my opinion, leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.

NEWMAN J: I agree. 
SIMPSON J: I also agree. 
NEWMAN J: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Studdert J. * * * 
