

Regina versus Sgd [1996] NSWSC 512 (24 October 1996) 
REGINA -v- SGD /96 
Thursday, 24 October, 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, NEWMAN J, IRELAND J 
JUDGMENT 
IRELAND J: This is an appeal against conviction on a charge brought under [S 66C(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s66c.html) of the [Crimes Act, 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) of sexual intercourse with a person under the age of 16 years, that person being under the authority of the person charged.

The appellant was tried by Judge Twigg, QC and a jury of twelve on 3 April, and occupied a single day. A single incident of sexual intercourse with the complainant, who is the appellant's daughter, was alleged to have occurred between 2 August, 1991 and 31 December, 1991, some four and a half years prior to trial.

The appeal is mounted upon the single ground that the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The trial exhibited some unusual features in that firstly, as I have mentioned, it occupied but a single day. The evidence of the complainant, who was the appellant's daughter, who was at the time of the alleged offence aged fourteen years, was without corroboration. At the close of the prosecution case Judge Twigg, of his own volition, gave to the jury a Prasad direction - (The Queen -v- Prasad [23 SASR 161)] - following which the jury retired and upon their return requested that the case continue. The jury delivered its verdict after a retirement of some twenty minutes. At the conclusion of proceedings on 4 April, 1996, Judge Twigg gave a certificate under the [Criminal Appeal Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) certifying the case to be one fit for an appeal to this court against conviction upon the ground that the verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory. The appellant was thereafter granted bail pending the hearing of this appeal.

The complainant, who was born on 2 August, 1977, is the child of the appellant. She is one of six children of the appellant and his wife. On 2
August, 1991 she had had fourteenth birthday. She was at that time attending high school and residing with her parents and four of her five siblings at
Wagga Wagga.

The complainant gave evidence that on an occasion in the latter half of 1991, the precise details of which the complainant was unable to recall, the appellant, who was at home on workers' compensation as a result of an injury sustained some years before, at a time when there were apparently no others in the house, entered his daughter's bedroom. He laid the complainant on the floor, removed her pants and underwear and had penile/vaginal sexual intercourse with her.

The complainant gave evidence that about a week later she was called by her father into the main bedroom where she said to him that she did not want to do it any more, notwithstanding the offer of extra pocket money and privileges.

The complainant made no complaint to her sister, to whom I shall refer as "K", with whom she shared a room and had a close relationship, or to her mother or any other person. No further incidents occurred.

The complainant left home when she was sixteen years old, following some acrimony with her parents concerning her "freedom".

On 12 July, 1995 the appellant came to the complainant's house and invited her to a bar-b-que that evening. Whilst there, the appellant told the complainant that he and her mother had split up and that the youngest child of the marriage. a boy to whom I shall refer as "S" would leave Wagga with his father and live "down the coast". S was then aged nine years.

Shortly after seeing the appellant on 12 July, 1995 the complainant went to her mother's house and told her mother that the appellant had sexually assaulted her some four years previously and said also "If I charge him they'll have to give custody of S to you, you'll get him back".

The complainant's younger sister K gave evidence that the complainant had come to her at their eldest sister's home on 12 July, 1995 and said "Look, will you two come to the police with me and lay charges against dad, say that he molested us, so mum can get S back from dad". K replied "Look he never touched me. I'm not going to lie so mum can get him back. It's the wrong thing to do.
I just don't want my name brought into it".

On 20 July, 1995 the complainant made a statement to police. When first approached by police in relation to the matter the appellant said "Don't tell me, it's about (naming the complainant), I knew you'd be up here. It's all lies and if you give me until this afternoon I can bring my wife and other two daughters and they will tell you. She's only doing this to stop me leaving town with my nine year old son".

The first complaint made by the complainant was to her boyfriend on 12 July, , the day on which she had been told by the appellant of the proposal to split up with his wife and of his intention to take S down to the coast. This was also the day on which the complainant had approached her sisters and suggested that they too join her in complaining to the police.

In her evidence the complainant was unable to describe the clothing she and the appellant were wearing at the time of the alleged offence, nor was she able to indicate with any degree of certainty when the offence had taken place. She first of all said that it had occurred late in the year, after her birthday in August, possibly during the school holidays, and somewhere between
October and December of 1991. When details of the motor vehicle accident in which the appellant had been seriously injured on 17 October, 1991 were put to the complainant, she stated that the offence may have occurred in September,
The complainant could not recount any detail of how the sexual assault upon her took place, apart from the fact that the appellant's feet were against the door of the bedroom. She could not say whether ejaculation had occurred or who else may have been in the house, apart from her mother who was absent at the time.

The appellant gave evidence in which he denied the offence occurred. No part of his evidence in chief or under cross-examination was inculpatory.

The appellant gave evidence that after the complainant moved out off home on her sixteenth birthday, ie 2 August, 1993, she returned to visit on the following Christmas Day and again in January and thereafter visited the family home on a regular basis, about once or twice each week. After the birth of her child in September, 1994 these visits became more frequent.

The custody order in relation to the child S was made by consent, however, this was apparently not specifically pointed out to the complainant by either the appellant or his wife.

The appellant's wife gave evidence in the defence case and recounted the conversation she had on 12 July, 1995 when the complainant said to her that the appellant had sexually assaulted her and if she charged him "... with something, they'll have to give you S back". The appellant's wife gave evidence that she had responded to this suggestion by saying "... it was not the right thing to do".

The appellant's wife gave further evidence that the day after the complainant made her statement to police she, the appellant's wife , had spoken to the complainant by telephone and asked her why she was making these allegations against her father and received the reply "You'll get custody of S". The appellant's wife said to the complainant that she was worried about the appellant taking S down the coast and that she wouldn't see S again. The complainant had replied "Now that he's been charged, he can't leave Wagga".

The complainant denied having ever said to her mother or to her sister K words to the effect that if she charged her father with sexual assault, her mother would obtain custody of S.

It is significant that the appellant's response to enquiries by the police officers was consistent with the account given by his wife and his daughter K of what the complainant had said to them and which was denied by the complainant. It is also of importance that this statement was made by him before the police officers had indicated the purpose of their visit. Neither the appellant nor the two witnesses called in the defence case were discredited.

Counsel for the Crown has helpfully reviewed in written submissions some of the authorities establishing the principles to be applied in considering the question of whether a verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory. This court must take into account the views expressed by the trial judge, however, these views cannot be conclusive. See Regina -v- Scott (unreported - CCA - 15.2.93); Regina -v- Mansfield <case>; [(1916) 33 WN 56]; Regina -v- W (unreported - CCA - 9.3.90); Regina -v- Day (unreported - CCA - 9.9.92).

A verdict will usually be considered to be unsafe and unsatisfactory if this court concludes that the jury, acting reasonably, should have (in the sense of ought to have) entertained a sufficient doubt as to the guilt of the accused so as to have entitled the accused to an acquittal. See Morris -v- The
Queen <case>; [(1987) 163 CLR 454] at 461. This court is required to undertake an independent examination of the relevant evidence and make its own assessment, both as to sufficiency and quality of the evidence, not for the purpose of substituting its own view of the accused's guilt for that of the jury, but in order only to base its judgment as to whether the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to that guilt. See Chidiac -v- The Queen <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 432] at 443-444, 452.

Mindful of the disadvantage of not having seen the witnesses themselves and the constraints which follow from assessing merely the written word, the view which I have formed in making an independent assessment of the evidence is that notwithstanding there is evidence upon which a jury might convict, it would be dangerous in all the circumstances to allow the verdict of guilty to stand.

I am persuaded to this view not merely because the complainant's evidence is uncorroborated, but in particular for the reason that the evidence called in the defence case and especially the anticipatory evidence given by the accused, together with the consistency of the support given by the other witnesses called which contradicts in a material respect the evidence of the complainant, when considered as a whole did not leave it open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. See M -v-
The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487.] 
In my view, this is not a case in which the evidence, falling as it does within such a small compass in which the jury's advantage in seeing an hearing the evidence is capable of resolving any doubts which this court may experience in concluding that a miscarriage of justice had occurred.

It follows that in my opinion and to use the words employed in the majority judgment in M -v- The Queen at p 404, "... even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted", this court is accordingly bound to act and to set aside the verdict.

I would propose the following orders:-
That the appeal be allowed.
That the conviction and sentence be quashed.
That a judgment of acquittal be entered.

HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Ireland J for the reasons which he has given.

NEWMAN J: I also agree.

HUNT CJ at CL: The orders of the court are as proposed by Ireland J. The appellant is discharged.
 * * * 
