

Smith versus Sadler Matter No 4564/97 [1997] NSWSC 525 (29 October 1997) 
Smith versus Sadler /97 October 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 - SMITH versus SADLER 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff is a member of a corporation formed under the Co-operation Act, 1923, The Independent Liquor Group Co-operative Limited. The defendant appears to be sued as the Co-operative's representative because he holds the liquor licence for the premises on which the Co-operative's Annual General Meeting is to be held at 9.45 today. Why the suit was framed in this way is unclear but no point turns on it. 
At 8.15 am this morning, the summons was filed, which was made returnable at .30 am seeking an order preventing the defendant from excluding the plaintiff from attending the Co-operative's Annual General Meeting.

On the return of the summons, Mr G Cohen appeared for the plaintiff and Mr S
Bell for the defendant.

There was a disputed question of fact as to whether there was an apprehended violence order current against the plaintiff preventing him from attending the meeting at the venue specified in the notice convening the meeting.

This question exercised my mind for some time because I cannot see how this court can exercise power under s562F of the [Crimes Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) as amended, to vary an apprehended violence order. This court can quash such an order or could quash it in part (Ex Parte Roxburgh (1919) 19SR 375), but it would only do so if there was some vice in the making of the original order, not because of subsequent events.

After some telephone calls made by counsel, it was agreed that there was not, in fact, any interim apprehended violence order made though there are proceedings for such an order pending before a Local Court.

The situation was, however, that the defendant would not permit the plaintiff to enter upon his premises because he indicated that he was apprehensive about the plaintiff's conduct and owed a duty under the [Liquor Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) to make sure that there was no altercation on licensed premises.

It is clear that at the time when the notice convening the meeting was issued the problem about the plaintiff going onto the premises where the meeting was to be held was a very real one. It seemed to me that because this was known to the Board of the Co-operative, the convening of the meeting may be invalid.

Although in some circumstances the Board of a company or co-operative may be able to convene a meeting without any constraint (see e.g. Campbell versus Loew's
Inc 134A (2d) 852, 856 (Del Ch 1957) in general, directors have a fiduciary duty to convene meetings, particularly Annual General Meetings at a time and a place where all members of the company present in the State will be able to attend.

In Albert E. Touchet Inc versus Touchet [163 NE 184 (Mass.] 1928) Rugg CJ emphasised at page 188 that the right to participate in the Annual General Meeting and the right to vote at elections held at that meeting is a right that is inherent in the ownership of the stock. Thus it is not competent for the Board of Directors to frustrate that right by either not holding a meeting or holding it at a time or place where it is almost impossible for some shareholders to attend. See also Camden & Atlantic Railroad versus Elkins NJ Eq (10 Stew) 273, 276.

In Coombs versus Dynasty Pty Ltd <case>; [(1994) 14 ACSR 60], 93, von Doussa, J said, "An annual general meeting is not a mere formality, particularly for members who have no opportunity to ask questions about the affairs of the company. To hold a meeting at a time and place where members are unlikely to be able to attend is tantamount to not holding a meeting at all." I respectfully agree.

The rules of the Co-operative are in evidence. [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s28.html) provides that the 
Annual General Meeting is to be held "at such place as the Board may determine." The rule in this general form does not exclude the fiduciary duty noted above. So directors must turn their minds to an appropriate place at which all members of the Co-operative within the State could attend as of right. They cannot choose a place where they have reason to suspect that one or more members will be excluded by the person in control of the specified premises.

There were a series of situations about 30 years ago where companies deliberately scheduled Annual General Meetings in obscure upstate towns during the festive season. In some countries, this practice was curbed by the regulatory authorities. Where this has not occurred and for private companies and co-operatives, the practice is controlled by the court policing fiduciary duties not to use the power to convene a meeting as a cloak for fraud. In other words, it is ordinarily a fraud on the power to convene a meeting at a time and place when or where at least one member cannot lawfully attend.
Obviously this proposition does not apply where a member is in gaol or overseas or merely finds it inconvenient to attend at the specified time and place.

After these matters were ventilated, the parties assessed their position and I am able to make the orders ensuring that the plaintiff can attend the meeting, but requiring that it be adjourned for an hour so that those who are present in court will be able to travel to Wetherill Park and attend it.

It seemed to me that had this consensus not been reached, it would have been necessary to order that the meeting only transact formal business and then adjourn to premises where the plaintiff had a right to attend. In this way the court would cause minimum disruption to the 250 people who may well attend the meeting but still permit the plaintiff to attend. Such an order would get over the problem that the defendant had the right to control who came onto his licensed premises, as well as the principle that the court does not lightly prevent people from meeting (see Uniting Church of Australia Property Trust v Macquarie Radio Network Pty Ltd [(1997) 24 ACSR 721).] * * * 
