

Timbertown Community Enterprises Ltd versus Holiday Coast Credit Union Ltd
Matter No 4469/97 [1997] NSWSC 509 (24 October 1997) ` 
Timbertown Community Enterprises Ltd versus Holiday Coast Credit Union Ltd` ` 4469/97` `24 October 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `  `
 /97 TIMBERTOWN COMMUNITY ENTERPRISES LTD versus HOLIDAY COAST CREDIT UNION LTD 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for security for costs. The facts have not yet clearly emerged. However, the defendant, whose counsel, Mr Seib, claims is a bank, held monies of the plaintiff company and was owed monies by the plaintiff on other accounts as at the date it went into administration. The defendant also had assumed contingent liabilities on behalf of the plaintiff and the plaintiff had agreed to indemnify the defendant if called upon to pay under those liabilities. After the administrator was appointed, the defendant purported to combine accounts. The administrator complains bitterly that, by so doing, the defendant has removed his ability to pay staff and operate the plaintiff's business. His counsel, Mr Burchett, strongly resists the application for security. The administrator has sued for the money. He says that the act of the defendant may very well frustrate the whole administration. 
Mr Seib says that the defendant had a right to do what it did. He says further, that, no matter what happens, the administrator is not entitled to be paid the money or, if he is, then the best he can do is have $35,000 remain on deposit with the defendant subject to some charge.

Section 1335 of the Corporations Law allows the court, if it appears by credible testimony that there is reason to believe that the corporation will be unable to pay costs, to require security for costs to be given and stay proceedings until the security is given.

The Corporations Law makes it quite plain that, whilst a company is in administration, no-one is to improve its position by curial or other action, except with the administrator's consent or with the leave of the court including (s 440B) enforcing a charge.

What the defendant did was either (a) to improve its position with respect to equitable charges by actually seizing cash; or (b) of no effect at all. If what the defendant did was to breach <case> and to deprive the administrator of the capacity of carrying out his duties under Part 5.3A of the Corporations
Law in the public interest, then one would think that it would be the duty of the court not to lay any barriers in the path of the administrator.

The company concerned is one which runs a theme park near Wauchope. The evidence is it is currently losing money at the rate of at least $2,500 a day, though the present is the lowest of the low seasons. The company would appear, on the limited material I have got at the moment, not to be solvent, but that may be arguable. Accordingly, the defendant is taking a reasonable position that it needs to protect itself as to costs.

However, that is not the end of the matter. The general rule is that the court does not require security for costs to be given by a plaintiff who sues as a trustee in bankruptcy even when the estate is in insolvent circumstances. This is the rule in Cowell versus Taylor [(1885) 31 Ch D 34.] There is another aspect of that rule that the court does not deprive a person of the opportunity for litigating a matter solely because he or she is impecunious but that is not directly in point in the instant case. The basic rule in
Cowell versus Taylor has been considered to be applicable in Australia and its scope is noted in the leading book, Delany on Security for Costs, (LBC,
Sydney 1989) at pages 34 and 43.

The real question is whether that principle applies to an administrator. In my view, it does. The administrator is, almost by definition, dealing with a company whose solvency is questionable and the policy of the Corporations Law is that there shall be a complete freeze on people altering their positions whilst the administrator is assessing the situation. There would be a complete breakdown of this policy if as soon as the administrator tried to protect the assets of the company generally, he could be foiled by a stay because of failure to meet an order for security for costs. Indeed in most cases of administration, the administrator would be in no position to marshal sufficient resources to meet any security ordered.

Counsel have cited to me a case where security for costs was ordered against a company in administration, namely, Pasdale versus Concrete Constructions <case>; [(1995) 131 ALR 268.] It would not appear that Cowell versus Taylor was referred to in that case either by counsel or the judge. Doubtless, there may be situations where it would be appropriate to order security for costs against an administrator, but I think that would rarely be the situation where the administrator is trying to protect the company generally against a person who, if the administrator is correct, may have acted contrary to the policy of Division 6 of Part 5.3A of the Corporations Law.

The submissions threw up the problem that it may very well be that the present summons is inadequate. It may be that the administrator will need to choose whether to treat the transaction put through by the defendant as valid or invalid, or whether to put in other claims other than repayment of the money, but it does not seem to me that those matters are sufficient to make an order for security for costs that I would not otherwise make.

Accordingly, having taken into account the matters in s 1335 namely that there is reason to believe the company will be unable to pay its costs, the question as to whether security will be ordered is still one for my discretion. Applying the principle enunciated in Cowell v
Taylor and the other matters that I have indicated, I decline to make any order for security for costs. The motion is, accordingly, dismissed with costs. The final hearing of the matter is fixed before Windeyer J on 30
October 1997.
 * * * 
