

Regina versus N Katsoolis [1999] NSWSC 1352 (10 April 1999) 
REGINA versus NICHOLAS KATSOOLIS /95 
WEDNESDAY, 28 AUGUST 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Nicholas Katsoolis has applied for leave to appeal against the severity of a sentence imposed upon him by Mahoney DCJ. The applicant was arraigned on six counts. On one he was acquitted by direction of the judge, there being no evidence to support it. On two counts he was acquitted by the jury. 
He was convicted of indecently assaulting his niece when she was nine years of age, by touching her on the outside of her knickers over the area of the vagina.

He was convicted of indecent assault upon her while he was driving a vehicle.
She was aged between nine and thirteen years. The applicant asked her to give him a cuddle. As she moved across the bench seat to sit beside him, he put her head down between the steering wheel and his body and put his erect penis in her mouth. When she tried to lift her head it was pushed back down.

He was convicted of buggery. This occurred in the refrigeration area of the cafe owned by her grandmother and in which the applicant worked.

The three offences, which were not isolated incidents, took place between 1969 and 1973. The complainant did not report the matter to the police for over twenty years. It seems that they were reported in 1994.

The judge sentenced the applicant to a fixed term of imprisonment of six months for the first indecent assault; a fixed term of two years for the second indecent assault, and a minimum term of six years with an additional term of one year for the offence of buggery. The terms of imprisonment were concurrent.

The judge stated that the offence of buggery no longer existed because of the amendments to the Crimes Act. His Honour said: "It seems to me to be appropriate, to sentence the prisoner for the offences for which he had been convicted, in the context of the penalty which applies at this present time in respect of the same or equivalent offences.
Consequently I will regard the maximum penalty which the third conviction, namely on the charge of buggery, could warrant, would be a sentence of penal servitude for twenty years." 
At the conclusion of his Honour's lengthy remarks on sentence, the solicitor appearing for the Crown submitted that his Honour had fallen into error and that the only maximum penalty on which reliance could be placed was that prescribed for buggery at the time at which the offence was committed. The judge stated that he had considered this. He explained that he had not been able to find any authorities which were of assistance. At pages 31-32 of his remarks the judge said: "What I have sought to do was to accommodate the sentencing exercise to the current mores, and to the current state of law both as to penalties and sentencing so as best to reflect the situation. I did not for one moment think that one-third of twenty years was appropriate so therefore it ought to be seven years or six years, or whatever it was. And I want to make that perfectly clear in case this is taken on appeal, that I did not apply a one- third factor. What I did was to apply a judgmental factor, having regard to a twenty year maximum." 
The judge stated that the maximum penalty at the time of the offences "seemed ... to be an irrelevant consideration ... the sentence will stand.". The judge erred in the approach he took. He was bound to proceed on the basis of the crime with which the accused was convicted and the penalty fixed by the statute for that crime.

In Regina versus Shore [66 A Crim 37] at 42, Badgery-Parker J (with whom Mahoney JA and Hunt
CJ at CL agreed) adopted the approach of Judge Court, the sentencing judge, that he had to impose a sentence appropriate not only to the applicable maximum at the date of the offence but also appropriate to the sentencing patterns which applied at that time. The accused was convicted before Judge
Court in 1991 for a crime committed in 1974. In Shore cases were found which indicated what the sentencing pattern was around 1974.

The researches of counsel in relation to the availability of material on sentences of buggery have not yielded much of use, nor have my researches. I have had to do the best I can in relation to the 1973 position. Given the approach of the judge, it is a case in which it is appropriate for this Court to re-sentence the applicant.

The offences were objectively serious. Buggery upon a child is repulsive.
These were also breaches of trust by an uncle in the home and the child was aged between nine and thirteen. The method chosen to secure the complainant's silence, namely that it would adversely affect the child's grandmother to whom she was very attached, was reprehensible.

In view of the applicant being acquitted of three of the six counts with which he was charged, the plea of not guilty was justified. It was also mainly a case of word against word. The applicant did express regret as to the first incident and attributed it to his being under the influence of intoxicating liquor.

The sentencing judge found that "no physical force of an injury producing nature was employed to compel the complainant to submit" and that "the offences were probably committed at times when his sense of propriety and rectitude and his inhibitions were all significantly undermined by the effects of alcohol." The judge also found that despite the breaches of trust this was not the same type of offence as a father or stepfather sexually abusing a child - it was an exercise in "opportunism" bearing in mind that he was "a sad man who must have been internally very unhappy and unfulfilled throughout his life." 
There are other significant considerations. The sentences will be served under protection. This makes the imprisonment much harder and will highlight the ostracism which the applicant has experience throughout his life. The offences are more than twenty-two years old and were not even reported until after twenty years had elapsed from the commission of them.

The applicant is now sixty-nine years of age and he is not in good health. He suffers from hypertension and indigestion, for both of which he receives medication, degenerative osteoarthritis; bronchitis and occasional haemoptysis requiring hospitalisation. He has had a replacement of his left hip and is in need of a right hip replacement. The combination of age and ill health will contribute appreciably to the harshness of his imprisonment.

The applicant married after these offences and had three children, his eldest son being killed in an accident. He is now divorced. The subject offences will isolate him from his family.

The applicant was otherwise a man of good character. Obviously he has never been in prison before. The judge not only held that there were no special circumstances, but that there should be a less than usual additional term.

As we are resentencing, this is a sentence which should be approached afresh.
I am unable to share the judge's views. Given the isolation of the applicant, his age, his health and his temperament, I think that the applicant is going to need considerable support for at least eighteen months and this will certainly be the case if, for a portion of this period, he has to undergo a hip replacement.

I would take a broad approach to the question of sentence. It seems to me that having regard to the total criminality in all the offences an appropriate minimum term is one of three years and six months; and an appropriate additional term is one of eighteen months. I have already identified the special circumstances. It will suffice if an order is made which varies the sentence which was imposed as to buggery.

In my opinion the appeal against sentence should be allowed and the sentence on the count of buggery should be quashed. I would impose a sentence on the count of buggery having a minimum term of three years and six months, commencing on 10 October 1995 and concluding on April 1999. The additional term of 18 months will commence on 10 April 1999.
The sentence thus imposed should, in my view, be concurrent with the sentences on the other counts of indecent assault.

HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J, for the reasons which he has given.

JAMES J: I also agree.

HUNT CJ at CL: The orders of the Court are as proposed by Smart J.
 * * * 
