

James Hardie and Coy Pty Limited versus Putt Matter No Ca 40062/98 [1998] NSWSC (22 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 October 1998 
JAMES HARDIE & COY PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus DESMOND PUTT 
CA 40062/98; DDT 181/97 May 1998 
Sheller JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Dust Diseases Tribunal - Judge O'Meally 
FILE NO/S: CA 40062/98; DDT 181/97 
DELIVERED: 27 May 1998 
HEARING DATE: 6, 7, 8 April 1998 
PARTIES: JAMES HARDIE & COY PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus Desmond PUTT 
AND BY AMENDMENT: 
JAMES HARDIE & COY PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus Michael Peter HALL As
Administrator ad litem of the ESTATE OF Desmond PUTT (Deceased) 
JUDGMENT OF: SHELLER, BEAZLEY, STEIN JJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: B W Walker SC/P Nygh/D E Graham 
Respondents: D F Jackson QC/A J Bartley/F Tuscano 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Allen Allen & Hemsley 
Respondents: McLaughlin & Riordan 
CATCHWORDS: 
FORUM NON CONVENIENS - whether should be decided after a hearing EXPERT
EVIDENCE - foreign law - role of trial Judge - role of Appeal Court
JURISDICTION - place of tort - action extinguished by legislation in New
Zealand CORPORATIONS LAW - circumstances in which corporate veil can be lifted - duty of care in corporate groups 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO OF PAGES: 60 
JAMES HARDIE & COY PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HALL As Administrator of the ESTATE OF PUTT 
Summary of Facts 
In 1997 the respondent was diagnosed as suffering mesothelioma. He sought to recover damages in New South Wales from two New South Wales companies, James
Hardie & Coy Pty Limited (JHC) and James Hardie Industries Limited (the
Holding Company), rather than from his New Zealand employer, James Hardie & Company Pty Limited (JHNZ) at whose premises in Penrose, Auckland he had been exposed to asbestos.

JHNZ and JHC were subsidiaries of the Holding Company which relevantly held % of the shares in JHNZ. Both JHC and the Holding Company supplied and exported to JHNZ the asbestos that the respondent was exposed to.

Judgment Below 
The respondent sued the appellants in negligence alleging that they were in such a relationship of proximity that they owed the respondent a duty of care and that the appellants exported the asbestos knowing that the use to which it was put constituted a foreseeable risk of injury. The appellants pleaded that the action could not be maintained in New South Wales because the subject matter of the tort was one which arose wholly within New Zealand where legislation prevented the commencement of proceedings for personal injury.

The trial Judge held that it was open to the respondent to maintain an action in New South Wales for two reasons. First, the relevant provisions of the
Accident Rehabilitation and Compensation Insurance Act 1992 (the ARCI Act) were procedural in nature and not substantive and therefore merely barred the remedy. Second, the respondent was not covered under the ARCI Act because it required both a casual and temporal connection between the employment and the disease and the respondent was not diagnosed as suffering from mesothelioma until 1997.

His Honour held the Dust Diseases Tribunal was not an inappropriate forum for the determination of the plaintiff's claim and, with respect to duty of care, that the James Hardie group of companies conducted but one enterprise and this gave rise to sufficient proximity to impose a duty of care on JHC and the
Holding Company to the class to which the respondent belonged. Both JHC and the Holding Company were held to be in breach of this duty of care.

His Honour held that the tort was committed in New South Wales because it was there asbestos was exported from. In addition it was held that the respondent was entitled to Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer damages.

Appeal 
The issues on appeal were: (i) the place of the tort; (ii) if the place of the tort was New Zealand, whether the second limb in Breavington versus Godleman <case>; [(1988) 169 CLR 41] was satisfied; (iii) whether New South Wales was a clearly inappropriate forum; (iv) whether JHC and/or the Holding Company owed a duty of care and whether it was breached; and (v) whether Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer damages should have been awarded.

Held
Rejecting the ground of appeal based on forum non conveniens, it is inappropriate to determine the question of forum non conveniens after the hearing.
An Australian court should only in exceptional circumstances make a finding about the meaning and effect of a foreign statute contrary to the uncontradicted evidence of a qualified expert in the law of that country:
Temilkovski versus Australian Iron and Steel Pty Limited (1966) 67 SR 211,
Sharif versus Azad [[1967] 1 QB 605], A/S
Tallinna Laevauhisus & Ors versus Estonian State SS Line (1946) 80 LlLRep 99.
It is the duty of an appeal Court to examine the evidence of foreign law which was before the trial Judge and to decide for itself whether the evidence justified the conclusion to which the trial Judge came: Parkasho versus Singh [(1968) P 233](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281968%29%20P%20233 "View LawCiteRecord" ), Dalmia Dairy Industries Limited versus National Bank of Pakistan [1978] 2
LlLRep 223, Bumper Corporation versus Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [[1991] 1 WLR 1362.]
The expert evidence before the trial Judge showed that the ARCI Act covered the plaintiff and therefore prevented the plaintiff commencing proceedings in any Court in New Zealand independently of the Act. This evidence was compelling and the trial Judge erred in holding otherwise.
If the defendants owed a duty of care, the breaches were in truth a failure, when supplying asbestos, to warn of the dangers of its use or if the defendants had the capacity to compel JHNZ to comply with instructions, the failure to ensure a safe system of work for JHNZ's employees.
If the defendants owed a duty of care, it was breached by a failure to warn or by the failure to provide a safe system of work when, and at the place where, the plaintiff was exposed to dust from the asbestos. Therefore, the tort was committed in New Zealand: Distillers Co (Biochemicals) Limited v
Thompson [[1971] AC 458], Jacobs versus Australian Abrasives Pty Limited <case>; [[1971] Tas Sr 92], Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538.]
To found jurisdiction in New South Wales for a tort committed in New
Zealand the plaintiff had to demonstrate that the circumstances from which the tort arose would have given rise to a cause of action of the kind he wished to enforce both in New South Wales and in New Zealand: McKain versus R W Miller &
Co (South Australia) Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 1.]
Section 17 of the ARCI Act must be read as extinguishing any cause of action for damages arising directly or indirectly out of personal injury caused and arising in the manner therein described. Therefore, the plaintiff's common law right to recover damages in New Zealand was extinguished and the test in McKain versus R W Miller was not satisfied: Thompson versus Hill [(1995) 38
NSWLR 714], Stevens versus Head <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 433.]
The corporate veil should only be lifted in circumstances where it is clear that the it is a mere facade: Woolfson versus Strathclyde Regional Council [[1978] SC (HL) 90], Briggs versus James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited [(1989) 16
NSWLR 549], Industrial Equity versus Blackburn <case>; [(1977) 137 CLR 567], Walker versus Wimborne <case>; [(1976) 137 CLR 1.] There was nothing to suggest that the separate corporate identity of JHNZ was a mere facade.
The relationship of control between a subsidiary and holding company is not of a nature so as to impose liability on the holding company for the acts of its subsidiary: Silicone Gel Breast Implant Products Liability litigation (1993) 837F Supp 1128.
The defendants did not stand in the position of an entrepreneur employing an independent contractor who had to look to them to provide a safe system of work. Therefore, the principle expounded in Stevens versus Brodribb Sawmilling Co
Pty Limited <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 16] has no application.
With respect to the issue of whether a duty of care is owed, CSR Limited v Wren [(1998) AustTortsR 81-461] concerned a very different factual matrix and is not applicable in this case.
It has been suggested that the corporate veil may be lifted between a parent and subsidiary where the latter was so controlled by the former as to be its agent for the purposes of liability: Smith Stone and Knight Limited v
Birmingham [[1939] 4 All ER 116.]
However, any departure from strict observance of the principles in Salomon v
Salomon [[1897] AC 22] has been made to deal with special circumstances when a limited company might well be a facade.
None of the cases referred to supports his Honour's conclusion that the control or influence exercised by the Holding Company and JHC over JHNZ was such as to impose a duty to the plaintiff.
Given the appeal is allowed it is not necessary to consider the question of Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer damages.

Authorities 
A/S Tallinna Laevauhisus & Ors V Estonian State SS Line (1946) 80 LlLRep 
Adams versus Cape Industries PLC  <case>; [(1988) 169 CLR 41] 
Briggs versus James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited [(1989) 16 NSWLR 549] 
Bryan versus Maloney (1995)182 CLR 609 
Bumper Corporation versus Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [[1991] 1 WLR ]

Carley versus James Hardie & Co Pty Limited (Unreported, Dust Diseases
Tribunal) 12 December 1997 
CSR Limited versus Wren [(1998) AustTortsR 81-461] 
Dalmia Dairy Industries Limited versus National Bank of Pakistan [1978] 2 LlLRep ,

Distillers Co (Biochemicals) Limited versus Thompson <case>; <case>; <case>; [[1971] Tas SR 92] 
James Hardie & Co Pty Ltd versus Bruce <case>; [(1995) 12 NSWCCR 286] 
McKain versus R W Miller & Co (South Australia) Pty Limited <case>; <case>; [(1967) 122 CLR 152] 
Parksho versus Singh [(1968) P 233] 
Salomon versus A Salomon & Co Limited <case>; <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 433] 
Temilkovski versus Australian Iron & Steel Pty Limited (1966) 67 SR 211 
Thompson versus Hill  <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] 
ORDERS
That the proceedings be and be deemed to have been amended by substituting
Michael Peter Hall the Administrator ad litem of the Estate of Desmond Putt deceased as respondent to the appeal in place of Desmond Putt since deceased as from the date of his death;
Appeal allowed;
Judgment and orders of 23 January 1998 set aside;
In lieu thereof judgment for the defendants;
Respondent to pay the costs of the hearing in the Dust Diseases Tribunal and of this appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).

JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
In January 1997 the plaintiff, Desmond Putt, a New Zealand resident, now deceased, was diagnosed as suffering mesothelioma. He set out to recover damages not from his New Zealand employer, at whose premises in New Zealand he had been exposed to asbestos dust, but in New South Wales from two New South
Wales companies which were related to his employer and were the suppliers and exporters of asbestos to his employer in New Zealand.

THE PLAINTIFF'S CLAIM 
On 20 November 1997 the plaintiff began these proceedings in the Dust Diseases
Tribunal of New South Wales against James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited (JHC) and James Hardie Industries Limited (the Holding Company) claiming damages for injury particularised as malignant pleural mesothelioma, shock and sequelae.
This injury was the result of the inhalation of large quantities of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form while the plaintiff was employed between and 1951 as a labourer in the handling of large quantities of "Fibrolite" asbestos cement building products at the Penrose factory of James Hardie &
Company Pty Limited (JHNZ). Penrose is in Auckland, New Zealand.

The Holding Company was incorporated in New South Wales on 3 June 1920. JHC was incorporated in New South Wales on 28 May 1937. JHNZ was incorporated in
New Zealand on 7 July 1937. JHNZ and JHC were subsidiaries of the Holding
Company which held over 95 per cent of the shares in JHNZ.

According to the plaintiff's statement of claim, between 1947 and 1951 either
JHC or the Holding Company or both of them had the control and management of
JHNZ's factory at Penrose. Furthermore, the Holding Company: (i) had a detailed knowledge of the nature and extent of the manufacture of asbestos cement building product at the plant at Penrose and of the sale in New Zealand of those products, (ii) received monies from the sale of asbestos cement building products which were manufactured at the Penrose plant and sold in New
Zealand, and (iii) profited thereby. The raw asbestos stored at Penrose and used there in the manufacture of asbestos cement building products was supplied to JHNZ by JHC and the Holding Company or by each of them.

PARTICULARS OF NEGLIGENCE 
The plaintiff gave separate particulars of negligence in respect of each defendant. Amongst the particulars alleged against JHC were: a. Failing to warn the plaintiff of the risks associated with the use of asbestos and materials containing asbestos manufactured and/or supplied by
JHC.
 b. ...... supplying asbestos or materials containing asbestos in circumstances where there was a real risk that persons such as the plaintiff would inhale asbestos dust and fibre as the consequence of manually working with and handling asbestos or asbestos materials and would thereby suffer injury as a consequence of the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibre.
 .......
 e. Having since 1938 appointed the Board to JCNZ, [failing] to take any steps to prevent the plaintiff from injury caused by the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.
 f. Despite continuous interchange of technical personnel and information between JHC's Australian operations and the plant at Penrose, [failing] to take any steps to prevent the plaintiff from injury caused by the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.

Amongst the particulars alleged against the Holding Company were: a. Controlling the manufacture of materials containing asbestos at JHNZ where there was a real risk that workers such as the plaintiff would inhale asbestos dust and fibre as a consequence of the manufacturing process and would thereby suffer injury as a consequence of the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibre and with such control, failure to take any or any sufficient steps to protect workers including the plaintiff from injury.
 b. Having since 1938 appointed the Board to JHNZ, failing to take any steps to protect employees of JHNZ including the plaintiff from injury caused by the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.
 ....
 d. Failure to take any or any sufficient steps to provide adequate exhaust system at the Penrose plant so that the plaintiff was not exposed to unnecessary risk of injury.
 e. Failure to take any or any sufficient steps to ensure that the areas where the plaintiff had to work did not have its atmosphere contaminated by the presence of asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form.
 f. Failure to take any or any sufficient steps to ensure that the plaintiff was supplied with safe and suitable masks or breathing apparatus when working at Penrose.
 g. Failure to ensure that efficient dust control measures were instituted at
Penrose.
 h. Failure to warn workers including the plaintiff of the risks associated with the manufacture of building products containing asbestos knowing that such workers including the plaintiff were being exposed to the release of asbestos dust and fibre into the atmosphere in their workplace.
 ......
 k. Failure to warn the plaintiff of the dangers to health and life arising from the inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres in respirable form.
 ......
 m. Failure to take any or any sufficient steps to prevent asbestos dust and fibres in a respirable form from being blown from stocks of raw asbestos stored at the factory at Penrose described in this Statement of Claim and being windborne in the vicinity of the factory......

The plaintiff claimed special damages pursuant to the principle enunciated in
Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer <case>; [(1977) 139 CLR 161] for services provided or to be provided for him.

TRIAL 
At the trial, which was expedited and began on 5 January 1998 before His
Honour Judge O'Meally, the plaintiff alleged that the defendants "were in such a relationship of proximity" that they owed him and other JHNZ employees a duty of care. The breach of that duty was "that he was exposed to asbestos".
The consequence was that he contracted mesothelioma. The plaintiff also alleged "that each defendant exported bags of asbestos to New Zealand for use in the factory of JHNZ, at Penrose in Auckland, when it was known that the use to which the asbestos was to be put constituted a foreseeable risk of injury." 
The defendants pleaded that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction over the subject matter of the plaintiff's claim since the tort was one which arose wholly in
New Zealand where, by legislation, proceedings for damages for such personal injury could not be commenced. Accordingly, it was said, the action could not be maintained in a court in New South Wales. Immediately before evidence was taken, the defendants conceded that foreseeability was not an issue.

On 23 January 1998 Judge O'Meally gave a verdict and judgment in favour of the plaintiff in the sum of $151,500 which included $10,000 for Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer expenses.

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
After describing the nature of the plaintiff's claim the trial Judge dealt with the issues in the following order:
Choice of law.
Forum non conveniens.
Duty of care.
Breach.
Place of the tort.
General damages.
Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer expenses.

The quantification of general damages was not an issue on the appeal.
Choice of law. His Honour considered this question in the context, first, that, if the proceedings were to recover damages in New South Wales for a foreign tort, the plaintiff had to show that the wrong alleged would have been actionable if committed in New South Wales and that by the law of New
Zealand the circumstances of the occurrence gave rise to a civil liability of the kind which he claimed to enforce, and secondly, that in New South Wales procedural law is governed by the law of the forum. In this context his Honour addressed the question of whether New Zealand legislation abolished any right of action the plaintiff might otherwise have had to recover damages for personal injury and, whether, if and to the extent that it applied, the New
Zealand legislation was procedural or substantive.

The relevant New Zealand legislation was the Accident Rehabilitation and
Compensation Insurance Act 1992 (the ARCI Act) which, in summary, continued a legislative scheme, which had been in force since 1 April 1974, substituting no fault statutory cover for personal injury occurring in New Zealand to replace the common law fault based right to recover damages. Applying what he had said in James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited versus Bruce <case>; <case>; [(1996) 13 NSWCCR 525], Judge O'Meally held that the relevant provisions of the ARCI Act were procedural in nature and not substantive. Accordingly, it was open to a plaintiff, in the circumstances there considered, to maintain an action in a court in New South Wales against companies incorporated in New
South Wales, even though the plaintiff was injured in New Zealand and no action could be brought by him in New Zealand to recover damages for such injury.

In addition, despite evidence of the opinions to the contrary of two experts in New Zealand law, Mr R S Chambers QC and Mr J M Miller, both of the New
Zealand Bar, his Honour decided that a requirement for cover under the ARCI
Act was "that there be both a causal and temporal connection between employment and disease". Contrary to arguments addressed to him, Judge
O'Meally, without evidence on the matter, applied his own knowledge of the aetiology and pathology of mesothelioma, namely that a person did not have mesothelioma until shortly before the symptoms presented, to find that the plaintiff's mesothelioma arose out of, but not in the course of, employment.
The result was that, in his Honour's opinion, the plaintiff's injury was not covered under the ARCI Act.
Forum non conveniens. His Honour held that taking account of various matters he listed, the Tribunal was not an inappropriate forum for the determination of the plaintiff's claim.
Duty of care. Judge O'Meally considered whether the defendants owed a duty of care to the plaintiff, as an employee of JHNZ, if so, whether there was a breach of that duty and, if so, where it occurred. His Honour described the duty and the breach in different ways when setting out the plaintiff's claims and when making findings. His Honour answered the question of whether there was sufficient proximity between the plaintiff and the defendants by examining in detail documentary evidence which came into existence before, during and after the period of the plaintiff's employment with JHNZ.

According to the trial Judge, the plaintiff alleged that the defendants "had the control and management of JHNZ's factory and the operations conducted there. It is upon that basis that he says the defendants owed him a duty of care". The plaintiff alleged that bags of raw asbestos, which were stored and used at Penrose, were supplied to JHNZ by JHC and "that [JHC] was negligent in failing to warn both JHNZ and the class of which he was a member of the risks associated with the use of asbestos." The plaintiff said further that JHC: "was negligent in failing to recommend to JHNZ that it withdraw asbestos and the products containing asbestos manufactured by JHNZ when it knew or ought to have known that the manufacture and supply of such products constituted a risk in the class of which the plaintiff was a member.

Additionally, it [was] alleged that [JHC] failed to take steps to protect the class of which the plaintiff was a member from injury, notwithstanding the exchange of technical personnel and information between it and JHNZ." 
His Honour summarised the defendants' submissions as follows: "The defendants submit that the substance of the plaintiff's case is that he was injured as a result of the failure to provide to him a safe place and system of work and the maintenance and enforcement of a safe system. Whilst those matters are not disputed by the defendants, the person liable to him is
JHNZ and not the defendants or either of them. It is also argued on behalf of the defendants, that the duty which JHNZ owed to the plaintiff, was non delegable. JHNZ and JHNZ alone, say the defendants, had the duty to provide, control and maintain a safe workplace for the plaintiff." 
A consideration of the following led his Honour to conclude that the James
Hardie companies conducted but one enterprise: * the minutes of directors' meetings of the defendants and of JHNZ from 1937, * directors' reports to shareholders, * "Reports of Factory Executive Staff." The first, a report of proceedings of the third annual conference of factory executive staff held at Camellia, near Parramatta, New South Wales, where JHC's factories in Sydney were located, between 12-16 November 1945. The second, a report of the fourth annual conference of factory executive staff held at Camellia between 14-21 November 1947, which included a Staff Organisation Chart incorporated by the trial Judge into his reasons for judgment, and * a report of a factory managers' conference held in 1968, which contained an historical overview of the operations of JHC and reference to the concept of an executive committee which the plaintiff claimed organised and controlled the total James Hardie enterprise including JHNZ. 
His Honour said: "It is plainly true that the first and the second defendants and JHNZ were separate legal entities, but it is equally as true that the enterprise was one and significantly and actually influenced by decisions taken by the Board of the first defendant [JHC]. Minutes, and not only those to which I have referred, demonstrate that it was not infrequent occurrence that [JHC] would make a request or recommendation or give an instruction to JHNZ which soon thereafter would be adopted and followed by JHNZ.

It is the case that between 1937 and 1952, the directors' meetings and annual general meetings of JHNZ were held in Sydney. Correspondence passing between
Auckland and Sydney, was on an `interhouse' letter." 
The trial Judge also referred to two publications "History of James Hardie and
Coy Pty Limited, [JHC] 1888 to 1966" and "A Very Good Business", a history of the Holding Company, as further confirmation of the single nature of the enterprise. His Honour said: "The published histories of the defendants demonstrate that the manufacture, production and sale of asbestos cement products produced by Hardie companies, in both Australia and New Zealand, were parts of a single administrative, manufacturing and technical entity." 
His Honour said that no single matter led him to the conclusion that JHNZ was an integral part of the one administrative and manufacturing and research enterprise, but the concatenated effect and the totality of the evidence had done so.

Dealing with the supply of asbestos, the trial Judge said: "I have referred to the fact that the defendants say that they did not themselves arrange for the purchase of asbestos for JHNZ, rather such purchases were made, and the location of asbestos stocks was decided, on behalf of JHNZ. It does not appear that the second defendant [the Holding
Company] arranged or procured asbestos for JHNZ. It is the fact, however, that
JHNZ paid the first defendant [JHC] a fee for the purchase of asbestos and it is the case that 1DX.3, which contains the minutes of meetings of the directors of JHNZ, show that once asbestos arrived in New Zealand JHNZ made decisions regarding it. For example, on 30 June 1939 JHNZ agreed to enter into an arrangement with the New Zealand government to carry an additional stock of asbestos and to extend its existing store, and on 19 June 1941 JHNZ confirmed agreements to stock 300 tons of asbestos with the Ministry of Supply, for emergency supplies.

PX 103 [an inter-house letter from JHNZ to Sydney] which is identical with
DX.5 does confirm that JHNZ paid for its asbestos and it did hold a licence to import asbestos. All those matters, whilst being correct, do not in my view derogate from the proposition, nor alter the conclusion that JHNZ did not procure for itself any asbestos fibre. Sources of asbestos were located by the defendants and allocated to JHNZ according to the decision of the first defendant [JHC]." 
His Honour said JHC's answers to interrogatories showed that: * JHNZ recruited its own staff but took account of JHC's recommendations, * it was likely that JHC provided technical and scientific information on the manufacture of asbestos cement products to JHNZ between 1947 and 1951, including information relating to the type of equipment used in the manufacture of asbestos cement products, quality control and correction of technical problems, * from 1967 JHC provided safety information relating to the effects of the health of inhalation of asbestos dust and fibres, and * from 1978 JHC informed JHNZ that warnings should accompany its asbestos cement products. 
His Honour said that from 1969 JHC placed itself in the shoes of JHNZ by: (i) holding itself responsible for ensuring that it complied with the National
Health and Medical Research Council Safety Guidelines and Standards in New
Zealand Government Regulations; (ii) taking action to eliminate the incidence of asbestos related diseases in JHNZ's workforce; (iii) providing surveillance and treatment for JHNZ's workforce; (iv) recommending deployment of staff within the Penrose plant; and (v) implementing engineering procedures.
 "I conclude that if the defendants, or either of them, had information in 1947 it was information which quite readily and easily could have been passed by the defendants, or either of them, to JHNZ. Reports of the first defendant's [JHC] factory executive staff show that there was a reluctance to speak about asbestosis with employees for fear of possible union reaction. It does appear to me, as I think I have made clear, that if information were passed at one stage it could have been passed at an earlier stage if then within the possession of the defendants, or either of them." 
Further answers to interrogatories by JHC were said to demonstrate that it had an intimate knowledge of the composition of asbestos cement products and of the operations of JHNZ and that JHC's directors discussed and approved capital expenditure at the Penrose plant. The trial Judge concluded that no more than plant and equipment were supplied and paid for by JHNZ. Interrogatories were directed to the position of "Works Director". His Honour expressed the view that the answers meant that the Works Manager in New Zealand answered to JHC's
Works Director.

The Holding Company's answers to interrogatories seemed to have demonstrated little more than that fact and its consequences. In 1937 the Holding Company applied to the Bureau of Industry of New Zealand for a licence to manufacture asbestos cement products. It was appropriate that the parent company would obtain the licence on JHNZ's behalf, in view of the fact that JHNZ was about to be incorporated. Other answers demonstrated the likelihood that the Holding
Company, like JHC, had knowledge of the operations of JHNZ which was acquired through the tabling of production and trading data received from JHNZ. Article of JHNZ's Articles of Association, after making provision for appointment of the first Chairman and ordinary directors, provided that all future ordinary directors should be appointed by the Holding Company. Those directors were given power, under article 12, to appoint special directors and to dismiss them. In practice, special directors became known as local directors and usually were resident in New Zealand.

The trial Judge said that the evidence supported the following findings: * Each defendant took decisions affecting application for price increases of products of JHNZ. * Requests made by JHNZ were agreed to by JHC. * JHNZ complied with requests and obeyed instructions given to it by JHC. * JHNZ was regarded as a branch of JHC and was part of `the organisation'. * JHC recommended the appointment of staff of JHNZ. * JHC provided to JHNZ between 1947 and 1951 scientific information on the manufacture of asbestos-cement products. * JHC probably recommended approval of capital expenditure on plant and equipment used by JHNZ between 1947 and 1951. * JHNZ made reports to JHC for inclusion in the Joint Factory Bulletin. * JHC intended to establish standard milling practice, uniform routine, standard pipe testing and a numerical code which would bind JHNZ. * Between 1948 and the end of the plaintiff's employment the Executive Committee took decisions affecting JHNZ. 
His Honour concluded: "......that each defendant exercised influence over JHNZ. JHNZ was part of a single enterprise, though with separate legal personality. The board of directors which made requests or gave instructions was comprised of many of those who complied with requests or obeyed instructions. There was, in my view, no distinction made between the plant or branches of the first defendant [JHC] in Australia and what was called its branch in New Zealand." 
The trial Judge was satisfied that the Works Manager, Auckland reported to Mr
J W Henderson as Works Director of JHC, that the executive committee was established by each defendant and exercised power over most decisions including those affecting JHNZ and that that committee was established in 1948 and continued to operate beyond the plaintiff's employment by JHNZ. Mr
Henderson was a director of JHC from 1939 to 1950. The trial Judge said: "As it appears to me, by reason of the nature of association between the defendants and JHNZ, and the capacity of the first defendant [JHC] to influence decisions affecting personnel, research and administration the defendants put themselves into a relationship of proximity with employees of the first defendant [sic -clearly JHNZ was meant]" 
The trial Judge considered whether the relationship of proximity found gave rise to a duty of care and after referring, inter alia, to Bryan versus Maloney CLR 609, particularly at 617 and 619 and Stevens versus Brodribb
Sawmilling Co Pty Limited <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 16], particularly at 31 and 47, said: "It is the case here that there is no direct connection between the defendants and the plaintiff, that is to say they were not his master and he was not their servant. Here the connecting factor is the factory at Penrose. It was foreseeable not only to JHNZ, but also to the defendants, that in working at
Penrose the class of which the plaintiff was a member was at risk of injury by inhaling asbestos. The connecting link which provides the necessary proximity is to be found in the administrative structures of the defendants, and in whether it was reasonably foreseeable that acts or omissions on their part might cause injury to persons in an identifiable class, that is those who worked at Penrose. As it seems to me, it is irrelevant that JHNZ also had a duty of care to the plaintiff. Measures were available to the defendants to prevent breaches of duty being committed by JHNZ. I emphasise that the relationship and the pattern of that relationship shows that if the defendants or either of them made a request to JHNZ it would have been complied with." 
Significant in this passage is the statement that measures were available to
JHC and the Holding Company to prevent breaches of duty being committed by
JHNZ. JHNZ would have complied with any request made by either of them.

The trial Judge referred to the decision of this Court in CSR Limited versus Wren [(1998) Aust Torts R 81-461] and those passages in the judgments where reference was made to the duties of manufacturers of products or suppliers of goods known to be dangerous to warn of the risks to potential users and the dangers associated with the product. The trial Judge observed that the nature of the duty will vary according to the danger of particular goods, that asbestos is not inherently dangerous and that its danger depends upon the manner of its use.
His Honour said: "I am satisfied that the defendants, and each of them, owed a duty of care to the class of which the plaintiff was a member." 
In the context of the cases cited, the duty his Honour was referring to must have been a duty to warn that the use of asbestos in the circumstances in which the plaintiff was employed was dangerous. In accordance with the passage quoted from the joint judgment of Beazley and Stein JJA in Wren the duty was owed both to JHNZ and to JHNZ's employees.
Breach. Under the heading "Were the Defendants in Breach of Their Duty of Care?" his Honour said that JHC had within its power the capacity to make requests, give instructions or take other steps, the effect of compliance with which would have been to protect the plaintiff from the risk of injury in working at Penrose. He said: "The involvement of the second defendant in the affairs of JHNZ was an involvement in excess of the normal role of and association between a Holding
Company and a subsidiary. Each defendant was in a relationship of proximity with the employees of JHNZ. Each defendant was in breach of the duty of care each owed to the employees of JHNZ. As a result of the breach of each, the plaintiff suffered injury."
Place of the tort. Having spoken of the duty of care and its breach in terms of the defendants' capacity to note requests or give instructions which would be complied with and in terms of the duty to warn JHNZ and its employees, his Honour, under the heading "Where was the tort committed?", turned to examine "whether the tort was exclusively a New Zealand tort or a
New South Wales tort." In this part of his reasons for judgment the trial
Judge concentrated on the supply by the defendants to JHNZ of the bags of raw asbestos stored at Penrose and there used in the manufacture of asbestos cement building products. He said that the evidence did not establish the direct involvement of the Holding Company in the supply of asbestos to JHNZ but it did establish JHC's involvement. Of JHC his Honour said: "In exporting or in arranging for the export of asbestos, in arranging for subsequent reimbursement and payment of commission, and in arranging for trans-shipment of asbestos from Australia to New Zealand the first defendant [JHC] was aware that it was shipping a commodity, the use of which in the circumstances in which the plaintiff was employed, was known to be dangerous so as to constitute a risk of foreseeable injury. In doing so [JHC] committed a breach of duty in New South Wales." 
With respect, the breach by JHC so described, was not the breach found of failing to use its capacity to make requests or give instructions to JHNZ nor of failing to warn JHNZ or its employees. It was not a breach of duty by the
Holding Company. The breach described was JHC's exporting or arranging for the export of asbestos from Australia to New Zealand when JHC was aware that its use in the circumstances in which the plaintiff was employed was dangerous.
Clearly enough, the act of exporting or arranging for export occurred in New
South Wales.

Under the same heading Judge O'Meally also mentioned a submission that in recommending equipment to be used at the factory of JHNZ, JHC committed a breach of duty and said: "It may well have been that [JHC] effectively could have proposed measures to be adopted in the factory at Penrose, but this it failed to do." After referring to Distillers Co (Biochemicals) Limited v
Thompson [[1971] AC 458], particularly at 468-9, and Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538] at 567, his Honour said: "As it appears to me, the series of events, that is the acts of commission and the omissions which led to the plaintiff's damage, in substance arose in the
State of New South Wales and so the tort committed by the first defendant was committed in this State." 
No express reference was made in this part of the judgment to the Holding
Company beyond saying that the evidence did not establish its direct involvement in the supply of asbestos to JHNZ.

The process of reasoning which I have outlined led his Honour to the conclusion that the plaintiff was entitled to a verdict against each defendant.
Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer expenses. In addition to an amount of $125,000 for general damages and $15,000 for loss of expectation of life his
Honour allowed $10,000 for Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer expenses. He said: "The right of the plaintiff to Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer is disputed. This is because the plaintiff has made a claim upon the Accident Compensation
Commission of New Zealand and he has been informed that his claim will be accepted. If it is, it well may be that the Accident Compensation Commission will bear the costs which ordinarily would be comprised within Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer expenses. The evidence, however, does not enable me to reach a conclusion on that matter. The parties have agreed, and for this I commend them, that a component of $10,000 should be allowed in respect of Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer expenses and it should be noted that that sum includes past and future expenses and interest. The parties have agreed that in the event that an amount is awarded to the plaintiff by the Accident Compensation Commission, then application may be made to me pursuant to section 13 (6) of the Dust
Diseases Tribunal Act to vary the award of $10,000 in accordance with such payment as may be made by the Commission." 
APPEAL 
On 19 February 1998 the defendants filed a notice of appeal, the hearing of which was expedited and took place on 6 and 7 April 1998. On 13 April 1998 Mr
Putt died. On 12 May 1998 an order was made by consent appointing Michael
Peter Hall administrator ad litem to represent Mr Putt's estate for the purposes of these proceedings.

Both defendants appealed against liability and, if that part of the appeal failed, against the award for Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer expenses. The issues on the appeal were defined as follows:
The place of the tort;
If the place of the tort was New Zealand (as the appellants submitted it was), whether the second limb in Brennan J's judgment in Breavington v
Godleman <case>; [(1988) 169 CLR 41] at 110-111 was satisfied;
Whether New South Wales was a clearly inappropriate forum;
Whether JHC and/or the Holding Company owed a duty of care to the plaintiff and if so, whether that duty of care was breached;
Whether any sum in respect of Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer expenses should have been awarded to the plaintiff.

Logically the third issue was one that should have been resolved before the trial began. The nature of the proceedings was such that, as the defendants properly recognised, the hearing should not be delayed. Accordingly, it was suggested, without any opposition, that the question of forum non conveniens be deferred until the conclusion of the hearing. When that time arrived the trial Judge said that it would be "highly unsatisfactory" then to hold that the Tribunal was a forum non conveniens for the determination of the plaintiff's claim. I have no doubt that his Honour was right. If the issue was a live one, certainly in the circumstances of this case, it required to be dealt with before the hearing was undertaken. Whatever the inconvenience of delaying the trial to deal with the matter, the inconvenience of holding that the forum was inappropriate after a hearing which had occupied many days both inside and outside the jurisdiction, in the circumstances where the plaintiff was close to death, was far greater. I think this ground of appeal should be rejected.

Before coming to deal with the other issues on the appeal it is useful to refer in detail to the relevant New Zealand legislation.

THE ARCI ACT 
According to the long title the ARCI Act was an Act to establish an insurance- based scheme to rehabilitate and compensate in an equitable and financially affordable manner those persons who suffer personal injury.

Section 4 (1) "Definition of `Personal Injury', which was found in Part I "Preliminary" of the Act, provided, so far as presently relevant: "For the purposes of this Act, `personal injury' means the death of, or physical injuries to, a person, and any mental injuries suffered by that person which is an outcome of those physical injuries to that person,....." 
Section 7 in the same Part, so far as presently relevant, provided: "(1) Personal injury shall be regarded as being caused by gradual process, disease, or infection arising out of and in the course of employment only if - 
In respect of a period that ended on or after the 1st day of April 1974, the employment task performed by the affected person, or the environment in which it was performed, had a particular property or characteristic which caused or contributed to that personal injury by gradual process, disease, or infection; and 
The property or characteristic is not found to any material extent in the non-employment activities or environment of that person; and 
The risk of suffering that personal injury is significantly greater for persons performing that employment task in that environment than for persons who do not perform that task in that environment.

Nothing in subsection (1) of this section shall require that the property or characteristic be present throughout the whole of that person's employment.
 .....

The date on which personal injury caused by gradual process, disease, or infection arising out of and in the course of employment is suffered shall be the date on which - 
The person first received treatment from a registered health professional for that personal injury as that personal injury; or 
That personal injury first resulted in the incapacity of the affected person - whichever first occurs." 
Part II was headed "Cover and Relationship with Other Rights" and comprised sections 8 to 17. In the first segment of Part II headed "Cover" s8, "Cover for personal injury occurring in New Zealand", subs (1) provided that the Act should apply in respect of personal injury occurring in New Zealand on or after 1 July 1992 in respect of which there was cover under the Act and subs provided that cover under the Act should extend to personal injury which, inter alia, (b) was "caused by gradual process, disease, or infection arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in s7 or s11" of the Act.

For the avoidance of doubt, s10 (1) declared that personal injury caused wholly or substantially by gradual process, disease, or infection was not covered by the Act unless it was, inter alia, "(a) personal injury caused by gradual process, disease or infection arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in s7 or s11 of the Act." 
Pausing at that point, in the present case on the trial Judge's findings the plaintiff suffered, within the meaning of the Act, personal injury shortly before the date in January 1997 when mesothelioma was diagnosed. Accordingly, the Act applied in respect of that personal injury unless, in accordance with the view the trial Judge favoured, the effect of s8 (2) (b) and s10 (1) (a) was that the Act did not apply because the plaintiff's mesothelioma was caused by a gradual process which arose out of but not in the course of employment as defined in ss7 or 11.

Section 11 "Cover in respect of personal injury caused by gradual process, disease, or infection where exposure occurred before 1 April 1974" subs (1) provided, before amendment, as follows: "Subject to subsection (2) of this section, where any person suffers personal injury caused by gradual process, disease, or infection from exposure of that person before the 1st day of April 1974 arising out of and in the course of employment within the meaning of section 7 of this Act that ceased before that date, the person shall be entitled to cover under this Act as if that personal injury had been suffered on or after the 1st day of July 1992 or such later date as is determined under section 7 (5) of this Act." 
Subsection (1) was amended in 1993 by the omission of the words "that ceased before that date". Subsection (2) was not presently relevant.

There is no doubt in the present case that the plaintiff suffered personal injury caused by gradual process from exposure before 1 April 1974.

In the second segment of Part II headed "Relationship with Other Rights", s14 "Application of Act excludes other rights", subs (1) provided: "No proceedings for damages arising directly or indirectly out of personal injury covered by this Act or personal injury by accident covered by the
Accident Compensation Act 1972 or the Accident Compensation Act 1982 that is suffered by any person shall be brought in any Court in New Zealand independently of this Act, whether by that person or any other person, and whether under any rule of law or any enactment." 
Section 17 "Proceedings for damages for personal injury caused by gradual process, disease, or infection where exposure occurred before 1 April 1974" provided: "No proceedings for damages arising directly or indirectly out of personal injury that is caused by gradual process, disease, or infection from exposure of any person before the 1st day of April 1974 arising out of and in the course of employment within the meaning of this Act that ceased before that date shall be commenced in any Court in New Zealand independently of this Act on or after the 1st day of April 1993, whether by that person or any other person, and whether under any rule of law or any enactment." 
On 8 and 11 September 1995 Judge O'Meally gave reasons for judgment in James
Hardie & Coy Pty Limited versus Bruce on the defendant's application to have the statement of claim stayed or dismissed and on 9 October 1996 on further applications, after another defendant had been added, to dismiss or permanently stay those proceedings. In both applications an issue was whether the plaintiff's claims against the New South Wales companies for personal injury the result of mesothelioma caused by asbestos exposure failed because the actions were barred in New Zealand by the ARCI Act. On both occasions
Judge O'Meally dismissed the applications. At the time of the September 1995 application the Judge did not have the benefit of any expert evidence about
New Zealand law. In his reasons for judgment of 8 September 1995 his Honour set out the aetiology and pathology of mesothelioma.
 "Shortly stated, a quantity of inhaled asbestos fibres resides within the lung, and one or more fibres gradually migrate to the pleura, either the parietal pleura or the visceral pleura and, there by an as yet unknown process, cause a tumour. No significant damage is done until the tumour develops and death usually follows within twelve months of that time. By reason of the nature of mesothelioma, a person does not have it until shortly before symptoms present: see American Home Assurance versus Saunders [(1987) 11
NSWLR 363] ." 
When last in relevant employment in March 1974, Mr Bruce did not have mesothelioma so that, assuming his allegations were proved, even though his mesothelioma arose out of his employment, it did not arise in the course of his employment. His Honour continued: "In my view, the Compensation Insurance Act (NZ) does not prohibit actions for injury arising by disease which arose out of, but not in the course of, employment and it is open to the plaintiffs, notwithstanding the Compensation
Insurance Act (NZ), to maintain action in New Zealand in respect of their disease." 
The 1996 applications were supported by affidavit evidence from Mr Chambers, which his Honour considered. Mr Chambers stated his opinion on the basis of the allegation that Mr Bruce had been exposed to asbestos dust and fibres between 1958 and 30 March 1974 and as a result of this exposure suffered and, on the 10 September 1995, died from mesothelioma. Mr Chambers' opinion was that s8 (2) (b) was applicable to the case. He said: "13. Section 8(2)(b) refers to two sections (7 and 11) in the alternative. The reason why is this. If, broadly speaking, the exposure to the hazardous material occurred after 1 April 1974, then s7 applies, there is a cover under the 1992 Act, and any common law claim is barred by s14(1) of the 1992 Act.
If, on the other hand, and again speaking broadly, the exposure to the hazardous material occurred before 1 April 1974, then s11 applies, and, for a short time, the injured person had an election. Under s11, until 1 April 1993, the injured person could elect to take cover under the 1992 Act or to sue. If the injured person elected to sue, that person was not entitled to any compensation or anything else under the 1992 Act, irrespective of the outcome of those proceedings or the amount received by way of damages, compensation or settlement: see s11 (2). If, however, the injured person chose to come under the accident compensation regime, then he or she would have cover by virtue of s11(1), with the consequence that any claim for compensatory damages would be barred. The election provided by s11 expired, however, on 1 April 1993: see s17. From that date, any common law claim for compensatory damages has been barred, even if the exposure to hazardous materials occurred before 1 April .
Since 1 April 1993, therefore, victims of exposure to hazardous materials have (in broad terms) been limited to cover under the 1992 Act and have been barred from bringing proceedings at common law. It accordingly no longer matters whether the exposure to hazardous material occurred entirely before 1
April 1974, entirely after 1 April 1974, or partly before that date and partly afterwards. Whenever the exposure, the test is whether the requirements of s7(1) have been met. (Those requirements are effectively carried over to s11 by virtue of s11(1).) In this case, there appears to be some conflict between
Mr Bruce's pleading and Mr Bruce's affidavit. The pleading purports to limit the exposure to pre-1 April 1974, whereas in his affidavit, Mr Bruce refers to exposure continuing after that date: see paragraphs 12, 16 and 17. Nothing hinges, however, on whether the pleading is correct or the affidavit is correct. For the reasons I have just explained, the result will be the same whether s7 applies or s11 applies." 
Mr Chambers went on to quote the passage from Judge O'Meally's decision of 8
September 1995 in which his Honour expressed the view that the ARCI Act applied only to injuries occurring by accident or disease where the accident or disease arose both in the course of employment and out of employment, so that temporal and causative elements were required. Mr Chambers said: "23. With respect, Judge O'Meally's opinion as expressed above is not correct.
It is quite true that the 1992 Act does, in s3, provide definitions for the expressions `arising out of and in the course of employment', `arising in the course of employment' and `arising out of employment'. But those definitions do not apply where `the context otherwise requires'. Those definitions are relevant in various parts of the Act, but are irrelevant in the situations covered by ss 7 and 11 of the 1992 Act. Section 7 is the `dictionary' which enables one to interpret s8(2)(b). It sets out the three criteria which must be established for an injury coming within s8(2)(b). If the three criteria are established, then one has personal injury which may be `regarded as being caused by gradual process, disease, or infection arising out of and in the course of employment'." 
In his decision of 9 October 1996 Judge O'Meally said he had been asked to reconsider his conclusion that the New Zealand Act was not effective to abolish actions for damages for injury caused by disease which arose out of employment but not in the course of it. His Honour was not moved by Mr
Chambers' evidence, to which he made no express reference. He said: "I should say now that in the decision given on 8 September 1995, I expressed the view that the phrase `arising out of and in the course of employment' in section 11 and section 17 related to personal injury and not to exposure.
Having given the matter further consideration, having looked more closely at the words of the sections and having, of course, been assisted by the arguments advanced to me, I am of the view that the phrase `arising out of and in the course of employment' in section 11 and section 17 relates not to injury but to exposure. However, section 8(2)(b) extends cover for personal injury caused by disease which arose out of and in the course of employment as defined in section 7 or section 11. Section 7 and section 11 apply to diseases caused by exposure which arose out of and in the course of employment. Thus in order to have cover under the Act both the disease and the exposure must arise out of and in the course of employment." 
In the present proceedings, the defendants relied not only on the affidavit of
Mr Chambers but also the written opinion of Mr Miller of 1 January 1998. As well as being an experienced practitioner in the field, with which he has been involved for over twenty years, Mr Miller has taught this area of the law at
Victoria University and is one of the authors of Brookers Accident
Compensation Law in New Zealand. Mr Miller had read Judge Armitage's decision in Carley versus James Hardie & Co Pty Limited (unreported) 12 December 1997, in which his Honour held that s14 of the ARCI Act did not apply because the terms of the section, properly construed, required an injury both to arise out of and to be in the course of employment of a person before the section operated to prevent proceedings in any courts in New Zealand for compensatory damages for personal injury.

Mr Miller traced the history of the legislation in New Zealand. In particular he pointed to the fact that s7 of the 1992 Act replaced s28 of the Accident
Compensation Act 1982 which provided that if a person's total or partial incapacity or death resulted from any disease, and the disease was due to the nature of any employment in which the person was employed as an earner during a period that ended on or after 1 April 1974, cover should exist "as if the disease were a personal injury by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment...." In this context the phrase "as if" was used in a series of sections with like intent going back to s10 of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/wca1922255/). Mr Miller said: "Section 7 of the 1992 [Act] replaced s28 of the 1982 Act. The wording was altered from the previous sections but in my opinion the intent clearly remained the same.

There is no evidence of any intention by the legislature to change the previous practice of over 70 years of including workers whose incapacity manifested itself after they ceased working and were therefore no longer in the course of employment.

Indeed in my opinion the legislative enactment of s11 of the ARCI Act 1992 shows that the intention was to bring in more incapacitated workers who were no longer in the course of their employment.

Under the 1992 Act cover is given for personal injury caused by employment related diseases that come within the criteria of s7 (1) (a) (b) and (c).

This is done by a combination of ss4, 7 and 8.

Under the 1992 Act the first step is to establish a personal injury under s4.
The next step is to establish that the personal injury has cover under s8.

Personal Injury 
Under s4 a personal injury is defined as a physical injury. Mesothelioma physically injures the body and comes under this definition.

Cover 
Under s8 cover is given in various ways.

Under s8 (2) (b) cover is extended to a personal injury which is caused by gradual process, disease or infection arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in section 7 or section 11 of this Act.

The opening words of s7 state that `Personal injury shall be regarded as being caused by gradual process, disease or infection arising out of and in the course of employment only if' .... (a) (b) and (c) apply.

The previous ACC legislation in 1972 and 1982 said that cover shall exist as if the disease were a personal injury by accident arising out of and in the course of employment.

The 1992 Act uses the words `shall be regarded' instead but in my opinion the meaning remains the same.

In my opinion the intention of this section remains the same as the previous legislation. It is to give cover to workers whose incapacity manifests itself even if they are no longer in the disease producing employment.

To decide otherwise would mean that the legislature intended to change the law that had stood for over 70 years and exclude workers whose incapacity only came to light after they had ceased being employed.

As I said at the beginning this would deprive many workers of compensation and put New Zealand in breach of her international obligations under the ILO convention.

It is unthinkable that this was intended. There is not the slightest sign that the legislature intended this." 
Mr Miller thought that Judge Armitage's approach may have been influenced by the fact that his Honour saw cover under the New Zealand scheme as leading to a bar on common law damages and therefore requiring clear words to remove the worker's right to sue for damages. "However from the New Zealand perspective cover under the ACC scheme is seen as something beneficial." Mr Miller's conclusion was that the plaintiff, Mr Putt, having been in an asbestos work environment from 1947 to 1951 and diagnosed with mesothelioma in January 1997, had cover under s11 of the ARCI Act. As he had cover his claim for compensatory damages was barred in New Zealand by s17.

Foreign law can be proved as a fact by skilled witnesses; compare [ss174](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s174.html)-[6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s6.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/);
Temilkovski versus Australian Iron & Steel Pty Limited (1966) 67 SR 211 at 215 and 225. Even if the evidence of such a witness is uncontradicted, the
Court is not bound to accept it but as Diplock LJ remarked in Sharif versus Azad [[1967] 1 QB 605] the Court should be reluctant to reject it unless it be patently absurd or inconsistent; compare A/S Tallinna Laevauhisus & Ors v
Estonian State SS Line (1946) 80 LlLRep 99 at 108. In my opinion, it would be only in a rare case that a trial Judge, required to make findings about foreign law, would find, contrary to the opinion of an appropriately qualified expert, in favour of his or her own interpretation of the law unless that interpretation was supported by other expert evidence or the opinion was shown to be inconsistent with high judicial authority in the country concerned. An
Australian court should only in exceptional circumstances make a finding about the meaning and effect of a foreign statute, over many years applied daily in the country concerned, contrary to the uncontradicted evidence of a qualified expert in the law of that country.

On appeal, as Cairns J observed in Parkasho versus Singh [(1968) P 233] at 250, the question of foreign law, although a question of fact, is a question of fact of a peculiar kind and the same considerations do not apply in considering whether and to what extent an appeal Court should interfere with the decision of the trial Judge as apply in the case of ordinary questions of fact which come before the primary Judge. His Lordship illustrated this peculiarity by referring to a statutory provision similar to [s176](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s176.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) which provides that if, in a proceeding in which there is a jury, it is necessary to ascertain the law of another country which is applicable to the facts of the case, any question as to the effect of the evidence adduced with respect to that law is to be decided by the Judge alone. Cairns J concluded that it was the duty of the appeal court to examine the evidence of foreign law which was before the trial Judge and to decide for itself whether that evidence justified the conclusion to which the trial Judge came; see also Dalmia Dairy
Industries Limited versus National Bank of Pakistan [1978] 2 LlLRep 223 at 286 per
Megaw LJ. In Bumper Corporation versus Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [[1991] 1 WLR 1362] at 1371 the English Court of Appeal, with these authorities in mind, came to the conclusion that a trial Judge was not entitled to reject the expert evidence of a foreign law. In my opinion, this Court should approach a finding at first instance about foreign law in the same way.

The evidence of Mr Chambers and Mr Miller was compelling and should have been accepted. Judge O'Meally proffered no reason for rejecting it beyond his own interpretation of the New Zealand legislation which, with the greatest respect, I am satisfied the experts demonstrated to be in error. The evidence showed that cover under the ARCI Act extended to the personal injury which the plaintiff suffered and for which he claimed in these proceedings and that in accordance with s17 no proceedings for damages arising directly or indirectly out of such personal injury could be commenced by him in any Court in New
Zealand independently of the Act. In holding otherwise Judge O'Meally erred.

THE PLACE OF THE TORT 
The resolution of this issue goes to determine whether the New South Wales
Court is being asked to decide a dispute about a wrong committed within New
South Wales, where no question of jurisdiction arises, or about a wrong committed in New Zealand in which case the Court's jurisdiction depends not only on the wrong being actionable by New South Wales law but also upon the circumstances of the occurrence giving rise to a civil liability of a kind which the plaintiff could enforce in New Zealand; Breavington versus Godleman at -111. Judge O'Meally appears to have found that the tort was committed in
New South Wales so that no question arose about the plaintiff's right to recover a judgment in respect of an extra-territorial wrong.

The appellant submitted that the trial Judge erred in finding that the alleged tortious act was arranging the supply and export of asbestos from Australia to
New Zealand when it was aware that the commodity shipped was one, the use of which in the circumstances in which the plaintiff was employed, was known to be dangerous so as to constitute a foreseeable injury. It was submitted that his Honour should have held that the alleged breach of duty properly analysed was: a failure on the part of JHC or the Holding Company or both to warn the class of persons of which the plaintiff was a member (namely employees of
JHNZ) of the dangers of exposure to asbestos dust and fibres in the circumstance in which that class of persons worked; and/or a failure to ensure a safe system of work for that class of persons.

When he addressed the question of whether the defendants were in breach of their duty to the class of persons of which the plaintiff was a member, his
Honour quoted from the judgment of Mason J in Wyong Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47-48 and said that it appeared to him that JHC "did indeed have within its power the capacity to make requests or give instructions or take other steps, the effect of compliance with which would have been to protect the plaintiff from the risk of injury in working at
Penrose." Of the Holding Company, his Honour said that its involvement "in the affairs of JHNZ was an involvement in excess of the normal role of an association between a Holding Company and a subsidiary." 
If his Honour meant, and I can read it in no other way, that JHC was under a duty to make requests, give instructions or take other steps to protect the plaintiff from the risk of injury and that the Holding Company was under a duty by reason of its involvement to do something similar, that was not the breach his Honour described when considering the place of the tort. The reasons for judgment place the tort in New South Wales solely by reference to arrangements for the export of asbestos and the shipping of it from Australia to New Zealand. I repeat a sentence which I have already quoted from his
Honour's reasons for judgment: "In doing so the first defendant committed a breach of duty in New South Wales." His Honour did not describe the breach unless it be the very act of export. Earlier his Honour had found that asbestos was not inherently dangerous. "Its danger depends upon the manner of its use." 
With respect I think the inconsistency to which I have referred and the absence of a complete and thorough analysis have tended to conceal what were in truth the breaches, if the defendants owed a duty of care. These were a failure when supplying asbestos to a consumer to warn of the dangers of its use without appropriate safeguards or if indeed the defendants had the capacity to give instructions which JHNZ was bound to accept, the failure to ensure a safe system of work for JHNZ's employees.

In Distillers Co (Biochemicals) Limited versus Thompson the plaintiff, an infant born malformed and with defective eyesight, proceeded in New South Wales against an English company. This defendant manufactured a pharmaceutical preparation containing thalidomide, which had dangerous qualities of which it ought to have known. Having sold the preparation to an Australian subsidiary company, which marketed it in Australia, it packed and shipped the preparation to Australia. The plaintiff, whose mother had purchased the preparation in New
South Wales, did not claim that those facts alone gave her a cause of complaint for reason only that the preparation would be dangerous to the unborn child if taken by an expectant mother in the first three months of pregnancy. The negligence alleged was a failure to give a warning of that danger.

On appeal to the Privy Council the question at issue was whether, on certain assumptions as to the law and the facts, the plaintiff had as against the defendants and within the meaning of s18 (4) of the Common Law Procedure Act "a cause of action which arose within the jurisdiction" of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales. "Cause of action" in the section meant "the act on the part of the defendant which gives the plaintiff his cause of complaint" . In considering whether there was a cause of action which arose within the jurisdiction their Lordships said at 468-9: "The right approach is, when the tort is complete, to look back over a series of events constituting it and ask the question, where in substance did this cause of action arise? ........

So far as appears, the goods were not defective or incorrectly manufactured.
The negligence was in failure to give a warning that the goods would be dangerous if taken by an expectant mother in the first three months of pregnancy. That warning might have been given by putting a warning notice on each package as it was made up in England. It could also have been given by communication to persons in New South Wales - the medical practitioners, the wholesale and retail chemists, patients and purchasers. The plaintiff is entitled to complain of the lack of such communication in New South Wales as negligence by the defendant in New South Wales causing injury to the plaintiff there. That is the act (which must include omission) on the part of the
English company which has given the plaintiff a cause of complaint in law. The cause of action arose within the jurisdiction." 
Relying on this dictum the appellants submitted that, in so far as the negligence complained of in the present case was a failure to warn JHNZ or the plaintiff, it was a failure to communicate in New Zealand. Jacobs v
Australian Abrasives Pty Limited <case>; [[1971] Tas SR 92] concerned a plaintiff in Tasmania who bought an abrasive wheel made by the defendant in New South Wales which broke and hurt him. At -8 Burbury CJ said, after referring to the Privy Council in Distillers: "The plaintiff is an ultimate consumer of the article, or user of the article, within the contemplation of the defendant, and is thus someone to whom the defendant owed the duty to which the breach is complained. That duty was breached when the abrasive wheel came into the hands of the plaintiff as an article exposing him to risk of injury in the absence of taking precaution in accordance with adequate instructions and warnings supplied with the article." 
By analogy, if the defendants owed the plaintiff a duty of care it was breached when and at the place where the plaintiff was exposed to dust from the asbestos without adequate warning. Although there was no complete tort until the damage occurred, as the Privy Council remarked at 468, it is manifestly just and reasonable that a defendant should have to answer for its wrong doing in the country where it did the wrong. In this case, properly understood, the defendants did the wrong complained of in New Zealand.

In Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538] at 567 the majority of the High Court said: "The approach formulated in Distillers does no more than lay down an approach by which there is to be ascertained, in a commonsense way, that which is required by Jackson versus Spittall [(1870) LR 5 CP 542] at 552, namely, the place of `the act on the part of the defendant which gives the plaintiff his cause of complaint'. That approach has particular point if, as was the case in Distillers, it is necessary to ascribe a place to an omission for the purpose of determining where, if at all, a tort was committed.

One thing that is clear from Jackson versus Spittall and from Distillers is that it is some act of the defendant, and not its consequences, that must be the focus of attention. Thus, in Distillers the act of ingestion of the drug
Distavel by the plaintiff's mother was ignored, the place of that act being treated like the place of the happening of the damage, as one that might have been `quite fortuitous'." 
In the present case the wrongful act of failing to warn or failing to provide a safe system of work occurred in the place where the plaintiff was exposed without previous warning to asbestos dust.

If the defendants owed a duty of care to the plaintiff by supplying asbestos to JHNZ, knowing that it would be used by JHNZ's employees in the course of their employment, the breach was a failure to warn of the dangers of exposure to asbestos dust and fibres in the circumstances in which those employees worked. So far as the plaintiff relied on the relationship between JHNZ and the defendants, the case particularised was one not of failing to warn JHNZ but of failing to ensure, by means of the control capacity they were said to have, that the workplace was safe. In one case the place of the tort was the place where the warning should have operated to protect the plaintiff, in the other, the place where the system of work should have been safe. Both places were in New Zealand and I have no doubt that it was there that the tort complained of, properly analysed, occurred. Treating the export of asbestos from Australia as one step in a series which ultimately led to the plaintiff being exposed at Penrose to the asbestos dust does not make the place of the tort relied upon New South Wales.

APPLICATION OF THE SECOND LIMB IN BRENNAN J'S JUDGMENT IN BREAVINGTON versus GODLEMAN 
It follows that the plaintiff sued in the Tribunal to recover damages for a foreign tort, that is a tort committed in New Zealand. To found jurisdiction in New South Wales the plaintiff had to demonstrate not only that the claim arose out of circumstances of such a character that, if they had occurred within New South Wales, a cause of action would have arisen entitling him to enforce against the defendants a civil liability of the kind which he claimed to enforce, but also that by the law of the place in which the wrong occurred, the circumstances of the occurrence gave rise to a civil liability of the kind which he claimed to enforce; McKain versus R W Miller & Co (South Australia)
Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 1] at 39.

According to New South Wales conflict of laws rules, procedural law is governed by the law of the forum alone. If by New South Wales law s17 of the
ARCI Act was procedural, that is to say, in this context, did no more than deny the plaintiff a remedy to enforce his claim for damages for tort, then
New Zealand law had no application in New South Wales and was not relevant to the resolution of the plaintiff's claim; see Thompson versus Hill [(1995) 38
NSWLR 714] at 735. On the other hand, if s17 by New South Wales law was part of the substantive law of New Zealand, it was imported into the law of the forum in this case in determining whether there was a civil liability which the plaintiff might enforce against the defendants. As four Justices of the High Court said in Stevens versus Head <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 433], a case concerned with s79 (1) and 79 (4) of the New South
Wales [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/), at 453: "A plaintiff's cause of action under the law of the forum thus depends in part upon an affirmative answer to the question whether, by the lex loci, the relevant facts gave and continue to give rise to a civil liability of the kind which the plaintiff seeks to enforce." 
Their Honours went on at 456-7 to say: "In determining whether, by the lex loci, the relevant facts gave rise to a civil liability of the kind which the plaintiff seeks to enforce, the courts of the forum distinguish between substantive and procedural laws. Procedure is governed exclusively by the laws of the forum, but the substantive laws of the place of the tort determine whether, by those laws, there exists a civil liability of the kind which the plaintiff seeks to enforce. In McKain, it was held that a South Australian law which imposed a limitation on the time within which to bring an action in the courts of that State for damages for a tort committed within that State but which did not extinguish the cause of action was not a substantive law which precluded the bringing of an action in the courts of New South Wales for damages for a tort committed in South
Australia. The majority followed a line of authority (at 40-43) which distinguished between a statute of limitation which does no more than cut off resort to the courts for the enforcement of a claim and a statute which extinguishes civil liability and destroys a cause of action. The former is classified as a procedural law, the latter as substantive.

A similar distinction has been drawn between a law which denies a remedy in respect of a particular head of damage in negligence (a substantive law) and a law which affects the quantification of damages in respect of a particular head of that damage (a procedural law). ......

Does [s79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) or s[79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) partially extinguish or make contingent the common law cause of action for damages for non-economic loss? If so, these provisions would be classified as substantive." 
In Thompson versus Hill at 737 Clarke JA referred to the discussion in McKain at 43 about the difference between a statute which bars stale claims and a statute which creates a right of limited jurisdiction so that after the expiry of the time prescribed the right ceases to exist for any purpose. His Honour said that in the latter example, which the majority in McKain said constituted substantive law, it was easy to comprehend that the right was conditional or contingent in the sense that it must be exercised within a prescribed time. Thompson versus Hill concerned [s93](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/taa1986204/s93.html) of the [Transport Accident Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/taa1986204/) (Vic) and whether it was substantive or procedural. Subsections (1) and (2) provided: "(1) A person shall not recover any damages in any proceedings in respect of the injury or death of a person as a result of a transport accident occurring on or after the commencement of [s34](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/taa1986204/s34.html) except in accordance with this section.

A person who is injured as a result of a transport accident may recover damages in respect of the injury if - the Commission has determined the degree of impairment of the person under [s46A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/taa1986204/s46a.html), [47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/taa1986204/s47.html) or [47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/taa1986204/s47.html) ; and the injury is a serious injury." 
At 739 Clarke JA said: "The [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/taa1986204/s93.html) is expressed in terms denying a party a right to damages in respect of injury or death as a result of a transport accident except in accordance with the regime appearing in the following subsections. That regime requires both that the injury be a serious one and that the plaintiff secure the determination of the Transport Accident Commission ...... before any action can be maintained.
In substance, the effect of [s93](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/taa1986204/s93.html) and s[93](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/taa1986204/s93.html) is to deny a person, who is injured in a transport accident, the right to sue a third party for damages for negligence unless at least two conditions are fulfilled - the Commission has determined the degree of impairment and the injury is a serious one. ....... [Sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/taa1986204/s93.html) , (2) and (4) do not, as later subsections do, affect the quantification of damages either generally or in respect of a particular head of damage. They operate to deny a person a right to recover in respect of any damages in the relevant circumstances unless the two conditions have been satisfied." 
At 740 his Honour said that it would, in his opinion, be an unacceptable extension of the concept of a procedural law to allow it to embrace a statutory provision which disentitled a person from recovering damages for personal injury received in a transport accident except upon satisfaction of conditions expressed in the statute. Accordingly, the subsections were substantive laws.

Section 17 of the ARCI Act provided that no proceedings for damages arising directly or indirectly out of personal injury "shall be commenced in any Court in New Zealand independently of this Act on or after 1 April 1993". In my opinion, consistent with McKain and Thompson versus Hill, s17 must be read as extinguishing any cause of action for damages arising directly or indirectly out of personal injury caused and arising in the manner therein described.
While the language of the section in form bars an action to enforce a right to damages, its substantial effect, read in the context of the Act as a whole, is to substitute cover under the Act for the right to recover common law damages.
It is a substantive law. Professor Fleming, The Law of Torts, 9th ed, at 449 described the New Zealand legislative scheme as "a comprehensive system of exclusive compensation, replacing tort recovery ....... for all `personal injury by accident', including certain industrial diseases .....". The section extinguished the plaintiff's common law right to recover damages for his injury.

WHETHER JHC AND/OR THE HOLDING COMPANY OWED A DUTY OF CARE TO THE PLAINTIFF AND IF SO, WHETHER THAT DUTY OF CARE WAS BREACHED 
An examination of the evidence which I have outlined led Judge O'Meally to the conclusion that each defendant exercised influence over JHNZ and that JHNZ was part of a single enterprise which meant that the defendants put themselves into a relationship of proximity with JHNZ's employees. The defendants submitted that this finding was not open.

The plaintiff started from the position that the Holding Company was a 95 percent shareholder of JHNZ. In that sense, so far as is known, the Holding
Company controlled JHNZ in that its shareholding carried with it the power to outvote all opposition in the company; see generally Mendes versus Commissioner of
Probate Duties (Victoria) <case>; [(1967) 122 CLR 152] at 160. However, the plaintiff's argument was not that for this reason this shareholder and perhaps controlling shareholders generally owed a duty to the company's employees to ensure the workplace was safe or they were warned of the dangers of materials being used by them in the course of their employment. Rather, the argument was that the defendants influenced or controlled JHNZ's board of directors so that it could be said that JHNZ "complied with requests and obeyed instructions given to it by JHC" a finding his Honour said the evidence supported. In short, the plaintiff did not say that the acts or omissions of JHNZ were to be treated as the acts or omissions of the defendants. The plaintiff relied upon the alleged acts or omissions of the defendants themselves.

However, I find it difficult to distinguish this approach from a reliance upon the undoubted control that the Holding Company, with 95 percent of the shares, had over JHNZ.

The characterisation of a group of companies, linked by shareholding, as a single enterprise where one is an actor, whose acts or omissions should be attributed to another or others within the group, involves either "lifting the corporate veil", treating the actor as an agent or imposing upon another or others within the group a duty by reason of the degree or manner of control or influence over the actor. The distinction between these ideas is easily blurred.

In Adams versus Cape Industries PLC [[1990] Ch 433] the plaintiffs were seeking to enforce a United States' judgment against English resident companies. An issue before the English Court of Appeal was whether the English companies were present or carrying on business in the United States because their subsidiary or representative was present in the United States. To support this conclusion the plaintiffs urged that the defendants and their subsidiary or representative constituted a single commercial unit and that therefore for jurisdictional purposes the presence of the subsidiary or representative sufficed to constitute the presence of the English companies.

At 532 the Court, in a judgment given by Slade LJ, pointed out that there was no general principle that all companies in a group of companies are to be regarded as one and at 536-7 said that English law, for better or worse, recognised the creation of subsidiary companies, which though in one sense the creatures of their parent companies, would nevertheless under the general law fall to be treated as separate legal entities with all the rights and liabilities which would normally attach to separate legal entities. A Court could not disregard the principle of Salomon versus A Salomon & Co Limited [[1897] AC 22](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1897%5d%20AC%2022 "View LawCiteRecord" ) merely because it considered it just so to do.

A number of factual matters were relied upon including the purpose of establishing the subsidiary, the fact that any major policy decisions concerning it were taken by the holding company and the degree of control exercised by the parent company. At 538 Slade LJ remarked that it was the very nature of a parent company - subsidiary relationship that the parent company was in a position, if it wished, to exercise overall control over the general policy of the subsidiary. As Robert Goff LJ observed in Bank of Tokyo Limited v Karoon (Note) [[1987] AC 45] at 64; "[Counsel] suggested beguilingly that it would be technical for us to distinguish between parent and subsidiary company in this context; economically, he said, they were one. But we are concerned not with economics but with law. The distinction between the two is, in law, fundamental and cannot here be bridged." 
At 539 Slade LJ referred to Woolfson versus Strathclyde Regional Council [[1978]
SC (HL) 90] at 96 where Lord Keith of Kinkel, with whose judgment the other members of the House of Lords agreed, said of the decision of the Court of Appeal in DHN Food Distributors Limited versus Tower Hamlets London Borough
Council [[1976] 1 WLR 852:] "I have some doubts whether in this respect the Court of Appeal properly applied the principle that it is appropriate to pierce the corporate veil only where special circumstances exist indicating that it is a mere facade concealing the true facts." 
In Briggs versus James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited [(1989) 16 NSWLR 549] after quoting at length from the DHN Food Distributors case, Rogers AJA said at that there appeared to be no special circumstances in the facts of the case which differentiated it from the ordinary relationship of parent and fully owned and controlled subsidiary. "Rare indeed is a subsidiary that is allowed to run its own race." At 576 his Honour asked: "If exercise of dominance be at least part of the test, what degree of dominance is required?" 
At 577 his Honour said that in his view the proposition that the corporate veil may be pierced where one company exercises complete dominion and control over another is entirely too simplistic. "The law pays scant regard to the commercial reality that every holding company has the potential and, more often than not, in fact, does, exercise complete control over a subsidiary."
If the test were as absolute as the submission would suggest, then the corporate veil should have been pierced in the case of both Industrial Equity v Blackburn <case>; <case>; [(1976) 137 CLR 1.] In the second of those cases Mason J said at 6 - 7: "To speak of the companies as being members of a group is something of a misnomer which may well have led his Honour into error. The word `group' is generally applied to a number of companies which are associated by common or interlocking share holdings, allied to unified control or capacity to control.
In such a case the payment of money by a company A to company B to enable company B to carry on its business may have derivative benefits for company A as a shareholder in company B if that company is then able to trade profitably or realise its assets to advantage. Even so, the transaction is one which must be viewed from the standpoint of company A and judged according to the criterion and of the interests of that company ..... Indeed, the emphasis given by the primary Judge to the circumstance that the group derived a benefit from the transaction tended to obscure the fundamental principles that each of the companies was a separate and independent legal entity, and that it was the duty of the directors of Asiatic to consult its interests and its interests alone in deciding whether payment should be made to other companies." 
There was nothing to suggest that those responsible for workplace safety at the Penrose plant were employees of the defendants rather than employees of
JHNZ and that the separate corporate identity of JHNZ was a mere facade. The most that could be said, and this was certainly true of the Holding Company, was that the defendants were in a position to insist that proper workplace standards were maintained. Did the defendants owe a duty to the plaintiff to do so when they were neither the occupiers of the premises nor the employers of those responsible for the safety of the workplace or of the plaintiff?
While the way in which the case was put and apparently accepted by Judge
O'Meally gives lip service to the integrity of the corporate veil, implicitly it lifts it by saying that the control of the workplace was not that of the subsidiary company occupier or employer but, through their influence or control, that of the defendants.

In the Silicone Gel Breast Implants Products Liability litigation (1993)
F Supp 1128 Chief Judge Pointer of the United States District Court,
Alabama, observed that the plaintiffs had attempted to state three basic claims against Dow and Corning premised upon their role as the corporate parents of Dow Corning; piercing the corporate veil; joint venture; and negligent or otherwise improper supervision. The facts clearly demonstrated a separate corporate existence for Dow Corning, recognised and respected by it and its parent corporations. According to the plaintiffs, inappropriate control and domination by the parents of the subsidiary could be found in "their providing technology, research, testing, personnel and facilities to Dow Corning; their control and election of Dow Corning's board of directors; their management of Dow Corning's financial affairs; their awareness of, and participation in, the `Breast Implant Controversy'; and the special relationship between Dow and Dow Corning, including the sharing of facilities, services and liability insurance." 
At 1134 the Chief Judge observed: "that a proper evaluation of the plaintiff's contentions should not disregard the fact that the protection of limited liability is generally accorded even for solely owned corporations, and that the shareholders of a corporation are permitted - and, indeed, required by law - to exert certain control over the affairs of the corporation. Transactions between corporations are legitimate and commonplace, and, when between one company and another with a significant or even controlling stock ownership in the former, do not necessarily suggest improper domination or a failure of the parties to respect their separate corporate identities." 
At 1138 the Chief Judge said, although Dow and Corning had had significant contacts with their subsidiary, these contacts did not, singularly or in combination, rise to the level of manipulation and control that would support a piercing of the corporate veil. As the only stockholders, Dow and Corning elected Dow Corning's directors, some of whom were current or former members of their own board. These directors influenced the financial policies of Dow
Corning, but so far as appeared, only in a manner that was appropriate considering their responsibilities to the corporation and to its stockholders,
Dow and Corning. Various business dealing between the three companies appeared to have been carried out with due regard for the separate existence and interests of each with all necessary corporate formalities being observed.

On the question of a duty said to flow from control and its alleged inadequacy, the Chief Judge said at 1140, that the Restatement (Second) of
Torts enumerated certain types of relationships in which such a duty should be imposed: the duty of a parent with respect to a child's conduct; the duty of a master with respect to its servant's conduct; the duty of a possessor of land or chattels with respect to its licensee's conduct and the duty of those in charge of a person having dangerous propensities. The courts of Alabama had rejected the attempt to extend the duties of such a special relationship to the relationships between parent corporations and their subsidiaries. The
Alabama courts have held that "the duty to control doctrine may not be applied to hold a parent corporation liable for the acts of its subsidiary". No contrary decision was to be found in any other jurisdiction. Moreover it was doubtful that any State currently imposed on a parent corporation a duty of disclosure to purchasers of a subsidiary's products.

The plaintiff relied upon what was said by the High Court in Stevens v
Brodribb Sawmilling Company Pty Limited <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 16] particularly at 29 about responsibility for a worker's injury arising out of dangerous operations or extra hazardous acts in the course of work carried out for the principal by an independent contractor which employed the worker. In that case, the worker had little choice but to rely on the care and skill of the principal in the arrangements made for the disposition of the work and the inter-dependence of the activities carried out called for the prescription and provision of a safe system by the principal. At 31 Mason J observed: "Although the obligation to provide a safe system of work has been regarded as one attaching to an employer, there is no reason why it should be so confined.
If an entrepreneur engages independent contractors to do work which might as readily be done by employees in circumstances where there is a risk to them of injury arising from the nature of the work and where there is a need for him to give directions as to when and where the work is to be done and to co- ordinate the various activities, he has an obligation to prescribe a safe system of work. The fact that they are not employees, or that he does not retain a right to control them in the manner in which they carry out their work, should not affect the existence of an obligation to prescribe a safe system. Brodribb's ability to prescribe such a system was not affected by its inability to direct the contractors as to how they should operate their machines." 
Neither of the defendants engaged JHNZ as an independent contractor to do work for them. There was no need for them to give directions as to when and where the plaintiff worked or to co-ordinate his activities with those of others.
The plaintiff could appropriately look to JHNZ, the occupier of the factory, to provide a safe system of work. No doubt the plaintiff relied upon JHNZ to do so. The defendants did not stand in the position of an entrepreneur employing an independent contractor which had to look to them to provide a safe system of work. The principle expounded in Stevens versus Brodribb Sawmilling
Company Pty Limited does not impose such a duty upon the defendants and has no application.

I have already observed that Judge O'Meally referred to passages in CSR
Limited versus Wren in his judgment. In the context of the issue of whether a duty of care is owned by either of the appellants to the plaintiff, it must be pointed out that Wren concerned a very different factual matrix. In Wren, it was the employees of CSR (the parent company) who controlled the day to day operations of the subsidiary. They, as employees of CSR, directed or controlled the system of work and the working conditions on the factory floor.
The factory manager and foreman was a CSR employee. CSR had direct control of the operational aspects of its subsidiary's factory. These facts illustrate that Wren is a very different case from the subject one. Wren did not involve any question of lifting of the corporate veil.

The Bhopal case which is discussed by P T Muchlinski in [50 MLR 545] concerned a subsidiary of the United States corporation Union Carbide which produced pesticides at its Bhopal plant in India. In December 1984 a substantial quantity of a highly toxic gas, an ingredient of the production, escaped killing and injuring thousands of people. The article concerns attempts made to recover compensation from the US Holding Company. The learned author discusses at 567 the question whether the Union Carbide was under a duty of care to the victims to provide a safe system of work at the plant and had failed to discharge that duty by properly supervising its subsidiary's activities. A recognised major problem was to establish a causal link between the US Holding Company's acts and omissions and the accident since the subsidiary was a separate person at law which could act independently in a way that made it the principal tortfeasor. None of the usual relationships necessary for vicarious liability, namely those of master and servant, principal and agent and employer and independent contractor, appeared to be analogous to the relationship between a parent company and its subsidiary.

It has been suggested that in company law the corporate veil between parent and subsidiary may be lifted where the latter was so controlled by the former as to be its agent for the purposes of liability; Smith Stone and Knight
Limited versus Birmingham [[1939] 4 All ER 116.]
However, in Woolfson versus Strathclyde Regional Council at 95 Lord Keith of
Kinkel said, in approving the reasons for the judgment appealed from, that the separate legal status of a limited company and its incorporators must, as held in Salomon versus Salomon & Co Limited [[1897] AC 22], normally receive full effect in relations between the company and persons dealing with it. His
Lordship referred to a passage in the judgment of Ormerod LJ in Tunstall v
Steigmann [[1962] 2 QB 593] at 601 to the effect that any departure from a strict observance of the principles laid down in Salomon versus Salomon has been made to deal with special circumstances when a limited company might well be a facade concealing the true facts.

This passage was discussed by Dr Rixon in an article "Lifting the Veil between
Holding and Subsidiary Companies" in [102 LQR 415.] At the learned author observed: "That the corporator has `complete control of the company' is not enough to constitute the company a mere facade; rather that term suggests, in the context, the deliberate concealment of the identity and activities of the corporator. Certainly the term calls to mind expressions used by the Court when lifting the veil in (cases which are then cited), all cases in which the company was formed in order to enable the corporator to do through, and under the cover of, the company what he might not do openly and in person." 
Judge O'Meally did not find, nor could he on the evidence, that JHNZ was a mere facade which concealed the true fact that the plaintiff was an employee of the defendants or that JHNZ in employing the plaintiff or manufacturing products at Penrose was the defendants' agent. Ultimately the question was whether the control or influence which his Honour found to have existed was such as to impose a duty to the plaintiff of which there was a breach. None of the cases referred to supports such a conclusion. To suggest that such a duty existed is to ignore JHNZ's separate legal identity and the absence of any evidence that this was a mere facade.

Accordingly, in my opinion, the duty of care and breach found by Judge
O'Meally were not made out.

GRIFFITHS versus KERKEMEYER EXPENSES 
The appellants submitted that even if the plaintiff was otherwise entitled to damages he should not have been awarded any amount for services recoverable under the principle in Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer. Further evidence was put before the Court about the plaintiff's entitlement to recover such expenses in
New Zealand. In view of my opinion that the plaintiff's proceedings in New
South Wales should be dismissed it is unnecessary to say anything further about this issue except that the trial Judge's order allowed application to be made pursuant to [s13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s13.html) of the [Dust Diseases Tribunal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/) to vary the award of $10,000 in accordance with any payment made by the Accident
Compensation Commission of New Zealand.

CONCLUSION 
In my opinion, the appeal should be upheld, the judgment of Judge O'Meally set aside and an order made dismissing the proceedings with costs. The respondent should pay the costs of the appeal but have a certificate under the [Suitors
Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).

ORDERS 
I propose the following orders:
That the proceedings be and be deemed to have been amended by substituting
Michael Peter Hall the Administrator ad litem of the Estate of Desmond Putt deceased as respondent to the appeal in place of Desmond Putt since deceased as from the date of his death;
Appeal allowed;
Judgment and orders of 23 January 1998 set aside;
In lieu thereof judgment for the defendants;
Respondent to pay the costs of the hearing in the Dust Diseases Tribunal and of this appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Sheller JA. 
STEIN JA: I agree with Sheller JA. * * * 
