

Landwell (Vic) P/L versus Neessen Investments P/L [1996] NSWSC 484 (11 October )

LANDWELL (VIC) PTY LTD V NEESSEN INVESTMENTS PTY LTD /96 
Monday 16 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Essentially, this is a dispute between a Mr Boehm and his interests and a Mr Neessen and his interests.

Mr Boehm is the registered proprietor of two properties "Lorraine" and "Illyria" near Jerilderie. Mr Boehm controls the first plaintiff, Landwell
Pty Ltd which appears to be the trustee of his family trust and he also controls Liberty Meat Exports (Aust) Pty Ltd. Mr Neessen controls the first defendant, Neessen Investments Pty Ltd.

The Boehm interests and the Neessen interests appear to have entered into an oral sharefarming agreement with respect to the Jerilderie properties, sometime in 1986 or 1987. No record was made of this agreement at the time, but later Mr Neessen prepared a sharefarming statement which purports to set out the principal terms of the agreement, viz - 
Mr Boehm would supply the land and working capital, while Mr Neessen would work on the properties and manage the farming venture; 
The agreement would be for a period in excess of ten years (this was later varied by the parties to take into account "the development and commercial return of the almond orchard"); 
The working capital supplied by Mr Boehm would be repaid in priority to any profit or capital distribution with subsequent profit or loss to be allocated between the parties on an equal basis.

It is arguable that this sharefarming agreement was subsumed in a partnership which commenced about August 1987 under the name "Neessen Farming". That name was registered as a business name under the NSW Business Names Act on 24 March
In Common Law Division proceedings 14137 of 1995, Mr Boehm's company,
Liberty Meat Exports (Aust) Pty Ltd claimed that Neessen Investments Pty Ltd and Landwell (Vic) Pty Ltd were partners and that Liberty Meat had loaned the partnership $859,600 between August 1992 and February 1994 of which only $200,000 had been repaid. Mr Neessen filed a defence for the first defendant, agreeing that there was a partnership, indicating that the loans by Mr Boehm or his companies were only $780,000 of which $280,000 had been repaid, and saying that it was agreed that repayment would only be made when the partnership made sufficient profits to enable it to make repayments and that event had not occurred.

On 20 October 1995, Mr Boehm's company, Landwell (Vic) Pty Ltd, moved the
Supreme Court of Victoria to wind up the partnership "Neessen Farming" and on October 1995, Beach, J made an order appointing a receiver to that partnership. The receiver appointed was a Mr Eustace. I believe he is still the receiver though he has indicated his intention to retire and be replaced by another member of his firm, Mr Colin McDonald.

On 19 July 1995, Landwell (Vic) Pty Ltd gave a notice to Neessen Investments
Trust trading as Neessen Farming that sharefarming arrangements between the trust and Landwell (Vic) Pty Ltd on "Lorraine" and "Illyria" were terminated, such termination to take effect six months from that date.

On 13 October 1995, an application was made under the Agricultural Holdings
Act 1941 to the Director General of the Department of Agriculture requesting that a dispute be referred to arbitration under that Act. The application named Mr Boehm as the registered proprietor and Neessen Farming as the tenant of "Illyria" and "Lorraine".

Para 9 of the application which dealt with the nature of the tenancy agreement said, "No formal sharefarming agreement exists, operation of sharefarming agreement and partnership is summarised as follows: ...". There was then set out a version of what I have set out above plus additional details. The application said that the Neessen interests had been locked out on 19 July and they sought a declaration that there was a valid and enforceable sharefarming agreement, that the notice to quit was invalid, that the locking out was a breach of the [Agricultural Tenancies Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ata1990233/) and damages for loss of income and improvements.

The Minister appointed Mr Damer Walsh as arbitrator of the dispute. Mr Walsh entered upon the arbitration on 3 June 1996. After giving leave for an amended application to be filed, Mr Walsh adjourned the arbitration pending the decision in these proceedings.

The amended application was lodged on 4 June 1996. In lieu of having been made by "Neessen Farming" the name of the tenant was noted as "Neessen Farming -
Neessen Investments Pty Ltd - Nol Neessen Nominees Pty Ltd and Arnoldus
Jacobus Marie Neessen." It otherwise appeared to be in the same form as the
October 1995 application.

A summons was filed on 31 May 1996 seeking a declaration that the first and second defendants, namely Neessen Investments Pty Ltd and Mr Neessen are without authority from the receiver of the partnership known as Neessen
Farming to initiate or continue arbitration proceedings purporting to be brought under the [Agricultural Tenancies
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ata1990233/) together with an injunction to restrain further prosecution of that arbitration.

The matter was finally argued before me on 5 June 1996. Mr Motbey of counsel appeared for the plaintiffs, Miss J Oakley of counsel appeared for the Neessen interests and Miss J Graham appeared for Mr Walsh. After hearing some oral submissions, I agreed that submissions could be completed in writing and that
I would reserve my decision.

Mr Motbey put that there were four problems facing the Neessen interests, namely:- 
A. When the partnership came into existence and the partnership took possession of the property any right of occupation of the Neessen interests under the sharefarming agreement must be ceased.

B. The only statutory rights to arbitration that were extant in October 1995 would have been rights under the [Agricultural Tenancies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ata1990233/). The application to be valid would have had to have been made under that Act not the Agricultural Holdings Act, 1941.

C. The application was out of time under the 1990 Act.

D. Even if one could deem the application to be made under the 1990 Act, there has been no authority to make the application on behalf of the partnership.

After considering these problems I will deal with - 
E. Mr Motbey's application for orders under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/s47.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/); and 
F. The result of the litigation.

A. There seems little doubt from the conduct of the parties that there was a partnership from at least 1992.

At all material times the fee simple in "Illyria" and "Lorraine" was vested in
Mr Boehm. There is no evidence at all to suggest that he intended that that fee simple be partnership property. The partnership obviously had some interest in the land. As it was in exclusive possession, that interest would appear to be a tenancy under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s127.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/). Each tenant would have a beneficial interest in that tenancy under the general law of partnership now codified in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/s20.html) of the [Partnership Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/).

Did the entry into the partnership terminate the sharefarming agreement? 
In Dudgeon versus Chie [(1954) 55 SR 450], affirmed by the High Court <case>; [(1955) 92 CLR 342], it was held that a sharefarming agreement was to be treated as a contractual licence and that the Agricultural Holdings Act 1941 did not convert it into an estate in the land. Partnership rights are contractual rights. Where one gets two contracts made between the same persons involving the same subject matter, the later will terminate the former if the parties have expressly or impliedly agreed to substitute the new contract in the place of the earlier one. As Chitty on Contracts 25th ed 1485 says, the question as to whether such a termination has been effected is frequently one of considerable difficulty and that one must gather the intention on examination of the terms of the subsequent agreement and from all the surrounding circumstances. As Lord Develin, when giving the judgment of the Privy Council, said in United Dominions Corp (Jamaica) Ltd versus Shoucair [[1969] 1 AC ], , "If the new agreement reveals an intention to rescind the old, the old goes; and if it does not, the old remains in force and unamended." 
In British & Beningtons Ltd versus North Western Cachar Tea Co Ltd [[1923]
AC 48], 62,
Lord Atkinson said, "A written contract may be rescinded by parol either expressly or by the parties entering into a parol contract entirely inconsistent with the written one, or, if not entirely inconsistent with it, inconsistent with it to the extent that goes to the very root of it ...". He cited as authority Morris versus Baron & Co [[1918] AC 1], Hunt versus South
Eastern Railway Co  <case>; [(1860) 8 CB (NS) 831]; ER 1392. See also Commissioner of Taxation versus Mercantile Credits Ltd [(1986) 10 FCR 340], 343.

To my mind, where there is a partnership agreement covering the parties' rights and duties vis a vis the working of land, there is such a fundamental inconsistency with a sharefarming agreement that the former must be taken as having been terminated and superseded by the partnership.

The instant case is complicated by the fact that it would appear that the oral sharefarming agreement was made between Mr Boehm and Mr Neessen personally, whereas the subsequent partnership agreement was between various companies they controlled. I have taken this point into consideration, but it does not seem to me that it changes the result. One must look to see whether in the second contract the parties intended that the first contract should be terminated. Messrs Boehm and Neessen personally were involved in the decision to make the second contract by their companies and must be taken to have impliedly agreed to terminate the first contract.

Another problem is that on 19 July 1995, Mr Boehm or his company gave Mr
Neessen or his company a notice to quit on the basis that the sharefarming agreement was still in force. This may have under some circumstances operated as some sort of estoppel, because a person cannot deny that the only source of power to give a notice is not available; see Franklin versus Manufacturers Mutual
Insurance Ltd <case>; [(1935) 36 SR 76.]
However, the parties, through their corporate vehicles, were represented before Beach, J in the Supreme Court of Victoria when an order was made that a receiver be appointed to their partnership and that each partner deliver up to the receiver all the effects of the partnership. There is thus, one would have thought, no dispute between them that there was a partnership so that any conduct which may have grounded an estoppel would not have affected the way the parties conducted themselves.

Accordingly, in my view it is almost incontestable that the prior sharefarming agreement has been terminated and the only relations between the parties is constituted by the partnership.

B. The [Agricultural Tenancies
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ata1990233/) No 64 of repealed the Agricultural Holdings Act 1941 subject to Schedule 2.
Clauses 3 and 4 of Schedule 2 are as follows:- "3. (1) Nothing in this Act affects any right, power or duty exercisable or to be performed under the former Act in respect of a tenancy: created before the repeal of the former 
Act; or created by the exercise of an option granted before that repeal, and the former Act, and the regulations under that Act, are to be taken to continue to apply to a tenancy so created, to the exclusion of this Act and any regulations under this Act.

This clause has effect subject to clause 4 and any regulation made pursuant to clause 2.
If a matter arising under the former Act is referred to arbitration after the commencement of this clause, the arbitration is to be conducted under and according to the provisions of this Act." 
The original sharefarming agreement was created under the 1941 Act. A right to compensation under the 1941 Act existed as at 1 May 1991 when the 1990 Act came into force. Accordingly, had the sharefarming agreement still been in force after the commencement of the partnership, it would have given rise to rights under the 1941 Act.

The evidence is not completely clear when the partnership commenced. The
Common Law Division proceedings between Liberty Meat Exports and the Neessen interests show loans from August 1992 onwards to the partnership, but there is some evidence elsewhere that the partnership only began in 1993. Whenever it began it was after the 1990 Act came into force.

In 1992 or 1993, the probabilities are that there were rights under the 1941
Act in the sharefarmer though it could be argued that Schedule 2 of the 1990
Act does not apply where there are incipient rights with respect to a tenancy that continue both before and after 1 May 1991: that is, there are not vested rights. However, any such rights to arbitration came to an end when the time for making the application expired. Under the 1941 Act this was two months from the termination of the tenancy.

Accordingly, any rights that existed under the 1941 Act ceased two months after the partnership commenced, that is, somewhere in 1992 or 1993.

If I were wrong about the partnership terminating the sharefarming agreement, and the sharefarming agreement continued on, then if the right to arbitration under the 1941 Act was a right covered by clause 3 of Schedule 2, there was two months from the termination of the tenancy to bring proceedings.

The argument for the Neessen interests, is that the tenancy was never terminated because <case> of the 1941 Act operated to extend a notional tenancy at will to a tenancy that could only be terminated on 12 months' notice at least and that that 12 months' notice did not expire until July 1996.
Accordingly, the notice given to the relevant Government authority on 13
October 1995 was within time.

The point was not argued before me and the only decided case on the Act which is relevant, Keevers versus Taylor's Pastoral Co Pty Ltd (Young, J, 2 May and 8
June 1994), assumes that the 1941 Act rights continue on until the tenancy that existed as at 1 May 1991 is finally determined. On this basis the Neessen interests would have a claim which was made within time. However, as I have said, in my view there was no sharefarming agreement after the partnership commenced in 1992 or 1993.

C. As I have said, Schedule 2 to the 1990 Act provides that the arbitration is to be conducted according to the provisions of the 1990 Act even though the arbitration is for matters under the 1941 Act. The question is whether the time limitation in <case> of the 1990 Act is a matter that falls within the phrase "the arbitration is to be conducted under and according to the provisions of this Act".

The 1941 Act set out the time limit in <case> as two months from the date of termination of the tenancy. Section 17 was the section setting up the arbitration. Section 20 of the 1990 Act provides for arbitration, the time limit however is in <case> which provides for three months after the date the tenant left the farm. If the 1990 Act applies, then the application made on 13
October 1995 is within time because the tenant left the farm on 19 July 1995.

There are many authorities dealing with the question as to whether time limits are procedural or substantial. A true Statute of Limitation which does no more than cut off resort to the courts for enforcement of a claim is a procedural law, Pedersen versus Young <case>; [(1964) 110 CLR 162]; McKain versus RW Miller & Co (SA) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 1.] Section 22 of the 1990 Act is purely procedural: there is much more doubt about <case> of the 1941 Act. However, Schedule 2 to the 1990
Act does not make the distinction between a matter of procedure and a matter of substance, but rather focuses on what is to happen before the arbitrator.
As <case> deals with what is to happen before the matter gets to the arbitrator or alternatively, confers on the Supreme Court jurisdiction to extend the time (under <case> the Supreme Court generally speaking has no jurisdiction over a matter before the arbitrator), my view is that clause 4 of Schedule 2 does not apply. Therefore, there is no escape from the time provisions of the 1941 Act.
As indicated earlier, this probably is of no consequence in view of my decision on question A.

D. The arbitrator permitted an amended application to be put in. If there was power to do this and if the same rules apply as apply in courts, then the amended application would date back to the time of the original application.
It is questionable, however, whether that is an appropriate analogy.

It is put that the so called "amended application" of June, 1996 was really the first application made under the 1990 Act, and so must be out of time.
This must be the case unless the amendment relates back to the day the original application was filed.

Section 23 of the 1990 Act makes the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), with certain exceptions, applicable to an arbitration under the provisions of the Act.

So long as the amendment is within the ambit of the dispute which has been referred to arbitration, an arbitrator has a full discretion as to whether he or she will allow amendments to the pleadings; see Re Crighton and The Law
Car and General Insurance Corp Ltd's Arbitration [[1910] 2 KB 738] and the discussion in Russell on Arbitration 20th ed p 256. 
The question here is, what was referred to arbitration? Was it the entitlement of the tenant generally, or was it the entitlement of the tenant under the 1941 Act. If it were the former, then the amendment could be made; if it were the latter, query whether this could be so because the arbitrator would be going outside his terms of reference.

The proposition that in court an amendment relates back to the commencement of the action seems to have commenced with the decision of the English Court of
Appeal in Sneade versus Wotherton Barytes & Lead Mining Co Ltd [[1904] 1
KB 295.]
That, however, was rather a special case because it concerned a writ out of the County Court for an amount larger than the Court's jurisdiction and all the case decided was that if the writ is amended to show a lower amount, the writ is deemed to always have shown the lower amount. In Warner versus Sampson [[1959] 1 QB 297], where it was a defence that was amended, the principle was taken further that once pleadings are amended, then the court considers the issues are defined by the present pleadings and does not look beyond those.
Thus, for all intents and purposes the amended pleadings are considered to be the pleadings in the action. However, both the High Court (Wigan versus Edwards [(1973) 47 ALJR 586], 596) and the NSW Court of Appeal have stated the proposition in the wider form that amendments date back to the commencement of the action. Although there is no decision on the point, on parity of reasoning, the same would apply to amendments made in an arbitration.

Accordingly, the whole question depends on whether the original claim was of sufficiently wide ambit to give the arbitrator the power to make the amendment he gave leave to make. That is a matter for the arbitrator that I should not enter into.

The next part of this question is whether the application before the arbitrator is defective because it was not made by the receiver of the partnership but was made by one of the partners.
 "Tenancy" is defined in <case> of the 1990 Act as meaning "a lease or licence, an agreement for a lease or licence, a tenancy at will or a sharefarming arrangement or any other arrangement by which a person who is not the owner of the farm has a right to occupy or use it." The definition in the earlier Act was different, but not materially different. Each definition would include some people who had an equitable title, namely persons who claimed under an agreement for lease though it may well be said that such people would have a legal interest as well.

As I have said earlier, where a partnership works land such as the present, it may well be that there is a <case> tenancy to the partnership and that each partner has some beneficial interest in that tenancy. However, this beneficial interest does not appear to me to be sufficient to amount to a tenancy. The
Act seems to contemplate that only one person will be a tenant and does not, generally speaking, recognize a beneficial interest in the tenancy.

Accordingly, the tenant is the partnership, that is, the partners.

Ordinarily one partner cannot sue in the name of the firm: Meyer & Co v
Faber (No 2) [[1923] 2 Ch 421.] The reason for this is probably twofold, first, as partnership rights are joint rights and most court rules require that all persons party to a joint right must be parties to the action. Secondly, ordinarily, cases where one partner is suing another should be brought for partnership accounts, not in an ordinary action at law.

Thus whilst the partnership is live, there is no authority that one partner may sue on behalf of the partnership in his or her own name. Once a partnership is wound up, there is even less warrant because any semblance of agency is gone except for the purposes of winding up the partnership.

It may be that what I have noted about one partner not being able to sue in the partnership name may sound the death knell for the application before the arbitrator. That, however, is a matter for the arbitrator.

Kerr on Receivers and Administrators, 17th ed (Sweet & Maxwell London 1989) says at p 177, "All applications to the court in respect of estates in the hands of a receiver should, as a general rule, be made on behalf of persons beneficially interested in the estate, and not by the receiver." This passage as it appeared in the 13th ed was approved and applied by the NSW Court of Appeal in Wilton versus Commonwealth Trading Bank [[1974] 2 NSWLR 96], 99. In that case, Hutley, JA said that the receiver's proper course is to apply to the court to compel the partners to lend their name to any proceedings. 
At 178, Kerr goes on to say, "A receiver acquires no right of action by virtue of his appointment: he cannot sue in his own name as receiver, eg for debts to a company, or to parties over whose assets he has been appointed receiver; nor can the court authorise him to do so. In such cases, he must maintain the action in the name of the person or persons who would be entitled to sue apart from his appointment." The principal authority for that proposition is Re
Sacker [(1888) 22 QBD 179.] That authority was followed by the House of Lords in Rodriguez versus Spyer Bros [[1919] AC 59](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1919%5d%20AC%2059 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 112. It was followed in this court in Re Scottish Properties Pty Ltd [(1977) 2 ACLR 264] by Needham, J; in Western Australia in Robertson versus Oskar [(1983) 8 ACLR 570] and the principle was recognized in the Federal Court but distinguished on the facts in Re Yates [(1989) 88 ALR 583.] 
As the receiver, accordingly, was not entitled to bring any proceeding in his own name, it is difficult to see how an application can be invalid merely because it was not made in the receiver's name.

There is, however, a separate point. The order appointing the receiver also ordered that each partner deliver up to the receiver all the effects of the partnership. The intent of the order was that the receiver would be in control of getting in the assets of the partnership. Probably a concomitant of this is that no party should have commenced proceedings to realize partnership assets without the approval of the receiver. It would appear that the receiver knows about the current action before the arbitrator and is just standing by and waiting to see what will happen. The consequence of commencing such proceedings may be that the person taking the proceedings has interfered with the receiver, thus interfering with an officer of the court and so is in contempt of court; see Kerr on Receivers op cit, Chapter 6.

That matter does not appear to me to give the plaintiffs any claim for relief in the current proceedings. First, any contempt of court would be a contempt of the Supreme Court of Victoria which appointed the receiver. Secondly, it is not necessarily the case that one partner maintaining an action to preserve or enhance partnership property is interfering with the receiver a fortiori when the receiver knows about it and does nothing about it, and thirdly, it is very difficult to maintain a case of interference brought by another partner where the receiver does not give any evidence of complaint that his office is being obstructed by the action of the defendants. Accordingly, it does not seem to me that this gives the plaintiffs any cause for relief.

E. The plaintiffs ask that if all else fails I give directions under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s47.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/). The first and second defendants oppose this.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s47.html) gives the court power to make interlocutory orders in relation to arbitration proceedings. Whilst the court has power to make such orders, it must be remembered that <case> of the 1990 [Agricultural Tenancies
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ata1990233/) makes it clear that the court has no jurisdiction in respect of any issue in a dispute arising out of anything contained in the 1990 Act except to the extent that it cannot be referred to arbitration. Although it can be argued that where the arbitration is procedurally under the 1990 Act but in respect of a 1941 Act application, the old rule should apply, that is, the court may interfere in special circumstances (Ryles versus Martin (1971) 1 BPR 9666), the general flavour of the legislation is that the court should not become involved in this sort of matter. One reason for this is the exacerbation of costs in what should be in almost every case a question of fact and fairness to be assessed by people in the "industry".

There may, in the present case, be some justification for the court taking action because there are very grave doubts as to whether the arbitration can produce any benefit for any party. The real dispute between the parties involves their partnership and their duties one to another and eventually those matters will either have to be resolved by a court or by a far wider ranging arbitration or mediation. I hope and believe that the reasons contained in this judgment may settle some of the issues merely because I have pronounced on issues, but I do not think there is any utility in making any actual orders. However, I have said I strongly suspect that there will be further litigation between these parties over their partnership and it may be wise merely to give leave to the plaintiffs to amend the summons generally and leave for a cross claim to be filed by any other members of the Neessen group if that leave be necessary.

F. To conclude, the basic premiss on which the plaintiffs' case is based is not made out. However, various subsidiary points made by the plaintiffs, particularly the one that there is no legal tenancy in the Neessen interests which can be the subject of proceedings before the arbitrator under the
Agricultural Holdings Act have been established.

It seems to me that the result is that I should make no order on the summons and as each contesting party has failed, there should be no order as to their costs. As the plaintiffs have failed against the arbitrator, they should pay the third defendant's costs to date. However, in fairness I should give the contesting parties the opportunity to be heard on the question of their costs.
I will not be sitting for the remainder of the year so that the matter of costs may be dealt with by a Registrar.

Accordingly, I decline to make any order on the summons at this stage. I give leave to amend the summons generally and leave to the defendants or any other company associated with the defendants to file a cross claim and stand the matter over to the Registrar's list for mention on 11 October 1996 provided that with the Registrar's consent that date may be amended to suit counsel.
The plaintiffs must pay the third defendant's costs to date. I make no other order as to costs save that the question of costs generally is reserved.
 * * * 
