

Regina versus Graham Victor Doolan [1997] NSWSC 218 (23 May 1997) 
REGINA versus Graham Victor DOOLAN /96 
Wednesday 7 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Graham Victor Doolan seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence imposed upon him comprising a minimum term of two years with an additional term of three years for the offences of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm upon Frank Gregory Kirby.

About 10.20pm on 11 January 1995 the applicant was at the Wentworth Wharf Park consuming alcohol with a number of other people. Whilst he was there a fight commenced between two females who were part of the group. The applicant pulled both of the females apart by their hair. Upon separating the females he took off his singlet and started to become aggressive, saying "Who wants a go at me?" He turned around and grabbed Kirby by the back of the hair and pulled him down to the ground. The applicant proceeded to kick Kirby and stomp on Kirby's head, causing him to become unconscious and to bleed from the head.

The applicant was moderately affected by alcohol and was very agitated. The ambulance arrived and took the victim to Mildura Base Hospital where he was diagnosed as having a fractured jaw and severe swelling and bruising to the face.

Kirby was admitted to St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne on 17 January 1995. An examination revealed a swollen black left eye. Kirby was very tender over the region of the left zygoma. It was fractured. He had numbness in the region of the left inferior orbital and anterior superior alveolar nerves. He had obvious mal-occlusion of his teeth and mild tenderness at the angle of the mandible bilaterally. He was subject to surgery, open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture were performed. Kirby had previously lost the sight in his right eye and it was fortunate that as a result of this attack he did not lose the sight of his left eye.

This narration of the facts reveals that the offence was a serious one. The applicant was born on 21 November 1971 and thus was aged twenty-three years at the time of the offence.

Unfortunately, the applicant has an extensive criminal history which began in early 1986. His record includes matters of dishonesty, driving offences, and assaults.

The applicant was arrested on 21 September 1995 upon a first instance warrant.
He was allowed bail but, in respect of other matters at the Bourke Local Court on 22 September 1995, was sentenced to three months' hard labour. He was released on 21 December 1995 and was at liberty for twenty-one days until he was arrested and charged at Dubbo on 11 January 1996 on a charge of break, enter and steal on 7/8 January 1996.

On 2 February 1996 the applicant was sentenced to a minimum term of thirteen months and two weeks from 11 January 1996, with an additional term of four months and sixteen days. On 30 May 1996 at Wentworth Local Court he was sentenced to three months imprisonment on a charge of assault. He was due for release on 23 May 1997, and it was from that date that the sentences under appeal date.

The applicant's prior criminal history, and the chances which he has been given, are set out in greater detail in the reasons of the sentencing judge.

It is apparent, both from the transcript of the proceedings before the judge, and his reasons, that he gave the question of sentence close attention. He took into account the applicant's plea of guilty, his age, his personal background, and the principle of totality. The judge was anxious to avoid the applicant becoming institutionalised. The judge carefully considered a report from the gaol psychologists at Bathurst, the Sexual Assault Service report of
Ms Rosalee Webb, a psychologist, and the report of Dr John Couper-Smartt, a psychiatrist.

It appears from these reports that the applicant had reported to these people that he had been sexually assaulted as a young child (when he was about five years) and by the victim when the applicant was approximately twelve or thirteen years of age (one report), fourteen years of age (in a second report), and fifteen years of age (in the third report). These reports relate to the one incident and it seems that after this length of time the applicant cannot remember exactly when the assault by Kirby is alleged to have taken place.

According to the psychiatrist the incident of sexual abuse by the man Kirby had rankled with the applicant for many years. He had felt powerless and a need to set the record straight. Kirby had enjoyed a relationship with the applicant's elder sister for many years.

Sexual abuse is capable of amounting to severe provocation. The judge paid particular regard to the principles in Regina versus Fernando [76 A Crim R ] when dealing with sentencing of persons who are indigenous to Australia, and the applicant's personal history and background as he grew up.

The judge found that the applicant had shown remorse and contrition. He had had extensive counselling. The judge observed that the applicant had spent much time in the last ten years as an inmate of penal institutions and that if he were to ever turn the corner he must begin to look seriously and realistically at his position and review the future for his family. He has a de facto wife and three young children. The judge determined that he would ensure that there was a longer additional term to ensure that the applicant got the best available counselling both in prison and post prison. The judge hoped that this would facilitate the applicant's rehabilitation.

Counsel for the applicant submitted that the judge failed to appreciate fully the significance of the material contained in the report of the psychiatrist.
That does not put the position correctly. Counsel submitted that the judge had not attached sufficient weight to the provocation which the applicant had suffered, there being gross provocation and yet the applicant received a sentence of five years against a maximum possible sentence of seven years.
Reliance was placed on the sentence being cumulated on another sentence, albeit that the matters were entirely separate.

Counsel for the applicant submitted that the sentence imposed in this case was out of pattern with other sentences. I agree with counsel that this particular case has some special features. Counsel submitted that the position was simply this, that a serious wrong had been done many years ago to the applicant by the victim and that the applicant had sought an opportunity for revenge and, when that opportunity presented itself, had acted. The applicant had finally been able to vent his anger and punish Kirby for his gross and wrongful acts.
Counsel contended that the lengthy additional term was appropriate but that the overall sentence was too severe.

It seems to me, particularly having regard to the judge's remarks on pp 4 and of his reasons that the applicant was in an aggressive frame of mind that night. This is illustrated by his remarks after he separated the women. That does not mean that there cannot be, and was not, provocation.

The judge had to consider and balance many factors. I am persuaded that he did so. Considerable weight had to be attached to the gravity of the offence. The record of the applicant could not be ignored. Neither the total sentence nor the minimum term were excessive. By imposing such a low minimum term and encouraging counselling his Honour was endeavouring to rehabilitate the applicant.

Leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders of the court will be as I have proposed.
 * * * 
