

Capital Television Group Ltd and Anor versus Northern Rivers Television Pty Ltd
No. 50004/94 [1995] NSWSC 75 (16 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
BAINTON J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 1 September 1995 #DATE 4:9:1995 #ADD 16:10:1995 
Counsel for the Applicants:     Mr D. Hammerschlag 
Solicitors for the Applicants:   Freehill Hollingdale and Page 
Counsel for the Respondent:     Mr R. Kaye 
Solicitors for the Respondent:   Mallesons Stephen Jaques 
Solicitors for Fourth, Sixth, Seventh Defendants: Miss A. Crammond 
Counsel for National Australia Bank Ltd: Mr M. Walton 
Solicitors for National Australia Bank Ltd: Ebsworth and Ebsworth 
Solicitor for Australian Broadcasting Authority: Ms E.N. Warner 
Counsel for Mr Charles Curran: Mr G. K. Burton 
Solicitor for Mr Charles Curran: Parry Carroll Kanjian 
Solicitors for Canwest Global
Communications Corp: Landerer and Co.
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
BAINTON J JUDGMENT ON NOTICE OF MOTION
Capital Television Group
Ltd and Capital Television Holdings Ltd were the plaintiffs in proceedings 50004 of 1994 in the Commercial Division of this
Court.
The Ten Group Ltd was the eighth defendant in those proceedings. The
Ten Group Ltd is the holder of 50,000 B class shares in Capital
Television
Group Ltd, which in turn holds all the shares in Capital Television Holdings
Ltd.
The proceedings to which I have referred were recently terminated by consent orders involving their dismissal and ordering the plaintiffs to pay the costs of some of the defendants. In the course of the preparation for the hearing of those proceedings the plaintiff company produced numerous documents on discovery, other documents were produced by various persons on subpoena and others again were made available on express under-takings as to confidentiality, given by the solicitors for The Ten Group Ltd.
By Notice of Motion filed on 24 August , The Ten Group Ltd seeks a variation in the implied undertakings in respect of discovered documents and the express or implied undertakings in respect of the documents produced on subpoena or produced in conformity with a confidentiality agreement "to permit the Ten Group Ltd to use those documents and information herein for the purposes of advising in relation to and bringing separate proceedings concerning the conduct of the proceedings". It would be difficult to describe the purpose to which the applicant wishes to put the documents and information with less specificity than those in that Notice of Motion.
It is well established that documents of which discovery has been given in civil litigation may not be used by the party to whom they are discovered otherwise than for the purpose of that litigation without the consent of the person giving discovery or of the Court. Harman versus Secretary of
State for the
Home Dept [1983 1 AC 280.]
In that case one of the solicitors acting for a plaintiff gave a journalist likely to make use of the information, access to some of the documents produced on discovery by The Home Office. They were all documents which had been read out by Counsel in Court in the course of the hearing. It is hardly surprising that she thought that any confidentiality had thereby been abrogated. The entire contents of those documents were in the public domain. By a majority (Lords Simon of Glaisdale and Lord Scarman dissenting) their
Lordships held that the implied undertaking given by a solicitor to whom documents are produced on discovery in civil litigation, that he will not himself use or allow the documents or copies of them to be used for any collateral or ulterior purpose of his own, his client or any one else, is not vacated by the documents having been admitted into evidence in Court. See Lord
Diplock's speech at p304. So to do, said their Lordships, was a contempt of
Court.
The House of Lords revisited this question in Crest Homes
PLC versus Marks [(1987) 1 AC 829.] All of their Lordships were of the opinions expressed by Lord
Oliver of Aylmerton. The circumstances giving rise to the appeal can be shortly stated. Crest Homes PLC in 1984 brought proceedings claiming breach of copyright in home designs and obtained an Anton
Piller order against Marks and
Wiseoak Homes Ltd. Marks had been an employee of Crest Homes PLC but left it to take employment as managing director of Wiseoak Homes Ltd. On execution of that order only two infringing designs were discovered. On the first inter partes hearing of the 1984 proceedings the defendants gave undertakings not to infringe. Shortly afterwards Marks made an affidavit in which he deposed that he had no relevant documents in his possession other than those which had been found as a result of the search of his premises on the execution of the Anton
Pillar order. In 1985 Crest Homes PLC obtained a further Anton Piller order against, inter alia, Marks and Wiseoak Homes Ltd. On the execution of this order, infringing designs relevant to the copyright claim which based the 1984
Anton Piller order were found. That discovery led Crest Homes PLC to conclude that there had been breaches of the undertakings in the 1984 action and that the affidavit to which I have referred was false. That there had been such breaches and that the affidavit was false were both very much in issue: to establish its execution Crest Homes PLC wished to use material which came into its possession on the execution of the 1984 order. But it being well established that execution of an Anton Piller order was of the nature of compulsory discovery, those obtaining the order and conducting the search were bound by the implied undertaking discussed in Home Office versus Harman. Crest
Homes PLC accordingly applied to be released from the implied undertaking in respect of the 1985 order to take proceedings against Marks and Wiseoak Homes
Ltd for breach of their undertaking in the 1984 proceedings and in respect of the allegedly false affidavit sworn in the 1984 proceedings.
Lord Oliver put the problem this way: "The purpose of an Anton Piller order is, primarily, the preservation of evidence which might otherwise be removed, destroyed or concealed but it operates, of course, also as an order for discovery in advance of pleadings. It is clearly established and has recently been affirmed in this House that a solicitor who, in the course of discovery in an action, obtains possession of copies of documents belonging to his client's adversary gives an implied undertaking to the court not to use that material nor to allow it to be used for any purpose other than the proper conduct of that action on behalf of his client: see Home
Office versus Harman [(1983) 1 AC 280.] It must not be used for any 'collateral or ulterior' purpose, to use the words of Jenkins J in Alterskye versus Scott [(1948) All ER 469], approved and adopted by Lord Diplock in Harman's case, at p302. Thus, for instance, to use a document obtained on discovery in one action as the foundation for a claim in a different and wholly unrelated proceeding would be a clear breach of the implied undertaking: see Riddick versus Thames Board
Mills Ltd [(1977) QB 881.] - and this must, in my judgment, clearly be right - that the implied undertaking applies not merely to the documents discovered themselves but also to information derived from those documents whether it be embodied in a copy or stored in a mind. But the implied undertaking is one which is given to the court ordering discovery and it is clear and is not disputed by the appellants that it can, in appropriate circumstances, be released or modified by the court."
He then turned to consider whether "appropriate circumstances" had been shown. He said, at p 857-8 "My Lords, I would not wish anything said in your Lordships'
House to be thought to detract from the integrity of the implied undertaking given to the court on behalf of a party obtaining an order for discovery. Nevertheless, in the very special circumstances of this case, I find myself unimpressed by the arguments adduced on behalf of the appellants. So far as concerns the effect of a relaxation of the undertaking upon the performance of the obligation to make full and frank disclosure, there are two points. In the first place, that obligation can be of little relevance in relation to the seizure of documents and materials under an Anton Piller order, the whole purpose of which is to gain possession of material evidence without giving the defendant the opportunity of considering whether or not he shall make any disclosure at all.
Indeed the justification for the application is the likelihood that, short of immediate and unheralded intervention, relevant material is likely to be spirited away or destroyed. Secondly, so far as concerns free and frank disclosure under the compulsion of that part of the order which requires the defendant to swear an affidavit, the point may have some general validity but in a case where, if Crest are right, the absence of free and frank disclosure on a previous occasion is manifest, an appeal to it has a somewhat hollow ring."
And later, at p859-860 "My Lords, although
I have, for my part, found the appellants' arguments less than convincing, they can and do fairly say that it is not for them to advance reasons why the implied undertaking should not be released but rather for the respondents to demonstrate cogent and persuasive reasons why it should be released. To that I now turn. Mr Henderson, on behalf of the respondents, whilst accepting the importance, as a matter of general policy, of preserving the integrity of undertakings given to the court as the Price of discovery, submits that there is an equally important countervailing consideration of public policy that orders of the court should be obeyed I accept that, but if what was in issue here was the revelation of a civil contempt in some wholly unrelated proceeding I would not for my part consider that the importance of ensuring obedience to the court's orders outweighed that of ensuring the continued observance of an undertaking given to the court by the party obtaining discovery.
Your Lordships have been referred to a number of reported cases in which application has been made for the use of documents obtained under Anton Piller orders or on general discovery for the purpose of proceedings other than those in which the order was made. Examples were Halcon International Inc. versus Shell Transport and Trading Co. [(1979) RPC 97] I do not, for my part, think that it would be helpful to review these authorities for they are no more than examples and they illustrate no general principle beyond this, that the court will not release or modify the implied undertaking given on discovery save in special circumstances and where the release or modification will not occasion injustice to the person giving discovery."
Lord Oliver's speech in Crest Homes PLC is plainly the source of the much used expression in subsequent decisions, "special circumstances", so it is appropriate to consider what he meant by it. There is no point in consulting dictionaries - both "special" and "circumstances" are quite amorphous expressions. What his Lordship was considering were two established principles; the first that undertakings to the Court should be observed, the second that Court orders should be observed. Allied to the second of these was the discouraging of and the punishment for false evidence (in this case on affidavit). I would sum up those considerations by proposing that the required enquiry, when application is made to be relieved of an implied (or for that matter an express) undertaking to the Court is whether or not the ends of justice are better served by relieving from or by maintaining that undertaking. It is a balancing exercise. That, I think, is what Lord Oliver meant - it is what he in fact did. When he referred to special circumstances, he meant that what was sought to be achieved in that matter by relieving the giver of the undertaker from his undertaking was more important for the purposes of the administration of justice generally (discouraging and punishing false evidence) than was maintaining, in the situation he was considering an undertaking as to confidentiality, because so to do might allow deceit and perjury to go unpunished.
That, I would have thought, was an easy choice.
I turn now to examine the subsequent treatment of this question in
Australia.
In Central Queensland Cement Pty Ltd versus Hardy [1989 2 QdR 509] McPherson J held that a witness statement served pursuant to a Practise Note not relevantly different from the directions usually given in cases in the
Commercial Division of this Court attracted the implied undertaking that it would not be used otherwise than for the purposes of the proceedings. This was a case where a copy had been given to a journalist likely to publish it, or perhaps more accurately, that journalist's view of it. This is simply another example of the general principal which has been applied to all stages of litigation, that material produced and disseminated (to other parties) under the compulsory processes of the course of litigation is subject to an implied undertaking from its recipient that he will not, without leave of the Court, use it, or make it available to others for use otherwise than for the purposes and in the course of the proceedings in and for which it was produced.
Burchett J considered the question of relieving against an implied undertaking in respect of documents produced on discovery in Holpitt Pty Ltd v
Varimu Pty Ltd <case>; [(1991) 103 ALR 684.] The proceedings before Burchett J claimed that the Applicants, as vendors, had been misled by Potts and West, who also, it was alleged, had aided and abetted the purchaser in misrepresenting that it had or would have the funds necessary to complete a purchase of the
Crest
Hotel at Kings Cross for $4.6m. Potts and West denied the allegations, but in the alternative asserted that they had reasonable grounds to make them.
In earlier proceedings Bank of New Zealand had produced on discovery documents which Potts and West wished to use in aid of their defence that they had reasonable grounds to make the representations.
Burchett J then recorded the applicants dilemma. They were required he said to give discovery of these documents because in the other proceedings they had been in the possession custody or power of Potts and West, having been produced to them on discovery in those other proceedings, but the implied undertaking in the prior proceedings (to use them only for the purposes of those proceedings) did not permit them to do so.
For myself, I would have thought that this question admitted of only one answer - "Yes". The applicants were obviously wanting to rely in the proceedings before Burchett J on the contents of documents produced to them subject to the implied undertaking in the earlier proceedings. But for the earlier proceedings they would not - ex hypothesi - have known of them. I say ex hypothesi because if they had the documents or had known of them otherwise than by reason of the earlier discovery their application would have been unnecessary. They would not have been relying on anything to which a confidentiality obligation attached. The documents were obviously relevant to the defence that Potts and West had reasonable grounds to believe the necessary funds would be available to a purchaser. And Bank of New Zealand could not have regarded the documents as confidential. In other words, there was a good reason to make the documents available to Potts and West, and no reason not to.
However, the argument before Burchett J did not proceed on that basis. He was asked to consider whether there were "special circumstances" as though, it seems to me, he was being asked to construe a statute or Rule of Court. The view which he expressed was that the test was whether or not an exercise of the discretion to permit the use of the material, despite the implied undertaking on which it was received, was "in the interests of justice" [(103
ALR 683] at 687).
For reasons I have earlier given, I regard that as an essential element, but not the only element, in the test (unless without expressly so saying his
Honour meant by the test as he propounded it, the balancing test as I would propound it).

Though the present question was not therein in issue Kirby P in Ainsworth v Hanrahan [(1991) 25 NSWLR 155] at p167 set out a number of matters relevant to determining whether the rule relating to the confidentiality of discovered documents should be extended to answers to interrogatories. He determined that it should. One of the matters he took into account he expressed as "There is a distinction between the provision of pre-existing documents, usually produced without thought to litigation or public exposure and the use of interrogatories. The latter are provided under oath or affirmation. The deponent must necessarily contemplate their possible use, at least in the litigation for which they are secured. And the very provision of the oath or affirmation ensures that, ordinarily, the deponent will have thought carefully and seriously about what is said. Such will not necessarily be the case in business or commercial documents. The risks of private, hurtful, extraneous or secret information being given in answer to interrogatories is considerably reduced when compared to the risk that discovery will produce to the public eye material which is private or confidential to the holder of the document. There is much greater opportunity ex post to control the supply of information than in document produced without a moment's thought to its subsequent public disclosure;"
The question of whether or not leave to use a witness statement prepared for one proceeding in another was necessary and should be given was considered by Wilcox J in Springfield Nominees Pty Ltd and Ors versus Bridgelands Securities
Ltd and Ors <case>; [(1992) 110 ALR 685.] On the first of those questions Wilcox J agreed with the decision and reasons on that question of Macpherson J in
Central Queensland
Cement Pty Ltd versus Hardy (at pp690-1). He then turned to whether or not his discretion should be exercised in favour of the applicant who wished to use the statement. The statement was one by a Mr John Hyla
Preston who had prepared it for the purposes of proceedings brought by
Springfield Nominees Pty Ltd against Bridgeland Securities Ltd and Preston in relation to "prospective investments by the applicants in the Estate Mortgage
Trusts" (p686) in the Supreme Court of New South Wales. As Rogers J transferred it to the Federal
Court it must have been filed in the Commercial
Division of this Court. Rogers J had ordered witness statements to be filed and I assume served on the other parties. Those proceedings, then in the
Federal Court, were settled so that the witness statement was not used (otherwise it would presumably have been tendered, a course which I would regard as having the same effect (for the purposes of the present question)) as reading it out in open Court. At about the time of the settlement of those proceedings, Aetna Pacific
Securities Ltd commenced proceedings against Hong
Kong Bank of Australia Ltd in the Supreme Court of New South Wales. These proceedings also related to the Estate Mortgage Trusts: the allegation appears to have been that Hong Kong Bank of Australia Ltd wrongfully converted some cheques intended for the trustee of those Trusts by collecting them for Estate
Mortgages Financial Services Ltd.
Apparently
Preston's statement had found its way into the possession of the liquidator, Mr Ramsay, of Estate Mortgage Financial Services Ltd and he gave a copy of it to a legal adviser of Hong Kong Bank of Australia Ltd.
Preston was asked for his permission for the Bank to use it in the proceedings brought against it by Aetna Pacific Securities Ltd but he refused. Application was then made by the
Bank to the Federal Court for leave for the Bank to use the Preston statement in the Supreme Court.
After referring to Harman,
Crest Homes, Central Queensland Cement,
Holpett and Ainsworth, Wilcox J said "Conformably with Central Queensland Cement and the position of both the present parties, I hold that the statement of Mr
Preston may not be used by Hong Kong Bank in its defence to the Aetna proceedings without his consent or leave of the Court.
He then went on to consider whether there were "special circumstances" which would justify the grant of leave. His ultimate conclusion is expressed as follows "Consideration of these factors leads me to the conclusion that it is proper to give leave in the present case. Mr Preston's statement was prepared for use in litigation; it was not pre-existing. It does not contain personal data or commercially sensitive material.
Although the author of the document does not consent, and would prefer it not used, he does not resist leave or advance any argument of prejudice. The document came into the possession of the present applicant under circumstances which reflect no discredit on it or its representatives. I cannot say that the document will be important to the achievement of justice in the Aetna-Hong Kong Bank case; much depends upon the course of that case and the evidence given in it. But it deals with matters relevant to that proceeding. It is a statement made by a person involved in transactions the subject of that proceeding.
It has at least the potential to be important to the proper determination of that case. I propose to grant leave." .
I am puzzled by aspects of this case. The implied undertaking in respect of discovered, or subpoenaed, documents or witness' statements can only be that of the party or parties to whom the documents are by one or other of those means made available. Hong Kong Bank of Australia Ltd did not get this document from anyone to whom it had been produced in the earlier litigation (which could only have been the plaintiff Springfield Nominees Pty Ltd or the other defendant Bridgeland Securities Ltd). Neither what their Lordships said in Harman or in Crest Homes, nor the historical basis for the proposition for which those decisions are authority would suggest that the obligation springs from the document and is peripatetic. The obligation is founded as I read their Lordships upon its having been made available for the purpose of its use in some particular litigation by a party therein who thereby becomes subject to the implied undertaking.. I would be surprised if a person who picked up and read a copy of an affidavit, or a witness statement carelessly dropped on the footpath in Phillip Street, and who read it could be restrained from making any use of what he thereby learned. It could not be said, surely, that he is bound by an undertaking implied by law, never, without the consent of the Court, to pass what he learned on to anyone else. He simply would not have got the document in the circumstances from which the implication arises. That purpose was described by Lord Diplock in Harman 1983 1 AC at 302 as a step in the achieving of justice in court actions, whereby a party or its legal representatives was enabled to obtain copies of other peoples' documents. (He was speaking of discovery, but the same reasoning would apply to answers to interrogatories, and to copies of witness statements, at least where they have been directed to be filed and served).
Again, it would be strange, it seems to me, to assert that a liquidator who comes into possession of a witness statement, or of copies of discovered or subpoenaed documents produced in the course of litigation to which the company of which he is liquidator was a party cannot use those documents, or information gleaned from a perusal of them, for the purpose of assisting him in the discharge of his statutory duty as liquidator, unless he first obtains the consent of the Court in which the proceedings in which the documents were produced were or had been taken.
The present application is avowedly to enable
The Ten Group Limited to use documents, and the information in them, produced on discovery or pursuant to subpoenas so as to obtain advice in bringing separate proceedings in relation to the conduct of the proceedings in which those documents were produced, those proceedings having been terminated by consent orders for their dismissal. The sole material relied upon in support of it is that
The Ten
Group Ltd holds 50,000 B Class Shares in Capital Television Group Ltd, which in turn holds all the issued capital of Capital
Television Holdings Ltd and that The Ten Group Ltd has commenced proceedings in the Federal Court against
Capital Television Group
Ltd for an order under s319 of the Corporations Law for authority to inspect and make copies of books of Capital Television Group
Ltd "relating to certain matters".
In my view, there is no justification whatever for making the orders sought. Indeed, there is, in my view, strong reasons for not doing so. The proper and expeditious determination of proceedings in the Commercial Division of this Court requires cooperation between parties and their respective legal representatives, particularly in the preparation and exchange of lists of documents and of witness statements. Undertakings given, or implied, facilitate this cooperation. It would, it appears to me, be mostly likely that this cooperation would not be so freely forthcoming if parties or their advisers had to anticipate that if their client lost the materials produced could be used to base an action against the client or its directors or executives of some nature which challenges the propriety of the bringing of the action. It does not appear to me that the interests of justice require that this be permitted: I think that they require it to be refused.
I should at this stage add that some of those who produced documents under subpoena, or perhaps simply on request but upon being furnished with an undertaking as to confidentiality, indicated that they consented to the order sought, so far as it concerned their documents. It is not apparent to me why any order is sought against those entities. I was simply told that it was done in case it was necessary. The present applicants can make their own decisions on whether or not to avail themselves of that consent. I see no reason why the
Court should absolve them in advance where it is not prepared to make orders against nonconsenting respondents.
As will have been clear from what I have said,
I do not propose to make the order sought, even where the producer of the documents consents. I do not think that the requirements of justice necessitate relief from an undertaking given in fact or implied by law so as to enable a litigant successful in litigation to bring, or examine whether he can find material which would enable him to bring some sort of proceedings against those who caused the bringing of the proceedings which have failed. On the contrary I am of the affirmative view that the requirements of justice are better served by refusing the dispensation.
I accordingly refuse to make the orders sought and I order The Ten Group
Ltd to pay the costs of each respondent which opposed the making of the order sought by the Notice of Motion.
Though not named as Respondents in the Notice of Motion, it was served upon and orders were sought against National Australia Bank Limited, the
Australian
Broadcasting Authority and Mr Charles Curran. My cost order extends to these parties, that is to say, that their respective costs are to be paid by The Ten Group Ltd.
After The Ten Group Ltd's Notice of Motion had been served on them,
Capital Television
Group Ltd and Capital Television Holdings Ltd filed their own Notice of Motion seeking relief from its undertakings as to confidentiality should The Ten Group Ltd obtain the orders it was seeking. It has not; so that no orders need be made on this Notice of Motion. But filing it was in the circumstances of this case a reasonable course to have taken.
The costs of the Applicants of this Notice of
Motion should accordingly be regarded as part of the costs of resisting The Ten Group Ltd's application and accordingly payable by
The Ten Group Ltd, and I so order.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/75.html  
