

Darcy versus The Commonwealth of Australia Matter No 13394/93 [1997] NSWSC 271 (25 July 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Darcy versus The Commonwealth of Australia /93 July 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /93 - Darcy versus The Commonwealth of Australia 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 30 August 1993. The plaintiff claims damages for personal injury. A cause of action founded on negligence is alleged. An Amended Statement of Claim was filed on 23 August 1996. 
On 8 December 1993, a Defence was filed. There are a number of defences (including a defence founded on the provisions of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969 (the
Act)). There has been an admission of breach of duty.

On 30 August 1993, the plaintiff also filed a Notice of Motion. It seeks an extension of the relevant limitation period. It expired on 10 February 1970.

On behalf of the plaintiff, affidavits have been sworn by the plaintiff himself. He has given supplementary oral evidence and has been subjected to lengthy cross-examination. The defendant relies on an affidavit sworn by V. E.
Salkin. Considerable documentation has been tendered.

This is yet another of the applications that arise out of the collision that took place between HMAS Melbourne (the Melbourne) and HMAS Voyager (the
Voyager) on 10 February 1964. The plaintiff was a member of the Voyager crew.
He had joined the ship about a week prior to the collision. At the time, he held the rank of Petty Officer Writer. This involved him in the performance of accounting and administrative tasks.

After being rescued, he signed a Statement which, inter alia, provided an account of events following the collision (Exhibit 2).

He served in the Navy during the years 1958-1983 (25 years of service). At the completion of his service, he held the rank of Commander. After leaving the
Navy, he conducted a real estate business.

The material deposed to by the plaintiff himself is relatively sparse. It includes the following:- "5. After the collision I and a number of other survivors were addressed by a senior naval officer, possibly a captain, and were informed we could not make any claim in respect of personal injuries other than making a specific claim for compensation if we had suffered the loss of a specific limb such as arm or leg or the loss of an eye. I was instructed to inform senior and junior sailors of this. It was made clear to us that other than recovering payment for lost personal possessions, we were not entitled to make any further claim against the Government in respect of the collision. Further, I, through my personnel duties as Petty Officer Writer, was aware that other survivors who jumped ship or refused to sail on other ships after the collision were labelled `psychos' and life was made difficult for them. Therefore, I attempted as far as possible to hide my fears of being at sea again and especially my fears of going down to dark or confined spaces below decks.
Because of my senior ranking, I was normally able to avoid tasks involving confined spaces by delegating them to other members of my staff.
I knew I had some problems arising from the collision, in particular this fear of sailing in ships and fear of being in confined or dark spaces, but I thought they would go away and I did not know they were part of a psychological disorder which was likely to become permanent if not treated. I sought no treatment for my problems during the Navy and was not encouraged to do so." 
The tendered documentation includes medical and other service material relating to the plaintiff which has been produced by the defendant. There were, inter alia, regular medical examinations and personal assessments.
Largely, the material demonstrates that his problems were not brought to the attention of the Navy and its doctors. Also, the evidence (see, inter alia,
Transcript p 52) discloses that the problems were not brought to the attention of his own doctors (including his general practitioner, Dr Cook).

He was approached by another Voyager survivor. He became aware that others had made a claim and was given the name of a firm of solicitors (Vicario &
Associates). He made contact with the firm of solicitors in 1990. They sent him a questionnaire which he completed and sent back. Nothing further happened until 1993. He thinks he had a letter suggesting that a claim should be lodged before some cut-off date (August 1993). He instructed his present solicitors.
He brought these proceedings. He was told that he would need a referral to a psychiatrist.

The plaintiff sought and obtained a referral from Dr Cook. On 10 November , he saw Dr Oley Kay. He was a local psychiatrist who practised within about 2 kilometres of where the plaintiff worked and lived. A report dated 11
November 1993 was prepared (Exhibit A). A diagnosis of a significant psychiatric disorder (Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)) was made (see
Exhibit A).

On 6 December 1993, he travelled to Brisbane to be seen and assessed by
Professor Beverley Raphael, Chairperson of The University of Queensland,
Department of Psychiatry. This was done at the request of the solicitor for the plaintiff. She has produced a report dated 18 January 1994. A copy of that report is an annexure to the affidavit sworn by the plaintiff on 23 April .

The report extends to some ten pages. It contains the following conclusions:- "Mr Darcy has managed very well in his life in many ways, particularly in the successfulness of his work and has had reasonable successful marital life.

Nevertheless Mr Darcy has had significant and disabling symptoms. He has clearly had ongoing Post Traumatic Stress Disorder although his avoidant symptoms have isolated this and he has managed his life around avoiding all reminders and thus the extent of his symptomatic response and distress in association with the `Voyager' has been concealed.

Secondly he has had a severe phobic syndrome, which has been present with increasing severity over recent years. Again because of his seniority and his rank he was able to manage to avoid many of the situations which were fearful to him, including going below deck, and the fearfulness that exists for him in situations where he is in enclosed spaces.

His areas of disability are limited, although it is clear that he has also shown some symptoms of Dysthymia or depression in recent months, as well as the current levels of distress in relation to his cardiovascular condition.
His levels of impairment is moderately severe, apart from the areas specific to his disorder, i.e. in relation to his avoidant symptoms and phobic symptoms.

It should be noted that Mr Darcy was attempting to manage his symptoms and did not believe they would have long lasting effects on him, both throughout his time in the service and before 1970. He had no indication that he would not be able to do this as he had used extensive avoidance defences and had been unaware of the likelihood of this being an ongoing problem. Furthermore he was not specifically aware of the fact that the agoraphobia that he suffered was likely to be ongoing and severe and specifically associated with his `Voyager' experience. He was unaware of the nature and extent of the personal injury that he suffered as a consequence of this disorder and was unaware of the relationship to his experience in the `Voyager'. It is also clear that he managed his life very successfully in many frameworks and thus set aside the area in which his functioning was significantly impaired in both terms of his interpersonal relationships, his `violent temper', his intolerant behaviour with his family and with the recurring images and intensive avoidance which have been part of the Post Traumatic Stress Disorder and the agoraphobic behaviour which arose following the `Voyager' disaster, but he did not specifically and clearly associate these with it. Nor did he see his problems as being an ongoing disability.

Although Mr Darcy suffered a second distressing incident with the collision of the `Melbourne' and the `Frank E Evans', his primary symptomatology relates to the `Voyager' experience and his reaction to this second incident reflects traumatisation by the `Voyager' incident.

There is no history of previous major traumatisation which led to any significant Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, nor is there any history of psychiatric disorder in his family or in his own background. He saw Dr O. Kay for an assessment in recent weeks, but this was a brief assessment and he has had no ongoing psychiatric treatment. It is my opinion that he would benefit from some psychotherapy to deal with some of the ongoing Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder and phobic symptoms which remain and I have so advised him.

There should be some concern about the interaction of his Post Traumatic
Stress symptoms and phobic symptoms with respect to the current fright and anxiety due to his concerns about his heart condition and the interaction of these stresses should be taken into account. However, it is clear that his major conditions of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder and Agoraphobia are a result of his experience in the `Voyager' incident and are a source of ongoing psychiatric distress and disability." 
Professor Raphael recommended that the plaintiff have treatment. Since 1994, he has been receiving psychiatric treatment. He sees Dr Risbey from time to time. He receives anti-depressant medication.

The extension of the limitation period is sought pursuant to section 60G(2) of the Act. Section 60G(2) confers the discretionary power upon the Court to make an order extending the limitation period where it decides that it is just and reasonable to do so. The power cannot be exercised until the applicant first satisfies the relevant threshold requirements set forth in section
I(1). In this case, it was common ground that the requirements of subsection (b) had no application. The threshold requirements involve questions of fact. The decision as to whether or not it is just and reasonable to make an order is no formality when the threshold conditions are satisfied (CSR v
Rendell (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7 August 1996)). The onus rests with the plaintiff (see Brisbane South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866] and BHP Steel (AIS) Pty Limited versus Giudice (& Ors) (Court of Appeal, unreported, 7 March 1997)).

Section 60I is in the following terms:- 
Matters to be considered by court 
I. (1) A court may not make an order under section 60G or 60H unless it is satisfied that: the plaintiff: did not know that personal injury had been suffered; or was unaware of the nature or extent of personal injury suffered; or was unaware of the connection between the personal injury and the defendant's act or omission, at the expiration of the relevant limitation period or at a time before that expiration when proceedings might reasonably have been instituted; and the application is made within 3 years after the plaintiff became aware (or ought to have become aware) of all 3 matters listed in paragraph (i)-(iii).

Subsections (2), (3) and (4) of section 60E apply, with any necessary adaptations, in relation to applications for orders under this Subdivision.

Before proceeding to deal with the principal submissions made by the parties,
I should first look at the question of the credibility of the plaintiff. This is a matter that has been raised by the defendant.

I closely observed the demeanour of the plaintiff. In assessing his credibility, I have taken into account both demeanour and evidence.

The defendant does not say that the plaintiff was deliberately untruthful. It says that he gave evidence that was less than frank. It says that he was non- responsive in answering questions. It says that his evidence should be treated with caution.

In my view, he appeared to do his best to give truthful evidence. Largely, I have formed the view that he was a reliable witness. It can be said that, at times, he gave non-responsive answers to questions and perhaps adopted the role of advocate from time to time. I do not consider that these traits demonstrated a lacking in honesty and reliability. I bear in mind that he was confronted with questions which were, at times, lengthy and of some complexity. Largely, I accept his evidence.

I now turn to the principal matters upon which submissions were made. It was common ground that the relevant time was in about February 1970. The plaintiff alleges that, at the relevant time, he was unaware of all of the matters listed in (a)(i)-(iii). The defendant disputes all of these allegations. Various discretionary matters were agitated (including delay, prejudice and the potential quantum of the plaintiff's claim).

The threshold question that attracted most attention was the matter listed in (ii). On this question, the parties referred to a number of decided cases (including Commonwealth of Australia versus Dinnison <case>; [(1995) 56 FCR 389]; Commonwealth of Australia versus McLean (Court of Appeal, unreported, 31 December 1996); Harris versus Commercial Minerals Limited &
Ors <case>; [135 ALR 353] and CRA Limited versus Martignago & Ors [(1995) 39 NSWLR ).] 
The plaintiff alleges that he was unaware of the nature or extent of personal injury (a psychiatric illness) suffered by him at the expiration of the relevant period. The test is subjective (Harris).

Since the collision, the plaintiff has experienced persisting symptoms (including nightmares, visions, irritability, claustrophobia and sleeplessness). He did not consider that he had any psychiatric problem. The effect of his evidence is that he accepted them as being "natural" or "part of life". These symptoms fluctuated over the years. There was a temporary aggravation of those symptoms during the late 1960's when he was involved in a further collision at sea (between the `Melbourne' and the `Frank E Evans'). He has said that it was not until 1993, after he saw a psychiatrist, that he became aware that he was suffering from a psychiatric condition.

I am satisfied that, until 1993, he was unaware that he was suffering from a significant psychiatric disorder which required treatment.

In my view, when regard is had to the evidence, it demonstrates that the plaintiff was unaware of the nature and extent of his personal injury at the relevant time. I consider that he has satisfied the threshold requirement listed in section 60I(1)(a)(ii).

The distinction between knowing of problems and an awareness that the problems amounted to a psychiatric illness has been drawn in other cases (Dinnison,
Syaranamual versus Commonwealth of Australia (28 August 1996), McLean). The phrase "the nature or extent" contemplates an awareness of the real nature of the personal injury as well as the extent thereof. This is not a case where the plaintiff was merely unaware of the precise description of the condition from which he was suffering (Martignago).

The matters listed in (a)(i) and (a)(iii) provoked the agitation of other questions. The defendant alleged, inter alia, that the plaintiff had knowledge of the suffering of "personal injury" (the swallowing of fuel oil, irritation to eyes and skin etc.) following the collision. In the light of the findings that I have made in relation to (a)(ii), it is unnecessary to dwell on these questions.

There was a delay of some 29 years before the filing of the Statement of
Claim. The defendant mounts a strong argument on the question of prejudice and various references have been made to what was said in Taylor. The judgments in Taylor were delivered after Syaranamual had been decided and before the
Court of Appeal dealt with McLean. The submissions on prejudice were restricted to the question of quantum. It was said that, inter alia, the defendant could not now test the plaintiff's evidence as to his condition.

Indisputably, there is presumptive prejudice. There is the possibility that witnesses may now not be available. It can be expected that memories may have faded. Some documents may not now be available (see the affidavit of V. E.
Salkin). The relevance of such documentation may be debatable. The deponent of the affidavit was not available for cross-examination. The contents of that affidavit were not referred to in submissions by Counsel for the defendant.

Generally speaking, lengthy delay may well confront a defendant with a difficult task in investigating a claim for damages. However, this case does have some unusual features. There is a significant body of documentary material (including medical and other service records) available to the defendant. The material has relevance to the claim for damages. Some use of this material was made during cross-examination of the plaintiff. It can be expected to afford assistance to the defendant in the defence of that claim.
The material presents a picture which is not helpful to the plaintiff's case.
The plaintiff will be placed in the position of satisfying the Court that the real picture was somewhat otherwise.

It is said that the plaintiff's claim is not a large one. There may be some force in this submission. However, at this stage, the potential of the claim is not easy to assess. In the light of the jurisdictional changes that have taken place, it may now be appropriate for these proceedings to be remitted to the District Court. I invite the attention of the parties to this question.

The remaining questions to be decided involve the Court in the performance of a balancing exercise. It is an exercise which is to be performed having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before it.

After performing that exercise, I have decided that it would be just and reasonable to make an order and that this is a case in which an order should be made.

Accordingly, I order that the limitation period for the plaintiff's cause of action be extended up to and including 30 August 1993. I reserve the question of costs. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
