

Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan Board & Anor versus Macquarie Infrastructure
Investment Management Ltd & Anor [2009] NSWSC 300 (21 April 2009) 
Last Updated: 29 April 2009 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan Board & Anor versus Macquarie Infrastructure
Investment Management Ltd & Anor <case>  
JURISDICTION: 
Equity Division 
Commercial List  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /08  
HEARING DATE(S):  /04/09  
JUDGMENT DATE:  April 2009  
PARTIES: 
Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan Board (First Plaintiff) 
Golden Apple Infrastructure Inc (Second Plaintiff) 
Macquarie Infrastructure Investment Management Ltd (First Defendant) 
Macquarie Infrastructure Group International Ltd (Second Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Einstein J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr J Stoljar SC, Mr D Sulan (Plaintiffs) 
Mr M Pembroke SC, Mr J Williams (Defendants)  
SOLICITORS: 
Atanaskovic Hartnell (Plaintiffs) 
Mallesons Stephen Jaques (Defendants)  
CATCHWORDS: 
Competing considerations involved in an application to release legal adviser from confidentiality undertaking to permit the disclosure of documents to a party, right of party to litigation to know the case it has to meet and to properly instruct solicitors and counsel  
LEGISLATION CITED:  
CATEGORY: 
Procedural and other rulings  
CASES CITED: 
C7 Pty Ltd versus Foxtel Management Pty Ltd <case> 
Hadid versus Lenfest Communications Inc <case> 
Macquarie Generation versus Coal & Allied Industries Ltd <case> 
Mobil Oil Australia Ltd & McDonalds Australia Ltd versus Guina Developments Pty
Ltd <case>; <case>  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Orders permitting application in so far as the extension of the undertakings necessary to allow access to the documents to be made available to nominate individuals.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
COMMERCIAL LIST  
Einstein J  
Tuesday 21 April 2009  /08 Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan Board & Anor versus Macquarie
Infrastructure Investment Management Ltd & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
The notice of motion The defendants by notice of motion filed on 3 April 2009 sought a number of orders.
 One of those orders if made would permit disclosure of a number of identified documents subject to the confidentiality regime to a sub-committee of the MIG Board comprising MIG's Chairman (Mr Johnson), a non-executive director (Mr Walsh) and the CEO (Mr Hughes).
 The matter was before the Court on 7 April 2009 when the parties respectively addressed inter alia mobilising written submissions. The Court was closed for a considerable period during which the motion was heard.
 Ultimately the Court made orders permitting the application in so far as the extension of the undertakings necessary to allow access to the documents to be made available to Mr Johnson and Mr Hughes. At that time I made clear that reasons for the decision would be given in due course. The purpose of this judgment is to furnish those reasons.
 
Background Three MIG executives, Ms Williams, Mr Lim and Mr Sims, are responsible for giving instructions to Mallesons in respect of the proceedings. On 18 March , Justice Hammerschlag granted permission to disclose specified documents which were subject to claims for confidentiality in these proceedings to these three executives to permit MIG's solicitors to take instructions as to a proposed Commercial List Response to be filed in response to OTPP's Amended
Summons (but excluding the Indemnity Issues which are the subject of the order noted in paragraph 3(b) above).  Having now seen the documents, each of Ms Williams and Messr Lim and Sims are of the view that the information was materially price sensitive so as to support the proposed inclusion of paragraphs 16A-16D in the Commercial List
Response (Black 1.4.09, [12]).
 Ms Williams (who is the Head of Legal and Risk and Compliance for the first defendant), now having seen the documents, has also formed the view that, having regard to the nature of the matters disclosed in the documents and their obvious commercial significance and sensitivity, the decision whether
MIG wishes to make the allegation in the proposed Commercial List Response should properly be made by the MIG board or a board subcommittee (Black .4.09, [13]).
 I accept that that is a perfectly understandable position to adopt, particularly where OTPP is a significant security holder in MIG and there are ongoing commercial discussions between MIG and OTPP.
 MIG has proposed that disclosure of the relevant documents be limited to a special subcommittee of the Board.
 In ICAP Australia Pty Ltd versus BGC Partners (Australia) Pty Ltd  <case>,
Jacobson J referred at [13]-[17] to the competing considerations involved in an application to release a legal adviser from a confidentiality undertaking to permit the disclosure of documents to a party, including the right of a party to litigation to know the case it has to meet and to properly instruct solicitors and counsel. His Honour in that case granted access to nominated representatives of the respondent to each class of documents in dispute on the basis that the documents, although confidential, went to important matters in the proceedings and that the respondent would be prejudiced in its defence without access to them.
 In summarising the principles which included: Mobil Oil Australia Ltd v
Guina Developments Pty Ltd <case>; [[1996] 2 VR 34], Macquarie Generation versus Coal & Allied Industries Ltd  <case>, C7 Pty Ltd versus Foxtel Management Pty Ltd  <case> and Reebok versus Sydney Organising Committee for the Olympic Games <case> his Honour observed as follows: In Mobil Oil at 38, Hayne JA pointed out that ordinarily, the fact that documents are confidential is not a bar to inspection by the other party.
He said, however, that where the parties are trade rivals, different considerations arise.
 What underlies Hayne JA's analysis is his statement that the principles of a trade rival cannot forget the secret information once it is revealed.
Thus, the value of the commercially sensitive information will be lost unless it is protected by an appropriate access regime. The implied obligation not to use the documents other than for the purpose of the proceedings is thought to be insufficient, as between trade rivals, to permit unrestricted access.
 The balancing exercise to which Hayne JA referred in Mobil Oil at -40 involves weighing the needs of a party to litigation against the "legitimate concern" of a trade rival.
 The principal factors which inform the exercise of the discretion have been stated in the authorities. A party to litigation is entitled to know the case it has to meet and to properly instruct solicitors and counsel. The nature and content of the documents, the degree of confidentiality of the information and the risk that the rival will use it to the detriment of the other party are important factors to be weighed in the balance; Mobil Oil at -40; Reebok at [43]; Hadid versus Lenfest Communications Inc [(1996) 70 FCR ]
at 410-411.
 
Decision  As is apparent in from the above authorities a party to litigation is entitled to know the case it has to meet and to properly instruct solicitors and counsel. The defendants are entitled to be placed in a position where they may make informed decisions as to the conduct of the proceedings, particularly in respect of important matters such as whether to make significant amendments to their Commercial Division Response and/or to bring cross claims against the plaintiffs and their executives.
 The current position is that Mallesons take instructions from Mr Williams,
Mr Sims and Mr Lim, none of whom occupy board level standing.
 The court's decision takes into account in a fairly delicate area the necessity for persons of the standing of Mr Hughes and Mr Johnson to act as a committee of two there being no real challenge to the bona fides of those persons.  *  
LAST UPDATED:  April 2009 * * * 
