

Lettice versus Council of the Shire of Muswellbrook and Anor [1996] NSWSC 656 (27 December 1996) 
Lettice versus Council of the Shire of Muswellbrook & Anor /93 December 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 15 December 1990, the plaintiff suffered personal injury in an accident. It is alleged that he fell from the Wilkinson Avenue Bridge (which is located in Muswellbrook). He suffered paraplegia and other disabilities.

At the time of the accident, the plaintiff was 17 years of age. The limitation period for the bringing of proceedings did not expire until 23 August 1994.

He instructed his present solicitors (Carroll & O'Dea) on 26 August 1992.
On 15 December 1993, a Statement of Claim was filed on his behalf. It claimed damages arising from personal injury. The Council of the Shire of Muswellbrook was named as the first defendant. The Roads and Traffic Authority of New South
Wales was named as the second defendant. In the alternative, an allegation of design and construction of the bridge is made against each of the defendants.
A cause of action founded on negligence is alleged against each of the defendants.

On 18 March 1994, the first defendant filed a Statement of Defence. The
Defence put in issue the allegation that the first defendant had designed and constructed the bridge. The second defendant has not filed a Defence. The pleadings have closed and the matter has been set down for trial. The plaintiff has not moved to enter default judgment against the second defendant.

By letter dated 24 August 1994, the Crown Solicitor (the solicitor acting for the second defendant) advised the plaintiff's solicitors as follows:- "I have instructions that my client had no involvement in the design, construction or maintenance of the bridge in question. It would appear appropriate in the circumstances therefore for this matter to be discontinued as against my client. Please seek instructions." 
About one year later, the plaintiff's solicitors issued a subpoena for the production of documents. The subpoena was made returnable on 13 September
Documents were produced by the first defendant. The documents were inspected on behalf of the plaintiff on 25 September 1995. The inspection of documents led the plaintiff's solicitors to the view that the bridge had been designed by the Department of Public Works. Prior to that time, the plaintiff was unaware that the Department may have been the designer of the bridge.

On 29 May 1996, the plaintiff filed a Notice of Motion. An Amended Notice of
Motion was filed on 6 December 1996. The plaintiff seeks leave to add the
State of New South Wales (being the legal entity responsible for the
Department of Public Works) as a third defendant to the proceedings and to file an Amended Statement of Claim. He also seeks an order extending the limitation period for the cause of action alleged against the proposed third defendant.

The application was heard on 6 December 1996. The application was opposed by the proposed defendant. The proposed defendant accepts that, if an order is made extending the limitation period, then the plaintiff should have leave to file an Amended Statement of Claim.

The plaintiff has read four affidavits. One of the affidavits was sworn by the plaintiff himself. The solicitor having the conduct of his matter (Mr
Thompson) has sworn two affidavits. Mr Brown (a civil engineer) has sworn an affidavit. The proposed defendant has not placed any material before the
Court.

The plaintiff seeks an order pursuant to section 60C of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/), 1969 (As
Amended) (the Act). Under that provision, the Court may, if it decides that it is just and reasonable to do so, order that the limitation period be extended. In exercising the powers conferred by section 60C, the Court is required to have regard to all of the circumstances of the case (including the matters enumerated in section 60E).

At the commencement of the hearing, Counsel for the proposed defendant identified two matters as being relied on in opposition to the application.
The principal matter was identified as the gross delay and the lack of satisfactory explanation for delay. The other matter concerns the lack of material to indicate the presence of a viable cause of action.

During the course of submissions, Counsel for the proposed defendant raised a third matter. This was presumed or inferred prejudice.

The Court has a judicial discretion to grant the relief sought by the plaintiff. The approach to be adopted in dealing with applications for the extension of a limitation period was recently considered by the High Court in
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866.] The onus of satisfying the Court that the discretion should be exercised in favour of an applicant lies on the applicant.

Clearly, there has been delay or lack of diligence on the part of the plaintiff. There are deficiencies in the material offered to explain delay or lack of diligence (inter alia, there are periods of delay which have been left unexplained).

In his affidavit, the plaintiff does not depose to having fallen from the bridge. However, there is an affidavit verifying the Statement of Claim and other material which provides an account of the accident. There are copy expert reports which suggest the availability of some material to support an allegation of negligence.

There are shortcomings in the material that is available on the question of the viability of the plaintiff's cause of action. The proposed defendant has not offered any evidence on this question. There is nothing to suggest that the allegations of design and construction are disputed by it.

There is no express provision in the statute which requires the plaintiff to prove that he does have either an arguable cause of action or available evidence to support his claim. Despite the absence of such a provision, the
Courts have made it clear that an order will not be made if it would be futile to do so.

As the pleadings presently stand, the second defendant has not put in issue the allegations of design and construction. If leave to amend is given to the plaintiff, the position may change.

I am not satisfied that it would be futile to make an order in this case. I am not satisfied that the evidence offered by the plaintiff is so tenuous as to justify a refusal to make an order.

The proposed defendant did not adduce any evidence of actual prejudice. Delay does give rise to presumed or inferred prejudice. In the circumstances of this case, it does not seem to me that this matter is one which should be given great weight.

Both the Department of Public Works and the second defendant are governmental bodies of this State. There is nothing to suggest that the accident has not been investigated by the second defendant. It has not, as yet, chosen to defend the proceedings. There is nothing to suggest that the results of any investigations carried out by the second defendant would not be made available to the proposed defendant.

In applications of this nature, the Court bears in mind that an extension of a limitation period will deprive a defendant of the statutory defence to the plaintiff's claim. It also bears in mind that, if relief is refused, the plaintiff will be barred from prosecuting his claim.

In this case, the plaintiff has suffered serious injuries. If he is allowed to prosecute his claim against the proposed defendant, he may recover a large judgment. The refusal of relief may be a great hardship to him.

The exercise of the Court's discretion involves a balancing exercise. Often, the scales can be finely balanced. Due weight must be given to, inter alia, the matters of delay, the inadequacies of the explanation for delay and presumed prejudice. However, when that is done, it seems to me that the other relevant considerations tip the balance. In the circumstances of this case, I am satisfied that the plaintiff has discharged the onus.

I decide that it is just and reasonable to make an order and that the discretion of the Court should be exercised in favour of the plaintiff.

I order that the limitation period for the cause of action founded on negligence alleged against the State of New South Wales be extended up to and including 27 December 1996. I give leave to add the State of New South Wales as third defendant in the proceedings. I give leave to the plaintiff to file an Amended Statement of Claim. I direct that any Amended Statement of Claim be filed on or before 4pm on 27 December 1996. I reserve the question of costs.
 * * * 
