

Motor Accident Mutual Insurance Pty Limited versus Kelly Matter No Ca 40058/96 [1998] NSWSC 560 (10 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
R 
MOTOR ACCIDENT MUTUAL INSURANCE PTY LIMITED versus WAYNE ANTHONY KELLY 
CA 40058/96; DC 409/91 September 1998 
Stein JA, Fitzgerald AJA, Rolfe AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: DISTRICT COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES - MOORE DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40058/96; DC 409/91 
DELIVERED: 10 SEPTEMBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 12 AUGUST 1998 
PARTIES: MOTOR ACCIDENT MUTUAL INSURANCE PTY LIMITED versus WAYNE ANTHONY KELLY 
JUDGMENT OF: STEIN JA, FITZGERALD AJA, ROLFE AJA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: MR A W YOUNG (IN PERSON) 
Respondent: MR G A RICH 
SOLICITORS 
Respondent: BINGHAM TURNELL CORAH 
CATCHWORDS: 
Whether insurer entitled to avoid policy on the grounds of non-disclosure in the policy: held on the facts it was not.

Whether insurer liable for damages for economic loss for breach of the policy: held it was not, but question as to whether such damages could arise in an appropriate case left open.

Whether insurer liable for damages for emotional stress: held it was.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED IN PART 
NO OF PAGES: 39 
MOTOR ACCIDENT MUTUAL INSURANCE 
PTY LIMITED versus KELLY 
District Court Appeal
The plaintiff, who is a carpenter, sued the defendant on a policy of insurance, which covered his motor vehicle for loss and damage in consequence of its having been stolen and subsequently found stripped and damaged.
The plaintiff's box of carpentry tools were in the motor vehicle when it was stolen and were not recovered. They were not insured.
The plaintiff claimed the value of the motor vehicle and, pursuant to the defendant's breach of contract in not indemnifying him earlier, damages for economic loss and emotional distress.
The trial Judge rejected the defendant's defence based on non-disclosure in the proposal and awarded damages on all three heads.
Held the trial Judge was correct in rejecting the defence based on non- disclosure and in awarding damages for emotional distress: Edwards versus A.A.
Mutual Insurance Company (1985) 3 ANZ Ins Cas 79160 and Stuart versus Guardian
Royal Exchange Assurance of New Zealand Limited (1988) 5 ANZ Ins Cas 75274 followed.
Held the trial Judge was in error in awarding damages for economic loss as such loss did not flow naturally from the breach and was not in the contemplation of the parties when the contract of insurance was entered into:
Hadley versus Baxendale [(1854) 9 Ex 341]; Konfos v
Czarnikow Limited <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 653] followed.
In the way in which the case was pleaded and conducted not appropriate to consider whether damages might be recoverable for economic loss caused by breach of contract because of circumstances which existed at the date of contract and where the party in breach continued that breach after being notified of those circumstances, yet, none-the-less, persisted in the breach:
Panalpina International Transport Limited versus Densal Underwear Limited <case>; [[1963] VR 396] considered.
Appeal allowed in part by reducing the damages by the amount of economic loss awarded by the trial Judge.

STEIN JA: I agree with Rolfe AJA and the orders he proposes. 
FITZGERALD AJA: I agree with the orders proposed by Rolfe AJA, and, subject to what follows, with his Honour's reasons. 
The respondent did not sue the appellant in tort , or seek to have his claim for damages for breach of contract determined otherwise than in accordance with the principles stated in Hadley versus Baxendale.[1] Neither the manner in which the case was pleaded and conducted nor the evidence makes this a suitable matter in which to consider in depth the principles relating to the recovery of damages for economic loss caused by breach of contract. In particular, I would leave for future consideration whether damages might be recoverable if economic loss is caused by breach of contract because of circumstances which existed at the date of contract and the party in breach continued that breach after being notified of those circumstances and the economic consequences for the innocent party if the breach persisted.

ROLFE AJA: 
Introduction 
The plaintiff/respondent, Mr Wayne Anthony Kelly, for whom Mr G.A. Rich of
Counsel, who did not appear at first instance, appeared, has been, at all material times, a carpenter and joiner by trade. On 1 May 1990 he entered into a Consumer Mortgage with Custom Credit Corporation Limited to enable him to purchase a Ford Fairmont Ghia motor vehicle. He paid for the vehicle, in part, by the trade in of another vehicle and, in part, with the money he borrowed.
From that date until September 1990 the motor vehicle was insured for loss and damage pursuant to the policy Mr Kelly had taken out over the traded in motor vehicle. On 17 September 1990 Mr Kelly completed a motor vehicle proposal form seeking insurance against loss and damage from the appellant/respondent, Motor
Accident Mutual Insurance Pty Limited, ("MAMI"). At the trial MAMI was represented by Counsel. On the hearing of the appeal Mr. A.W. Young, who is a director of MAMI, sought to appear on its behalf in consequence of the company's and his purported compliance with Part 11 rule 1A. The Court was prepared to waive strict compliance with this rule provided Mr Young gave an undertaking to the Court that, in the event of any order for costs being made against MAMI, he would be personally responsible for such costs. Mr Young gave that undertaking and confirmed, in answer to a question raised by Mr Rich, that he had not, to his knowledge, committed an act of bankruptcy.

The proposal sought insurance from 17 September 1990 to 17 September 1991. It set out usual details concerning Mr Kelly, his driving record and particulars of previous insurance. Mr Kelly described his occupation as "carpenter" and named an employer. It is only necessary to refer to certain portions of the proposal for present purposes. Section B posed the question:- "Has any person mentioned above had any Policy, Renewal or Proposal cancelled, withdrawn or declined? 
If YES give details." 
Mr Kelly, who was "the person mentioned above", answered this question "No".

Section D asked:- "Have ANY of the persons named in Section B above had an accident or loss, or made any claim within the last five years? 
If you have answered "YES" give full details below." 
Mr Kelly answered "Yes" and furnished particulars that he had made a claim in respect of a stolen car in 1987 on "NRMA", i.e. NRMA Insurance Limited to which I shall refer as "NRMA".

Section F asked whether the vehicle would be used "for any business purposes", to which Mr Kelly replied "No". If the answer to that question had been in the affirmative the proposal sought a percentage assessment of the time it would be used for such purposes.

The first page of the proposal contained a warranty and declaration, as a condition of the proposed insurance, that the proposal and declaration "shall be the basis of the contract between" Mr Kelly and MAMI; that if any part of the proposal was completed by any other person "that person shall be my" (i.e.
Mr Kelly's) "agent and not the agent of" MAMI; and that all questions "have been truthfully answered and I have not withheld any information likely to affect acceptance of this proposal".

On the reverse side of the proposal, in bold type and under the heading "Your Duty of Disclosure", there was a statement of the duty under the [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), ("the
Act"), to disclose to MAMI "every matter that you know, or could reasonably be expected to know, is relevant to the insurer's decision whether to accept the risk of the insurance and, if so, on what terms". This notice was given, no doubt, to comply with [s.22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s22.html) of the Act.

The extent of the duty was expanded upon and, under the heading "Non-
Disclosure", it was stated:- "If you fail to comply with your duty of disclosure, the insurer may be entitled to reduce his liability under the contract in respect of a claim or may cancel the contract.

If your non-disclosure is fraudulent, the insurer may also have the option of avoiding the contract from its beginning." 
This portion of the notice set forth, although in abbreviated form, the provisions of [s.28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) of the Act.

Either late on the night of 24 October 1990 or in the early hours of 25
October 1990 the motor vehicle was stolen from the vicinity of Mr Kelly's home. He reported the matter immediately to Gosford Police and, on 25 October , he lodged a claim form. The motor vehicle, although severely damaged and stripped, was recovered on 27 October 1990. MAMI took possession of it soon after, and it was not returned to Mr Kelly until about August 1991 at which time it was still in the same condition.

Prior to the theft Mr Kelly used the motor vehicle to travel to and from the various places where he was employed to carry out carpentry work, and he transported his box of tools in it. At least on the night of 24 and 25 October they were left in the motor vehicle, and they were not recovered. Part of
Mr Kelly's case, notwithstanding that his tools were not insured, was that because of the failure of MAMI to meet the claim, he was unable to purchase replacement tools and, accordingly, he was unable to pursue his trade. This, so it was alleged, led to his ultimate bankruptcy.

In about November 1990 Mr Kelly advised staff at MAMI's Gosford Office that he was a qualified carpenter; that his tools of trade with a value in excess of $4,000 had been stolen from the boot of the motor vehicle; that this meant that he was currently unable to maintain his employment as a carpenter and could not resume that employment until he had sufficient funds to purchase further tools; that he was being pressed by various creditors to repay debts; and that because of his financial and employment situation an urgent settlement of his claim on MAMI was essential "if he was to avoid serious financial difficulty and continue to meet his obligations". This was pleaded in paragraph 10 of his Amended Statement of Claim, and was not put in issue, i.e. it was not in issue that Mr Kelly gave that advice.

On 15 November 1990 Mr Kelly's solicitors wrote to MAMI seeking some prompt attention to his claim. The letter stated, inter alia:- "We understand that our client has been waiting three weeks for a representative from your Company to inspect our client's vehicle. This is causing our client to suffer even further loss in addition to that which he has already suffered from the theft of the vehicle, the damage of the vehicle and the removal from the vehicle of numerous items and parts.

Our client relies upon that vehicle for his work. He is a self-employed carpenter and travels by motor vehicle all over the Central Coast and from Sydney to Newcastle to carry out his work. His tools of trade were in the back of the vehicle when they were stolen and this has caused him to suffer further loss.

We would appreciate if you would give this matter priority and treat it as a matter of urgency.

Would you please arrange as a matter of urgency, for your representative to inspect the vehicle to assess its loss and to respond to our client's claim for indemnity under the Policy." 
The effect of the letter was pleaded in paragraph 11 of the Amended Statement of Claim and its having been sent was not in issue.

In paragraph 12 of the Amended Statement of Claim it was pleaded that on 20
February 1991 the solicitors for Mr Kelly telephoned MAMI's claims manager; repeated the matters set forth "above"; and requested that the claim receive urgent attention. He was told that no decision on the matter had been made and that it was in the hands of Mr Young. This paragraph was not put in issue.

As no response was forthcoming Mr Kelly's solicitors wrote again to MAMI, on March 1991, noting that fact and advising that proceedings had been instituted in the District Court at Gosford. A copy of the originating process was enclosed.

The Previous Theft 
It is now necessary to return to the previous theft Mr Kelly had suffered. As his proposal form indicated that vehicle was insured with NRMA. By letter dated 23 December 1987 NRMA advised Mr Kelly:- "We wish to advise that your abovementioned claim has been considered by a panel of senior management of this Company and the panel has decided to refuse the claim.

We do not consider that you have been accurate and frank in connection with your claim. In this regard, we draw your attention to the section of your policy headed `Exclusions' which says: `10.2 We may refuse a claim, or cancel this policy, or do both, if: you are not accurate and frank in any statement you make in a Claim Form or in connection with a claim.' 
We must also advise you that if, by operation of law, policy number CRP8448217 has not expired we hereby cancel it and also advise that, in any event, we are not prepared to offer cover to you in the future." 
In his evidence, which was not challenged on this point in any material respect, Mr Kelly said that after this refusal he commenced litigation in the
Local Court "and it took three years and eventually got to court. I got a verdict in my favour": AB14.

Mr Kelly was then referred to Section B of the proposal and he was asked, without objection, of his understanding at the time he gave the answer "No".
He said:- "A. Well at the time I hadn't - the NRMA had sent me a letter after my policy had run out on the previous vehicle and I wasn't intending on taking insurance out with them again because they'd been so slow processing the claim and also they refused the claim and then they sent me a letter stating that they'd refuse to insure me again and as far as I was concerned I wasn't going to take out insurance with them so how can I be refused if I wasn't going to take anything out with them again. So that's why I put `No' down." (My emphasis.) 
Counsel, who appeared for MAMI at the hearing, cross-examined Mr Kelly about his receipt of this letter. At AB36 Mr Kelly gave the following evidence:- "Q. And you - do you accept that the last paragraph of that letter that it's indicated to you that the NRMA Insurance advise you that they cancelled that insurance policy with you? 
A. Yes.

Q. That was insurance policy number CRP8448217 that related to the previous claim you made upon them? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you accepted that, did you not, as being notification by that company that they cancelled your insurance? 
A. No because the policy was already outdated and I never renewed it.

Q. But you were certainly aware, were you not, that the NRMA were indicating to you that they were effectively cancelling your policy? 
A. Yes I suppose that's what you'd say, yes.

HIS HONOUR: Q. You say it had already been cancelled, did I understand you? 
A. The policy ran out prior to that date of the letter and I never took out insurance - I never renewed the policy as such.

KIRBY: Q. And they further indicated that they weren't prepared to offer you cover in the future? 
A. That's correct." 
Mr Kelly was cross-examined about the proceedings against NRMA in the Local
Court. They were heard on 6 April 1989 and, as I have stated, resulted in judgment in Mr Kelly's favour.

Subsequently Counsel for MAMI returned to this matter and asked Mr Kelly various questions about his understanding of what was stated in the letter of December 1987. At AB40 Mr Kelly gave the following evidence in cross- examination and without objection:- "Q. And I suggest to you that in fact the reference to the policy renewal proposal being withdrawn on a claim was not truthfully answered was it? 
A. No. I actually, when I took out the proposal I told the people I was speaking to that I had a letter from the NRMA stating that they would refuse insurance, well I got knocked back on the insurance, but I told them that I'd never taken out, well never renewed the policy and they said just fill in `no'.

Q. Well who is the person that you refer to? 
A. The people at the Gosford office.

Q. Was it a man or a woman? 
A. It was a man.

Q. You know his name? 
A. No.

Q. You say that you were aware that by signing this document, are you not? 
A. Yes.

Q. That you were adopting it as being correct? 
A. Yes.

Q. And that the information required in that document is the information upon which the insurance company would rely? 
A. Yes.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Do you say that you filled in that proposal form that's in front of you, or the original of it, at the Gosford office of MAMI, did you? 
A. That's right, yes.

Q. And you said a moment ago something about a man at the Gosford office telling you something? 
A. Yes ...

Q. How did that arise? 
A. .. I said to him that I'd received, I asked him about the question, whether I should fill in `no' or `yes' and I told the gentleman that I'd received the letter from the NRMA on an old policy that they would refuse to insure me as such and I said `well I never took out the policy, so' I said `how can I be refused on a policy that I never took out?' So he said `well just fill in "no" then'.

KIRBY: Q. You were aware that you had an obligation to provide as much relevant information to the insurance company as possible? 
A. Yes.

Q. Surely it would have been easy for you to put some further notation on this proposal indicating the information conveyed to you by the NRMA in that letter of 23 December ..

HIS HONOUR: I'm sorry to interrupt you but just before we leave my question. Q. Who was `the man' at the Gosford office, who do you mean by that? 
A. He was a representative of the company, I'm not sure who he was.

Q. No I mean, I'm not asking you what his position was, but he was he a man that walked in from the street or was he a man behind the counter or ..

A. No he was the man behind the counter ..

Q. .. In an office or what was he? 
A. .. He was the person serving behind the counter." 
This evidence could only have been admissible against MAMI if it accepted, as the absence of objection indicates it did, that the person at the MAMI office to whom Mr Kelly spoke had authority to discuss with him the form of the proposal. Indeed, Counsel for MAMI suggested to him, AB42, that he had not provided MAMI "with that information". Mr Kelly said he did to the person "who was attending me". It was again put to him that he did not provide "them" with the information and he said that he thought he did.

In due course I shall refer to his Honour's consideration of this evidence. In my opinion the matter was pursued by Counsel for MAMI in circumstances where there could be no objection, in my opinion, to his Honour's treating the evidence as properly admissible against it.

The Proceedings 
On 27 March 1991 Mr Kelly filed an Amended Ordinary Statement of Claim in the
District Court at Newcastle. He pleaded, and so much was not in issue, that he was the owner of the motor vehicle; that to the knowledge of MAMI it was financed by Custom Credit Corporation Limited; and that he entered into the policy of insurance with MAMI. He pleaded that it was a term of that policy that the value of the vehicle was agreed at $14,000, which MAMI did not admit, asserting that at the date of issue of the policy its agreed value was $14,000.

In paragraph 7 Mr Kelly pleaded that it was a further term of the policy or, in the alternative, the duty of the defendant to act towards him in respect of any matter arising under or in relation to the policy of insurance with the utmost good faith; in paragraph 8 that during the currency of the policy the vehicle was stolen and, some days later, recovered and found to have been stripped and damaged by a person or persons unknown and to have suffered substantial loss; and in paragraph 9 that in or about late October or early
November 1990 Mr Kelly made a claim under the policy. I have referred to paragraphs 10, 11 and 12.

In paragraph 13 it was pleaded that by a memorandum dated 2 April 1991 MAMI "wrongfully, and in breach of its covenants under the Policy, and, further and in the alternative, its duty to the Plaintiff, advised that it would not accept liability under the Policy and would not indemnify the Plaintiff".

Paragraphs 14 and 15 claimed damages in the following terms:- "14. As a result of the said breaches by the Defendant, the Plaintiff: a. Was unable to continue work as a self-employed carpenter.
 b. Was unable to meet his outstanding liabilities to creditors.
 c. Was declared bankrupt on 4 November, 1991.
 . The Plaintiff claims damages from the Defendant.

PARTICULARS a. The Plaintiff claims as damage the measure of his entitlement pursuant to the terms of the policy.
 b. Further, the Plaintiff claims economic loss, the result of loss of his capacity to earn in his trade by reason of his lack of funds consequent upon the breaches by the Defendant and further the consequence of his inability to hold a Builders Licensing Corporation licence during the period of his bankruptcy.
 c. Further, the Plaintiff claims general damages for substantial inconvenience manifested in the bankruptcy with associated damage to his credit rating, inability to hold a Building Services Corporation licence and dislocation of his personal affairs." 
By an Amended Notice of Grounds of Defence, which was filed in Court on 26 May , MAMI denied paragraphs 13 and 14 of the Amended Statement of Claim and the entitlement of Mr Kelly to damages "as alleged or at all". It pleaded that "any" policy of insurance issued by it was issued on the basis that all statements made and information provided by Mr Kelly to it were correct and that on the proposal form Mr Kelly stated, inter alia, that he had never had any insurance refused or declined whereas:- "6. In truth and in fact, the Plaintiff had had insurance declined previously and did fail to reveal such a material fact to the Defendant." 
In paragraph 7 it was pleaded that on the proposal form Mr Kelly stated the vehicle was not to be used for business purposes and, in paragraph 8, that prior to November 1990 he had failed to reveal to MAMI that the vehicle was being used for business purposes.

In paragraph 9 it was pleaded:- "By reason of the breaches aforementioned, the Defendant is entitled to decline indemnity against any loss or damage to the motor vehicle under any policy of insurance." 
As there was no allegation that MAMI was entitled to avoid the policy, it seems to me that this must have been an attempt to raise a defence pursuant to [s.28(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) of the Act.

The proceedings came on for hearing before his Honour Judge Moore on 30 May , and he delivered his reasons for judgment on 2 June 1995. Final judgment, including an interest component, was not entered until 10 October .

The total amount of the judgment was $77,031.56, made up of the following figures:- $12,750 for loss of the motor vehicle; $31,750 for loss of earning capacity; $12,500 for emotional stress.
 $57,000 
The difference between the sum of these figures and the judgment amount appears to have been interest, at least to 9 August 1995, calculated at the rate of twelve per centum per annum on the first two components and two per centum per annum on the third. No objection was taken to the interest rates applied.

On 26 February 1996, Sheller JA extended the time to appeal to 28 February and, on 28 February 1996, a Notice of Appeal was filed. On 11 March 1996 his Honour granted a stay, on a condition which was fulfilled, viz that MAMI pay $20,000 by 9 April 1996. On 6 May 1998 the hearing of the appeal was specially fixed for 12 August 1998, almost eight years after the theft of the motor vehicle and notwithstanding that the original proceedings had been brought within six months of that event. MAMI appealed in effect against all the findings his Honour had made, including a ground that he erred in law in finding that the Amended Defence dated 25 May 1994 did not raise the defence of a general duty of disclosure by Mr Kelly to it.

It is convenient to consider this ground immediately. At AB77 his Honour raised with counsel for MAMI whether the Defence raised an issue that there had "been a breach of the general duty of good faith, utmost good faith". This was in the context as to whether his Honour had to determine that point, or simply the alleged failures by Mr Kelly to answer properly the questions in the proposal form to which I have referred. This discussion took place in the absence of any pleading of or mention of the provisions of the Act. It went on for several pages of transcript and, at AB79, his Honour invited an application to amend and Counsel said that he thought MAMI "would prefer to amend the Defence to claim the breach of a general duty .., particularly when one looks at the reverse side of the proposal ..".

Counsel for Mr Kelly said he would object to the granting of any such amendment on the ground of prejudice and, after further argument, the following transpired at AB83:- "KIRBY: Well your Honour I formally seek leave to amend the defence your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: I think I would only allow you to make that amendment on terms, that there should be an adjournment and Mr Hipsley allowed to call evidence. I don't know whether I should even - that's putting the hardship on the plaintiff then, to have to go away and come back another day, when his whole case is based on his being in an impecunious position.

KIRBY: Could I just obtain some instructions? 
HIS HONOUR: Yes.

KIRBY: I'll withdraw that application." 
Thus, this ground of appeal, having regard to the way in which the trial was conducted, lacked any substance.

There was some discussion, at AB80-81, in this context, about the position of the employee to whom Mr Kelly had spoken. If I may say so with respect, it seems to have been overlooked that the evidence was adduced in cross- examination and without objection. In those circumstances it was, in my opinion, clearly admissible, and there could be no argument that the employee did not have the requisite authority to receive the information or to make the statement he did.

Whilst the amount in issue is small, in relative terms, it is no doubt a matter of great significance to Mr Kelly and it is unfortunate that the ultimate resolution of the proceedings has taken so long, notwithstanding that
Mr Kelly commenced them promptly.

The Provisions Of The [Insurance Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) 
Before turning to the reasons of the trial Judge I think it appropriate to refer to certain of the provisions of the Act, to which his Honour does not appear to have been referred, for he made no reference to them in his reasons.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s13.html) provides:- "A contract of insurance is a contract based on the utmost good faith and there is implied in such a contract a provision requiring each party to it to act towards the other party, in respect of any matter arising under or in relation to it, with the utmost good faith." [Part
IV](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/index.html#p4) is headed "Disclosures and Misrepresentations". [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s21.html), which is headed "The Insured's Duty of Disclosure", provides:- "21(1) Subject to this Act, an insured has a duty to disclose to the insurer, before the relevant contract of insurance is entered into, every matter that is known to the insured, being a matter that - the insured knows to be a matter relevant to the decision of the insurer whether to accept the risk and, if so, on what terms; or a reasonable person in the circumstances could be expected to know to be a matter to be so relevant." 
Sub-section (2) provides that the duty of disclosure does not require disclosure of various matters, including those as to which compliance with that duty is waived by the insurer. Sub-section (3) provides that where a person has either failed to answer or given an obviously incomplete or irrelevant answer to a question in a proposal form about a matter, the insurer shall be deemed to have waived compliance with the duty of disclosure in relation to the matter.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) provides:- "(1) This section applies where the person who became the insured under a contract of general insurance upon the contract being entered into - failed to comply with the duty of disclosure; or made a misrepresentation to the insurer before the contract was entered into, but does not apply where the insurer would have entered into the contract for the premium and on the same terms and conditions even if the insured had not failed to comply with the duty of disclosure or had made the misrepresentation before the contract was entered into.

If the failure was fraudulent or the misrepresentation was made fraudulently, the insurer may avoid the contract.

If the insurer is not entitled to avoid the contract or, being entitled to avoid the contract (whether under sub-section (2) or otherwise) has not done so, the liability of the insurer in respect of a claim is reduced to the amount that would place him in a position in which he would have been if the failure had not occurred or the misrepresentation had not been made." 
Although Mr Young gave evidence that had he been aware of the attitude taken by NRMA MAMI would not have entered into the contract, the proper question to which that gave rise was how the provisions of [s.28](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) applied in the present circumstances. This matter was not addressed before the trial Judge or this Court. The evidence makes it abundantly clear that if there was any failure to comply with the duty of disclosure by Mr Kelly it was not fraudulent. Accordingly, it becomes unnecessary to discuss the meaning of "fraudulent" for, whatever its meaning is, Mr Kelly's conduct did not amount to fraudulent conduct.

The Two Areas Of Alleged Non-Disclosure 
I have identified the two issues raised in relation to the alleged failure to disclose. Firstly, the answer to the question as to whether any policy, renewal or proposal had been cancelled, withdrawn or declined was strictly accurate. The most that could be said was that NRMA had indicated that if any further proposal was made by Mr Kelly it would be declined. There was no suggestion, on the facts, of either cancellation (because the NRMA policy had already expired by effluxion of time), or withdrawal.

I think that the duty of disclosure did extend to advising that NRMA had indicated that it would not, if a proposal was made to it, insure Mr Kelly.
However, I am also of the opinion that Mr Kelly clearly disclosed to the officer of MAMI the true position. There was no suggestion that the officer was not an appropriate person to whom to make that disclosure, and the uncontradicted evidence was that he advised to answer the question "No". There was no suggestion that the officer did not have authority to make that statement. In those circumstances I am satisfied that the duty of disclosure to MAMI was met, and, notwithstanding the evidence of Mr Young, who may well not have been made aware of the conversation, there is no room for the operation of [s.28(3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s28.html) 
It was submitted that if the proposal was completed by any other person it expressly provided that that person was the agent of the proponent. But Mr
Kelly completed the proposal. What happened was that he made a full oral disclosure to the MAMI Officer and acted on his advice. That did not give rise to any question of agency.

Although any further disclosure was, in my opinion, strictly unnecessary, the statement that a car had been stolen previously when insured by NRMA further reinforced the information available to MAMI.

The other matter on which MAMI placed reliance was the negative answer as to whether the vehicle was to be used "for any business purposes". The evidence was that the vehicle was to be used to transport Mr Kelly and his tools of trade to and from his various places of employment. I agree with the trial
Judge that such activity does not constitute using the vehicle for business purposes, any more than the use by a person of that person's private motor vehicle to travel to and from his or her place of employment, even if at that place of employment the person is self-employed. Further, the transporting of tools used in the employment in the vehicle does not constitute the use of the vehicle for business purposes. In the present case there was no evidence, for example, that Mr Kelly used the vehicle to transport material or to assist in the carrying out of his work as a carpenter. In these circumstances I consider that the answer was not a failure to comply with the duty of disclosure. The answer accurately stated the position. In his submissions Mr Young placed little, if any, reliance on this point.

I am satisfied that the trial Judge was correct in holding that Mr Kelly was entitled to recover the amount for which the vehicle was insured of $14,000, from which he deducted the salvage value of $1,250, leaving $12,750.

The Conduct Of MAMI 
The trial Judge set out in detail the delay of MAMI in informing Mr Kelly of its decision. In my respectful opinion that conduct was commercially unacceptable and, obviously enough, placed Mr Kelly in a most invidious position. I shall further consider it in the context of the award of damages for emotional stress. However, a substantial question is whether Mr Kelly was entitled to the further damages by way of loss of earnings, which his Honour allowed.

At AB118 his Honour said:- "The defendant should have had, in contemplation, that its failure to pay the plaintiff's claim could have resulted in the plaintiff suffering a diminution of his earnings. There could be many mechanisms of that loss, the one which I mention as an observation only. Many people use their cars to get themselves to and from work and if unable to purchase a replacement can lose a well paid job then either be out of work or obliged to take a less remunerative job. What happened here is that the plaintiff had just enough resources to be able to purchase a cheap replacement vehicle but not enough to replace his expensive and essential tools of trade. The harm that befell the plaintiff is the very real thing that the defendant should have had in mind as a real possibility. The mechanism that produced that harm was bound up with the defendant's breach, however, that mechanism is of a different kind from the example given earlier. It is an unusual mechanism and might well be said to be beyond the defendant's expectation of the factual situation which his breach would produce.

However loss of earnings, due to the plaintiff's reduction of financial resource, is within that expectation. Care must be taken not to confuse what remains as the distinction between the liability for damages in tort as distinct from contract." 
His Honour referred to the decisions in Hadley versus Baxendale [(1854) 9 Ex ]
and Koufos versus Czarnikow Limited [1969] 1 AC 350 and continued:- "The plaintiff's loss of the substratum necessary to support his earning capacity is, to employ the words of Baron Alderson, `such as may fairly and reasonably be considered as arising naturally, that is according to the usual course of things from the defendant's breach of contract'.

This is not a case where the plaintiff's financial embarrassment is an independent cause of his loss (Liesbosch Dredger versus SS Edison <case>; [[1933] AC 449] at 114).

Whilst the plaintiff is then entitled, in principle, to his claim, its measure I feel is not the full amount which he claims." 
His Honour's reasons seem to proceed on both limbs of the test for remoteness laid down in Hadley versus Baxendale. In my respectful opinion, his Honour erred in awarding damages for loss of earnings on either basis. Firstly, the economic loss could not be said to arise conformably with the first limb. The loss was not as a "natural" consequence of the failure by MAMI to meet its obligations under the policy. The "natural" consequence of that was that Mr
Kelly was not put in funds to buy another vehicle, but it was by no means a consequence of that that he was unable to earn income.

Further, I consider his Honour was in error in applying, if he did, the second limb. The contract entered into between the parties was for the insurance of a motor vehicle. There was no insurance for the tools. I agree that it was foreseeable that the motor vehicle may be used to transport Mr Kelly to and from work. However, I do not see how it can be said that it was within the contemplation of the parties, when the contract was entered into, that this was the only way in which Mr Kelly could have attended at his employment.
There was no conversation, at that time, which would lead to this contemplation. There was no indication to MAMI that Mr Kelly had to travel long distances to work, nor that if he was deprived of the motor vehicle he would not have alternative means of transport. In any event there was evidence before his Honour that Mr Kelly was able to obtain another vehicle, but that that exhausted his financial resources, such that he could not purchase tools.
It is by no means clear to me that the parties had in contemplation, bearing in mind that the tools were not insured, that if the motor vehicle was lost either the tools would also be lost or, if they were, that Mr Kelly would not have sufficient finances to purchase replacement tools. Finally, Mr Kelly had not made known, justifiably in my view, that he would use the motor vehicle in earning income.

In Burns versus M.A.N. Automotive (Aust) Pty Limited <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 653] Gibbs CJ said, at p.657:- "There can be no doubt that it was within the reasonable contemplation of the parties at the time when the contract was made that if the warranty was broken the appellant might lose the profits which he might otherwise have made in the business of an interstate haulier. According to the finding of the learned trial Judge the appellant might have been able, with the use of a prime mover whose engine had been fully reconditioned, to earn such profits for four years. The appellant had made known to representatives of the respondent the purpose for which he intended to use the vehicle, and if the engine was not in a fully reconditioned state a loss of profits was a serious possibility at the time when the contract was made. In accordance with the rule in Hadley versus Baxendale, as explained in Victoria Laundry (Windsor) Limited versus Newman Industries Limited; see Czarnikow Limited versus Koufos and Wenham versus Ella any loss of profits proved to have resulted from the fact that the engine was not fully reconditioned would, subject to the considerations which I am about to mention, be recoverable as damages for breach of warranty." (My emphasis.) 
In the joint judgment of Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ their Honours considered the position, relevantly for present purposes commencing at p.667, and quoted from the speech of Lord Reid in Czarnikow:- "The crucial question is whether, on the information available to the defendant when the contract was made, he should, or the reasonable man in his position would, have realised that such loss was sufficiently likely to result from the breach of contract to make it proper to hold that the loss flowed naturally from the breach or that loss of that kind should have been within his contemplation." 
Their Honours continued:- "This was a straightforward contract leading to the acquisition by the appellant of a chattel on hire purchase. Within a month of his taking possession of the vehicle the appellant returned it to the respondent for repair or replacement of the fuel pump and injectors. His evidence was that he was then told by a servant of the respondent that the engine had not been fully reconditioned. Had he established a breach of warranty at that time the measure of damages would have been the cost of then reconditioning the engine, about $7,000, together with the resultant loss of profits whilst the vehicle was out of action. The Full Court may have been generous in their approach to the appellant's case in holding that it was not until July 1978 that he was fully apprised of the deplorable state of the engine, on the other hand, the holding may reflect a sensitive appreciation of the difficulty faced by the appellant in his struggle to make a success of the new venture with no financial resources behind him and his consequent inability to face the reality of his situation. But by July 1978 that reality could be disguised no longer." 
However, the starting point was what Lord Reid identified as "the crucial question".

Brennan J said, at p.672:- "In contract, the starting point of a consideration of the assessment of damages is the same general principle that the plaintiff is to be placed in the same position as if the contract had been performed; Wenham versus Ella. The general principle is qualified so as to limit recovery to loss actually resulting which `was at the time of the contract reasonably foreseeable as liable to result from the breach', foreseeability depending on the knowledge of the parties (or of the party who later commits the breach) either imputed or actual: Victoria Laundry (Windsor) Limited versus Newman Industries Limited; Coulson & Co Limited. The two parts of the rule in Hadley versus Baxendale treat remoteness according to whether the knowledge on which foreseeability depends is knowledge of `the usual course of things' (which is imputed) or knowledge of other circumstances which make a breach liable to cause more loss (which must be actual knowledge). Provided a loss is foreseeable by reason of one or other kind of knowledge it is not essential to identify which kind establishes foreseeability: cf Wenham versus Ella." 
On the facts of the present case I am not satisfied that his Honour was justified in holding that when the contract was entered into it was in the contemplation of the parties that, in the event of the motor vehicle being lost or damaged, Mr Kelly would suffer economic loss. In my opinion that was not in their contemplation.

Another Basis Suggested On Which Such Damages May Be Claimed 
Although Mr Kelly did not rely on a Notice of Contention, the Court raised with the parties whether the damages for economic loss could be recovered on a different basis. I have referred to the portions of the pleading, which were not in issue, that shortly after the theft representations were made to MAMI for prompt payment because of the financial difficulties Mr Kelly was, or certainly would, experience in the absence of such a payment. At that stage, namely November 1990, MAMI was either not in breach of its contractual obligations to indemnify Mr Kelly or, if it was, there had been no acceptance of any repudiation by it by Mr Kelly. In these circumstances Mr Kelly, and his solicitors, were advising MAMI that if it did not comply with its contractual obligations loss of earnings and other loss would be suffered by Mr Kelly.
Therefore, even if it was not in the contemplation of the parties when the policy was entered into that such loss would be suffered, nonetheless, prior to any breach of contract, or, perhaps, while the contract was being breached,
MAMI was made aware that if there was a breach loss would be occasioned.
Accordingly, if MAMI chose not to honour the contract, on the basis that it was not obliged to do so, and if that attitude was subsequently found to be wrong then, as a matter of principle, it was suggested that it was arguable that Mr Kelly should be entitled to recover the loss he sustained and which he had advised MAMI he would sustain if there was a breach.

The general rule is that damages for breach of contract will be awarded, on the basis that they are not too remote, if they meet one of the tests propounded in Hadley versus Baxendale, namely:- "Where two parties have made a contract which one of them has broken, the damages which the other party ought to receive in respect of such breach of contract should be such as may fairly and reasonably be considered either arising naturally, i.e., according to the usual course of things, from such breach of contract itself, or such as may reasonably be supposed to have been in the contemplation of both parties at the time they made the contract, as the probable result of the breach of it." 
Essentially, for the reasons I have given, I do not think that either of these tests are met when one has regard to the position at the time the contract was entered into. The question is whether a later notification may lead to the award of damages. As I have said the matter was raised by the Court. Mr Rich, understandably enough, was not in a position to argue it, and the Court could not reasonably expect Mr Young to do so.

In Greig and Davis "The Law of Contract" the authors said, at p.1386:- "Where the plaintiff's loss is outside the range of what is regarded as normal, having regard to the type of contract and the relationship of the parties, the defendant, must have been made aware of the special circumstances which led to that loss, and at least not have refused to accept the risk of liability for the enhanced damages which would arise in the event of his breach." 
The matter was considered, to some extent, in Panalpina International
Transport Limited versus Densal Underwear Limited [1981] 1 LLR 187. In that case the plaintiff agreed to arrange for the carriage of its goods from London to
Nigeria. The defendant had made it clear that it was important that the goods arrive in time for the Christmas trade, although the contract did not refer to that. The plaintiff delayed sending the goods, which did not arrive in Nigeria until it was too late to take advantage of the Christmas trade, and it was held liable for the increased losses arising from the fact that the goods could not be sold at the higher prices then prevailing. In that case the requirement for delivery, which did not find its way into the contract, was stated at the time of entering into the contract.

At p.1387 the authors of Greig and Davis stated:- "Any information as to special circumstance which would affect the plaintiff's losses must be communicated to the defendant at or before the time of making the contract, if it is to be relied on in extending the horizon of liability." 
Reference was made to the decision of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of
Victoria in Kollman versus Watts <case>; [[1963] VR 396.] 
In that case the appellant purchased from the respondents a mixed business. At the trial the respondents were awarded damages for interest they had to pay upon money borrowed upon the security of a bill of sale to meet the purchase price of another property they had intended to buy in the expectation of paying for it from moneys received from the sale of the business, which were not forthcoming because of the appellant's refusal to proceed with the purchase. In a joint judgment, Lowe, Dean and Pape JJ said, at p.400:- "In his reasons for judgment the learned Judge said: `Mrs Kollman knew before she committed that Watts was buying a house. The vendor was not obviously a man of means. It was reasonably foreseeable that Mr Watts was relying on his money to complete the transaction for the purchase of the house. I think that Mrs Kollman should have contemplated that default by her would lead to default by Watts. What he did was his best to minimise the damage. For these reasons Watts' actions were not unreasonable. What he did was within the reasonable contemplation of the parties." 
It will be observed, immediately, that the trial Judge approached the matter on the ground of reasonable contemplation at the time the contract was entered into.

Their Honours continued:- "It is important to observe that the learned trial Judge treated as the relevant point of time for determining what was within the contemplation of the parties, not the date of the contract, but the date of the breach. At the date of the contract the respondents had not entered into their contract with Pool and such contract and its obligations could not have been in the contemplation of the parties. Nor is there any evidence that at the date of the contract the appellant was aware that the respondents proposed to purchase a house, the purchase price payable under any future contract or the terms of payment, the financial position of the respondent or that the respondents were relying on performance by the appellant of her contract in order to meet their liabilities under a contract which they might make thereafter. Therefore, it seems clear that if the relevant date be the date of the contract the basis on which damages are recoverable in this case disappear. Impecuniosity of a party can provide a ground for awarding damages if loss from such a cause was such as might reasonably be expected to be in the contemplation of the parties as likely to flow from a breach: Trans Trust SPRL versus Danubian Trading Co Ltd [[1952] 2 QB 297], at p.306 per Denning LJ; at p.307 per Romer LJ; ..

In the present case the learned Judge did not apply his mind to the question of what was in the contemplation of the parties at the time of the making of the contract. There is no evidence to support a finding that at that time the parties had in mind any such damage as that awarded by the learned Judge in respect of interest paid by respondents." (My emphasis.) 
This decision further reinforces that the defendant is entitled, in a contractual situation, to have the damages fixed, when consideration is being given to the contemplation of the parties, by reference to the position which existed at the date of the entry into the contract. The fact that thereafter the plaintiff may alter his, her or its position on the faith of the entry into the contract, although that was not a matter which was within the contemplation of the parties at the time of entry into the contract, and advise the defendant of that change, does not, as I understand the authorities, entitle the plaintiff to increase the contractual obligations of the defendant created when it was made.

At paragraph 247 of McGregor on Damages (16th Edition) (1997), it was stated that whilst the starting point in resolving the problem as to the measure of damages for breach of contract is "the rule that the plaintiff is entitled to be placed, so far as money can do it, in the same position as he would have been in had the contract been performed", the rule is limited firstly, but not substantially, by the principles as to causation; and secondly, "a much more far-reaching limit is that the scope of protection is marked out by what was in the contemplation of the parties". "The evil or danger sought to be overcome, in formulating the rule of remoteness, was that unless remoteness was used as a test damages could provide a complete indemnity for all loss de facto resulting from a particular breach, however improbable and unpredictable. It was therefore considered, as a matter of policy, that some limitation should be introduced and this occurred with the decision in Hadley versus Baxendale".

In Czarnikow the distinction was, of course, drawn between foreseeability in tort and reasonable contemplation in contract. Thus if a party after the entry into the contract, or at the time of breaching a contract, is put on notice that a breach will cause a certain type of loss to the other party such that the other party will be sought to be made liable for that loss, a different basis for the formulation of damages, at least in the case of what is in the contemplation of the parties, for breach of contract is created. It is not one which has been embraced hitherto. As I understand the present legal position it must be possible to say that the loss flowed in the ordinary course of things from the breach, or that it was within the contemplation of the parties at the time the contract was entered into. Each of these formulations is concerned, it seems to me, to ensure that before entering into a contractual relationship the parties are entitled to have within their actual or imputed knowledge the extent to which they may be made liable, or to put it more conventionally, what damages will not be too remote. What happens after the contract is entered does not, as the authorities stand, bear on this position. Accordingly, I have come to the conclusion that the second basis on which the matter has been put is not one which should lead to the recovery of damages for economic loss by Mr Kelly. Even if I had been minded to come to a different conclusion, I would not have done so in this case as the matter was not argued fully for the reasons I have mentioned.

Damages For Emotional Stress 
There is no doubt that Mr Kelly suffered substantial inconvenience, which his
Honour found led to emotional stress, by virtue of the failure of MAMI to honour its contractual obligations and by the way in which it failed to do so.
I have characterised the conduct of MAMI in delaying its decision. In
Edwards versus AA Mutual Insurance Company [1985] 3 ANZ Ins Cas 79160 at p.79174 Tompkins J said:- "The plaintiffs, however, gave evidence that they, and particularly Mrs Edwards, suffered considerable upset not only as the result of the fire but also of the events that followed flowing from the defendant's failure to acknowledge liability to indemnify. Mrs Edwards was particularly upset by the manner in which the defendant's agents investigated the fire and in particular how they interviewed her on a number of occasions concerning allegations against her husband which she found distasteful.

I do not consider that damages are recoverable for these reasons. As a general rule, damages for injured feelings, upset and annoyance resulting from breach of contract are not recoverable: Addis versus Gramophone Co Limited <case>; [[1909] AC 488.] has been cited in subsequent cases.
 `For the mere inconvenience such as annoyance and loss of temper or vexation or for being disappointed in a particular thing which you have set your mind upon without real physical inconvenience resulting, you cannot recover damages. That is purely sentimental and not a case where the word inconvenience as I here use it would apply.' 
But where substantial inconvenience results from the breach of contract damages can be recovered: see for example, Bailey versus Bullock [[1950] 2 All ER 1167] where the authorities are reviewed and where a plaintiff recovered damages for inconvenience resulting from the failure of his solicitor to recover possession of his house.

In considering this claim therefore, the Court is required to consider whether the plaintiffs have proved that they did suffer substantial inconvenience as a direct result of the defendant's breach, and that that damage is not too remote to be recoverable, that is that this inconvenience should have been reasonably contemplated by the defendant as a probable result of its failure to indemnify the plaintiffs.

It was, as I have found, the direct result of the defendant's failure to indemnify, that the plaintiffs had no option but to abandon their intention to live permanently on the ... property. They then had to sell the land and live in their .. bach. Mrs Edwards had to give up her position as a teacher until she found a further position following her move. All of these factors in my view amount to substantial inconvenience. Further, I consider that inconvenience of this kind should have been reasonably contemplated by the defendant when it made the decision to decline to indemnify the plaintiffs." 
The concluding sentence of this passage is interesting because it relates the contemplation to the time when the decision was made to decline to indemnify the plaintiffs, rather than what was within the contemplation of the parties at the time the contract was entered into. To that extent I respectfully disagree with it, unless his Honour was having regard to something other than a strict contractual position.

In Stuart versus Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance of New Zealand Limited [1988] 5 ANZ Ins Cas 75274 Heron J considered damages for mental stress and anxiety. At p.7528 his Honour said:- "It is submitted in this case that in the circumstances, in view of the type of contract at issue, an award of damages for mental stress and anxiety is appropriate. In my view, the borderline between the inconvenience suffered as a result of living with the plaintiff's mother, and in cramped conditions, and the mental anguish which is stressed as a separate issue, to a great extent overlap. An award made for the physical inconvenience, provided it is adequate, will largely take care of and compensate for the mental anguish which the plaintiff speaks of here. He has described the circumstances surrounding the embarrassment involved in having to explain to other people that his insurers thought that he had burnt the property down, and that is why it took such a long time before the dispute was resolved." 
After referring to certain authorities his Honour concluded that it was appropriate to award damages for both physical inconvenience and mental stress. It is thus established that such damages may be awarded in an appropriate case.

The trial Judge considered this to be an appropriate case and, having reviewed the evidence, I see no basis on which to differ from that conclusion. It was submitted by Mr Young that there was no medical evidence, which would support the fact that Mr Kelly had suffered from any particular emotional stress or strain. None-the-less, there was clearly evidence on which his Honour could find that he had, notwithstanding that medical treatment was not necessary. It was further submitted by Mr Young that his Honour had disclosed no basis for so large an award as $12,500. Whilst I consider there is justification for this criticism I am not satisfied, on a consideration of all the evidence, that the figure is so high as to be beyond the range of an appropriate discretionary judgment such that this Court should interfere with the assessment.

Conclusions 
In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed, save for the award of damages for economic loss in the sum of $31,750.

In my opinion Mr Kelly is entitled to recover the sum of $12,750 together with interest thereon calculated at the rate of twelve per centum per annum from 9
April 1991, viz one week after MAMI declined indemnity, to 9 April 1996 when $20,000 was paid. The liability for the $12,750 should be treated as discharged on that date. The amount of interest on $12,750 is, therefore, $7,650. He is also entitled to recover the sum of $12,500 with interest at the rate of two per centum per annum from 9 April 1991. Interest on $12,500 from 9
April 1991 to 9 April 1996 is $1,250. The balance of the $20,000 remaining after the payment of $12,750, i.e. $7,250, should be set off against the $12,500 reducing that to $5,250, which should carry interest at the rate of two per centum per annum from 9 April 1996 to 12 August 1998, viz 855 days, constituting further interest of $246. The sum of these figures is $34,396.

In the result I consider that the appeal should be allowed; that the judgment for Mr Kelly in the sum of $77,031.56 should be set aside; and that in lieu thereof there should be judgment for Mr Kelly in the sum of $34,396. As $20,000 of that amount has been paid, the balance payable by MAMI to Mr Kelly is $14,396.

On the question of costs the conclusion to which I have come demonstrates that
MAMI has been essentially successful and, accordingly, Mr Kelly should pay its costs of the appeal and have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act if he is otherwise entitled to it. The trial Judge's order for costs should not be disturbed.
 [1] [[1854] 9 Ex 341] * * * 
