

Regina versus Kerr Matter No 60275/97 [1997] NSWSC 334 (26 August 1997) ` 
Regina versus Hamish Younger KERR` ` 60275/97` `26 August 1997` `Newman J, Abadee J, James J` `In the Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` `60275/97 REGINA V HAMISH YOUNGER KERR` 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I will ask James J to deliver the first judgment. 
JAMES J: This is a Crown appeal brought by the Director of Public Prosecutions pursuant to s5D of the Criminal Appeal Act against the respondent, Hamish Younger Kerr, against an order made on 29 May 1997 in the Newcastle District Court by his Honour Acting Judge Coolahan, remanding the respondent for sentence to 9 October 1997 on a charge of armed robbery to which the respondent had pleaded guilty. The order made by his Honour was a "Griffiths remand": see Griffiths versus The Queen (1977) 137 CLR 293. An appeal lies to this Court from such an order as being within the extended definition of "sentence" in the Criminal Appeal Act. 
The offence of armed robbery was committed by the respondent on 14 November
The facts of the offence were concisely stated by Acting Judge Coolahan in remarks delivered on 27 March 1997 as follows.
 "He went to the Prince of Wales Hotel bottle shop (that is, a bottle shop of a hotel in Newcastle) with the intention of robbing it. He was wearing a balaclava and had a knife. He approached the two men referred to in the indictment (that is the victims of the robbery) who were working at the bottle shop, threatened them with a knife ... and escaped with a sum of money, $542".

Armed robbery is an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act and carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for 20 years.

The respondent was questioned by police about the robbery later on the same night. One of the victims of the robbery had noted the numbers of the registration plates on the vehicle in which the offender had driven to the bottle shop and in which he had made his escape. The other had succeeded in breaking the windscreen of the vehicle before it left the grounds of the hotel. The owner of the vehicle was the respondent's father. On 14 November the respondent made a short statement to the police in which he asserted that he had been at his father's home with his girlfriend at the time the robbery occurred and that he had subsequently gone for a walk with his girlfriend. On November the respondent's girlfriend also made a statement in which she supported the respondent's alibi. No arrest was made on 14 November. On 21
November the respondent's girlfriend retracted her first statement and made a further statement to the police tending to incriminate the respondent in the robbery. On that day the respondent was arrested. He was interviewed by the police in an electronically recorded interview in which he denied having committed the armed robbery on 14 November 1996 but admitted having committed an earlier robbery on 11 October 1996.

On 15 January 1997 the respondent was granted bail in the Supreme Court on conditions including a condition that he reside at Odyssey House for the purpose of undertaking a full-time drug rehabilitation programme. On 17
January the respondent was released on bail and entered Odyssey House.
However, he was discharged from Odyssey House on 3 February 1997, "due to behavioural problems" and, accordingly, became in breach of a condition on which he had been granted bail. He was rearrested on 18 February 1997 and on the same day he pleaded guilty in a Local Court to a charge of armed robbery on 14 November 1996.

On 10 March 1997 the respondent was again granted bail in the Supreme Court.
The bail conditions included conditions that he reside with a family friend, who was an accountant living and practising at Hunters Hill, and that he undertake an outpatient drug rehabilitation course with the William Booth
Institute conducted by the Salvation Army.

On 11 March 1997 the respondent was released from custody pursuant to this grant of bail.

On 27 March 1997 the respondent came before Acting Judge Coolahan in Newcastle
District Court. Pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Procedure Act he asked
Acting Judge Coolahan to take into account in sentencing him, and his Honour took into account, six further offences. The most important of these further offences was the offence of robbery committed on 11 October 1996. The short facts of this offence were that the respondent, wearing a balaclava and holding something clenched in his right hand which the victim was unable to identify, entered a service station and demanded money from the console operator, who was a young woman, and took $450 in cash out of the cash register, before making his escape.

The other offences to be taken into account were two offences of being disguised with intent to commit a felony, which were related to the offence of robbery on 11 October 1996 and the offence of armed robbery on 14 November respectively; an offence of stealing a power tool from a carport on 19
October 1996, which the respondent had later pawned and offences of possession of a prohibited drug and self-administering a prohibited drug which were committed on 21 November 1996. As regards the last two offences, police found a foil of heroin in the respondent's wallet when he was arrested on 21
November 1996 and the respondent admitted to police that earlier that day he had administered portion of the heroin to himself.

In the proceedings on sentence on 27 March the respondent, the respondent's mother, a former girlfriend of the respondent (not being the young woman he was associating with in November 1996), the respondent's godmother and the family friend who was the accountant, all gave evidence in the respondent's case. The family friend gave evidence that the respondent had been residing with him and that the respondent had been regularly attending the William
Booth Institute. He also gave evidence that he himself would be leaving for overseas later that day and would be overseas until 4 May.

In his remarks delivered on 27 March 1997 Acting Judge Coolahan referred firstly to the offence of armed robbery and the further offences to be taken into account in sentencing the respondent. His Honour then turned to the subjective circumstances of the respondent.

The respondent had been born on 23 April 1973 and, hence, was 23 years old at the time of committing the offences. He had no previous criminal history, apart from two driving offences. In 1976 the respondent's father had been involved in a serious accident which had left the respondent's father a paraplegic. The respondent's parents separated after the respondent had completed Year 10 at school and the respondent went to live with his father.
Acting Judge Coolahan accepted evidence that the respondent had helped his father cope with his disabilities. The respondent's father began drinking heavily and began associating with persons who were addicted to drugs and "it was in the context of this environment, namely living with and helping his father" that the respondent was introduced to drugs, at first marijuana and later heroin.

In his remarks his Honour said that he had been impressed by the evidence of the various witnesses for the respondent, who had given evidence that the respondent, before he became addicted to drugs, had been a young person of good character and promise.

In his remarks his Honour noted that counsel for the respondent had submitted that the respondent should be given a Griffiths remand. His Honour also noted that the Crown's legal representative had opposed the granting of a Griffiths remand and had referred his Honour to cases which laid down authoritatively, "that offences of this gravity, except in very exceptional circumstances, merit a full time term of penal servitude." 
His Honour accepted this principle of sentencing but proceeded to find that in the present case there were exceptional circumstances in that before the respondent became addicted to drugs he had been of good character; that the respondent had a supportive family; that the respondent had prospects of rehabilitation; that if the respondent was rehabilitated it was unlikely that he would reoffend; that the respondent had served almost three months of full time custody between 21 November 1996 and 17 January 1997 and between 18
February 1997 and 11 March 1997 and that the respondent, after some initial mendacity, had pleaded guilty and was entitled to some credit for his plea of guilty. His Honour concluded that he should grant a Griffiths remand. He proceeded to remand the respondent for sentence to 29 May 1997, giving the respondent bail to 29 May on conditions including conditions that he report to and remain at the William Booth Institute as a full time patient at least up until 5 May 1997, when the family friend was due to return from overseas, and that thereafter, if not at the William Booth Institute as a full time patient, he reside with the family friend and continue to seek assistance from the
William Booth Institute. There was some delay in the respondent being admitted to the William Booth Institute but this did occur on 4 April 1997. No appeal was brought by the Crown against the Griffiths remand granted on 27 March .

On 29 May 1997 the respondent came before Acting Judge Coolahan again. A letter from the Newcastle District Office of the Probation and Parole Service dated 29 May 1997 stated: "Mr Kerr has been an inpatient of the William Booth Institute since 4 April
He has successfully completed Stage One and has subsequently commenced
Stage Two at Miracle Haven, Morisset on 13 May 1997. Reports from the William
Booth Institute reveal that Mr Kerr is progressing with the program as anticipated and he is expected to remain at Miracle Haven for six months before continuing onto Stage Three in Sydney".

On 29 May 1997 the Crown's legal representative referred Acting Judge Coolahan to the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal in R versus Wright (unreported February 1997), which had not been cited to his Honour on 27 March 1997. In
R versus Wright the Court of Criminal Appeal reaffirmed that armed robbery is to be regarded as an offence of the utmost gravity, which, except in the most exceptional circumstances, must carry a full time custodial sentence. It can readily be inferred that in referring his Honour to R versus Wright the Crown's legal representative was opposing the granting of a further Griffiths remand.

On 29 May Acting Judge Coolahan said that on 27 March he had found that there were most exceptional circumstances, in the circumstances in which the respondent had been introduced to heroin and in the respondent's potential for rehabilitation and that even in the light of Wright's case his Honour would not be changing his mind. His Honour proceeded to grant a further
Griffiths remand to 9 October 1997, allowing the respondent bail up until 9
October 1997 on conditions including a condition that he continue with the drug rehabilitation programme at the William Booth Institute.

On 2 June 1997 the Director of Public Prosecutions appealed against this order.

On this appeal it was submitted by the Crown that the principle stated in R v Wright, which was accepted by his Honour, is well established; that the circumstances relied on by his Honour could not be properly regarded as amounting to "most exceptional circumstances" and, accordingly, a full-time custodial sentence should have been imposed; and that his Honour had erred in principle in granting the Griffiths remand in that a Griffiths remand should be granted only when, if rehabilitation is achieved, it would be appropriate for the sentencing Judge to impose a non-custodial sentence (see R versus Tindall & Anor [(1993) 74 ACrimR 275)], whereas in the present case, even if rehabilitation was achieved, a non-custodial sentence would not be appropriate.

Counsel for the respondent submitted, in accordance with such authorities as
Griffiths versus The Queen; Everett versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295] and R versus Allpass (unreported CCA 5 May 1993) that a primary sentencing Judge has a wide discretion in sentencing; that the Court of Criminal Appeal has only a limited power to interfere with a primary judge's findings of fact; and that the Court of Criminal Appeal must exercise restraint and allow Crown appeals against sentence only exceptionally. It was submitted that Acting Judge Coolahan could not be held to have erred in making the findings he did and in concluding that the matters he identified in his remarks delivered on 27 March and 29 May amounted to most exceptional circumstances, such as to take the case out of the general rule requiring a full time custodial sentence.

Alternatively, it was submitted that even if Acting Judge Coolahan had erred, this Court, in the exercise of its undoubted discretion, should refrain from upholding the Crown's appeal, on grounds of double jeopardy, that the Crown had not appealed against the granting of the original Griffiths remand, that the respondent had complied with the Griffiths remands over a period of several months and that the respondent had made progress in his rehabilitation. It was further submitted that the respondent had been in full time custody for a total of two to three months and that he had spent some months in restrictive full time drug rehabilitation programmes.

As I have already indicated, it was not disputed that armed robbery is an offence of the utmost gravity which, except in most exceptional circumstances, must carry a full time custodial sentence.

As was said by David Hunt CJ at CL in Tindall at p 277: "It is always important in seeking to determine the sentence appropriate to a particular crime to have regard first to the gravity of the offence viewed objectively, for without such an assessment the other factors requiring consideration before arriving at the proper sentence to be imposed cannot properly be given their place: Dodd [(1991) 57 A Crim R 349] at
Except in well-defined circumstances (none of which applies here), public deterrence is generally regarded as the main purpose of punishment, and the subjective considerations relating to the particular prisoner (however persuasive) are necessarily subsidiary to the duty of the courts to see that the sentence which is imposed will operate as a powerful factor in preventing the commission of similar crimes by those who may otherwise be tempted by the prospect that only light punishment will be imposed: Rushby [[1977] 1
NSWLR 594] at 597-598.

What all of those principles make clear is that rehabilitation (or reform) - the hope that the offender will be released back into the community a better person that when he or she left it - is only one of the purposes of punishment and that, when some measure of rehabilitation has been achieved, such a subjective consideration remains necessarily subsidiary to the need for the sentence to act as a deterrent to the public and (in my view) by way of retribution for the crime which has been committed" 
In the present case the objective facts of the offence included that the respondent committed a planned armed robbery, wearing a disguise and carrying a knife with which he threatened the victims. Also to be taken into account were the further offences and particularly the offence of robbery committed on October 1996, when the respondent was also disguised.

At the time of committing the offences the respondent, although a young man, was nevertheless 23 years old and it was not suggested either by the judge at first instance or on this appeal that the respondent was entitled to any significant allowance on the grounds of youth.

In my opinion, having regard to the gravity of the objective facts of the offence and having regard to the additional offences, the subjective circumstances relied on by his Honour and by counsel for the respondent on this appeal could not properly be regarded as amounting to "most exceptional circumstances", such as to take the present case out of the operation of the general rule of sentencing reaffirmed in R versus Wright. As regards the subjective circumstances, there will usually be some explanation as to how a drug addict originally came to use drugs and it is, unfortunately, not infrequently the case that drug addicts were, before becoming addicted, persons of good character who, had they not become addicted, would have been unlikely to have committed criminal offences and who, if they could succeed in overcoming their addiction, would be unlikely to reoffend. The present case is similar in many, even though not in all respects to R versus Crotty (unreported
CCA 28 February 1994), where this Court held that the judge at first instance had erred in granting a Griffiths remand.

I am, accordingly, of the opinion that, subject to discretionary considerations, the Crown appeal should be upheld. However, it is clear that the Court of Criminal Appeal, even if it considers that the sentencing Judge erred, may in its discretion refrain from upholding a Crown appeal against sentence.

In the present case I have reached the conclusion that this Court should, in the exercise of its discretion, decline to uphold the Crown appeal. The factors which have led me to reach this conclusion include that the Crown did not appeal against the first Griffiths remand granted by Acting Judge Coolahan on 27 March, that the respondent has complied with the terms of the Griffiths remands for a period of approximately four months, including undertaking restrictive full time drug rehabilitation programmes, that according to evidence which has been placed before the Court today the respondent is making good progress in his rehabilitation (he has been drug free for eight months) and that the respondent is continuing to undertake a drug rehabilitation programme. I also take into account that the respondent spent a total of almost three months in full time custody when he was not at liberty on bail.

The Crown Advocate, who appeared for the Crown on the appeal, suggested that the Director of Public Prosecutions might not have appealed against the original Griffiths remand because of the decision of this Court in R v
Anderson (unreported 25 June 1996), where the Court decided that, in the exercise of its discretion, it should dismiss the Crown appeal against a
Griffith remand, where the date to which the primary judge had adjourned the proceedings on sentence was only a short time ahead. However, important considerations in that case were that the adjourned date was only a month after the date of the hearing of the appeal, the Court of Criminal Appeal did not have available to it any reasons for the primary judge's decision to grant a Griffiths remand and there was no evidence about the progress (if any) of the respondent's rehabilitation between the date on which the Griffiths remand had been granted and the date of the hearing of the appeal.

In the special circumstances of this case, I would propose that, notwithstanding that I consider that the primary judge should not have granted the Griffiths remand, nevertheless, the Crown appeal against sentence should be dismissed.

NEWMAN J: I agree. 
ABADEE J: I also agree. 
NEWMAN J: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by James J. * * * 
