

Regina versus Lawson; Regina versus Wu; Regina versus Thapa Matter Nos Cca 60271/97; Cca /97; Cca 60273/97 [1997] NSWSC 644 (12 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 3 July 1998 
REGINA versus ADAM CARL LAWSON /97 
REGINA versus LUI MING WU /97 
REGINA versus KRISHNA KUMAR THAPA /97 December 1997 
Hunt CJ at CL, James J, Levine J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Armitage DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 60271/97; 60272/97; 60273/97 
DELIVERED: 12 December 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: 4 December 1997 
PARTIES: Regina versus Adam Carl LAWSON; Regina versus Lui Ming WU; Regina versus Krishna Kumar THAPA 
JUDGMENT OF: Hunt CJ at CL, James, Levine JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT- M J Ierace 
RESPONDENT - P Byrne SC (Lawson) - DN Stewart (Wu) - SJ Odgers (Thapa) 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - Commonwealth DPP 
RESPONDENT- William O'Brien (Lawson) - Kinley's Solicitors (Wu) - TA Murphy (Thapa) 
RESULT: 2 Crown appeals upheld, 1 Crown appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Commonwealth Drug Offences - Crown appeals against sentences - importation of heroin and being knowingly concerned in the importation of heroin - 2 couriers each aged only 18 - avoidance of tiered process of sentencing - tariff of sentences for drug couriers in R versus Ferrer-Essis - youth of couriers, relevance and weight. 
No of pages: 27 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by James J, for the reasons which he has given. I add my own observations in relation to two issues which were raised in argument. 
Where this Court refers to a range of sentences which have been imposed for a particular offence, it is doing no more than recording, as an historical fact, that that is the general pattern of sentencing at that particular time, so that sentencing judges will have regard to that general pattern when imposing sentences in the particular case.[1] Such patterns are not immutable; this
Court has at times said that some sentencing patterns have been too low, and that more severe sentences should be imposed.[2] A range or pattern of sentencing does not imply that every case within that range is of precisely the same type: some of the cases within that range will have more serious objective circumstances than others; some will have more impressive subjective considerations than others. It is for the sentencing judge to determine where the facts of the particular case fit within that pattern.

It is, of course, wrong to pick just one case within the range and to attempt by a comparison of the facts of that case with those of the subject case to assess what the sentence should be in the subject case.[3] It is equally wrong to say that a sentencing judge is bound by the range or pattern which has been referred to. Such a range or pattern is not to be equated to the much and justly criticised "gridline" system of sentencing adopted in some jurisdictions in the United States.[4] Even in relation to the range referred to in Regina versus Ferrer-Esis,5 this Court has said that the age of the particular offender will justify a departure from the range of head sentences for couriers of substantial (but nevertheless still traffickable) quantities of heroin referred to in that case.[6] A plea of guilty will often be a significant factor permitting such a departure, depending upon the extent of mitigation attaching to that plea.[7] It is significant, in my view, that the cases in the schedule to my judgment in Regina versus Chau Thi Bao Doan[8] to which James J has referred are almost entirely cases in which there was a plea of guilty. It would nevertheless usually be appropriate for the sentencing judge to explain just why there has been a departure from a recognised range or pattern of sentencing.

The other issue to which I will refer relates to the relevance of the youth of two of the respondents. James J has discussed the cases in which this Court has accepted that general deterrence is not as important when sentencing a young person and that rehabilitation is very important. That principle is not restricted to young persons who are under the age of eighteen years, although obviously enough the provisions of the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) do have a marked effect upon the correct approach when sentencing such persons. Once that Act no longer applies, there is no hard and fast rule as to the extent to which the principle is to be applied in the particular case. Each of Lawson and Thapa was almost nineteen years of age, and neither could be regarded as a child, although each was (to differing extents) immature. Their youth could in no way justify the sentences which were imposed in the present case.

Nor is general deterrence ignored entirely even where the principle does apply, particularly where a young person conducts himself in a way an adult might conduct himself and commits a crime of considerable gravity. James J has referred to some of the cases where that exception to the principle has been applied.[9] I agree with the submission by Mr Odgers (for the respondent
Thapa) that the exception applies only where the offence is not only serious but one which is frequently committed by young persons - for example, home invasion,[10] culpable driving,[11] and mugging involving violence when death or serious injury results.[12] The exception exists because they are the very kind of case where their prevalence amongst young persons demonstrates a need for public deterrence.

I do not, however, accept that some strictly mathematical approach should be taken as to the percentage of young persons within a particular category of offence which is required before the exception will apply. More is required than a reference to the sentencing statistics supplied in the Judicial
Information Research System by the Judicial Commission. These present cases may be the first in which young persons aged almost nineteen years have been selected as couriers, no doubt because it was thought that they were unlikely to be suspected by customs officials. That does not mean that at least some regard must not be paid to the need for public deterrence, albeit less than would be paid in the case of more mature offenders. There is no cut and dried test as to the extent to which regard must be had to public deterrence.
Sentencing is not carried out by the applications of formulae. As I have said before, it is largely an instinctive process, and the influences of different factors are infinitely various in different cases..

JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: These are three appeals by the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions pursuant to s5D of the Criminal Appeal Act against sentences pronounced by his Honour Judge Armitage in the District Court on 2 May 1997 on the respondents, Adam Carl Lawson, Lui Ming Wu and Krishna Kumar Thapa. Each of Lawson and Thapa had pleaded guilty to committing an offence under s233B(1)(b) of the Customs Act of importing into Australia not less than a trafficable quantity of heroin. Wu had pleaded guilty to committing an offence under s233B(1)(d) of the Customs Act of being knowingly concerned in the importation into Australia of not less than a trafficable quantity of heroin. Under s235 of the Customs Act the maximum penalty which could have been imposed on each of the three respondents was imprisonment for a period not exceeding twenty-five years and a fine not exceeding $100,000. Judge Armitage sentenced each of Lawson and Thapa to a term of imprisonment of three and a half years commencing on 21 November 1996, the day on which each was taken into custody, with a non parole period of two years. Judge Armitage sentenced Wu to a term of imprisonment of nine years commencing on 21 November 1996, which was also the day on which he was taken into custody, with a non parole period of six years. 
Lawson is a citizen of the United States of America. His father, an officer in the Foreign Service of the United States, has been stationed in Hong Kong since 1993. Wu is a Hong Kong national. Thapa has joint British and Nepalese nationality.

The sentencing judge did not in his remarks on sentence set out the objective facts of the offences. His Honour observed that the objective facts were contained in three statements of facts prepared by Mr McMahon, an agent of the
Australian Federal Police, and in the answers given by the three respondents when interviewed by officers of the Australian Federal Police. The following statement of the facts of the offences is derived from the statements of facts prepared by Mr McMahon and the supporting documents in the briefs of evidence which were admitted into evidence in the proceedings on sentence. The answers given by the three respondents in their interviews were not entirely consistent.

Each of the three respondents arrived at Sydney Airport at about 9.45 am on the morning of 21 November 1996 on a flight from Bangkok. Lawson was carrying internally seventy-three packages wrapped in condoms which he had swallowed in
Bangkok. These packages contained 468 grams of impure heroin, yielding 320 grams of the pure drug. Thapa was carrying seventy-five similar packages which he had swallowed in Bangkok and which contained 500 grams of impure heroin, yielding 346 grams of the pure drug. In the documents in the briefs of evidence the packages swallowed by Lawson and Thapa are sometimes referred to a "pellets" or "bullets". Wu himself was not carrying any heroin when he entered Australia.

At the airport Lawson was allowed to pass through customs. However, both Thapa and Wu were detained by customs officers, who suspected that Thapa was carrying heroin internally and that Wu was acting as an overseer of Thapa.

When Wu was initially questioned by a customs officer he claimed that he had come to Australia for a holiday.

Wu was then subjected to a body search and during this search a customs officer found an envelope on which Lawson's name was written and a photograph of Thapa. Wu was told by the customs officer that the officer did not believe that Wu had come to Australia for a holiday and he was pressed to tell the truth about why he had come to Australia. After making a false claim that he was a private detective, Wu admitted that he had been following Lawson and
Thapa and that they had swallowed packages containing heroin.

Shortly after midday on 21 November Mr McMahon went to an interview room at the airport and spoke to Wu. Wu told Mr McMahon that he had followed Lawson and Thapa from Bangkok "so they not run away". Wu said that the arrangements he had made with Lawson and Thapa were that they should meet at midday at a coffee shop at the Hyatt Hotel at Kings Cross and that Wu would wait at the hotel until Lawson and Thapa had eliminated the drugs from their bodies. By the time Wu gave this information it was already past midday. Wu told Mr
McMahon that the arrangements for the handing over of the drugs were that the persons to whom the drugs were to be delivered would meet Wu in the coffee shop at the hotel at 5 o'clock that afternoon. Wu told Mr McMahon that he was prepared to co-operate in a controlled delivery of the drugs. For about an hour commencing shortly after 5 o'clock Wu sat in the coffee shop at the Hyatt
Hotel under police surveillance but no one appeared to take delivery of the drugs. Mr McMahon observed to Wu, "it seems your contact in Australia has been scared off".

When Thapa was originally questioned at the airport he denied that he was carrying heroin. He was taken by Federal Police to the St George Hospital at
Kogarah. At the hospital he admitted that he had swallowed seventy-five pellets of heroin and an x-ray examination performed at the hospital revealed a number of foreign objects inside his body. At the hospital Thapa passed the seventy-five pellets.

Wu told police that he had made an arrangement with Lawson and Thapa that if they missed meeting each other at midday, they should meet in the coffee shop at the hotel between 7 and 8 o'clock that evening. At about 7 o'clock Wu returned to the coffee shop at the hotel and sat in the coffee shop under police surveillance. Lawson entered the coffee shop and approached Wu and was then arrested. Lawson was asked by police whether he had any "gear" still inside his body and he replied "yes". He said that he had about twenty bullets still inside his body and that he had passed about fifty bullets, which were in his hotel room. Lawson was taken to the St George Hospital where an x-ray examination revealed the presence of a number of foreign objects inside his body. He was admitted to the hospital and subsequently passed nineteen pellets. Police recovered a total of fifty-four pellets from Lawson's hotel room.

Each of the respondents was interviewed by Federal Police. In his interview
Lawson said that in November 1996 he had been approached in Hong Kong by an
Englishman named "Andy", who suggested that Lawson smuggle heroin internally from Bangkok to Sydney. Andy introduced Lawson to Wu (who Lawson knew as "Jimmy"). Wu told Lawson that Andy "knows a little more about it and pretty much organises it". On 14 November Lawson had travelled by plane from Hong
Kong to Bangkok. Lawson was met at Bangkok Airport by Wu. While Lawson was in
Bangkok, Wu arranged hotel accommodation for Lawson and provided him with spending money. Wu was the only person Lawson was with, the whole of the time he was in Bangkok. On 20 November in the presence of Wu Lawson had swallowed the pellets. Wu then gave Lawson an airline ticket and his passport, which had previously been taken from him. Lawson was instructed by Wu to book a room at a hotel in Sydney after he arrived and was given times for a meeting at the
Hyatt Hotel coffee shop. Lawson and Wu then separately boarded the plane for
Sydney. Towards the end of the flight Wu gave Lawson some spending money and reminded him where to go after he arrived in Sydney. Lawson was to receive $HK80,000 (approximately $US10,000) for his services.

In his interview Thapa stated that Wu had recruited him in Hong Kong on or about 12 November to smuggle drugs to Australia, in return for a payment of $HK45,000 (approximately $US5,000). Wu had bought Thapa an airline ticket and
Thapa had travelled from Hong Kong to Bangkok on 14 November. In Bangkok he had swallowed the heroin pellets and boarded the plane for Sydney.

In his interview Wu said that he had been recruited in Hong Kong in mid
October 1996 by a person named Andy to follow some heroin couriers to
Australia. Wu travelled to Australia on 30 October and remained in Australia for three days, meeting the person in Australia who was to receive the heroin.
Wu said that the heroin carried by Lawson and Thapa had been supplied to Wu in
Bangkok by two friends of Andy. Wu saw both Lawson and Thapa swallow the pellets. After the pellets had been swallowed Lawson and Thapa were taken to the airport and the three of them had boarded the plane for Sydney. Before disembarking at Sydney Wu gave each of the couriers some spending money and gave them instructions about meeting him in Sydney at the Hyatt Hotel.

In the proceedings on sentence the respondent Lawson did not himself give evidence but his father gave evidence in his son's case. Wu gave evidence in which he verified a four page document supplying information about himself. A report about Wu by a psychologist Ms Janet Devlin was admitted. Thapa gave evidence and a report by a social worker Mr Bembrick was admitted. I will be referring to parts of the evidence given in the sentence proceedings later in this judgment.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge, after saying that the objective facts of the offences were to be found in the statements of facts prepared by Mr McMahon and the answers given by the respondents when interviewed, referred to the subjective circumstances of each of the respondents.

The first matter his Honour noted was that both Lawson and Thapa were only eighteen years old at the time the offences were committed. Lawson was born on December 1977, so that he was almost nineteen years old at the time the offences were committed. Thapa was born on 21 January 1978, so that he also was approaching his nineteenth birthday. Neither Lawson nor Thapa had any previous criminal convictions.

As to Lawson, his Honour said:- "It emerged in evidence given by the prisoner's father that he, the father, was unaware of the presence of his son in Hong Kong. He had a few months earlier been enrolled in an American university and had seemed to be progressing satisfactorily. He left the university, travelled to Hong Kong to see his old school friends, and almost immediately found himself in a desperate financial situation. As at the date of his recruitment he had no permanent accommodation, no money, and had been wearing the same clothes for three weeks.

Mr Lawson senior's evidence is that when he enrolled his son in the university he hoped he was mature. He says it is apparent that he wasn't, and he attributes that lack of maturity, in part, to the cloistered environment in which his son has been required to live all over the world by reason of his father's occupation.

When questioned as to any change he observed in his son since December 1996 Mr
Lawson said that there had been a remarkable change. In December, he said, his son has been distraught and confused. He is now afraid, but is thinking much more positively and carefully, and is happy with his full time employment in the print shop at the gaol. It is his ambition, in due course, to return to university.

Mr Lawson has also given evidence that his son suffers from Crohn's disease, a disease of the small intestine, the symptoms of which are diarrhoea, abdominal pain, failure to gain weight, and anaemia. Support for Mr Lawson's evidence has been provided in the form of a report dated 11 April 1992 from the
Fauquier Hospital in Virginia. According to Mr Lawson the disease can never be cured, but his son is at present in remission. Mr Lawson has told me that his son has no friends in Australia, as a result of which he has no visitors.

I should say that I was very impressed with Mr Lawson's evidence and with his objectivity in what must be a very difficult situation for him. I have no hesitation in accepting, in its entirety, what he has told me".

Mr Lawson senior had given evidence in the proceedings on sentence that from onwards he had lived in Hong Kong, apart from relatively short visits to
Washington.

In his evidence Thapa said that the information he had given Mr Bembrick was true. In his report Mr Bembrick had said that Thapa had been born in Hong Kong and had both British and Nepalese citizenship. Thapa's father had until his recent retirement been a member of a Ghurkha military regiment. Much of
Thapa's early life had been spent in military bases in Hong Kong and Malaysia and his schooling had suffered. Thapa was able to speak English but his comprehension of English was limited. While living in Hong Kong he had become addicted to heroin and had quickly developed a substantial heroin habit.

The sentencing judge referred to Thapa's own evidence given in the proceedings on sentence in the following terms:- "Mr Thapa's evidence is that as a result of his addiction he accumulated a large number of debts to a Pakistani who took his passport as security. It was that person who suggested to the prisoner that he clear his debts by bringing drugs to Australia. The prisoner said he had no idea of the maximum penalty for the offence and was told by the Pakistani that if he were caught he could expect at the worst a sentence of six months imprisonment.

He said his parents and brother still do not know he is in gaol in Australia, and he has been unable to get in touch with them. It was the prisoner Thapa's evidence that he is not using drugs in gaol, and that he has learnt his lesson.

He said he was introduced to the prisoner Wu by the Pakistani, and he said he was to receive $US5,000 for importing the heroin. In fact he received nothing." 
His Honour continued:- "I note that Mr Bembrick, social worker, in his report of 27 March 1997 states that in his view the prisoner is particularly at risk in prison given his lack of English, ethnicity, appearance and age. He has no family in Australia and has had no visitors since his arrest other than British Consular staff and
Prisoners' Aid employees." 
As to Wu, his Honour noted in his remarks on sentence that at the time of committing the offence Wu was thirty-eight years old. Wu had a previous criminal history commencing when he was only seventeen. His Honour continued:- "In 1983 he was convicted in Thailand of smuggling heroin out of Thailand as a courier and was sentenced to 25 years gaol; however he was released in 1994.
He says that on his return to Hong Kong he found it difficult to adjust and he found it difficult to get a job.

In 1995 to 1996 he got himself into financial difficulties as the result of two traffic accidents. He gambled without success in an effort to resolve those difficulties. He then became involved with people he describes as `bad people', through whom he met an Australian named Paul, who on learning of his financial difficulties suggested he help him smuggle heroin to Australia by overseeing two couriers and contacting buyers in Australia." 
In his remarks on sentence his Honour quoted part of Ms Devlin's report:- "It is Miss Devlin's opinion that his potential for reoffending would be greatly reduced if some form of counselling were to be provided to improve his low self esteem and associated lack of assertiveness and to develop skills in interpersonal relations".

In sentencing Lawson Judge Armitage took into account Lawson's subjective circumstances, which had been made the basis of submissions by his counsel, including his youth at the time of committing the offences, his desperate financial situation, his lack of any prior convictions, the influence which had been exerted over him by others and his excellent prospects of rehabilitation, and said that these were reasons for imposing a sentence less than would otherwise be appropriate. His Honour added that the fact that the sentence would be served in a foreign country in which Lawson had no relatives or friends was a matter to which some weight should be given.

His Honour noted in his remarks on sentence that counsel for Thapa had relied on much the same matters as those relied on by counsel for Lawson, and particularly Thapa's youth, his isolation from family and friends, the absence of parental guidance and his excellent prospects of rehabilitation. Judge
Armitage was not convinced that Thapa was in quite the same desperate situation as Lawson or anywhere near as immature. However, his Honour noted Mr
Benbrick's opinion that Thapa was at risk within the Australian prison system and was now isolated in a foreign country.

In his remarks on sentence Judge Armitage said that he had been referred by counsel for Lawson to the decision of this Court in R versus Lawless (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 24 June 1994), where Lawless had applied for leave to appeal against a sentence of five years with a non parole period of three years, after he had been found guilty of being in possession of not less than a trafficable quantity of heroin which had been imported. Judge
Armitage said that in Lawless the amount of heroin had been 342 grams of the pure drug, being an amount very close to the amount of the pure drug being carried by each of Lawson and Thapa. His Honour observed that Lawless had been refused leave to appeal and that Hunt CJ at CL in delivering the leading judgment in the Court of Criminal Appeal had said that both the head sentence and the non parole period were within the appropriate range of sentences for those in possession of a trafficable quantity of heroin in the context of an organised drug enterprise. Judge Armitage also referred to a remark made by
Hunt CJ at CL, repeating what had been said by his Honour in R versus Ferrer-
Essis [(1991) 55 A Crim R 231] at , that the offence of possession is not necessarily a less serious offence than that of importing drugs. Judge Armitage accepted a submission that the sentence imposed on Lawless was a guide to the sentence he should impose on
Lawson and Thapa and decided that because Lawson and Thapa, unlike Lawless, had pleaded guilty, the sentence he should impose on Lawson and Thapa should be less than the sentence which had been imposed on Lawless.

In his remarks on sentence Judge Armitage then set out the steps by which he said he had arrived at the sentence he would impose on Lawson and Thapa. His
Honour considered that an appropriate "starting point" was a term of imprisonment for nine years. Having regard to the favourable subjective circumstances of each of Lawson and Thapa, that term should be reduced to five and a half years. Having regard to s16G of the Commonwealth Crimes Act 1989 and the absence of remissions in New South Wales, the term of five and a half years should be reduced to three and a half years. In a sentence of three and a half years an appropriate non parole period would be two years.

In regard to the respondent Wu, Judge Armitage noted in his remarks on sentence that it was conceded by Wu's legal representative that he was more than a mere courier but that it had been submitted that Wu was not operating at a substantially higher level than that of a courier. His Honour said that it was not clear from the evidence precisely what Wu's role had been. His
Honour said:- "All I can say with confidence is that his part in the enterprise was played out at a level higher than that of his two co-offenders and that it certainly involved a higher degree of responsibility".

His Honour considered that there was little which could legitimately be put in
Wu's favour. "He knew exactly what he was doing and went into it with his eyes open. As to his prior record I say no more than that it is of no assistance to him".

His Honour then set out the steps by which he said he had arrived at the sentence imposed on Wu. An appropriate "starting point" was a term of imprisonment for fifteen years. Having regard to favourable subjective matters, that term should be reduced to thirteen years. These subjective matters were described by his Honour as "the subjective matters raised on the prisoner's behalf to which I have already referred" and appear to include, and indeed be limited to, the early admissions of guilt, the plea of guilty and the assistance provided by Wu. The term of thirteen years should then be reduced to nine years, by reason of s16G of the Crimes Act. In a sentence of imprisonment for nine years an appropriate non parole period would be six years.

The principal submissions made by the Crown in support of its appeal against the sentences imposed on Lawson and Thapa were:-
The sentence imposed on Lawless in the case of R versus Lawless was unsuitable as precedent in sentencing Lawson and Thapa.
The sentencing judge had commenced with too low a "starting point" and the consequence had been that the sentence finally imposed was manifestly inadequate, being outside the range of sentences which may properly be imposed on couriers of substantial trafficable quantities of heroin.
Many of the subjective circumstances of Lawson and Thapa mentioned by the sentencing judge, apart from their youth, for example the absence of any previous criminal history, the hardship they would experience in serving a prison sentence in a foreign country and even their pleas of guilty, so far from distinguishing their cases, were typical of drug couriers.
While it was accepted that both Lawson and Thapa were unusually young to be drug couriers, their youth and connected circumstances such as their immaturity, could not justify sentences as low as those imposed by his Honour.

The principal matter relied on by both counsel for Lawson and counsel for
Thapa was the youth of their clients, coupled with the circumstances that at the time they were recruited and committed their offences they were alone, desperate and vulnerable to being exploited by older persons.

Counsel for both Lawson and Thapa (and counsel for Wu) relied on the general principles relating to the determination of Crown appeals. R versus Allpass <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295.] 
The principal submissions made by the Crown in support of its appeal against the sentence imposed on Wu were:-
Wu had been found by the sentencing judge to have had a role higher than that of a courier.
The "starting point" selected by his Honour of fifteen years was too low, as being within what this Court had said in Ferrer-Essis was the appropriate range of sentences for persons who were couriers of trafficable quantities of heroin before applying a s16G deduction, whereas Wu had a higher role than that of a courier. Wu's case was worse than that of Saisuwan in
R versus Saisuwan (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 30 September 1994), where a starting point of eighteen years had been adopted.
Wu's objective criminality was considerable. He had not merely been an overseer or "shotgun" of the couriers on the flight to Australia. He had done numerous things in furtherance of the importation venture, both in Hong Kong and Bangkok, and had made an earlier visit to Australia.
Wu had been previously convicted and sentenced for the serious offence of exporting two kilograms of heroin from Thailand.
Wu had provided some assistance but this assistance had been taken into account by the sentencing judge, even if the allowance made by the sentencing judge could not be described as generous. Lawson, the person who had been apprehended as a result of Wu's assistance, was at a lower level in the criminal organisation than Wu and there had not been any undertaking by Wu to provide future assistance.
Wu was entitled to only limited credit for his plea of guilty. Before he made any admissions, Wu had been detained at the airport, Thapa who was carrying heroin internally had also been detained and a photograph of Thapa had been found on Wu when Wu was searched. In these circumstances there was a strong case against Wu.
Apart from the assistance and the plea of guilty, there was, as his Honour had found, little that could be said for Wu.

It was submitted on behalf of Wu that the "starting point" adopted by the sentencing judge in sentencing Wu was appropriate; alternatively, if the starting point adopted by his Honour had been too low, this was counterbalanced by his Honour not taking into account, or insufficiently taking into account, Wu's plea of guilty and the assistance he had rendered.
It was submitted that while Wu's role was higher than that of a courier it was not much higher than that of a courier and that the difference between the sentences passed on Wu on the one hand and the sentences passed on Lawson and
Thapa on the other hand adequately reflected, and indeed more than adequately reflected, the differences in their criminality.

It is convenient to deal first with the appeals against the respondents Lawson and Thapa. The sentencing judge did not consider that he should differentiate between them and it was not suggested on the hearing of these appeals that any distinction should be drawn between them.

Little attempt was made by counsel for either Lawson or Thapa to defend the use which had been made by the sentencing judge of the case of R versus Lawless in sentencing Lawson and Thapa and I am satisfied that in relying on R v
Lawless as he did his Honour fell into serious error. In fairness to his
Honour, I repeat that the case had been drawn to his Honour's attention by counsel.

In R versus Lawless Lawless himself and a co-offender named Bhandari were each charged with being knowingly concerned in the importation of not less than a trafficable quantity of heroin and, alternatively, with having in their possession without reasonable excuse a trafficable quantity of heroin which had been imported. Bhandari was found guilty on the first charge. Lawless was found not guilty on the first charge but guilty on the alternative charge.
Bhandari was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for nine years, with a non parole period of six years. Lawless was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for five years with a non parole period of three years.

In R versus Lawless the heroin had been imported by two Nepalese couriers named
Gurung, who had ingested the heroin in much the same way as Lawson and Thapa did. The total amount of heroin was 440 grams of impure heroin (345 grams of pure heroin). The two couriers were apprehended by customs officers in Sydney.
One of the couriers agreed to participate in a controlled delivery of a small amount of the heroin, being 208 grams of impure heroin (161 grams of pure heroin), which was mixed with an inert substance. Bhandari and Lawless went to a hotel where that courier was staying and assumed joint possession of the heroin and the inert substance.

The sentencing judge sentenced Lawless on the basis that the offence for which he was being punished was that of being in possession of approximately 20 grams of impure heroin but that the sentencing judge could take into account as a circumstance of aggravation a finding made by him that Lawless intended to take into his possession all the heroin that was available for collection from the courier. The Court of Criminal Appeal held that in adopting this approach the sentencing judge had not made any error. Hunt CJ at CL, who delivered the leading judgment in the Court of Criminal Appeal, said that the head sentence of five years, representing a sentence of seven and a half years before the adjustment required by s16G was made, fell within the range of sentences appropriate for an offender in possession of a trafficable quantity of imported heroin.

The Nepalese courier who had not provided assistance had applied to the Court of Criminal Appeal for leave to appeal against the sentence imposed on him (R versus Gurung unreported 22 May 1992). The other courier, who had provided assistance, had received a special discount in sentencing for his assistance.
The courier who had not provided any assistance and who had applied for leave to appeal had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of six and a half years with a non parole period of four and a half years. The application for leave to appeal was based on a submission that there was an unfair disparity between the sentences passed on the two couriers. Leave to appeal was refused.

It can be seen from what I have said about the cases of Lawless and
Gurung that :- 
Lawless was not a courier 
Lawless was acquitted of the charge of being knowingly concerned in the importation of 345 grams of heroin 
The actual offence for which Lawless was sentenced was that of being in possession of 20 grams of impure heroin, although it was held that the sentencing judge was entitled to take into account that Lawless had intended to take into his possession all the heroin that was available for collection from the courier. If any comparison was to be made with a single other case for the purpose of fixing a sentence (and such a procedure will not usually be appropriate except in the case of a co-accused), the comparison should have been between the degrees of gravity of the criminal conduct in the two cases and not simply a comparison between the quantities of the drugs involved in the two cases.

The sentences imposed on the co-offender Bhandari and the courier who had not provided assistance, whose positions were closer to those of the present respondents, were greater than the sentence imposed on Lawless.

It should also be pointed out that Hunt CJ at CL, after saying that the offence of being in possession of drugs is not necessarily a less serious offence than that of importing the drugs, went on to say that "it may or may not be, depending upon the circumstances of the particular case, and in particular upon the involvement of the individual prisoner in each". No general principle about the comparative seriousness of offences of possession of drugs and offences of importation of drugs could be drawn from his Honour's judgment.

In my opinion, the error made by the sentencing judge in relying on the sentence passed on Lawless in R versus Lawless was so serious and so infected his Honour's sentencing decision as to amount to "an error in principle".
Everett versus The Queen.

I have already referred to the process which his Honour said he had followed in arriving at the final sentences passed on Lawson and Thapa. Firstly, his
Honour selected what he described as an appropriate "starting point", which I infer was the sentence which his Honour considered would be appropriate, having regard only to the objective facts of the offences and before making any deduction under s16G of the Crimes Act. Then his Honour reduced the figure selected, by having regard to "the various subjective matters raised on the prisoner's behalf". Finally, his honour made a reduction because of s16G of the Crimes Act.

It is true that the adoption of a stepped or tiered process in sentencing
Commonwealth drug offenders, by which the sentencing judge first selects a provisional figure which he considers appropriate to the objective facts of the offence and then makes a deduction from that provisional figure because of the subjective circumstances of the offender, has not infrequently been adopted by sentencing judges and has been referred to without disapproval by this Court, for example in R versus Gurung (per Hunt CJ at CL at p2) and R v
Saisuwan (per Badgery-Parker J at p3). It is also clear that it is permissible, although not obligatory, for a sentencing judge in his or her remarks on sentence expressly to state what sentence would have been imposed before making the deduction required by s16G. Such an express statement has the virtue of demonstrating beyond argument that the sentencing judge has taken s16G into account in arriving at the final sentence. Even after the decision in R versus Gallagher [(1991) 23 NSWLR 220] it may be appropriate in a particular case for a sentencing judge to specify the amount of a discount which has been allowed for assistance which has been provided by the prisoner. Section 21E of the Commonwealth Crimes Act requires such a specification in the case of an undertaking to provide future assistance.
However, in my opinion, it is not appropriate for a sentencing judge, firstly to say what sentence would be appropriate having regard only to the objective facts of the offence, and then to say what sentence should be imposed after taking into account the subjective circumstances of the offender. Such a stepped or tiered approach to sentencing has been criticised by this Court in such cases as R versus Gallagher [(1991) 23 NSWLR 220]; R v
Beavan (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 22 August 1991 especially per
Hunt CJ at CL at 14-15; R versus Lett (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 27
March 1995). In R versus Lett Hunt CJ at CL said at 9:- "Sentencing is largely an intuitive process. The influences of the different factors to be taken into account are infinitely various. Leaving to one side the special case of any discount for assistance to the authorities, it is both unnecessary and often unwise for a sentencing judge to identify a sentence which he or she regards as appropriate to the particular case without reference to particular factors and then to identify the sentence which is appropriate when those factors are taken into account: Regina v
Williscroft <case>; [[1975] VR 292] at 299-300; Regina versus Holder [[1983] 3 NSWLR 245] at 258, ; Regina versus Morton <case>; [[1986] VR 863] at 868; Regina versus Young <case>; [(1990) VR 951] at 960; Regina versus Gallagher (1991) 23 NSWELR 220 at 230, ; Regina versus Garry John Beavan (CCA, 22 August 1991, unreported) at -15. It is unwise because it will only multiply the possibility of error, and it is unnecessary because it will inevitably increase the incidence of arguable appeal points".

The decision of this Court in Ferrer-Essis does not require or authorise such a stepped or tiered approach to sentencing. The range of between twelve years and sixteen years referred to by Hunt J at p236 in Ferrer-Essis was what his Honour found had been the range of head sentences (my emphasis) for couriers of substantial quantities of heroin prior to the commencement of the New South Wales [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) and was not a range of provisional sentences having regard only to the objective facts of such offences. The only kind of deduction which his Honour referred to in his judgment was a deduction to take into account s16G of the Commonwealth Crimes
Act. 
In the present case the sentencing judge should not have first determined a provisional sentence, having regard only to the objective facts of the offence and without reference to the subjective circumstances of the offender.
However, the adoption of this course would not necessarily produce any error in the sentence finally passed.

In Ferrer-Essis Hunt J giving the judgment of a court consisting of the
Chief Justice, the then Chief Judge at Common Law and his Honour, said at -7:- "The recognised pattern of sentencing for couriers of substantial quantities of heroin, prior to the commencement of the Sentencing Act (which applied to these Commonwealth offences for a short period prior to the commencement of Pt 1B of the Crimes Act: Oti [(1990) 19 NSWLR 561]; [48 A
Crim R 91)](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=48%20A%20Crim%20R%2091 "View LawCiteRecord" ), produced head sentences of between 12 and 16 years, with minimum terms generally fixed within the order of approximately 60 to 75 per cent of the head sentence.
 * * * 
The minimum terms imposed during the period when the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) applied were not remarkably lower than the minimum terms previously fixed, mainly because of the requirements of [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of that Act. Since Pt 1B of the Crimes Act commenced, there does appear to have been a slight, but hardly any significant downturn, in the periods thought to be appropriate before the adjustment is made for the loss of remissions in accordance with s16G of that Act. What difference there does appear to have been seems to me to have been a result mainly of the absence of the previous rigid 75 per cent rule in the ratio between the minimum term and the total sentence. Certainly it could not be said that the previous pattern of sentencing has continued (subject to that adjustment) without alteration. It is still too early to tell, and in any event caution needs to be exercised in translating such sentencing patterns into actual decisions after the two changes which have now occurred in the sentencing legislation: cf Maclay [(1990) 19 NSWLR 112] at 126; [46 A Crim R 340] at 345 
But, however cautiously the previous sentencing patterns are viewed, the sentence imposed by the judge in the present case must be seen as being outside the range of what would have been expected in the ordinary case.
Taking into account the adjustment required by s16G, the previous pattern translates into a head sentence of between eight and a half and 11 years. The head sentence imposed in this case was only six years".

In the passage in his judgment which I have quoted Hunt J spoke of the pattern of sentencing before the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) commenced and spoke of the need for caution in determining, or predicting, whether the previous pattern of sentencing would be continued, after the two important, successive, changes to the sentencing of Commonwealth offenders effected, firstly by the New South Wales [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/), and then by the insertion in the Commonwealth Crimes Act of Pt1B. It is of course clear that where an offender has provided assistance to the authorities and has received a discount for that assistance, the resulting sentence may be below the lower limit of the range of sentences indicated by his Honour. However, since Ferrer-Essis the pattern of sentences which have been imposed on couriers who have not provided assistance has tended to be rather lower than the range of sentences indicated by his Honour. See the schedule of particulars of cases attached to his Honour's judgment in R versus Doan (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 27 September 1996). In Doan itself the sentence imposed on the applicant of a term of imprisonment for six years with a non parole period of three and a half years was described as being within the range appropriate for this kind of offence. In Gurung a sentence of six and a half years with a non parole period of four and a half years was described as being within the sentencing judge's discretion, although "towards the bottom of the range". Statistics provided by the
Judicial Commission show that in the higher courts between January 1990 and
December 1996 the great majority of sentences for offences under s233B of the
Customs Act involving a trafficable quantity of heroin, where the offender had pleaded guilty and had no prior convictions, were less than eight years.

However, whether or not the range of sentences for couriers of trafficable quantities of heroin may be somewhat wider than the range stated in Ferrer-
Essis, I nevertheless consider that, quite apart from the general illegitimacy of the stepped method of sentencing adopted by the sentencing judge, it was erroneous for the sentencing judge to select as a starting point a term of nine years, which is nearly at the bottom of the range of sentences indicated in Ferrer-Essis and which was arrived at in Ferrer-Essis only after applying a s16G deduction, and then to make a deduction of more than one third for favourable subjective circumstances not including assistance and then to make a further deduction of more than a third because of s16G of the Commonwealth Crimes Act. This error on the part of the sentencing judge amounted to an error in principle.

I would accept the submission made by the Crown that the subjective circumstances of Lawson and Thapa, apart from their youth and matters connected with their youth, did not distinguish them from many other couriers.
The one subjective circumstance which was unusual was their youth, together with matters connected with their youth, and it was the youth of their clients which was the principal matter sought to be relied on by counsel for Lawson and Thapa in resisting the Crown appeals.

Each of Lawson and Thapa was eighteen years old at the time of committing his offence. Each was then approaching his nineteenth birthday. Neither was of course subject to any special statutory regime for the sentencing of offenders who are children.

It was common ground that the age of each respondent was a matter which the sentencing judge was required to take into account in sentencing him. Crimes
Act s16A(2)(m). What was in issue between the Crown and the respondents was the weight which should properly be given to this factor.

Counsel for each respondent relied on the well known passage in the judgment of Gleeson CJ, with whom Allen and Studdert JJ concurred, in R versus C, S and
T (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 12 October 1989), which was cited by
Mathews J in her judgment, Gleeson CJ and Samuels JA concurring, in R v
GDP [(1991) 53 A Crim R 112] at
In C, S and T Gleeson CJ said that he accepted a submission "that in sentencing young persons of this age the consideration of general deterrence is not as important as it would be in the case of sentencing an adult and that considerations of rehabilitation should always be regarded as very important indeed". It would appear from the report of C, S and T that at the time the joint offence was committed C and S were each sixteen years old and T was seventeen years old. The applicant for leave to appeal in GDP was only fourteen years old when he committed the offence for which he was sentenced (the head note in the report in the Australian Criminal Reports inaccurately states that he was fifteen years old) and was still only sixteen years old when his appeal was heard and determined by the Court of Criminal Appeal.

It was further submitted on behalf of the respondents that the present case was not within the qualification to the general principle enunciated in R v
C, S and T, which applies when the youthful offender is being sentenced for a type of offence which is frequently committed by young offenders, for example an offence in the nature of home invasion or culpable driving. See R v Pham [(1991) 55 A Crim R 128] especially at 135; R versus Slattery [(1996) 90 A Crim R 519] especially at 522-3. In the present case it had been accepted by the Crown that the respondents were unusually young to be drug couriers.

In my opinion, the youth of each of the respondents Lawson and Thapa, while it was a relevant factor in sentencing and could properly be given some weight, could not be given such weight as would bring the sentences imposed by the sentencing judge within the range of sentences within a proper exercise of his
Honour's sentencing discretion. The crime of importing a substantial trafficable quantity of heroin into this country is objectively serious. As
Lee CJ at CL remarked in Pham, in the case of grave crimes deterrence and retribution do not cease to be significant merely because the offenders are in their late teens. Lawson and Thapa were each somewhat older than the offenders in C S & T and GDP. The desperate situation of Lawson at the time he was recruited was to some extent self induced. His father was in Hong Kong and Lawson could have turned to his father. Lawson was not in the position of a young person in a foreign country who is completely without recourse to friends or relatives. His Honour found that Thapa was less immature and less desperate than Lawson.

I have concluded that the sentencing judge erred in matters of principle and that the sentences imposed by him on Lawson and Thapa were manifestly inadequate. I do not consider that there is any discretionary reason why the
Crown appeals should not be upheld and accordingly I consider that the appeals should be upheld and that this Court should re-sentence the respondents Lawson and Thapa. In re-sentencing the respondents it is necessary to take into account the provisions of the Crimes Act and especially s16A and s16G. In re-sentencing each respondent this Court should comply with the principle that because of the double jeopardy involved in re-sentencing after a successful
Crown appeal, the sentence imposed on re-sentencing should be somewhat less than the sentence which would appropriately have been imposed in the first instance. I have already dealt at length with the objective facts of the offence and with the subjective circumstances of each offender and I will not repeat them. While I have held that the youth of each respondent could not be given such weight as would authorise the sentences imposed by his Honour, it is nevertheless a relevant factor to which weight should be given and it, together with the good prospects of rehabilitation of each respondent, warrants the imposition of a lesser sentence than would otherwise be appropriate. Furthermore, the youth of each offender and his good prospects of rehabilitation are grounds for fixing a lower than usual non parole period.

In my opinion the following orders should be made in each of the appeals against the respondents Lawson and Thapa:-
The appeal against sentence should be allowed and the sentence imposed by
Judge Armitage quashed.
In lieu thereof the respondent should be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of six years commencing on 21 November 1996, with a non parole period of three years six months commencing on the same date and concluding on May 2000.
The legal representatives of each respondent be directed to explain to their client the effect of these orders in accordance with s16F of the Crimes
Act.

I turn to the Crown appeal against the sentence imposed on the respondent Wu.

There is force in each of the submissions made by the Crown which I have listed earlier in this judgment, including the submission that the starting point of fifteen years adopted by the sentencing judge is too low. However I have reached the conclusion that, although the sentence could properly be described as lenient, this Court, having regard to the principles which govern
Crown appeals against sentence, should not intervene. In sentencing Wu the sentencing judge did not make the error of relying on the sentence passed on
Lawless in R versus Lawless and did not commit the error of making a double allowance for s16G of the Crimes Act.

The figure of fifteen years adopted by his Honour as "a starting point", before any deduction for s16G or for assistance, was too low and a figure of at least eighteen years should have been chosen. However, the effect of this error was reduced by a third when the deduction for s16G was made. The deduction then made by the sentencing judge for assistance was, as the Crown conceded, less than generous; only two years was deducted by the sentencing judge for the combination of the assistance and the plea of guilty. Without the assistance provided by Wu, it is unlikely that Lawson would have been apprehended. A further matter is that if this Court were to uphold the Crown appeal and itself re-sentence the respondent, it would impose a somewhat lesser sentence than the sentence which should properly have been imposed in the first instance. In all of these circumstances the sentence this Court would impose if it were to uphold the Crown appeal and re-sentence, would not be substantially different from the sentence the sentencing judge imposed.

In my opinion, the Crown appeal against the sentence imposed on the respondent
Wu should be dismissed.

LEVINE J: I agree with the orders proposed by James J and his reasons therefor. [1] Regina versus Oliver [(1980) 7 A Crim R 174] at ; Regina versus Visconti [[1982] 2 NSWLR 104] at 107.
 [2] See, for example, Regina versus Hayes [[1980] 1 NSWLR 740] at -743; Regina versus Poyner [(1986) 17 A Crim R 162] at ; Regina versus Ellis [(1993) 68 A Crim R 449] at .
 [3] Regina versus Ellis (at 460-461); Regina versus Morgan [(1993) 70 A Crim R ] at 371.
 [4] They are discussed in general terms in "Sentencing" (1996) LRC 79 at par .13.
 [(1991) 55 A Crim R 231.] [6] Regina versus Warfield [(1994) 34 NSWLR 200] at 207.
 [7] cf Regina versus Winchester [(1992) 58 A Crim R 345] at .
 [8] (CCA, 27 September 1996, unreported) at 9-11.
 [9] See also Regina versus Hawkins [(1993) 67 A Crim R 64] at ; Regina versus Gordon [(1994) 71 A Crim R 459] at .
 [10] Regina versus Pham [(1991) 55 A Crim R 128] at .
 [11] Regina versus McIntyre [(1988) 38 A Crim R 135] at ; Regina versus Hallocoglu [(1992) 29 NSWLR 67] at 76;
Regina versus Slattery [(1996) 90 A Crim R 519] at -523.
 [12] Regina versus JB (Hunt CJ at CL, 20 November 1997, unreported) at 21-22.
 * * * 
