

Brett William Galloway versus Lexi-Alana Collins [2015] NSWSC 154 (4 March )

Last Updated: 5 March 2015 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Orders made as per paragraph 9  
Catchwords: 
RESTRAINING ORDER - dispute over ownership of property in defendant's possession - defendant restrained from dealing with engagement ring and earrings until further orders - no point of principle  
Category: 
Procedural and other rulings  
Parties: 
Brett William Galloway (Plaintiff) 
Lexi-Alana Collins (Defendant)  
Representation: 
Counsel: 
Mr Nagle (Plaintiff) 
No appearance for the Defendant  
Solicitors: 
Galloways Solicitors & Attorneys (Plaintiff) 
No appearance for the Defendant  
File Number(s): /66272  
EX TEMPORE JUDGMENT
Brett William Galloway makes application for an urgent interim order restraining the defendant, Lexi-Alana Collins, from dealing with certain jewellery, being an engagement ring and a set of matching earrings, said to be valued at some $70,000, which Mr Galloway alleges are owned by him but are in the current possession of Ms Collins.
Mr. Galloway is represented by counsel; Ms. Collins was called outside the court three times but does not appear. I am satisfied that she has been given notice of today's proceedings.
It is unnecessary for the purposes of issuing an interim injunction to set out the facts in any detailed way. There is affidavit material before the court which sets out the facts as Mr Galloway alleges them to be, but essentially the dispute is as to whether or not the jewellery was given to Ms Collins by Mr. Galloway as a gift without conditions, she thus being entitled to keep it; or, whether the jewellery was given as a conditional gift, the condition being to make the gift subject to a marriage taking place between Mr Galloway and Ms Collins. It was envisaged by Mr. Galloway that a marriage would take place at the time the jewellery was given to Ms. Collins.
The marriage did not in fact to take place, Ms Collins having broken off her engagement to Mr. Galloway.
Exhibited before the court is a bundle of material annexed to the Mr Galloway's affidavit, the affidavit having been prepared for these proceedings. There appears to have been some significant short message or text message traffic, largely from Mr Galloway to Ms Collins it must be said, concerning the jewellery, together with some letters of demand sent by Mr Galloway's firm of solicitors on his behalf, seeking the return of the jewellery. Some of the material I note in passing does Mr Galloway, as a solicitor of this court, no credit in that he appears to suggest to Ms Collins that it would be in his control to have Ms Collins criminally charged by police over her retention of the jewellery, or made subject to orders against her for costs, made by this court in relation to these proceedings. Those are not things within Mr Galloway's control and it is not appropriate for a solicitor of this court to make such threats, presumably as a means of obtaining some leverage over Ms. Collins.
Notwithstanding those comments there is sufficient evidence to establish that there is a potential cause of action as to rightful ownership of the disputed property. There is plainly a dispute over the ownership of the earrings and the ring. The items of jewellery have some significant value and plainly the dispute will have to be determined. The orders I intend to make will do no more than maintain the current position between the parties, and ensure that the jewellery is not disposed of before the Court can determine the dispute.
I am prepared to make order 1 as sought by the plaintiff today, that being an order which simply restrains Ms Collins from dealing with the relevant jewellery subject to further order of this court.
Mr Galloway did seek an order for Ms Collins to deliver up the jewellery to the registrar of this court by 5 pm on Thursday 5 March of this year, but I see no reason to conclude that Ms Collins, once duly served with a copy of the court's orders, would breach them or would otherwise fail to abide by them.
Accordingly I make orders in these terms: * (1) Until further order of this Court, the defendant, Lexi-Alana Collins, is restrained from dealing with an engagement ring and matching engagement earrings which were given to her by Brett Galloway.
* (2) A copy of the court's orders are to be served personally upon the defendant's mother, Joanne Collins, at 51 Wallaroy Road, Double Bay, and also on the defendant's friend, Carissa Lea, at 1 Britannia Lane, Woollahra by 5 pm today. A copy of the orders is additionally to be served upon Ms Collins by way of email and notified to her by text message at the email and text addresses evidenced to the court by affidavit.
* (3) This summons and the affidavits in support which have been filed in court today are to be served upon the defendant by 5 pm Thursday 5 March 2015.
* (4) The matter is listed at 9 am on 13 March 2015 before the duty registrar for directions.
* (5) Orders are to be entered forthwith.
 * * * 
