

Rooke versus Vinidex Tubemakers Pty Limited and Thiess Contractors Pty Limited
Matter No Nr 600030/97 [1998] NSWSC 296 (7 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 28 August 1998 
KEITH ROOKE versus VINIDEX TUBEMAKERS PTY LIMITED & THIESS CONTRACTORS PTY LIMITED 
NR600030/97 August 1998 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff sustained serious injury on 7 July 1996 when a pipe weighing about 300 kgs fell from a trailer load of them which he had delivered to the Mount Owen mine site in the Hunter Valley. He was a self employed haulage contractor and had collected the load at the depot of the first defendant (Vinidex) Coopers Plains, Brisbane. The second defendant (Thiess) was the customer to which the load was despatched. 
In final address senior counsel for Thiess raised an issue relating to the nature of the claim by assertion that any damages recoverable by the plaintiff were required to be assessed pursuant to the Motor Accidents Act. Certain amendments to the principal statute made by the Motor Accidents Amendment Act and taking effect on 1 January 1996 are applicable. The factual matrix from which the plaintiff's claim emerged included the failure of an employee of Thiess to keep the load secure by bringing the tines of a forklift into vertical contact with the load on the trailer during a phase of the unloading operation while the plaintiff was removing restraints. The particular forklift, designated a Model IT 28 was clearly a "motor vehicle" as defined in the Act. Mr Poulos QC for Thiess referred to <case> of the Act which provides: "A court shall not award damages to a person in respect of a motor accident contrary to this Part." 
Part 6 of the Motor Accidents Act contains what are generally referred to as the "caps" on damages. It is not necessary to detail the provisions. "Motor accident" is defined to mean "an accident caused by the fault of the owner or driver of a motor vehicle in the use or operation of the vehicle which causes the death of or injury to a person." 
It was argued that "use or operation" in that context should be construed in a negative as well as a positive sense and that failure by an employee of Thiess to use the forklift brought the event within the scope of the definition. In argument an analogy was offered with the liability incurred by a driver who abandoned his vehicle in an unlit situation to the hazard of other road users.
The contention needs to be looked at in the light of the definition also appearing in <case> providing that "injury" means "personal or bodily injury caused by the fault of the owner or driver of a motor vehicle in the use or operation of the vehicle if, and only if, the injury is the result of and is caused during: the driving of the vehicle, or a collision, or action taken to avoid a collision with the vehicle, or the vehicle's running out of control or such use or operation by a defect in the vehicle ......." 
Injury to the hypothetical plaintiff in the analogy mentioned by counsel would appear to be covered by the provision as to collision, whether directly with the unlit vehicle or in an impact occurring as a result of avoiding one.

The concept of a motor accident as defined is different from that which became familiar in expressions like "arising out of the use of" a motor vehicle in connection with legislation superseded by the Motor Accidents Act. The legislative intendment to depart from that concept and the authoritative expansions that it had received, including specifically loading operations:
Government Insurance Office versus R.J. Green & Lloyd Pty Limited <case>; [1966 114 CLR 437] was made manifest in the second reading speech of the
Attorney General when speaking to the 1995 Amendment Act. He said: "The CTP policy and the motor accidents scheme simply are not, and were never intended to be, a comprehensive accident compensation scheme providing substantial damages in all cases of injuries connected in some way to the use of a motor vehicle. Common sense and community expectations generally demand that the CTP policy provide coverage in respect of injuries which arise from crashes and collisions on the roads or from vehicles running out of control.
Over the years the courts have interpreted the CTP policy as providing for a wide range of injuries often unrelated to motor accidents. For example, the
CTP has been held to cover injuries sustained during the loading and unloading of vehicles, and injuries sustained while standing on the back of a stationary trailer, and injuries involved in the use of a firearm in a vehicle.

It is therefore proposed to amend the definition of `injury' to adopt an approach similar to that taken in Queensland, South Australia and Western
Australia, where `injury' is qualified in terms of its cause." Hansard
Legislative Council 16 November 1995 p 3322.

It has been recognized that the expression "arising out of" requires a less formal relationship of the injury to the relevant user of the vehicle than is required to satisfy the words "caused by". State Government Insurance
Commission versus Stevens Brothers Pty Limited <case>; [1984 154 CLR 552]. An understanding of the reference to "cause" by the
Attorney General is aided by that authority.

Although it would not be conclusive, it can be observed that the plaintiff was not suggested to have given any of the notices or complied with various procedural requirements of the Motor Accidents Act. That was acknowledged but
Thiess argued that <case> was in mandatory terms and it was open to it, at its election, to waive or decline to plead any bar. It was not argued that the unloading operation per se fell within the scope of the definition in the Act.
Nor am I persuaded that the alleged action of the employee of Thiess in failing to use the forklift to provide restraint during the unloading operation fell within the scope of the Act. I reject the argument advanced by
Thiess.

The plaintiff was born on 31 December 1947. He is married with three children and lives on a small property at Ulmarra about 18 kms from Grafton where he went to school until he was aged 14 after which, following some work tiling, he acquired qualifications for driving heavy equipment and articulated vehicles. For a time he drove logging trucks for a timber company but since about 1971 he has been for the most part a self employed haulage contractor.
Prior to the accident there was no reason to anticipate that his health would not permit a long and successful working life.

The consequences of accident have been devastating. The plaintiff impressed as cheerful and stoic but even without resort to the medical evidence, it was obvious that he was handicapped to a crippling extent and struggling with surges of pain. I accept the plaintiff as a truthful and honest witness, if anything allowing his uncomplaining nature to result in understatement of his disabilities. It is confirmatory of those observations that, although the usual medical examinations were held on behalf of the defendants no evidence was called by them on the issues and the plaintiff's medical evidence was unchallenged. In that circumstance I can deal with the detail of injury without great elaboration as I necessarily have accepted the accumulated history and opinion set out in the medical reports.

After the injury the plaintiff was airlifted to John Hunter Hospital. Although someone on the admissions staff ticked the "alert" box for mental state assessment on the nursing notes, I accept that the plaintiff has a significant period of amnesia spanning from a memory of seeing a blue strap at the rear of the trailer and forming an intention to roll it up to waking up as a patient in hospital. He was there for about 7 weeks and then transferred to Grafton
Base Hospital for a further 3 weeks.

The plaintiff suffered many injuries of which the major ones included a fracture of his right shoulder including the glenoid and scapular with quite marked displacement of the glenoid, a compound fracture of the left ankle, a major right brachial plexus palsy, a right haemo pneumothorax, multiple fractures of ribs on both sides and a peri-hepatic haematoma.

As noted, despite treatment he remained significantly and obviously handicapped. He walks with a limp and the right upper half of his body is distorted with the right arm giving little practical utility. I noticed that the plaintiff whom I saw over 4 separated hearing days at Grafton,
Darlinghurst and Queen's Square cradled his injured right limb with his left hand in what appeared to be an unconscious fashion and that conduct, which I have no reason to think was feigned, offered confirmation that there exists a constant need to comfort the injured and less than useful limb.

I accept the opinion of Dr Hopcroft that it is unlikely that there will be further recovery so as to allow the plaintiff to return to work and I find that he is not and will remain unfit for any manual work. He can perform small tasks about the farmlet where he resides but I do not find that that ability represents a marketable working capacity in any relevant sense.

I turn to ingredients of damage. The out of pocket expenses are agreed at $14,569.

The plaintiff has been unemployed since the accident and I am satisfied that he has been prevented by its consequences from any exercise of earning capacity. Exhibit N comprises a collection of balance sheets of the plaintiff's haulage business which he conducted in partnership with his wife.
The activity of the partnership was dependent upon the plaintiff operating the truck. Claim is made for $530 per week an average nett weekly income extracted from those records. The claim is modest as it ignores some benefits which the plaintiff enjoyed in terms of living expenses on trips and asset depreciation at taxation rather than market rates. It is unsurprising that no express submission on this aspect was made on behalf of the defendants save to contend that I should perceive some residual earning capacity capable of being exercised.

For 107 weeks since the accident the plaintiff will receive $530 x 107 = $56,710. I allow interest at 11% for 2 years which I have halved to allow for the gradual accrual of loss during the span. $6,238 will be added for this item.

The plaintiff's notional future working life is 15 years if taken to just past his 65th birthday. It was urged strongly by counsel for the defendants that the plaintiff should be found to be likely to exercise some earning capacity during that period. Mr Glissan QC for Vinidex pointed to tasks which the plaintiff conceded he could perform about his home property and Mr Poulos QC for Thiess lauded the plaintiff as a repository of knowledge within the transport industry. I am unpersuaded that the plaintiff's residual abilities are likely to produce any significant income in any labour or job market. Self employed the plaintiff may well have, uninjured, earned some income beyond the age of 65. It would more than liberally account in the defendants' interests for such tasks as the plaintiff might be able to do and acquire some small financial reward and the possibility of adverse vicissitudes if I reduce the sum to which the plaintiff would be entitled on capitalization of a weekly loss of $530 by 20%. I use 3% tables for which the 15 year factor is 632.2.
$530 x 632.2 x 80% = $268,053. That will be included in the damages.

The plaintiff was a driver of superior qualifications capable of operating large vehicles which I am prepared to infer were likely to be fitted with the extensive gear range typical in such. The injury to his right upper body is such that even for driving an ordinary family car he must have automatic transmission fitted. I refer to the evidence of Dr Berry and Dr Hopcroft in this regard. The evidence from the NRMA reveals the likely cost difference between automatic and manual control vehicles and this can be computed at $17.10 per week. Given the plaintiff's life expectancy of 28 years I estimate the plaintiff should receive $17.10 x 993.7 = $16,992 for this ingredient of damage.

Claim is made for domestic assistance and attendant care. I am not satisfied that it would have been reasonable to acquire such at cost until the plaintiff was discharged from Grafton Base Hospital. I am conscious that his wife paid attention and did some things for him while he was in hospital. There is a range of evidence concerning the costing of services which can be given to the plaintiff. The Homecare rates vary from supply through a government agency at $23 per hour on week days to a full "corporate rate" on Sundays and holidays of $47 per hour. There is evidence from Ms Berger an occupational therapist.
Counsel has also realistically acknowledged rates which can be calculated under statutory regimes set up under the Worker's Compensation and Motor
Accidents Acts which will reduce to a figure in the order of $15 per hour.
Having regard to all of the evidence I select the government agency week day rate of $23 per hour as an appropriate guide for these purposes.

I accept the evidence that for 4 months after discharge from hospital the plaintiff required assistance with almost all activities. I award damages upon the hypothesis that 3 hours per day during that period was solely devoted to fulfilling the plaintiff's tort induced needs. $23 x 21 hours x 16 weeks = $7,728.

Since that time and for the future I find in accordance with the evidence of the plaintiff and the evidence of Ms Berger that it would be reasonable to fulfil at cost the needs of the plaintiff calculated by reference to service provision for 8.5 hours per week. To date there will be included $23 x 8.5 hours x 83 weeks = $16,227.

For the future, using the life expectancy factor abovementioned, I also include $23 x 8.5 hours x 993.7 = $194,268.

The ingredients for past notional cost total $23,955. I include interest for .5 years at 11%, halved for gradual accrual. $23,955 x 5.5% x 1.5 years = $1,976.

Claims are made for future hydrotherapy and acupuncture. These are respectively costed at $30 and $50 per attendance. Their present need and likely need sometime into the future is confirmed by medical evidence. The cost of travel for these purposes between Ulmarra and Grafton is also claimed.
One trip each week for one each of both these attendances can be costed at $93.68 per week if one borrows a travel rate of 38¢ per kilometre from a regulation proclaimed under the Workers Compensation Act. It was conceded on behalf of the plaintiff that it would be unreasonable to project this claim indefinitely or to the end of the plaintiff's life expectancy. Calculations were offered based upon expenditure over the next 10, 15 or 20 years. I consider the plaintiff will be fully compensated if I include the figure derived from the 10 year hypothesis. 451.7 x $93.68 = $42,315.

Finally I turn to general damages. These are necessarily matters of impression. I have already remarked that the plaintiff impressed me as sincere, genuine and uncomplaining. I must of course allow for his age when the accident occurred but the balance of his life will be spent coping with significant handicap and pain. I assess general damages at $120,000. I allow interest on half for damages representing to date at 2% for 1 year of $1,200.

For ease of reference I will tabulate the ingredients of my assessment of damage: 
Out of pocket expenses $14,569 
Economic loss to date $56,710 
Interest on economic loss to date $6,238 
Future economic loss $268,053 
Cost of automatic transmission to vehicle $16,992 
Domestic assistance and attendance to date $23,955 
Interest on that assistance $1,976 
Future domestic assistance and attendance $194,268 
Future treatment and travelling $42,315 
General damages $120,000 
Interest on general damages $1,200 
Total: $746,276 
The essentially mundane incident of a large round pipe being unrestrained and falling from its position on a trailer was and has been the focus of considerable examination. Vinidex argued that it had discharged any duty of care to the plaintiff and in any event had delegated any duty of care which was breached to Thiess. Should that argument fail, contributory negligence against the plaintiff was contended as well as a cross claim against Thiess seeking full indemnity as contribution to any damages payable to the plaintiff. Senior counsel for Thiess conceded that, particularly in the light of the evidence of its employee Mr Gibson, there would be a finding that negligence was established against his client. He joined in the assertion of contributory negligence against the plaintiff and submitted that there should be a substantial contribution by Vinidex to any damages Thiess was found liable to pay him.

The pipes were delivered pursuant to a material supply agreement between
Vinidex and Thiess containing this provision as to delivery: "The material shall be delivered to the mine site by the seller and unloaded by the purchaser at location/s designated by the purchaser. Delivery shall be made between the hours of 7.00am and 4.00 pm Mondays to Fridays (excluding public holidays, rostered days off or any other days when the site is closed, unless otherwise arranged with Thiess." 
The documentation in evidence does not provide a comprehensive picture but I am satisfied from it and the evidence of Mr Lane and the plaintiff that
Vinidex and Thiess agreed upon Sunday delivery. There emerged from discussions between representatives of Vinidex and Thiess an expectation that the pipes would be unloaded by "stringing out" that is extracting them rearwards from the trailer at intervals in a line. It ought to have been appreciated by both the defendants that exigencies at the time of unloading, for example to rain or weather might well provoke a decision to unload otherwise.

It is not disputed that before loading at Coopers Plains the plaintiff made one of his repeated requests for the pipes to be cradled in scalloped timber.
Mr Lane described him as a very safety conscious haulage operator. It is obvious that when restraints and strapping which would secure the load during travel are removed, pipes lying in scalloped cradles would not roll off to the side. Vinidex did not make such cradles available in response to the request.

The pipes were loaded in layers on the trailer. The pattern is shown on the diagram Exhibit C and in the many photographs in evidence. Nothing remarkable happened on the journey. The plaintiff was bound to take a rest break and he took it at his home which was near the half way point of the particular run. A then current family problem was entirely irrelevant to the embarkation or continuance of the plaintiff on the trip and therefore irrelevant to this litigation.

By arrangement Mr Gibson from Thiess met the plaintiff and directed him to the ultimately selected unloading point. Mr Gibson had been told nothing by anyone about contemplation that the load would be "strung out" and he prepared to unload from the side and to stockpile the pipes. The plaintiff removed extensions which telescoped to add height to the side support stanchions on the trailer. The implement available to be used in the unloading was the IT 28 abovementioned and it was discovered that its reach was not sufficient to lift the pipes over the side stanchions of the trailer.

I do not accept the evidence that Mr Gibson requested the plaintiff to come back on the following day when a crane and driver could have been made available. Apart from the plaintiff's denial of the conversation which I accept, he gains powerful corroboration from the undisputed facts that he was scheduled to remain in the Newcastle area to collect a load on the following evening and such were the terms of his agreement with Vinidex that if he stayed over and unloaded on the following day he would have received an additional payment. I find nothing to denigrate from the plaintiff's credibility in the knowledge of Mr Gibson about the scheduled pickup or about the plaintiff having concerns in connection with a family problem. I do not doubt that there was some conversation between them and it was probably a sociable exchange between two working men.

As the forklift would not reach sufficiently, a system was devised whereby the tines would be placed in the vertical to hold the load in place whilst the travel load restraints were taken off. Both men agreed to adopt this system but I have noted already that as between Vinidex and Thiess, the contractual responsibility to unload lay with Thiess.

When the load had been brought down to five tiers, for reasons for which Mr
Gibson cannot explain, he failed to bring the IT 28 back into contact with the offside of the load as agreed. I am satisfied that at the relevant time the plaintiff was on the other side of the vehicle. Counsel examined the minutiae of the occurrence but some observations should be made. First it is plain that the cross strapping method required the plaintiff to attend on each side of the load and not, as Mr Gibson recollected, to work only from one side. Second the cross examination of the plaintiff posited on requiring him to assert that he was at the rear of the load when the accident happened needs to be looked at in the light of the plaintiff's last recollection being there about to roll up a strap. It does not follow that his last recollection is in fact the last thing that he did or that he was necessarily in the position where he last remembers when struck by the pipe. Third, if Mr Gibson left the IT 28 to assist in detaching the load straps, I am unpersuaded that he made the plaintiff aware of it. The probability is, bearing in mind that the plaintiff took the full force of the pipe and Mr Gibson was apparently struck less directly, that he was between the forklift and the pipes but further away from them at the time of the incident.

Within two days of the accident meetings were held attended by representatives of both Vinidex and Thiess to discuss the accident. The plaintiff was of course not a participant. I note that Vinidex appears forthwith to have offered scalloped timbers "for stockpiling on site". If available for that purpose such timber was available to fulfil the plaintiff's requests.
Understandably the apparent principal concern of the meetings was to identify not only the cause of the accident but to identify suitable procedures to be instituted in order to avoid recurrence. The exclusive focus was not upon identifying negligence.

At the hearing expert evidence was called. Again it is no criticism of the witnesses that much of the material which they presented was directed towards general practice in safe loading.

In a report obtained on behalf of the plaintiff Professor Stevenson summarized: "The deficiencies of Vinidex Tubemakers and Thiess Contractors which led to this accident may be summarized as follows: 
Vinidex Tubemakers * Using a load restraint system which was not best practice. * Failing to assess the safety of the loading method. 
Thiess Contractors * Failing to liaise with Vinidex Tubemakers to determine the safety of the method used to unload the tubes on site. * Not using the available equipment in a way which would have prevented the accident. * Assigning a forklift driver to the task who was not able to identify a serious hazard and work accordingly." 
Vinidex called Mr Larsen whose report concluded: "The load restraint system used was capable of safely restraining the load for road transport. In this instance, the level of restraint may have been marginally below the required performance standards in relation to rearward restraint.

The load and the load restraint system were compatible with unloading by `stringing out the back'.

The load and load restraint system was compatible with unloading using an appropriate forklift or crane, provided that at least two stanchions were kept in place on either side of each element of the load. In this case, the forklift used was not suitable.

Given the equipment available on site for unloading, viz an IT 28 integrated tool carrier fitted with forklift tyres, the stringing out the back method was the better method of unloading because it ensured that the pipes could not become dislodged from the trailer by rolling and ensured long lengths were not handled by an inappropriate forklift." 
Nothing will be gained by recitation and analysis of the various theses explored in examination and cross examination.

I find that the plaintiff has established negligence by Vinidex in failing to respond to his request for scalloped timbers. Irrespective of whether Vinidex expected the load to be "strung out", scalloped timbers would have obviated the risk of side fall of a pipe if the restraints and stanchions were for any reason not in place. It ought to have foreseen that exigencies might require unloading other than by "stringing out".

I find that the plaintiff has established negligence by Thiess in the casual act of negligence by Mr Gibson in failing to take the designated step of putting the IT 28 in position to hold the load when the necessary task of removing restraints for unloading was undertaken.

Both defendants were negligent in failing to adequately communicate with each other. Thiess complained that all previous loads which came were in fact from
Melbourne depot and smaller in number of pipes and differently loaded. It was said that those trailers were gated rather than fitted with stanchions.
Adequate communication should have led to the provision of suitable unloading machinery for the load as despatched from Coopers Plains and if that were done the risk to the plaintiff would have been obviated.

I reject the argument that any breached duty of care had been wholly delegated by Vinidex to Thiess. It is by no means clear that Thiess informed Vinidex that they would unload by "stringing out" and no other method. At its highest
Thiess asked for timber inserts in order to enable "stringing out" and it may have been reasonable for Vinidex to assume that this was probably what was intended, but that is far from making it reasonable to assume that it was inevitable that no other method might need to be adopted once site factors were taken into account.

The evidence discloses fax traffic and telephone conversations between representatives of the defendants. The lines of communication were well open.
They were not put to practical use so as to avoid the risk of injury which fell due upon the plaintiff.

Counsel for Vinidex asserted that the plaintiff himself was negligent in three respects, summarized in a written outline of submission thus:
He placed himself in a position of danger - that is the low side of the truck and at the side of the truck from which unloading was conducted, the side from which the securing stanchions had been removed, without ensuring or even noticing that the forklift was not in place to prevent the load shifting and falling.
His own experience and knowledge was that after the down pressure was released pipes of the type being unloaded could flex and move without apparent outside agency.
He failed to ensure the unloading site was suitable.

Counsel for Thiess expressly adverted to the plaintiff's duty to make use of his own awareness of the stability of the load.

I find nothing unsuitable about the unloading site. Its selection was a matter for Mr Gibson rather than the plaintiff but it was to all intents and purposes flat and stable and therefore suitable site for that purpose. I am not satisfied that the flexing of a pipe upon removal of restraint in fact occurred. The probable cause of the fall itself was a combination of the shape of the pipe, the absence of restraint and the law of gravity.

The force of the defendants' arguments on contributory negligence is to be found in the plaintiff's own candid concession that he heard the running engine of the IT 28 and simply assumed that it was propping up the load as arranged. No more than a glance was required to have enabled him to learn to the contrary. He was aware that an ad hoc system was implemented and I find that it has been proved that reasonable care for his own safety in those circumstances required him to check that the forklift was where he assumed it was. He must at the time have been aware that he was close to the load from which the restraints (other than his anticipation about the forklift) had been removed and he ought to have foreseen that if it was not securing the load there was a real risk of a pipe coming off and causing injury.

Nevertheless both the defendants could have avoided the accident altogether if, in the case of Vinidex, it supplied the scalloped timber as requested and, in the case of Thiess, Mr Gibson had placed the IT 28 in position as agreed.
In addition the ad hoc method would not have been needed to be adopted if there had been relevant communication and supply of what was needed for this actual job. Having regard to his share in the responsibility for the damage, I find it is just and equitable that the plaintiff's damages be reduced by 10%.

The foregoing remarks suffice to record my findings from which I conclude that the defendants should bear as between themselves responsibility for damage in equal shares.

I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff against both defendants for $671,648.

On each of the cross claims there will be judgment for the cross claimant for $335,824.

The defendants are ordered to pay the plaintiff's costs of action.

Liberty to apply.
 * * * 
