

Marchlewski versus Hunter Area Health Service Matter No 20937/95 [1998] NSWSC (14 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 January 1999 
LAMPHUD MARCHLEWSKI, ROMAN MARCHLEWSKI and DELORES MARCHLEWSKI (by her next friend LAMPHUD MARCHLEWSKI) versus HUNTER AREA HEALTH SERVICE /95 August 1998 
Dowd J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
This is an action for compensation and damages by the three plaintiffs, against the defendant for negligence arising out of the death of Maria Irena
Marchlewski ("Maria") at the John Hunter Hospital ("the Hospital") on 27
October 1992. Maria, who died as a consequence of an obstructed labour, causing her to suffer asphyxia at birth and then aspirated pneumonia, was some weeks old at the time of her death. The first plaintiff, Lamphud Marchlewski ("Lamphud"), Maria's mother, brings this action on her own behalf, on behalf of the estate of Maria and as next friend to her daughter Delores Marchlewski ("Delores"), the third plaintiff. The second plaintiff, Roman Marchlewski ("Roman") is the husband of Lamphud and the father of Maria. Breach of duty is admitted by the defendants against Lamphud and Roman, but not against Delores.
The defendant concedes in Delores' action that Maria's brain damage and death was consequent upon surgical negligence.

The defendant concedes that Lamphud and Roman suffered an injury, being nervous shock, for which they are entitled at law to compensatory damages consequent upon the admitted breach of duty being surgical negligence in the course of Maria's delivery occasioning her brain damage on 29 September 1992, such surgical negligence being causally related to her death. The defendant does not however concede that they are responsible at law for all of the differing factors which have impacted on Lamphud's life since Maria's death, nor do they concede that they are responsible at law for all of the differing factors which have impacted on Roman's life since his arrival in Australia, or at least since 1983.

The Facts giving rise to the Cause of Action for all Plaintiffs 
The facts relating to each individual plaintiff are dealt with later in the consideration of the issue of damages.

The defendant held itself out as providing antenatal, delivery and post-natal care and in fact did so for Lamphud's confinement with Maria.

Lamphud attended an antenatal clinic in 1992 with a previous obstetric history of a full term birth with no difficulties, however that child was large. At her antenatal visit on 23 September 1992 Lamphud was estimated with some doubt to be about 38 weeks pregnant with mild polyhydromnious. It was not possible at that stage for an ultrasound to be performed at the Hospital and it was not arranged to be carried out at another hospital, but to be done on 30 September at the Hospital.

At the time of the examination of 23 September 1992, in addition to the fluid, the baby appeared to be large for 38 weeks, and had an elevated fundal height of 41 cms.

On the evening of 29 September 1992 Lamphud, whose language is Thai, her
English being very limited, went into labour whilst at home. She attended the
Hospital and was admitted to the labour ward at around 22.15. A vaginal examination was performed and she was found to be 6 cm dilated. The foetal heart sounds were normal and the child's head was well down. Her contractions continued moderate to strong and the labour progressed normally with no signs of foetal distress.

At about 23.25, some 50 minutes later, the midwife noticed that Lamphud was fully dilated and there was anal bulging indicating that delivery was imminent. Nurses Stuckings and Roth were in attendance at around 23.25. The
Resident Medical Officer, Dr Miller, was paged and attended immediately. At .30 Maria's head delivered spontaneously with the umbilical cord wrapped around her neck, loosely. The cord was unable to be lifted over Maria's head and in the circumstances a decision was made to cut and clamp the cord to prevent any cord tightening or entanglement during the imminent delivery. The umbilical cord was cut by Dr Miller.

During the next contraction, some time at or before 23.38 p.m. Maria's shoulders did not deliver, indicating an obstetric emergency known as "shoulder dystocia" Nurses Stuckings, Roth and Dr Miller attempted to facilitate the delivery following the Guidelines for the Management of
Impacted Shoulders which were prepared by the Director of Obstetrics, at the
John Hunter Hospital, Dr Brinsmead. Despite following the Guidelines, delivery was not achieved. Lamphud was moved from the all fours position to the left lateral position and traction was applied. She was then moved to the lithotomy position and traction was applied and fundal pressure was applied on her abdomen.

At approximately 23.47, nine minutes after the shoulder dystocia occurred, and even longer since the cutting of the cord, Nurses Stuckings and Roth and Dr
Miller summoned the Senior Midwife, Nurse Baldwin, and the Senior Obstetrics
Registrar, Dr Wallman. Nurse Baldwin cut a large episiotomy. Dr Wallman, who arrived at approximately 23.48 directed that Lamphud be made ready for the application of the McRoberts manoeuvre, a sharp flexion of the maternal legs toward the chest and into the abdomen, that fundal pressure cease and that suprapubic pressure be applied. Dr Wallman successfully performed the
McRoberts manoeuvre and Maria was delivered at around 23.50.

Maria was born clinically dead suffering brain damage caused by cerebral hypoxia which was caused by asphyxia (lack of oxygen) during the delivery but was resuscitated. Maria was placed on a ventilator life support system.

What occurred after Maria was placed on the life support system was the subject of dispute between the parties.

According to the plaintiffs, after Maria was delivered, Roman, whose mother tongue is Polish but who speaks English with limitations, was summoned to the hospital and attended the delivery room where he witnessed the bloody aftermath of the delivery and was told that there had been problems. Both
Lamphud and Roman specifically directed Dr Brinsmead, Dr Wake, Dr Buckner and others that Maria not be removed from life support without their consent.
Continued support management continued which involved constant care with frequent suctioning and careful positioning of the child.

A CTG taken 12 hours after the birth revealed that Maria suffered substantial brain damage caused by cerebral hypoxia caused by the asphyxia during the delivery. It became apparent in the opinion of the attending neonatologists that Maria's prognosis was so poor that continuation of life support assistance was not in Maria's best interests.

On 1 October 1992, a case conference was convened which was attended by the neonatologists, a paediatric social worker, a paediatric midwife and a Thai and Polish interpreter (for the benefit of each parent). The events leading to the delivery and the resuscitation were explained in detail. It was explained to the parents that there was severe brain damage from which the child would never recover. Discontinuance of the life support system was recommended by the staff of the Hospital. Roman requested that life supportive measures be continued.

Over the following six days there were a number of discussions between the neonatologists and the parents in an attempt by the Hospital to explain why life support assistance should not be continued.

On 6 October 1992 Maria was gradually weaned from ventilator life support and appeared to adequately handle each of the readjustments. The steps taken to wean Maria from the life support system consisted of (a) substituting a "CPAP tube", for full ventilation. The "CPAP tube" consists of a tube which goes into the windpipe and operates by applying gentle pressure on the trachea so that a child breathes to some extent spontaneously. When this was done a normal blood gas reading was recorded; (b) on 11 October a nasopharyngeal CPAP tube was substituted, with the consent of Roman, stabilising Maria with normal blood gases. Supportive management of the child was continued as requested by the parents.

On 15 October 1992 it was found that Maria was breathing room air normally and remained able to do so and her blood gas readings remained completely normal.
Ventilation was not continued and she continued to breathe room air on her own.

On 16 October 1992 Drs Wake, Buckner and Gill decided that Maria should not be re-ventilated in the event of deterioration in her condition. This decision was made without consultation with, or the consent of, Lamphud and Roman and was against their stated wishes.

On 27 October 1992 Maria had a respiratory arrest and did not respond to any resuscitation. Maria was not fully re-ventilated and died, notwithstanding
CPAP ventilation.

A coronial inquest was held before Coroner Elliott in late 1993 at Newcastle, the decision being handed down on 12 January 1994.

According to the Lamphud and Roman the Hospital staff initiated a coronial inquest and arranged for an autopsy to be performed without any staff member explaining the nature of an autopsy to Lamphud and Roman and without obtaining their consent, which consent, if sought, would have been refused by them on religious and cultural grounds, in any event.

The defendant admits in the Statement of Defence to the Amended Statement of
Claim that on 16 October 1992 Dr Gill recorded in the clinical notes a treatment regime to the effect that if Maria suffered a major cardiorespiratory event a neonatologist was to be called, and the bag and suck procedure was to be applied and that intubation was not to occur because Maria was not, in his view, a candidate for re-ventilation. The defendant further admits that Dr Wake recorded in the clinical notes his agreement with the policy as did Dr Buckner on 27 October 1992. The defendant however denies that the decision by Drs Wake, Buckner and Gill that Maria was not to be re- ventilated in the event of deterioration in her condition was made without the consent of Lamphud and Roman and against their stated wishes.

The defendant further admits that the death of Maria was reported to the
Coroner but denies that the Hospital initiated a coronial inquest or arranged for an autopsy to be performed without explaining its intentions to Lamphud and Roman and without obtaining their consent.

Breach of Duty and/or Contract 
The plaintiffs alleged that the Hospital, through its employed staff or agents breached its non-delegable duty of care, its common law duty of care and/or the terms of its contract in relation to antenatal care in so far as the
Hospital failed to perform or ensure that an ultrasound was performed as soon as practicable after 23 September 1992. The plaintiffs alleged that had the ultrasound been performed and the results properly interpreted it would have indicated that Maria was a very large baby in relation to the mother and an experienced obstetrician or senior registrar would have been directed to be present at the delivery.

In relation to the actual delivery, the plaintiffs alleged that the Hospital failed to recognise the indications of obstructed labour and shoulder dystocia from Lamphud's clinical history and in particular the fact that she was of small stature, had previously delivered a large baby, was large for dates on September 1992, had an elevated fundal height of 41 cms on 23 September , had clinical polyhydromnious, and had symptoms of pre-diabetes.

The plaintiffs further allege that the Hospital breached its duty in that it failed to ensure that an experienced obstetrician or senior registrar was in attendance before 23.25 when Lamphud's cervix was fully dilated, there was anal bulging and Maria's delivery was imminent. The Hospital also failed to summon help within a reasonable time after the delivery staff knew or ought to have known that an emergency situation had developed and, in particular, delivery staff knew that Maria's umbilical cord had been cut, thus depriving her of oxygen, shoulder dystocia was present at or before 23.38, and asphyxia was foreseeable, as delivery was not achieved within five minutes of the cutting of the umbilical cord.

It is further alleged that the defendant failed to properly manage the shoulder dystocia emergency and in particular the delivery staff failed to cut a large episiotomy, failed to apply appropriate pressure at the appropriate time to disengage the impacted shoulder and failed to perform the McRoberts manoeuvre and that the Hospital failed to provide appropriate Guidelines for the Management of Impacted Shoulders in that the Guidelines, ("the
Guidelines"), then in force, which were followed, were deficient because they failed to adequately state the clinical indications in which obstructed labour and shoulder dystocia can be anticipated and, in particular, failed to include factors such as the small stature of the mother, the previous delivery of a large baby, an assessment of relative size for gestational age, established or suspected polyhydromnios and established or suspected pre-diabetes.

The plaintiffs allege that had the indicators of obstructed delivery and shoulder dystocia should have been recognised on 29 September 1992. Dr
Wallman should have been directed to be present at the delivery where, on the shoulder dystocia occurring, he would have immediately employed the McRoberts manoeuvre and delivered Maria alive and well, and further that had the delivery staff summoned help in a timely fashion, Dr Wallman would have attended and performed the McRoberts manoeuvre and delivered Maria alive and well, and had the delivery staff managed the delivery properly Maria would have been born alive and well.

The plaintiffs also submit that the defendant in its duty of care failed to amend the Guidelines prior to 29 September 1992 to include the use of the
McRoberts manoeuvre when the McRoberts manoeuvre was a recognised procedure for the delivery of impacted shoulders since 1983, and was a recommended priority procedure for the delivery of impacted shoulders since 1989, that Dr
Brinsmead knew of the McRoberts manoeuvre prior to 29 September 1992 and had the power to amend the Guidelines to include use of it and that it had been suggested to Dr Brinsmead prior to 29 September 1992 that the Guidelines be amended to include use of the McRoberts manoeuvre.

The plaintiffs allege that had the Guidelines been adequate, Dr Wallman would have been directed to be present at the delivery where, on the shoulder dystocia occurring, he would have employed the McRoberts manoeuvre and delivered Maria alive and well and that had the Guidelines been adequate Dr
Wallman would have been summoned in time to employ the McRoberts manoeuvre and deliver Maria alive and well.

It is also alleged by the plaintiffs that had the Guidelines been adequate the delivery staff would have delivered Maria alive and well; and had the
Guidelines been amended prior to 29 September 1992 the delivery staff would have employed the McRoberts manoeuvre as a priority and would have delivered
Maria alive and well.

In relation to postnatal care the plaintiffs allege that the Hospital terminated life support to Maria without first obtaining Lamphud's and Roman's express consent, terminated life support to Maria when Lamphud and Roman specifically directed them not to do so without their express consent and performed an autopsy on Maria's body without obtaining the consent of Lamphud and Roman. The plaintiffs further submit that the defendants breach of duty, on the balance of probabilities, caused or contributed to the death of Maria.

The defendant has admitted breach in relation to the allegations in the
Statement of Claim, that it breached its common law duty of care to Lamphud and Roman and its non-delegable duty to them.

The defendant does not admit that it has breached any duty of care to Delores but has conceded, as indicated earlier, that for the purposes of Delores' action, Maria's brain damage and death was consequent upon surgical negligence.

I have set out the pleadings on liability to indicate the foundation for the claim by Lamphud and Roman for aggravated and exemplary damages which are claimed by each of them. I will deal with those issues separately. The pleadings on liability are also the foundation for Delores' claim for liability and for damages.

Compensation to Relatives Act 
Roman claims compensation under the Compensation to Relatives Act NSW 1897 for funeral expenses. These are admitted by the defendant.

Damages of Lamphud and Roman 
The defendant submits that the damages awarded to Roman and Lamphud should be moderate given that once the proceedings are over, the Marchlewskis will be able to continue their lives. The Hospital does not dispute that the long and trying "leading up" time and stress of the trial, as well as the re-living, in effect, of the events that occurred for the purposes of the trial was bound to exacerbate the condition of both parents.

The defendant further submits that the Marchlewskis appear to have got on with their lives - they now have a son, Dominic.

Exemplary and/or Aggravated Damages claimed by Roman and Lamphud 
Lamphud and Roman claim exemplary and/or aggravated damages on two grounds.
The first ground relates to the decision made by Hospital staff on or about 16
October 1992 that Maria was "not a candidate for resuscitation" in the event that her condition deteriorated. Lamphud and Roman allege that this decision was taken without their consultation or consent and in circumstances where the defendant had already received advice that it would be contrary to law to withdraw support without the parents' consent.

The second ground relates to the defendant's initiation of a Coroner's inquest by the defendant to investigate the circumstances of Maria's death. Although
Lamphud and Roman had complained about the defendant's management both during the delivery and up to the time of Maria's death, and had concurred in the decision to hold an inquest, they submit that they did not appreciate that an autopsy would be performed as a matter of course. Had they known this, they contend that they would not have given consent due to their religious convictions (particularly those of Lamphud who is a Buddhist, believing in reincarnation).

The defendant denies this allegation and denies that Lamphud and Roman are entitled to exemplary and/or aggravated damages. The defendant submits that it does not suggest that Maria's prognosis was anything other than extremely poor and confirms that the prognosis for Maria included a likelihood of death, or if death did not eventuate, an inevitability of severe disability involving no possibility of an independent existence. However, the defendant submits that in making decisions as to the treatment to be provided for Maria, the medical practitioners that were charged with her care owed their primary, and indeed only, duty to Maria, and whilst consideration could be and was given to the wishes of Roman and Lamphud, those wishes could not be allowed to dictate the provision of appropriate medical care to Maria.

The defendant further submits that the maintenance of Maria's life for purposes other than her best interests would have been entirely inappropriate and there was no high handed conduct on the part of any of the doctors who were discharging a difficult duty in difficult circumstances. The defendant claims that there was no contumelious and deliberate disregard of the rights of Lamphud and Roman, no malice involved, nothing outrageous in the conduct of the doctors whose primary duty concerned the welfare of the child, and no conduct deserving of punishment and/or deterrence. Thus the defendant argued that these actions do not entitle Lamphud and Roman to an award of aggravated or exemplary damages.

In relation to the autopsy, the defendant submits that it was Roman who required a full inquiry as to why Maria had died, despite Dr Wake being prepared to sign the death certificate, and that it was Dr Wake who, at the direction of the General Manager of the Hospital, Mr Batts, reported the death of Maria to the police and completed and signed a written Report to the
Coroner.

The defendant submits that in any event, once the matter was reported to the police and the Coroner, it was up to the Coroner to determine whether there should be an inquest or a post-mortem and that it would be unfair and unreasonable to impose aggravated and/or exemplary damages by reason of the fact that the post-mortem and its sequelae caused Lamphud and Roman nervous shock or added to the nervous shock they had already sustained. The defendant argues that there is no evidence that they knew or ought to have known that reporting the death to the Coroner would have any particular impact upon Roman and Lamphud.

Where, in tort, the conduct of a defendant is deliberate, and causes the plaintiff something more than mere indignity, the court may include a sum to compensate the indignity in addition to the amount awarded for general damages. Such damages, known as aggravated damages are awarded where the wrongful act that was done was aggravated by the manner in which the act was done: Uren versus John Fairfax & Co Ltd <case>; [(1966) 117 CLR 118] per Windeyer J at 149.

The phrase "aggravated damages" is most often used to describe the award of compensation for the insult or loss of dignity suffered by a plaintiff and may be awarded when it appears the plaintiff is being, or has been subjected to an outrageous indignity, regardless of whether the defendant had the requisite intention, and it would be improper to award exemplary damages in the circumstances: Luntz, Assessment of Damages 3rd Edition, at pp's 68, 71.

Where an award of aggravated damages is inadequate in the circumstances of the case, the Court has a further power to award exemplary damages. Exemplary damages may be awarded where the defendants have deliberately embarked on conduct knowing that it could harm others and engaged in conscious wrongdoing in contumelious disregard of another's rights: Whitfield versus De Laurent &
Co Ltd <case>; [(1920) 29 CLR 71] per Knox CJ at 77. Mere negligent errors or errors of a kind which might only amount to conduct that can be classified as "gross negligence" is not enough to ground a claim for exemplary damages: per
Ormiston JA in Backwell versus AAA <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 1] in a court judgment stating at p.8: "Aggravated damages in contrast to exemplary damages, are compensatory in nature being awarded for injury to the plaintiff's feelings caused by insult, humiliation and the like. Exemplary damages, on the other hand, go beyond compensation and are awarded `as a punishment to the guilty, to deter from any such proceeding in the future, and as a proof of the detestation of the jury to the action itself'(Wilkes versus Wood (1763) Loft p.1 at p.19)" 
The purpose of awarding exemplary damages are, according to Windeyer J in
Uren (supra) at p.149: "...to punish the defendant, and presumably to serve one of more of the objects of moral retribution or deterrence." 
To first consider the issue of the autopsy which took place prior to the
Coroner's inquest, it is not submitted that the defendant acted unlawfully and indeed inappropriately or unnecessarily. The Hospital enquired of Roman whether he wished a Coroner's examination and reported the death of Maria to the Coroner, completing a report. The power to have a coronial post-mortem lies with the Coroner under the [Coroners
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca120/).

Although Newcastle lies in a multicultural area where it cannot be assumed that medical and legal terminology is necessarily understood by every person coming in contact with a hospital, particularly in circumstances of distress, the failure to outline in detail what an autopsy involves is probably something which sadly occurs quite frequently. Roman has not had a developed education in English but is clearly educated and the Hospital employees would be entitled to assume that he understood what would be involved and that it would be explained to Lampud.

However, in the circumstances of the exacerbated sensibilities of Lamphud and
Roman, and in the knowledge of her religious beliefs, some degree of care should have been taken to ensure that the consent or instruction to have a coroners inquiry was based on proper knowledge of what was involved, particularly as to the way an autopsy is carried out. Multicultural
Australians include people from diverse religious nations and cultures.
Sensitivity should be shown to different burial rituals. There is no evidence before the Court that in fact there was a proper explanation of what was involved.

This failure to ensure understanding about the nature of an autopsy, however, does not constitute a basis for aggravation of the damages or a finding of exemplary damages to which Roman and Lamphud are entitled. The negligence giving rise to the damages was in relation to the initial trauma to Maria and although the issue of the Coroner's inquest was a natural consequence of the initial act of negligence, there has been in no way any contumelious disregard by the defendant of the feelings of Lamphud and Roman shown, and no warrant for any punishment for the omission involved. There is no insult or loss of dignity suffered by Lamphud or Roman as a matter of law, even though they obviously considered it should have been better explained. Even if the employees of the defendant had no such intention, there was nothing in which the transaction involving the commencement of the Coroner's autopsy which warrants the awarding of aggravated damages. That claim in relation to the coronial autopsy therefore fails, notwithstanding the very real pain it clearly caused Lamphud and Roman.

In relation to the decision on 16 October 1997 that Maria was not a candidate for resuscitation, the Hospital staff had clearly formed the view that Maria could never have sustained any meaningful quality of life; her injuries were irreversible and death at an early age even if full ventilation treatment had continued was a real likelihood.

The Hospital had a duty to Maria, but also to Lamphud and Roman. The failure to obtain either the parents' consent or approach a court for an order that the treatment be terminated constituted a total disregard of the feelings of
Lamphud and Roman notwithstanding what would appear to the Hospital to be a meaningless prolonging of human life. A judgment would probably have been made that seeking further consent would be a waste of time. The decision not to re- intubate would mean inevitably, even though the parents were not told of that decision or the likely consequence thereof , that a reasonably competent neonatologist would know that resuscitation using a bag without an endotracheal tube permits gas to enter a baby's stomach as well as lungs, and that where gas enters a baby's stomach there is an increased risk of provoking aspiration which is likely within a short time to cause aspirational pneumonia, and in the circumstances of Maria, that it was likely to be fatal.
The fact that the decision not to re-ventilate Maria was made in her best interests is irrelevant to the question of aggravated damages, which Lamphud and Roman claim. The Hospital wilfully and deliberately disregarded the wishes of the parents with the knowledge that any non-ventilator resuscitation would probably be ineffective to preserve Maria's life. What the Hospital did was to allow parents, in the terrible emotional state they were in, to believe that
Maria was stable or indeed improving, and thus deprived them of an opportunity or apparent need to pursue alternative treatment, ineffective though alternative treatment may have been. It meant that the damage which the defendant has admitted was cruelly exacerbated.

In relation to the claim for exemplary damages I do not, however, consider that the actions of the defendant warrant moral retribution or deterrence on which such a claim must be based. Even though there may have been a disregard for the feelings of the parents, there is not on the evidence before me a basis for exemplary damages as held in Fontini versus Katabodis <case>; [(1962) 108 CLR 177] and in Hart versus Herron [(1980) ATR 80-201], where
Fisher J of the NSW Supreme Court held that there was no conscious disregard of the plaintiff's rights to entitle the jury to award exemplary damages. I respectfully agree that the present case does not give rise to a finding of exemplary damages and the punitive element of such a finding.

However painful the decision may have been in the circumstances of Lamphud and
Roman I do however consider that, in the light of the very real damage which
Lamphud and Roman suffered in the initial few weeks after the original injury and the months and years that followed, and will follow, the actions of the defendant in making the 16 October 1992 decision, without the parents' concurrence, aggravated the damage that they would otherwise have suffered.
The strongly held belief of both parents in the future life of Maria and the opportunities of medical care, however unsoundly based that may have been, has meant that the pain, anguish and other damage that they have suffered has been exacerbated by the Hospital's action during the four short weeks of Maria's life. I will deal with the quantum of aggravated damages after dealing with the issue of general damages for Lamphud and Roman.

Roman's Claim for Damages 
Roman claims damages, as particularised in the [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca120/index.html#p33)
Statement, for pathological grief reaction, post traumatic stress disorder, delusional disorder, paranoia, severe depression, mood swings, insomnia, agitation and change of personality. Roman also claims damages for past and future treatment costs, future fund and economic loss.

The defendant concedes that Roman has suffered nervous shock for which he is entitled to compensatory damages. The defendant does not however concede that it is responsible at law for all of the differing factors which have impacted on Roman since his arrival in Australia, or at least since 1983.

The defendants further submit that in relation to Maria's birth and death,
Roman was not a person of "normal fortitude" and had a very clear pre- disposition to an abnormal psychiatric condition. The defendant also argues that Roman must be treated with caution in that he is a person who is prepared to exaggerate his condition and/or make statements in order to improve the case he was presenting.

Counsel for Roman argues that it is not open to the defendant to make the claim that Roman is not a person of normal fortitude and thus he should be denied recovery, and submits that the fact that Roman may have been predisposed to shock is no answer to his claim. The argument for Roman is that therefore the damages should at least be what a "normal person" would have recovered in the same extent. It is submitted for Roman that the shock of the injury to Maria in the admittedly negligent circumstances, and Maria's subsequent death and autopsy produced significant and irreversible change, particularly in Roman.

Roman was born in Poland on 9 September 1948. He is now approximately 50 years of age. He left Poland in 1980 as a political refugee and came to Australia with his then wife and their daughter. He was employed by BHP as a labourer in but was retrenched later that year. He separated from his wife Anna and suffered emotionally as a result of that. He threatened to hang himself in , and in March 1993 was admitted to the Mater Hospital with self-inflicted stab wounds to the abdomen. In May 1983 he was also admitted to the Royal
Newcastle Hospital with a self inflicted wound to the right arm and was there examined by Dr Osman Ali, who expressed Roman's condition as a reactive depression with endogenous features including terminal insomnia, loss of weight, drop of social functioning and some persecutory beliefs towards neighbours, work colleagues and the community at large. He found that his mental state was a very anxious man with some dysphoria and tearfulness. He found that he had a high risk of self mutilation. He was discharged on 8 June after his arm injury. He was re-engaged by BHP as a labourer only notwithstanding his considerable skills acquired whilst in Poland. He was again hospitalised after he was attacked in May 1985.

It was during this period that he met Lamphud who had come to Australia for a holiday, and who had taken temporary work as a seamstress.

Roman suffered a work accident at BHP in August 1987. He married Lamphud on 31
October 1987 and after an operation on an injured right knee returned to work on selected duties. By January 1989 he had become depressed about his situation and very angry towards Australia. He attended a clinic for depression but formed a considerable anger about the injustices of the
Australian citizen believing that he was being racially discriminated against and treated as a fifth class citizen. He had several returns to work with periods off work and by May 1990 was diagnosed as being very depressed about his situation because of worries about his financial position that resulted in him having difficulty sleeping, and he had become bitter as a result of his experiences in Australia with a history of problems with work colleagues. By
June 1990 he had aggravated depression and anxiety as a result of his injuries and was not fit to return to pre-accident work but had a limited capacity to carry out light duties. In July 1990 he ceased work at BHP and continued on worker's compensation. By August 1991 Roman was diagnosed as suffering a severe depression anxiety and was found to be medically unfit for pre-injury occupation and that his symptoms of anxiety and depression would severely hamper his capacity to carry out light duties. His physical injuries added to his severe depressive anxiety in determining his capacity to work.

The work and problem history of Roman occupied a large part of the cross- examination in these proceedings. Videos were shown during this period demonstrating Roman's capacity to carry out physical labour. I am satisfied that part of his physical incapacity is exaggerated. However, the videos do not refute the medical opinion that his capacity to carry out heavy duties is severely impaired.

Roman commenced workers' compensation proceedings contending that the physical damage caused his unfitness, deep stress, nervous breakdown and depression. In
January 1992 he was further diagnosed as suffering from anxiety, depression and that it had been present for some time. He was found by a medical panel in
May 1992 as having a 20% loss of use of his right leg and he required a lumbo- sacral corset in May 1992. He continued to have problems with his painful knee. Subsequent to the events concerning the death of Maria he was, on 18 May , determined to have a 30% diminution of his right leg and a 10% back injury. A medical panel determined in February 1994 that he had a 5% injury to his back.

Videos were also shown, during the proceedings, of Roman using a walking stick and limping on the way to Dr White's rooms. On 30 June 1994 Roman settled his claim with BHP for a lump sum which resulted in a holiday for his family in
Queensland. Roman considered that he was pressured by his lawyers to accept a lesser sum than that to which he was entitled. There was a severe impairment on Roman's capacity to earn income. His work history shows that if he did work it would only be for limited period and despite attempts to work and an attempt to run his own business, his business management skills are extremely limited and he has difficulty with English. It was likely that a large part of his life would be spent on unemployment relief. The anxiety and depression conditions which he suffered because of the difficulties of his feelings of rejection by the Australian community and the unfairness of his Polish skills not being recognised in Australia and his confinement to what would be little more than, or only, labouring jobs on light duties makes a man of his age very difficult to employ.

In Jaensch, Murphy J at p.557 held where there exists an abnormal predisposition to shock or "nervous injury"; "..if liability extends to `normal' persons, it must also extend to predisposed persons, who at least should be able to recover where a `normal' person would have recovered and to the same extent." 
Gibbs CJ held, in Jaensch, at p.566: "A final question arises. The respondent had, before her marriage, led an unhappy and deprived life and had suffered much abuse during her childhood. In consequence she had an exceptional predisposition to anxiety and depression.
However the learned trial judge held that her predisposition was controlled and that she was a person of normal fortitude. It may be assumed (without deciding) that injury for nervous shock is not recoverable unless an ordinary person of normal fortitude in the position of the plaintiff would have suffered some shock. The findings of the learned trial judge make it right to infer that this has been established in the present case. In those circumstances the fact that the respondent was predisposed to shock is no answer to her claim. There is no reason why the principle of such cases as
Watts v. Rake (196) <case>; [108 CLR 158] should not apply.." 
This makes the task of assessing loss of earning capacity as a result of the trauma sustained by the pathological grief reaction which he has suffered from the events surrounding the death of his daughter Maria, and the traumatic aftermath, very difficult. I find that Roman has suffered post traumatic stress disorder, severe depression and a delusional condition and severe change of personality, and that in the circumstances an ordinary person would have so suffered but obviously not to the same extent. I do not consider for the balance of the 15 years of his working life that he is likely to be able to enter the workforce or gain employment as an employee or in any business he may attempt to run. I consider that the net loss in terms of the earning capacity that he would otherwise have had before the injuries sustained as a result of the defendant's action, taking into account the limited earning capacity which Roman retained at the time of that injury, can only be calculated as an average annual income which balances periods of unemployment with periods of limited employment.

I consider that he should be awarded for past economic loss before the period until the settlement of his claim with BHP on 30 June 1994, the sum $20,000.00, being the sum submitted. I am advised by Counsel for Roman, and it is not challenged, that as part of the basis of this calculation he is required to repay a charge to the Department of Social Security of $7541,64 per annum. I consider that for past economic loss from 30 June 1994 until 14
August 1998, that Roman's loss of net earning capacity to be $350.00 per week, being the difference calculated on an after tax basis as the whole of his residual earning capacity which he has now lost as a result of the defendant's actions, taking into account his pre-existing injuries and psychological state. Although Roman is entitled to be compensated on the basis, notwithstanding his pre-existing mental and physical condition, nonetheless the loss which I have estimated is the actual loss of net income resulting from the defendant's actions.

It was submitted on Roman's behalf that he is entitled to 48 weeks during the fiscal years 1994/1995, similarly for 1995/1996, 1996/1997, and I bring his submission forward from 1997/1998 together with a period of six weeks which I bring to date of judgment, being the sum of $69,300.00. I calculate interest thereon at 12% per annum over 5.9 years, the sum of that calculation being halved, which I then round to $25,042.00 which when added to $69,300.00 makes a sum of $94,342.00.

Future Loss of Earnings 
The plaintiff is almost 50 years old and intended to work to age 65 years. I calculate 15 years of working life using a 3% multiplier of 632.2 on what I have calculated to be a net income of $350.00 per week, being $221,260.00.
From that sum should be deducted the normal vicissitudes of 15% bringing the future earnings to $188,071.00. I consider that the basis upon which I have calculated future loss of earnings as set out above takes into account anything outside the normal vicissitudes.

Therapy Costs 
I accept the submission on behalf of Roman that he is likely to need weekly therapy and that is based on the next ten years at $140.00 per week multiplied by the appropriate multiplier of 451.7. I allow the sum of $63.238.00. On a life expectancy of a further 15 years after the first 10 years at 4 sessions per year the calculation on the basis of $10.77 per week multiplied by 922.2 (being the 25 year multiplier) at $9832.00, less $10.77 multiplied by 451.7 (being the 10 year multiplier) being $4864.00 which gives a net calculation of $4968.00, which I allow.

I also accept the evidence that Roman will require the anti-depressant drug
Prozac and also an anti-psychotic drug, Serenace, and an amount should therefore be made for a 10 year treatment period. The cost of Prozac is approximately $70.00 for 20 tablets, including dispensing fee. Roman will require one per day at a cost of $24.50 per week. The cost of Serenace is approximately $21.00 for 100 x 5 mg tablets which he will need two per day at a cost of approximately $3.00 per week making in all $27.50 per week times a multiplier of 451.7 totalling the sum of $12.422.00 which I allow.

Roman will require some travelling costs since he will need to attend therapy at Gosford for a lengthy return trip. The result of these proceedings is likely to be that there will be a relocation of the family and it is likely that counsellors will be found closer to his eventual residence. I allow $10.00 per week for such costs since there is no evidence on which I can readily base a cost. That amount at the multiplier of 451.7 is the sum of $4517.00 to which I add $500.00, providing relocation travel costs, being $5017.00 in total.

It is claimed on Roman's behalf that there will be future counselling required after the 10 years at four counselling sessions per year, which is claimed on a basis of $1.15 per week. I calculate this sum of $1.15 at the multiplier of .2 less $1.15 per week at 451.7 making the sum of $547.00 the total allowance therefore allowed for therapy is the sum of $86,192.00.

Roman's General Damages 
It is submitted on behalf of Roman that the issue of Roman not being of "normal fortitude", is not relevant for liability in calculating general damages: Jaensch versus Coffey (supra), per Gibbs CJ at 556. I concur with that submission. Calculation of pain and suffering in general damages must take into account the appalling way in which Roman was treated in relation to the issue of the non re-ventilation of Maria and the pressure, as submitted on his behalf, that Maria not be re-ventilated because of the cost to the Hospital.
The fact that Roman is a difficult person is not to the point. The depression from which he suffered before the injury would probably have resolved. It is in my view now unlikely to ever resolve. The agonies through which Roman has had to continue through the Coroner's inquest and subsequent legal proceedings, including the fact that the police and hospital contended to the
Coroner that there was no fault on the part of the hospital.

The ongoing grieving has distorted and will continue to distort the rest of
Roman's life. I accept as genuine the grief with which Maria's ashes were brought and remained in court during the course of the hearing. This was no contrivance.

Damages at common law are extremely difficult to calculate, for pain which is suffered is inevitably idiosyncratic to the individual. The general damages to which Roman is entitled as a result of the breach of the defendant's duty is assisted by the reasoning in the decision of Strelec versus Nelson & Ors , an unreported decision of Smart J on 6 February 1996, to which I have been referred where the sum of $130,00.00 was awarded to a mother in circumstances not entirely dissimilar. I consider that the general damages to be awarded to
Roman should be the sum of $180,00.00. To that sum I consider that there should be added aggravated damages for the reasons I have earlier given which
I calculate at an additional 20% making as additional sum of $36,000.00. I allow therefore a total of $216,00.00 for general damages including the aggravated damages.

Compensation to Relatives Claim 
I am unable to find a note of the claim of the funeral expenses under the
Compensation to Relatives Act but will allow this sum, when advised on further submission, by counsel for the parties.

Delores' Therapy Costs 
I have received submissions that Delores will require psychiatric therapy and counselling from the time that she is 18 years of age for a period of five years on the basis of six one hourly consultations per year at $160.00 each, being a total of $960.00 per year and additional medication. This is the responsibility of the father as the income earner in this family. The counselling is a function which would be substantially within the province of parents, but the parents have been deprived of the capacity to provide that counselling, notwithstanding that obligation to Delores. The evidence before me makes it very difficult to determine not only counselling but the question of medication. I consider that a sum to be provided for future counselling and medication should be allowed at the amount of $5,000.00.

As I understand, the Protective Commissioner has been appointed to look after the affairs of Roman and I would require further argument on the question of funds management and the appropriate form of order. I grant leave to Counsel for both parties to arrange for any further submissions in relation to both matters.

Lamphud's Claim for Damages 
Lamphud claims damages, as particularised in the Part 33 Statement, for pathological grief reaction, post traumatic stress disorder, delusional disorder, paranoia, severe depression, mood swings, insomnia, agitation and change of personality. She also claims damages for past and future medical costs, funds administration fees as well as economic loss. Her entitlement to compensation is conceded by the defendant.

Lamphud has required intensive counselling from doctors and social workers and has been on anti-depressant medication and sleeping tablets. It is claimed on
Lamphud's behalf that she will require five years of weekly counselling and further counselling up to three times a year for the rest of her life.

Lamphud was born in Thailand of Cambodian parents on 14 January 1962 and is therefore 36 years of age with a life expectancy of 41 years, and a potential for a working life of some 24 years. Lamphud came from a rural background and left school at eleven years of age, speaking Cambodian, Thai and some limited
English, leaving her, nevertheless, functionally illiterate in English.

She is of Buddhist faith. She does not speak her husband's language, Polish, nor does he speak Thai or Cambodian. This severely limits their capacity to console each other.

Lamphud married Roman in 1987 and Delores was born in 1992. Delores was three years and three months at the time of Maria's birth.

Lamphud worked at sewing in a factory. Roman then purchased sewing machines so that she could work at home, but she was unable to work at home. She found she was suffering from asthma.

Lamphud and Roman have since had a child named Dominic, born on 29 July 1996.
Lamphud now cares for Dominic and Delores. She was not working at the time of
Maria's birth and was not likely to have started working until Maria reached school age. She is not now likely to work for some three or so more years, until Dominic reaches school age.

In the course of the closing stage of Lamphud's confinement with Maria,
Lamphud was told that the baby was large and was told that she may have to have a caesarean. She was then told during a very difficult birth that Maria was brain damaged. Lamphud then had to endure the terrible period in her life between her daughter being born brain damaged, and her daughter's death on 27
October 1992.

During that period, I am satisfied that her English was sufficient for her to understand in fairly general terms what was going on, and when her husband,
Roman, complained and spoke to the hospital authorities, he was speaking on behalf of them both. I accept the evidence on her behalf that she was pressured by the Hospital staff to terminate Maria's life.

The fact that Lamphud held Buddhist beliefs as to kharma and reincarnation made the circumstances of the autopsy particularly appalling for her. She believed, on reading the autopsy report, that some of Maria's body parts had been harvested, as indeed did Roman. And although, as I indicated above, the failure to obtain her consent or concurrence to the autopsy and the fact that there was no proper explanation of the autopsy procedure does not entitle her to aggravated or exemplary damages, it is nonetheless a significant part of the pain and suffering experienced by Lamphud. It is likely that this pain and suffering will continue for all of her life, fading as time assists in the healing process. Nonetheless, it will continue because of her belief that proper funeral rites could not be performed on the body of Maria after Maria's death. The continued distress and anxiety felt by both parents is, in part, a result of their agony during the Coroner's inquest and the matters that I have referred to in relation to Roman.

The acute ongoing distress is very clear from the medical evidence supporting
Lamphud's claim. I find that she is, and will continue to suffer from a
Pathological Grief Reaction, that a Post Traumatic Stress Disorder exists and will continue for many years to come, and that severe depression, insecurity and agitation and a change of personality have resulted from the fault of the defendant.

Lamphud continues to have a need for counselling and medication, although it is not clear that she will continue to take that medication.

Lamphud's Economic Loss 
Lamphud ceased employment in November 1991 as a result of medical conditions and respiratory problems as well as physical inability to work at home. She was, as I have indicated above, unlikely to resume employment until after
Maria was old enough to go to school, and would now be unlikely to resume work for some years in any event. On the evidence before me, it is very difficult to see what the future working life of Lamphud would be. She is younger than her husband by some 13 or so years, and is therefore likely to live longer than he, and with the increasing percentage of women returning to some sort of remunerative work, even someone with her limited skills, it is difficult to assess an appropriate sum for loss of earnings.

I consider that at some stage, Lamphud would have returned to the workforce, particularly since before the trauma giving rise to these proceedings, her husband had a limited earning capacity, and economic necessity would probably have forced her into some sort of employment. Notwithstanding the difficulty of assessing all of the various factors in relation to her future life, I find that she is not now likely to rejoin the workforce which she would otherwise have done, but for the trauma that she has suffered. I consider that a proper sum to allow to cover future economic loss caused by the actions of the defendant, is the sum of $60,000.00, which is somewhat more than a "cushion", but nevertheless is in my view commensurate with a proper calculation of the economic loss suffered. I do not calculate any past economic loss. The sum covers the likely income she would otherwise have earned but only at a low rate of income for limited periods of her life.

Lamphud's General Damages 
I consider that the pain and suffering that Lamphud has gone through, as I have outlined above, and the fact that she will have to live with this injury for the rest of her life to a large extent, and the unremitting and continuous grieving, will in fact impact very severely on her. She is not likely to ever fully recover.

Looking at the provisions in Strelec referred to above, and examining the nature of general damages awarded for personal injury, I consider that the pain and suffering thus endured by Lamphud entitles her to a sum of $200,000.00. And for the reasons that I have enunciated in relation to aggravated damages, I consider that that aggravation should add 20% to the damages that Lamphud has been awarded, making an additional $40,000.00, being $240,000.00 in all.

Lamphud's Claim for Therapy, Future Treatment and Medication 
It is difficult to see the extent to which Lamphud is likely to undergo counselling and treatment. Persons with English as a second language, with the limited education of Lamphud, will tend not to carry out a strict regimen of treatment, and it is difficult on the evidence to see the extent that she would undergo counselling.

A claim for some $54,000.00 is made on behalf of Lamphud under this head. It is put on behalf of the defendant that the calculation of her future treatment costs does not provide a basis for a strict calculation based on a specific number of treatments and specific medication. I agree with that submission. I think a proper approach to cover future psychological counselling and medication would be to allow a sum of $25,000.00 as a sum to provide a fund for that future treatment.

As I understand it, the Protective Commissioner has been appointed to look after the affairs of Lamphud and I would require further argument on the question of funds management. I grant leave to Counsel for both parties to arrange for any further submissions in relation to the issue and the form of appropriate orders as to payment of damages.

Delores' Claim for Damages 
The claim for general damages for Delores is based on her having suffered an emotional injury as a result of the death of her sister and as a result of her parents' emotional problems. Delores' claim is that she suffers from sleep disturbance, agitation, mistrust of authority and changes to her personality.
She has had counselling for such problems, principally by psychologist Anita
Smith, whose reports were admitted in evidence before me.

Counsel for Delores, Mr Menzies Q.C. submits that the defendant owed a duty to
Delores because she falls into that class of persons, being a sister of Maria, as set out in Jaensch versus Coffey, supra, to whom a duty is owed.

In Jaensch, the High Court extended the circumstances in which damages for nervous shock can be recovered to circumstances where the plaintiff was not within the "area of physical risk." Whether such damages extend, however, to a sibling of the deceased is a different question. Gibbs CJ in Jaensch, commenting on to whom a duty of care is owed said at p.553: "Duty is owed not to the world but to one's neighbour; that is, to persons who are so close to and directly affected by my act that I ought reasonably to have them in contemplation as being so affected that I am directing my mind of the acts or omissions which are called into question." 
At p.602, Deane J, with whose reasons Gibbs CJ, in general, agreed, said: "If liability in negligence for nervous shock caused by the death, injury or peril of another in a road accident fell to be determined by reference to an unqualified test of reasonable foreseeability, there would be no proper basis for excluding liability on the part of the injured person, her or his estate, or her or his compulsory third party insurer for mere psychiatric injury which was sustained by another as a result of the self-inflicted death, injury or peril of the negligent person in circumstances where the risk of such psychiatric injury was reasonably foreseeable: compare Bourhill versus Young's
Executor [(1941) SC 395] at 399. Nor, on an unqualified test of reasonable foreseeability, would there be any rational basis for excluding liability to a close relative or a friend who has no contact with the accident or its immediate aftermath but who suffers reasonably foreseeable nervous shock by reason of constant social contact, as loyal nurse or companion, with the injured victim." 
In Alcock versus Chief Constable South Yorkshire Police [(1992) 1 AC 301] case at 411,
Lord Oliver of Aylmerton observed that: `in the end, it has to be accepted that the concept of `proximity' is an artificial one which depends more upon the Court's perception of what is the reasonable area for the imposition of liability than upon any logical process of analogical deduction.' 
Counsel for Delores submits that Delores should be viewed as an extension of her mother because at the time of the death of her sister, at her young age of three years and three months, she was still extremely dependant on her mother and because of her own developmental stage she had but no choice to accept the experiences her mother and her family were going through. It is submitted that
Delores' parents' shock, in effect, became hers. I do not accept that even if this is so, that it gives rise to a compensable claim in damages for Delores.

Delores attended the Hospital with her parents when her mother went into labour. Although she was not present at the birth, the Hospital failing to contact Roman when the birth was imminent, she experienced some part of the following twenty eight days of trauma and confusion after Maria was born.
Anita Smith, who saw Delores Marchlewski on a number of occasions at the request of her parents comments on how Delores perceived the imminent birth of her sister.
 "Delores had experienced a great sense of anticipation of the birth and was excited about the prospects of a baby brother or sister. She stated to the clinician in a later session that `it's a family if you have a sister, it's not a family if you don't have a sister." 
Leaving aside the question of whether the Hospital owed a duty to Delores, liability for nervous shock depends upon the sudden sensory perception of phenomenon which affronts or insults the plaintiff's mind and causes a recognisable psychiatric illness, such that damages are recoverable if the psychiatric injury was induced by shock: Campbelltown City Council & Ors v McKay & Anor [(1988) 15 NSWLR 501.] 
I have been provided, on behalf of Delores, with numerous decisions relating to a claim for nervous shock as well as a number of articles concerning the same. The case law on this area is indeed comprehensive and vast. I have been most guided by the principles discussed by Sheller JA in his principal judgment in Chiaverni versus Hockey & Anor [(1993) ATR 81-223] agreed to by the other members of the Court and approved by Rolfe J in Masri versus Marinko & Anor (unreported 4 June 1998). Those principles are: "1. The elements of nervous shock giving rise to tortious liability are a recognisable psychiatric illness caused by shock meaning a sudden sensory perception - that is by seeing, hearing or touching - of a person, thing or event which is so distressing that the perception of the phenomenon affronts or insults the plaintiff's mind. See per Brennan J in Jaensch versus Coffey at -7 and per Lord Ackner in Alcock versus Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police <case>; [[1992] 1 AC 310] at 401F.
Damages are not recoverable if the psychiatric injury was not induced by shock: Campbelltown City Council versus Mackay [(1989) 14 NSWLR 501] at 503 and 509E. In Alcock's case Lord Ackner went on to say, at 401F that "nervous shock has yet to include psychiatric illness caused by the accumulation over a period of time of more gradual assaults on the nervous system." Psychiatric illness caused by the experience of having to cope with the deprivation consequent upon the death of a loved one attract no damages; nor does the psychiatric illness suffered by a spouse who has been worn down by caring for a tortiously injured husband or wife or by a parent made distraught by the wayward conduct of a brain damaged child; Jaensch v
Coffey at 565; Alcock's case at 400F-G.
At common law liability for such shock depends in part on foreseeability and so may extend to the parent, spouse or rescuer brought to the scene or the hospital but may be denied to a stranger in the vicinity; Bourhill versus Young <case>; [[1943] AC 92.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1943%5d%20AC%2092 "View LawCiteRecord" ) It also depends on proximity; Jaensch versus Coffey at 553-583-585....
While at one stage recovery of damages was largely confined to circumstances where the psychiatric injury resulted from direct sensory observation of or alarm caused by the occasion of injury to a person at the scene as distinct from the observation of the consequences of injury even by a parent or near relative (Chester versus Waverley Corporation <case>; [(1939) 63 CLR 1]; Jaensch versus Coffey at 551-2), the boundaries have been extended to those circumstances where the plaintiff is confronted with the aftermath at the scene of the accident or at a hospital shortly thereafter:
McLoughlin versus O'Brien <case>; [[1983] 1 AC ] and
Jaensch versus Coffey. This more liberal trend had started to emerge earlier in
England in Hambrook versus Stokes Bros [[1925] 1 KB 141] and Owens v
Liverpool Corporation [[1939] 1 KB 394.] Jaensch v
Coffey decides that damages are recoverable even though the plaintiff was not within the `area of physical risk'....
The overriding limitation upon the test of reasonable foreseeability does not seem to preclude recovery in a case where the psychiatric injury was sustained as a result of the combined effect of what a plaintiff himself or herself observed and that which he or she was told while at the scene of the accident or its aftermath: Jaensch versus Coffey per Deane J at 609.

The defendant submits that Delores' condition, whatever it may be, was not caused by an "sudden sensory perception", that there is no evidence that
Delores was traumatised by visiting the hospital or seeing Maria at the hospital following birth and death. The defendant submits that whatever condition Delores was suffering from was caused by a consequence of family dynamics. The defendant further submits that there is insufficient evidence before the court upon which it could reliably make any findings of nervous shock in relation to Delores. I agree with these submissions. Though it appears that Delores may have suffered to some extent directly or indirectly from the effects of the death of her sister I cannot find any evidence of a nervous shock as contemplated in Jaensch, supra.

The fact that Delores was just over three years of age on the evidence before me makes it highly unlikely that a child of that age in the circumstances of the birth and death of a sibling would suffer the sudden sensory perception required.

Ms Smith in her report of 5 September 1995, reports that, according to the
DSM-IV, Delores appears to possess many of the symptoms of chronic Post
Traumatic stress Disorder. Delores also suffers from vivid and realistic nightmares such that: "When experiencing the nightmare, Delores often calls out, screams and struggles and awakens with a continuation of the fear and anxiety. These factors mean she often has difficulty in returning to sleep and therefore has reportedly had difficulty in her day to day functioning in areas such as concentration, depression, anxiety and irritability." 
And: "the death of Maria was shocking and confusing to Roman and Lamphud but it was also for Delores. She found it a bewildering experience and her lack of knowledge or understanding of what happened would have probably compounded these feelings. The ideas of birth and death were mixed up for her and therefore the loss for her was difficult to be mourned. Delores' parents were apparently very distressed, tearful, angry and depressed and because of their extreme mental and emotional state Delores was left behind. The families social isolation has meant that Delores has had to remain with them though all the situations, including the Coroner's inquest and she has had to rely on her parents in the midst of their own chaos. They have expressed all their feelings in front of her with little or no inhibitions and struggled to meet her needs to the best of their ability at the time. Following on from this both parents now have an extreme pre-occupation with their grievances and they see the child as having died as a result of medical negligence. Because of their severe and persistent grief reaction, post traumatic stress disorder and depression they have experienced great difficulties in their lives which has flowed down to Delores and has presented some severe consequences for her." 
Dr Warwick Irvine, psychologist, who counselled Delores after the death of her sister opined that at the time of Maria's death Delores would have been going through the "autonomy versus shame and doubt stage" and that she wouldn't have been an independent person and would very much have relied on her parents for direction and for security. According to Dr Irvine, if that security was not met there may be damage to the self esteem and at that stage, although a child has language, they do not have sufficient concepts to understand things like death or birth. Dr Irvine gave the following evidence in relation to her developmental stage at the time of Maria's death.
 "I think, to be realistic, when she would visit her sister in hospital more than likely Delores would give her sister a cuddle because that made mum and dad happy. I doubt whether there would have been any great bond developed, although she would have been expecting a playmate and I gather she was rather lonely and looking forward to having a little sister to play with.

The difficulty would have been more of a secondary nature, whereby there was an upset to her equilibrium because her parents were upset. She would have felt for them, and just like a baby on the breast can sense when a mother is distressed and may cease to feed, from that early age children are very tuned in to the parents' feelings and that is where they gain their sense of security or insecurity." 
In relation to the loss of a sister, Ms Smith writes in her report that Delores has now become quite aggressive and has begun to express herself in an angry manner saying, for example, "I want her back. I don't want the stupid people to kill her again." Ms Smith made the following comments in relation to this attitude exhibited by Delores: "This could be a reflection of her parents continuing anger as Delores notes that `Daddy's not much happy because Maria is not coming back' `When I dreamed, I dreamed my father is crying because of Maria dying; and `Mum is sad because she wants Maria back... sometimes they are angry because that is not fair when Maria is gone." The loss of this potential playmate and friend for
Delores creates a great deal of sadness in her, not just for the fact that she has died, but for herself because of her loneliness. She feels that she would like to be like the other children at her school who have brothers and sisters and she feels incomplete without a sibling." 
Dr D'Costa, whose report of 2 December 1995 was in evidence before me, made the following observation of Delores whom he has known for some time: "Following the loss of her baby sister which she is unable to comprehend at present she developed behavioural problems both at home and school.

She would ask her parents about her sister whom she found particularly distressed, would have piercing cries at night sometimes uncontrollable. She had participation in he mother's pregnancy feeling her tummy and the kicking of the baby with great expectations of playing with the new born but was sadly disappointed when she was not coming home. She had become introverted and drawn at school tending to play with the younger children." 
In a report of 18 June 1996, Ms Smith recommended a quick resolution of the matter because of the degenerative effects the continuing trauma seems to be having on Delores: "She has persistent and unremitting symptoms which are being exacerbated by this situation. These include a fear of hospitals (in particular John Hunter
Hospital), doctors and illness, a belief that doctors from the John Hunter hospital killed her sister, a fear of going to sleep at night (which means she has to have a parent sleep with her), nightmares, bed wetting, headaches and behavioural disturbances." 
It is quite understandably a disappointment and source of sadness for Delores that she did not have a sibling to play with and that she was not able to bring home Maria from the Hospital, but with the birth of Dominic, who was born on 27 July 1996, this situation must now have changed somewhat. What is most sad however, is the fact that she has been denied the opportunity to continue with her life, due to her obsessive father and his not unreasonable desire to have the Hospital admit liability: cf Report of Warwick Irvine, psychologist, of 4 January 1998.

Law Reform Miscellaneous Provisions Act 
Under the Law Reform Miscellaneous Provisions Act 1944 ("the Act"), family members have an automatic right to recover for shock, provided they are present at the scene of the accident to the relative. The relevant sections of the Act are Part 3 and particularly section 4(1) which I set out below: "Personal injury arising from mental or nervous shock
In any action for injury to the person caused after the commencement of this Act, the plaintiff shall not be debarred from recovering damages merely because the injury complained of arose wholly or in part from mental or nervous shock.

In determining any question of liability for injury to the person caused before the commencement of this Act, no regard shall be paid to the fact that this section has been enacted, or to the provisions hereof.

Extension of liability in certain cases
The liability of any person in respect of injury caused after the commencement of this Act by an act, neglect or default by which any other person is killed, injured or put in peril, shall extend to include liability for injury arising wholly or in part from mental or nervous shock sustained by: ....
 any other member of the family of the person so killed, injured or put in peril where such person was killed, injured or put in peril within the sight or hearing of such member of the family.
 "Member of the family" is defined in s.4(5) to mean; "the husband, wife , parent, child, brother, sister, half-brother or half- sister of the person in relation to whom the expression is used." 
The Act, appears on its face to be wider that the common law, replacing the common law foreseeability test by a statutory formula, and thereby allows a plaintiff to recover in cases where it is not possible to recover at common law. The most notable difference between the Act and the common law is the availability for family members to recover provided they are within sight of hearing of the accident: s.4(1)(b). However, it is not the aftermath of the accident but the accident itself. Once a family member can place themselves within s.4(1)(b), that is, they are present at the scene of the accident to the relative, they have an automatic right to recover for shock.

The defendant submits that the Act will not operate to found a cause of action for children if their sibling is not killed within their sight or hearing, s.4(3)(1), it being a codification of the law relating to nervous shock superseding the common law. Counsel for the defendant referred me to the decision of Chester versus Council of the Municipality of Waverley <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 1] which was a case in which a mother's claim for nervous shock failed because despite suffering shock when her child's body was recovered, she did not witness the child's accident.

Whether the Act is an extension of the common law has been a matter of considerable debate. I have been referred by counsel for the defendant to a number of decisions in which this issue has been addressed. I have considered what each has had to say but rely on the comments of Stein JA in Chiaverni, supra, who at p.18 concluded after reviewing the case law and the legislation stated; "It is, I think, plain that s.4 was introduced to overcome what were at the time seen as problems caused by the requirement of foreseeability and the application of a test of remoteness in the case of claims by members of the family of the person killed, injured or put in peril. It is unnecessary here to consider whether the section may also limit the availability of the cause of action to members of the family of the person killed, injured or put in peril: see per Windeyer J in Mount Isa Mines Ltd versus Pusey at 408 and Deane
J in Janesch versus Coffey at 611.

I accept that in the case of a claim by a person described in <case>(a) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/) considerations of foreseeability and proximity otherwise applicable to a claim at common law for nervous shock may not be relevant. Thus it may not be necessary to show that the shock occurred at some point within the proximity described in the aftermath of the accident. But it seems to be inescapable that the section requires that the illness be caused by mental or nervous shock." 
I do not consider that Delores is an extension of her mother because of the age of Delores, notwithstanding her dependence on Lamphud and the derivative sharing of her parents experience. I do not consider, as I have indicated above, that there is a `nervous shock' which avails Delores of a claim at common law or under the statute, and in my view the defendant is entitled to a verdict in respect of Delores' claim.

In the event of my finding on liability being set aside, I should nonetheless calculate damages for Delores as if she had suceeded.

There is no evidence before me that contemplates any economic loss on the part of Delores, the claim being for general damages and the need for future treatment. I would allow an amount for future treatment which I have set out under Roman's claim for damages, namely, the sum of $5,000.00.

As to general damages it is clear that Delores has and will continue to suffer pain and has already suffered considerable pain and suffering arising out of the events surrounding the death of her sister Maria. Much of her pain and suffering arises from the obsessional conduct of her father and the derivative pain she must suffer from her mother's grieving and psychiatric injury. In the circumstances I consider that a proper sum to cover general damages attributable to her damage and to compensate her for injury directly referable to the actions of the defendant is the sum of $50,000.00.

Claim of the Estate of Maria Marchlewski 
I have not received submissions in relation to this issue and I therefore grant leave to counsel to further address me as to how this claim should be appropriately dealt with.

Orders 
Notwithstanding that there are some matters that still need to be resolved I make the following orders:
Verdict for the first plaintiff, Lamphud Marchlewski, against the defendant.
Verdict for the second plaintiff, Roman Marchlewski, against the defendant.
Verdict for the defendant on the claim for the third plaintiff, Delores Marchlewski.
I reserve the formulation of final orders on damages for the first and second plaintiffs until the finalising of submissions in relation to the form of orders and remaining issues to be determined.
I reserve costs for argument.
I grant liberty to the parties to apply by arrangement with my Associate for a date for hearing of the remaining issues.
 * * * 
