

Wilkinson and Ors versus Feldworth Financial Services Pty Limited and Ors
Matter No 50230/97 [1998] NSWSC 775 (30 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 February 1999 
WILKINSON & ORS versus FELDWORTH FINANCIAL SERVICES PTY LIMITED & ORS /97 November 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division Commercial List 
Name of Case: WILKINSON & ORS versus FELDWORTH FINANCIAL SERVICES PTY LIMITED & ORS 
Proceedings: 50230/1997 
Dates of Hearing: 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29 October 1998 
Date of Judgment: 30 November 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiffs: Mr A S Martin 
Solicitors for Plaintiffs: Carneys 
First and Second Defendants: No appearance 
Counsel for Third and Fourth Defendants: Mr J D Heydon QC/Mr J B Simpkins 
Solicitors for Third and Fourth Defendants: Phillips Fox 
Counsel for Fifth Defendant: Mr S G Finch SC/Mr D E J Ryan 
Solicitors for Fifth Defendant: Freehill Hollingdale & Page 
Counsel for Minter Ellison: Mr M A Pembroke SC/Mr I M Jackman/Ms K A Rees 
Solicitors for Minter Ellison: Mallesons Stephen Jaques 
Counsel for National Registries Pty Limited: Mr G K Downes QC/Mr D L Williams 
Solicitors for National Registries Pty Limited: Allen Allen & Hemsley 
Investment adviser acts in contravention of s.995(2) of the Corporations Law, such as to entitle investors who were misled and deceived to recover damages pursuant to s.1005(1) of the Law.

Aiding and abetting pursuant to s.79 of the Law considered.

Yorke & Anor versus Lucas <case>; [(1985) 158 CLR 661] noted.

Trustees, which invested money, held liable for breach of trust and wilful default.

Right of trustee to appoint an agent.

Circumstances in which trustee liable for breach by agent.

Speight versus Gaunt <case>; Bennett versus Wyndham [(1862) 4 DeG&J 259]; Bartlett versus Barclays Bank [1980] 2 All ER 92 applied.

Obligations of a professional trustee: Australian Securities Commission versus A S Nominees Limited & Ors <case>; [(1995) 62 FCR 504] followed.

Trustee Interest Rate - held compound interest at trustee rates should apply.

Re Dawson (1966) 84 WN (Pt 1) 399; Hagan & Ors versus Waterhouse & Ors [(1992) 34 NSWLR 308] applied.

Solicitors Acting As Trustees 
Conceded that the solicitors acted in breach of trust and negligently.

Held that the solicitors did not act inadvertently and ought not to be excused.

Effect Of Exclusion Clauses Relied On By Solicitors 
Construction - held not to apply 
Chan versus Cresdon Pty Limited <case>; <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 99] followed.

Application of Such Clauses in Trust Cases 
Helvetic Investment Corporation Pty Limited versus Knight [(1982) 7 ACLR 225] considered.

Held that as a matter of construction the clauses in the present case did not protect the trustee.

Purpose of Releases and Unconscionable Conduct 
Grant versus John Grant & Sons Pty Limited <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 112] followed.

Misleading And Deceptive Conduct By Silence 
Rhone-Poulence Agrochimie SA versus UIM Chemical Services Pty Limited [(1986) 12 FCR 477] followed.

Held there was misleading and deceptive conduct.

Causation 
Breach of Trust 
Breach of Fiduciary Duties 
Brickenden versus London Loan and Savings Co [(1934) 3 DLR 465] considered.

Held the breaches caused the loss.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Plaintiffs 1 
Feldworth And Mr Felden Do Not Defend 3 
The Plaintiffs' Case Against Feldworth And Mr Felden 3 
Messrs Minter Ellison Fletcher Cross 7 
The General Plan For Investment 7 
The Trust Arrangements 9 
The Procedure For Subscription 11 
The Paying Agency Agreement 17 
The Subscription Agreement 19 
The First Trustee Settlement 27 
The Investments Made 35 
The Plaintiffs' Case Against Feldworth And Mr Felden 45 
The Case Made Against PTWA And PT 54 
The Evidence Of Mr Shaw 59 
The Evidence Of Mr Grimshaw 77 
The Evidence Of Mr Thorne 100 
Further Evidence On Behalf Of PTWA And PT 105 
Mr Heydon's Submissions 108 
The Position Of The Thirty Sixth And Fortieth Plaintiffs 135 
Damages As Against Feldworth and Mr Felden 136 
Damages As Against PTWA And PT 137 
The Case Against FlexiPlan 143 
The Position Of The Plaintiffs 152 
The Case Made Against Minter Ellison 153 
The Submissions On Behalf Of PTWA And PT 161 
The Evidence Of Mr Lewis 165 
The Effect Of The Exclusion Clauses 214 
The Fair Trading Act Claim 233 
Causation 243 
The Position So Far As Equitable Compensation Is Concerned 245 
Contribution 252 
Further Cross-Claims 257 
The Evidence Of Mr John Garry Higginbotham 262 
The Submissions On Behalf Of National Registries 277 
Several Further Matters 280 
Proposed Orders 281 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By a Summons, which was filed on 24 December 1997 and which has since been amended on several occasions, forty plaintiffs, for whom and which Mr A.S.
Martin of Counsel appeared, have sued five defendants seeking to recover money, which they invested in EC Consolidated Capital Limited, ("ECCC"), between 1993 and 1995, and which they have undoubtedly lost by reason of, inter alia, ECCC's being placed in provisional liquidation and liquidation on 28 May 1997 and 15 July 1997 respectively.

The Plaintiffs 
The plaintiffs, generally speaking, are people of or approaching retirement age, who received or were to receive superannuation or other similar financial benefits, or who had liquidated an asset, such as the family home, which had become superfluous to their needs, or who had otherwise received a capital sum. They were desirous of placing the money thereby obtained in a safe investment. They had neither the financial strength nor inclination to engage in speculative investments, their over-riding aim being to achieve a safe form of investment, which would provide a level of income appropriate to their needs without jeopardising the capital. They were, once again speaking generally, somewhat financially unsophisticated, and, with two exceptions, viz
Ms Patricia Mary Mann, the thirty sixth plaintiff, and Ms Alison Howgrave
Corfield, the fortieth plaintiff, they sought advice from a financial and investment adviser, the first defendant, Feldworth Financial Services Pty
Limited (in liquidation), ("Feldworth"), which went into liquidation on 8
October 1998, as to a form of investment, which would satisfy their needs.
They did not know each other, their common interest being that they received the advice which led to their investing in ECCC. The advice was provided by the second defendant, Mr Hans Felden, ("Mr Felden"), who was Feldworth's
Managing Director at all material times.

The plaintiffs, who, of course, paid Feldworth a fee for the advice, had no reason to doubt, nor would any reasonable enquiries have caused them to doubt, the integrity or competence of Feldworth or Mr Felden. On 6 September 1985
Feldworth, which on its letterhead held itself out as "Independent Licensed
Investment Dealers and Financial Planners" and, according to all the documentation tendered, carried on its business in an orderly and conventional manner, became a principal member of the Australian Investment Planners
Association and, in July 1992, a principal member of the Financial Planning
Association of Australia Limited, a professional association the members of which are financial advisers operating throughout Australia. It retained that membership at least until 8 October 1998. On 6 September 1985 Mr Felden joined the Australian Investment Planners Association. On 26 July 1993 he became an
Associate member of the Financial Planning Association of Australia Limited and, prior to December 1994, a Senior Associate member.

Feldworth And Mr Felden Do Not Defend 
Feldworth and Mr Felden originally defended the proceedings, but shortly before their commencement their solicitor filed a Notice of Ceasing to Act and thereafter on interlocutory applications and the hearing there was no appearance by them or on their behalf. I am satisfied Feldworth and Mr Felden were aware of the interlocutory applications and the date for hearing, which was fixed prior to their former solicitor ceasing to act. On 19 October 1998, in the circumstances I recorded in a judgment delivered on that day, I granted leave to the plaintiffs to proceed against Feldworth. Accordingly, the matter has proceeded ex parte against Feldworth and Mr Felden.

The Plaintiffs' Case Against Feldworth And Mr Felden 
The plaintiffs' case against Feldworth and Mr Felden is that they sought advice from Feldworth, which was provided by Mr Felden, I infer acting in his capacity as its Managing Director; that he advised that an investment in preference shares in ECCC would meet their investment criteria; that the investment in ECCC was not safe; that they were never advised of that; and that had they been they would not have authorised it. Further, they allege that Feldworth and Mr Felden must have been aware that the investment was not safe because the promotional information literature emanating from ECCC stated that it was "speculative", of which they were not and were never made aware; and that irrespective of ECCC's characterisation of the nature and quality of the investment there was an obligation on Feldworth and Mr Felden to verify those matters independently. The evidence from an expert financial adviser called on the plaintiffs' behalf, Mr Geoffrey Wall, whose witness statement is
Exhibit AQ and was read only against Feldworth and Mr Felden, was that
Feldworth was a small financial adviser, which did not have the capacity or resources to carry out the necessary research and analysis into all available investments before making an investment recommendation and, therefore, it should have obtained its research and analysis from an external research provider. Mr Wall set forth the appropriate procedures in detail and, in paragraph 18, stated that when a financial adviser makes a recommendation based on the client's needs and requirements, a written record of the basis on which the recommendation is made should be retained. In the present case material produced by Australian Securities & Investments Commission, formerly the Australian Securities Commission, ("ASC"), shows that it called on Mr Felden to inform it of the material on which Feldworth and he based their recommendation, and that all which Mr Felden identified was that issued by ECCC. There was no evidence that Feldworth or Mr Felden had regard to any independent research and analysis of the type Mr Wall said should have been obtained.

Mr Wall set forth the steps an investment adviser should have taken in the circumstances and, in paragraph 25, stated that if Feldworth and Mr Felden neither obtained external research or analysis, nor made the enquiries to which he referred:- "... they acted contrary to the usual practices of a reasonably prudent and competent financial adviser. Until all such information had been obtained, a reasonably prudent and competent research adviser would not have recommended his client to proceed with the investment in ECCCL." 
Mr Wall considered the position of the defendant trustees in so far as it was relevant to the position of Feldworth and Mr Felden. He noted the way in which the investment was to take place and what was to occur on settlement, i.e.
when the plaintiffs' money, inter alia, was paid to ECCC. His opinion was that if the investment adviser did not receive confirmation from the trustees and/or the entity with which bearer Deposit Certificates were to be lodged that settlement had been concluded in the contractually contemplated way, and that those certificates had been lodged:- "... the investment adviser acted contrary to the usual practices of a reasonably prudent and competent financial adviser. Until such written confirmations had been obtained, a reasonably prudent and competent financial adviser would have sought to obtain a full refund of the capital involved and refrained from making any further recommendation to clients about investing money with ECCCL." 
There was no evidence that any such confirmation was ever received.

This evidence was not, of course, challenged by Feldworth or Mr Felden.
Although certain of the plaintiffs' evidence was not tendered against the other defendants, it is significant that that which was was not challenged by any of them or the cross-defendants, who and which had an interest, if their instructions had enabled them to mount an attack on it, to do so. None-the- less the evidence of the plaintiffs was compelling and inherently probable, and that of Mr Wall, if I may say so with respect, was not only stated to be in accord with the practices to which he referred, but also accorded with commonsense. The plaintiffs thus alleged that had Feldworth and Mr Felden acted properly they would never have advised them to invest in ECCC; or, in the alternative, having done so, they would have called for a refund of all money invested when the required confirmations were not received, at which time ECCC was financially able to repay. In my opinion the first limb is the stronger. The evidence of the plaintiffs, even though unchallenged, satisfies me that had they been advised of the nature of the investment they would not have authorised it.

Messrs Minter Ellison Fletcher Cross 
In about 1991 or early 1992 ECCC, or other companies related to it which, for the purposes of this judgment, require no differentiation, had instructed Mr
I.G. Lewis, a senior partner of Messrs Minter Ellison Fletcher Cross, ("Minter
Ellison"), for the partners of whom Mr M.A. Pembroke of Senior Counsel, Mr
I.M. Jackman of Counsel and Ms K.A. Rees of Counsel appeared, to advise on the legal aspects of a plan whereby ECCC could raise money from the public for use in its business. Mr Lewis, who specialised in commercial and insolvency law and is based in the Melbourne Offices of Minter Ellison, is the only partner who had any relevant connection with the transactions, the other partners being joined because of that relationship with him. He was assisted by a senior solicitor, Mr A.M. Gaffney, whom he regarded as competent in this field.

The General Plan For Investment 
The plan went through various phases and during the time that investments were being made certain parts of it were under constant consideration. For present purposes the following is an adequate summary of the investment proposal. ECCC invited members of the public to subscribe for redeemable "A" class Preference
Shares in its capital, and in that invitation stated that its redemption obligations were supported by the provision of a Deposit Certificate issued by a Prime Bank. "Deposit Certificate" was defined as meaning:- "... the bearer certificate of deposit, guarantee or letters of credit drawn against and with full recourse to the Prime Bank to be lodged in accordance with clause 4 of the Subscription Agreement with the Paying Agent on the terms of the Paying Agency Agreement." "Paying Agent" was defined originally as Westpac Banking Corporation, ("Westpac"), which did not ultimately act in that role, its place being taken by National Registries Pty Limited, ("National Registries"), for which Mr G.K.
Downes of Queen's Counsel and Mr D.L. Williams of Counsel appeared. "Paying
Agency Agreement" was defined as ".. the agreement between the Paying Agent and the Company under which the Paying Agent will hold the Deposit
Certificate", and "Prime Bank" was defined as "Dresdner Bank AG or any wholly owned subsidiary of" it.

The invitation stated that investments for any amount less than $500,000 would not be accepted, thereby avoiding the need to comply with the prospectus provisions of the Corporations Law, ("the Law"). The money of the plaintiffs and various other investors was pooled and furnished by a fund manager to two trustee companies, the third defendant, Perpetual Trustees WA Limited, ("PTWA"), and the fourth defendant, Perpetual Trustee Company Limited, ("PT"), for which Mr J.D. Heydon of Queen's Counsel and Mr J.B. Simpkins of Counsel appeared.

The Trust Arrangements 
On 31 January 1989 the Excelsior Managed Superannuation Plan, ("the Excelsior
Plan"), was established by a Trust Deed and a manager was appointed. On 21
December 1990 the then trustee retired, and PTWA was appointed in its place and remained the trustee until 27 October 1993. On 22 March 1993 FlexiPlan
Australia Master Plan, ("the FlexiPlan Plan"), was established by a Trust
Deed. PTWA was appointed the trustee. The FlexiPlan Plan comprised three separate trusts being the FlexiSuper Fund, the FlexiRollover Fund and the
FlexiInvestment Fund. On 27 October 1993, PTWA was replaced as trustee by PT pursuant to a Deed dated 17 September 1993. By a Deed dated 29 June 1994 the
FlexiPlan Trust Deed was amended to create two separate Trust Deeds with identical terms to those of the FlexiPlan Trust Deed, and to establish the
FlexiRollover Fund and the FlexiSuper Fund under one of the Deeds so created, and the FlexiInvestment Fund under the other. Pursuant to the [Superannuation
Industry (Supervision) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sia1993473/), PT was replaced by the fifth defendant, FlexiPlan Australia Limited, ("FlexiPlan"), for which Mr S.G. Finch of Senior Counsel and Mr D.E.J. Ryan of Counsel appeared, as the trustee of the FlexiSuper and FlexiRollover Funds, but PT remained the trustee of the FlexInvestment Fund.

Between 4 May 1993 and 17 November 1993, namely on 4 May, 22 June, 12 August, October and 17 November, PTWA, as trustee for the Excelsior Plan, subscribed for and was issued with various tranches of "A" class Preference
Shares in ECCC. The respective amounts invested were $592,300, $557,600, $601,700, $601,300 and $573,200. Between 23 December 1993 and 5 December 1995, on the dates and in the amounts I shall specify, PT purchased the following tranches of "A" class Preference Shares in ECCC as trustee for the FlexiPlan
Plan: December 1993 - $ 688,300 March 1994 - $ 562,600 May 1994 - $ 610,000 July 1994 - $ 1,021,700 January 1995 - $ 726,000 January 1995 - $ 708,900 March 1995 - $ 844,900 September 1995 - $ 595,200 December 1995 - $ 1,442,100 
It will be necessary to consider in detail the way in which the subscription was made. Suffice to say at the moment that all the money to which I have referred was not money invested by the plaintiffs. Rather it represented all the money invested in ECCC, which included money invested by the plaintiffs, and all of which money PTWA and PT are seeking to recover in their cross- claims to replenish the trusts.

The 525Procedure For Subscription 
The Preliminary Information Memorandum, dated 1 September 1992, stated that investors were being invited to subscribe for Preference Shares in ECCC having a par value of one cent each and a subscription price of $100 per share. The shares were stated to be non-voting, save for some limited exceptions explained in the Articles of ECCC, and to be redeemable by investors only as provided for in the Articles. It continued:- "The Company's redemption obligations are supported by the provision of the Deposit Certificate" and that at least $500,000 had to be subscribed.

The potential benefits to holders of the Preference Shares were stated to be substantial dividends and cash flow, capital appreciation, a diversified and balanced international investment portfolio, the Deposit Certificate intended to provide for the return of each investor's original capital, (Subscription
Moneys), and ECCC's tax liability management to maximise the net after tax returns to investors.

The business of ECCC was described as conducting managed investments in the international money markets and in commodity contracts in the major international markets. This was described in some greater detail and it was stated:- "Derivatives will be used extensively as a means of acquiring or hedging part or all of the international money markets portfolio with respect to the asset allocation and debt funding." 
It continued that a minor proportion of ECCC's funds would be invested to facilitate trading in commodity contracts and other diversified derivatives on an international basis. The Information Memorandum referred to the diversification of the trading activities and concluded:- "The trading methodology to be utilised by the Company's Commodity trading advisers is based on the premise that sound money management and risk management are paramount and that the trade selection and market timing are of secondary importance." 
The advantages and benefits of the business were set forth at length and, under the heading "Capital Redemption `AAA' Bank Secured", appeared:- "The Company proposes from time to time to issue Preference Shares and, as part of the terms and conditions relating to the issues of the Preference Shares, the Company is to procure the provision of the Deposit Certificate for the benefit of the Holders of the Preference Shares (and each of them) as follows: 
As a term of the Investor's subscription for Preference Shares under the Subscription Agreement, the Company will be obliged to procure for the Investor the benefit of the Deposit Certificate. 
The Deposit Certificate (issued by Dresdner Bank AG or by a wholly owned subsidiary of Dresdner Bank AG) will be held by the Paying Agent (Westpac Banking Corporation Limited) to be applied for the benefit of the Investor in accordance with the Paying Agency Agreement.

The Deposit Certificate will be procured by the Company prior to Completion (as detailed in Clause 4 of the Subscription Agreement) and delivered to the Paying Agent." 
It was stated that the terms of the Subscription Agreement required the
Deposit Certificate to be issued by the Prime Bank, to have a maturity date which either corresponded with the Redemption Date or was no more than fourteen days prior to it, to have on its maturity date a value at least equal to the Subscription Moneys, and to be deposited at Completion with the Paying
Agent to be applied for the benefit of the holder of the Preference Shares in accordance with the Paying Agency Agreement.

After referring to what should happen on redemption it continued:- "Therefore, upon redemption of all of the `A' class and `B' class Preference Shares, the Investor will have received from the Paying Agent a return of capital amount equal to the Subscription Moneys." 
This was repeated, and the Memorandum continued:- "The only potential downside to an Investor based on the provision of the Deposit Certificate for the benefit of the Investor, rests in the possibility that the investment in the Preference Shares may not match the returns that the Investor may gain from alternative use and application of the Subscription Moneys." 
Then in heavy type appeared:- "Investors should note that all of the relevant credit rating agencies (including Moody's and Standard & Poor's) have given Dresdner Bank AG a rating of `AAA' which is the highest rating obtainable.

With reference to `AAA' ratings Standard & Poor's say this: `The highest degree of safety with overwhelming repayment capacity'." 
Particulars of ECCC's manager were set forth, and they were followed by other material extolling the virtue of the investment, including a primary objective being "protection of principal".

Later the Information Memorandum dealt with "Risk Management" and the inherent risk "associated with holding positions in the Commodity Markets", which were stated to be managed in several ways. It concluded this portion:- "There can be no guarantee that trading in Commodity Contracts will be profitable. Performance depends on market conditions and factors may fluctuate significantly. The risks of trading in Commodity Contracts can be substantial. Past performance is no guarantee of future performance." 
At the commencement of the Memorandum, under the heading "Important Notice", it was stated:- "Investors must make their own inquiries and assessment of the risks of any investment in the Company.

The Company, persons and other entities referred to in this Memorandum make no representation or warranty either express or implied and assume no responsibility or liability for the accuracy, completeness of or any errors or omissions in, any information, statement or projections contained in this Memorandum.

Investors should note that any projections referred to in this Memorandum are not based on any trading history of the Company, are illustrative only and are based upon certain key assumptions. The projections are no indication of future returns or any guarantee of performance by the Company.

Dresdner Bank AG and Westpac Banking Corporation Limited do not make any statements or representations nor do they give any warranty for and in respect of the financial and income projections or other financial data in this Memorandum." 
The document set forth various definitions, including those of "Deposit
Certificate", "Paying Agent", "Paying Agency Agreement" and "Prime Bank" to which I have referred. As to the "Paying Agent" it will be recalled that
Westpac was replaced by National Registries.

The Information Memorandum was dated 1 September 1992. It was in essentially the same form as the Preliminary Information Memorandum, although it provided additional information. It repeated the assurance of the returns of the principal sum and, under the heading "Disclaimer", stated:- "The Preference Shares are to be subscribed for on the basis of the information and representations contained in this Memorandum, the Preliminary Information Memorandum, the Investment Summary, the Subscription Agreement and the Memorandum and Articles of the Company (`the Approved Documentation') only and any further information given or representations made by any dealer, salesman or other person are unauthorised. Investors must only rely on statements made in the Approved Documentation. 
Nothing contained in this Memorandum constitutes an offer to subscribe for shares in the Company. ... Investors have the benefit of the security of the Deposit Certificate for capital redemption.

Investors should note that an investment in the Preference Shares is speculative and that they should consult their own independent investment adviser, accountant or solicitor in relation to their investment and to any corresponding liability to taxation." 
Under the heading "How To Invest" it was stated:- "The Investor, upon signing the Subscription Agreement is to provide an unendorsed bank cheque made payable to Minter Ellison Morris Fletcher's trust account for an amount equal to the Subscription Moneys to be held in trust by Minter Ellison Morris Fletcher pending satisfaction of the Completion provisions detailed in the Subscription Agreement.

The Investor will be entitled to be refunded in full without deduction an amount (in cash or bearer securities) equal to the Subscription Moneys if at the date agreed for completion of the share purchase the Investor does not among other things receive the benefit of the Deposit Certificate. The Deposit Certificate issued by the Prime Bank will be held by Westpac Banking Corporation Limited as Paying Agent for the benefit of the Investor." 
It is obvious, when one reads these documents, why Mr Wall, having considered them, was of the view that a financial adviser would refrain from making any recommendation concerning the investment unless and until satisfied that adequate and thorough research and analysis had been carried out, and he said:- "22. The financial adviser would have critically examined the promotional material issued by ECCCL such as the Preliminary Information Memorandum and the Information Memorandum. He would not have relied on the information in that material but would have checked its accuracy. He would have sought and obtained from an appropriate external research provider research and analysis about the proposed investment. He would have sought and obtained accounting advice concerning the viability of the investment projection suggested by ECCCL in the Preliminary Information Memorandum and the Information Memorandum. He would have obtained a report from a market specialist concerning ECCCL and the investment. He would also have made inquiries with fund managers and brokers in the money market about ECCCL, its advisers, its manager, its directors and the investment itself.
 . In particular, he would have noted from the Preliminary Information Memorandum and the Information Memorandum that the central feature of the investment was that the investment capital would be secured by way of the lodgment of a bearer deposit certificate with the third party custodian, National Registries, over the life of the ten year investment. He would have made inquiries about the third party custodian, National Registries, to determine its suitability to act in that role. He would have understood that settlement would be taking place by release of the balance of the investment funds to ECCCL which, in turn, would lodge the bearer deposit certificate with National Registries. He would have been concerned that the deposit certificate was a `bearer' security and that its safe delivery to and custody by National Registries was an important aspect of the settlement." 
The Paying Agency Agreement 
On 4 December 1992 ECCC entered into the Paying Agency Agreement with National
Registries, which was drafted by Minter Ellison, and which recited that ECCC proposed to or had issued certain "A" and "B" class Preference Shares in accordance with its Memorandum and Articles of Association, and that National
Registries had agreed to act as Paying Agent:- "For the redemption of these preference shares on and subject to the terms and conditions set out in this document." 
There were various definitions, including that of "Deposit Certificates" in the following terms:- ".. means the bearer deposit certificates, guarantee or letters of credit denominated in dollars with full recourse to the Prime Bank and lodged with the Paying Agent from time to time for application in accordance with the terms of the Agency." "Agency" was defined as meaning the agency on the part of the Paying Agent "contemplated by this document".

Clause 2 dealt with the appointment of National Registries, which agreed to act as the Paying Agent "for and on behalf of" ECCC "in respect of the Shares and any Redemptions on the terms and subject to the conditions contained in this document". Clause 12 reinforced this position by stating:- "In acting under this document and in connection with any Redemption, the Paying Agent is acting solely as agent of ECCCL and does not assume any obligations towards or in the relationship of agency or trust for the holder or owner of any Share." 
When one has regard to the significance of the role of National Registries it may be thought this is a somewhat strange provision. None-the-less, it was the basis on which National Registries contracted.

In paragraph 3 the agency obligations were set forth, including the requirement that the Deposit Certificates should be lodged with National
Registries "for safe custody pending maturity", and what should happen on maturity. Clause 3.3, which assumes some importance in the submissions, stated:- "On the maturity of each Deposit Certificate the Paying Agent will if required by the terms of the Deposit Certificate present the relevant certificate to, or make demand on, the Prime Bank, collect the maturity funds as agent for and on behalf of ECCCL and deposit the maturity funds in the Deposit Account on trust, first for those holders of the Shares specified in the relevant Schedule who present their Shares for Redemption and secondly after the payment of any applicable expenses (as provided in this document) for ECCCL." (My emphasis.) 
In view of the form which the Deposit Certificate should have taken, it is difficult to see in what circumstances it would not be necessary for it to be presented to the Prime Bank. This is particularly so in the case of a bearer
Deposit Certificate payment for which could not otherwise be achieved.

Clause 3.4 provided that National Registries was to pay each holder of the shares $100 for each share duly presented.

The Subscription Agreement 
The procedure for each of the subscriptions was essentially the same. Members of the plans provided an investment authority to the Plan Manager authorising the trustee to invest in the Preference Shares. Once the Plan Manager had the necessary minimum sum of $500,000 it approached either PTWA or PT to make the investment and provided the trustee with the money, investment authorities, a
Subscription Agreement for execution by the trustee, various documentation identifying the respective contribution from each member and a confirmation that Minter Ellison was appointed agent for the trustee at Completion. The trustee executed but did not date the Subscription Agreement, and sent it and a cheque for the amount of the Subscription Moneys to Minter Ellison.

The Subscription Agreement, which was drafted by Minter Ellison, was entered into between ECCC and the party named in Schedule 1 as the Investor, being the appropriate trustee company. Schedule 1 also set forth the aggregate of
Subscription Moneys, the number of Preference Shares being applied for, the
Deposit Certificate purchase limit "as a proportion of the Subscription
Moneys", and details of the Paying Agent, it being stated as National
Registries.

The recitals set out the business in which ECCC intended to engage; its primary investment objective and its intention to carry out that objective "by not transacting business on a bare speculative risk basis"; the proposal to issue Preference Shares to the Investor "pursuant to this agreement"; and:- "D. As part of the proposed issue of Preference Shares under this Agreement the Company will be obliged to procure for the Investor the benefit of the Deposit Certificate which will be held by the Paying Agent to be applied for the benefit of the Investor in accordance with the Paying Agency Agreement." 
Clause 1 set out a number of definitions. The "Company's Solicitors" were defined as Minter Ellison, and "Completion" as completion of those matters detailed in clause 4.
 "Deposit Certificate" was defined as meaning:- ".. the bearer certificate of deposit, guarantee or letters of credit drawn against and with full recourse to the Prime Bank to be lodged in accordance with clause 4 with the Paying Agent on the terms of the Paying Agency Agreement." "Paying Agent" was defined as National Registries, and "Paying Agency
Agreement" was defined as the agreement between National Registries and ECCC "under which the Paying Agent will hold the Deposit Certificate". "Prime Bank" was defined as "Dresdner Bank AG or any wholly owned subsidiary of" it.
"Subscription Moneys" were defined as:- ".. that amount to be paid by the Investor to the Company detailed in Schedule 1 for the allotment of each of the Preference Shares." 
Clause 2 was concerned with the subscription for shares, clause 2.1 providing that the Investor, on signing the Subscription Agreement, would provide an unendorsed non-negotiable bank cheque payable to Minter Ellison's trust account for the aggregate of the Subscription Moneys, which was to be:- ".. held in trust by the Company's Solicitors in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement." 
Clause 2.2 provided that on Completion the Investor would subscribe for the
Preference Shares at a par value of one cent per share, which were to be issued at a premium of $99.99 per share, which ECCC agreed to allot and issue.
Clause 2.3 stated:- "The Company subject to the terms of this Agreement will use the Subscription Moneys in the following manner: 
Procuring the provision of the Deposit Certificate as detailed in clause 3; 
Paying expenses and commissions incurred by the Company relating to the subscription by the Investor under this Agreement details of which are set out in Schedule 2; and 
The balance to be applied to the working capital requirements of the Company to be used ..." 
Sub-clause (c) set out various of the proposed business activities of ECCC.

Clause 3 is headed "Deposit Certificate", clause 3.1 providing that prior to
Completion and from the funds provided by the Investor to Minter Ellison, pursuant to clause 2.1, ECCC would procure the delivery of the Deposit
Certificate, and:- "The Company has entered into the Put Option which provides, among other matters, for the delivery to the Paying Agent of the Deposit Certificate which complies with the requirements detailed in clause 3.2." 
Clause 3.2 required that the Deposit Certificate be issued by the Prime Bank; have a maturity date corresponding either to the Redemption Date or no more than fourteen days prior to it; have on its maturity date a value at least equal to the aggregate of the Subscription Moneys; and be deposited at
Completion with the Paying Agent to be applied for the benefit of the holder of Preference Shares "in accordance with the terms of the Paying Agency
Agreement".

Clauses 3.3 and 3.4 continued:- "3.3 The Investor by his execution of this Agreement authorises the Company's Solicitors prior to Completion to release that amount requested by the Company up to and not exceeding the Deposit Certificate Purchase Limit to be applied by the Company solely for the purposes of procuring the Deposit Certificate by way of the Put Option.
 .4 The parties agree and acknowledge that the Company's Solicitors have no liability for disbursement of the funds held pursuant to clause 2.1 and the parties indemnify and hold the Company's Solicitors harmless for any claim, demand, action or cost arising out of or in connection with the disbursement of any funds under this Agreement." 
Clause 4 was headed "Completion" and provided for it, the Investor being required to give to ECCC a duly executed application for the Preference Shares in the form of Schedule 3, and a written authorisation to Minter Ellison in the form of Schedule 4:- ".. to pay to the Company the aggregate of the Subscription Moneys after the purchase of the Deposit Certificate under clause 3." 
Schedule 4 was executed by the Investor and irrevocably and unconditionally authorised Minter Ellison to disburse the money held in accordance with clause
The letter acknowledged that pursuant to clause 3:- ".. an amount up to but not exceeding the Deposit Certificate Purchase Limit may have already been disbursed by you in accordance with the Subscription Agreement." 
The next paragraph read:- "Further I absolutely and unconditionally release and discharge you from any liability or obligation to me arising under the Subscription Agreement." 
Clauses 4.3 and 4.4 detailed other matters to which attention had to be given at Completion, and clause 4.5 stated:- "The Investor will not be obliged to complete the subscription for the shares under this Agreement and will be entitled to be refunded in full without deductions of the moneys paid by the Investor under this Agreement if at Completion the matters set out in clauses 4.3 and 4.4 do not occur provided that the Investor has first complied with its obligations under clause 4.2." 
Clause 5.1 contained an acknowledgment by the Investor that its investment in
ECCC "is speculative", and that it had received no representation or other assurance as to the possibility of any return of capital or income by ECCC "except as detailed in clause 6".

Clause 5.2 was an acknowledgment by the Investor that it had made its own inquiries and investigations in relation to the financial position of ECCC and was not relying on any representation or warranty made by it or any other person, and a confirmation that the Investor had read the Information
Memorandum and was aware of the disclosures contained in it. Clause 5.3 noted that a copy of the Paying Agency Agreement was available for inspection by the
Investor at various places.

Clause 6 was concerned with Provisions for Redemption, clause 6.1 stating:- "As a term of the Investor's subscription for the Preference Shares the Company undertakes to procure that at Completion the Deposit Certificate which satisfies the requirements of clause 3.2 is delivered to the Paying Agent." 
Clause 6.2 noted that on the Redemption Date the holder of the Preference
Shares may present the scrip and various other documentation to the Paying
Agent, which would redeem the Preference Shares from the maturity funds held by it "(as a result of the maturity of the Deposit Certificate) and pay to the holder of the Preference Shares $100 for each redeemed share".

The Managers of the Funds furnished with each Subscription Agreement a "Confirmation", stating that Minter Ellison "are to act as its agent at
Completion".

There was further documentation concerning the settlement, which involved a
Put Option and certain other steps, although they do not affect the matters arising in the present case, as I understand the submissions made.

It is necessary to highlight certain aspects of the Subscription Agreement, which are critical to the resolution of the present proceedings. It was not in issue that in each of the transactions the "Deposit Certificate" which was utilised was a "Certificate of Deposit"; i.e. it was not suggested that there was any attempt to use a guarantee or letters of credit. Further, it was not in issue that the Deposit Certificate had to be a "Bearer" Certificate of
Deposit, i.e. one which was negotiable by its holder. Accordingly, the Deposit
Certificate, by which name I shall hereafter refer to the bearer Certificate of Deposit only, was, in itself, worth its face value and, upon presentation by the bearer to the Bank, i.e. the Prime Bank, the Bank had no alternative but to meet it. Of course if the party which was bound to indemnify the Bank for so doing could not, in the present case that being ECCC, that would give rise to a dispute between the Bank and ECCC. However, in the hands of the bearer there was no room for argument so far as the Bank was concerned. That was a feature of critical importance in the whole arrangement to furnish investors with security for the return of the principal sum.

It was not in issue that on completion Minter Ellison attended and acted on behalf of ECCC and as agent for the Investor. Nor was it in issue that Minter
Ellison never sighted nor received a Deposit Certificate, i.e. one which conformed with the Subscription Agreement, and that this was a fact that
Minter Ellison knew. At best they received a document acknowledging that a certain amount had been deposited with the Bank in the name of ECCC. Mr
Pembroke did not seek to avoid the conclusion that the failure by Minter
Ellison to sight and/or receive a Deposit Certificate constituted breach of trust and negligence on their part. A question may arise as to the extent of and the consequences of that conduct by virtue of the various claims made against Minter Ellison. He submitted that what occurred was inadvertence on the part of Minter Ellison. All other parties submitted that it was advertent breach of trust and negligence, in the sense that Minter Ellison appreciated, at least from late December 1992 when the first transaction was entered into, that they were not receiving a Deposit Certificate, which conformed to the requirements of the Subscription Agreement. It will be necessary for me, in due course, to determine this issue because, as the submissions ran, various consequences are said to flow from the nature and quality of the admitted breaches of duties. Further, Minter Ellison expressly put in issue the quality and nature of breach of trust and negligence. I assume this was done because it was perceived as going to an issue.

Minter Ellison, which were not joined as a defendant by the plaintiffs, asserted, inter alia, as against the defendants which cross-claimed against them, that whilst there was breach of trust and negligence it was mere inadvertence; that in any event they were protected by the terms of clause 3.4 and the exemption contained in Schedule 4 of the Subscription Agreement; and that if those submissions were not accepted their conduct was not causative of any loss the defendants may have sustained because, firstly, if complaint had been made about the breach ECCC would have cured it, and, secondly, on 24 May , PTWA and PT had by Deeds Poll consented to the withdrawal of the money held by the Prime Bank on behalf, inter alios, of the plaintiffs, and that it was that act and certain other provisions of those Deeds, which led to the loss, rather than Minter Ellison's wrongful failure to obtain Deposit
Certificates.

The First Trustee Settlement 
At the settlement on 6 May 1993, which was the first Minter Ellison attended as agent of PTWA, but not the first, but rather the second it had attended, there was handed to Minter Ellison a document referred to as a Deposit
Certificate, which bore date 4 May 1993. It was in the form of a letter to Mr
Steve Lowe of Dresdner International Financial Markets (Australia) Limited. It does not become necessary to distinguish between the various Dresdner entities, to all of which I shall refer as "Dresdner". The letter stated:- "We confirm your deposit to us of AUD277,000 value 4 May 1993 to our account with the Bank of New Zealand Sydney. This deposit is on a zero coupon basis and will mature on 5 May 2003. At maturity, we will pay to yourselves AUD592,200." 
On 13 May 1993 Mr Lewis signed a letter to Mr Senese of ECCC, which appears to have been drafted by Mr Gaffney but for which Mr Lewis took responsibility, in which he stated:- "Certificate of Deposit 
Further to our meeting on 6 May 1993 concerning the investment in Preference Shares by Perpetual Trustees WA Ltd we have still not received the original Certificate of Deposit which was intended to replace the letter from Dresner (sic) that we received at settlement.

Could you please attend to this as a matter of urgency.

In addition, you said that you would be able to provide the tax advice from Peat Marwick after settlement. Could you please provide a copy of that advice as soon as possible." 
On 31 May 1993 Mr Lewis signed another letter, which was addressed to Mr
Senese and, in all probability, drafted by Mr Gaffney. Once again it was a letter for which Mr Lewis took responsibility. It said:- "Terms of Issue for Preference Shares.

Certificates of Deposit 
We refer to our letter of 13 May 1993 and our numerous subsequent telephone conversations regarding the provision of the Certificates of Deposit.

As you are aware we are holding certain original documents relating to the acquisition by Perpetual Trustees WA Limited (`trustee') of preference shares in EC Consolidated Capital Limited (`EC'). We have not forwarded those original documents to the trustee as you instructed us to wait for a substituted Certificate of Deposit.

We draw to your attention that as a result of the delay in providing the Certificate of Deposit you have breached the terms of the Subscription Agreement between EC and the Trustee (to the extent that the Certificate of Deposit has not been provided to the Paying Agent). Accordingly the Trustee could rescind the Subscription Agreement and demand that EC return all of the funds the Trustee has paid to EC.

The delay would be of great concern to the Trustee and as we are holding original documents for the account of the Trustee unless we receive the substituted Certificate of Deposit by the close of business tomorrow we feel obliged to notify the Trustee of this delay.

Earlier we expressed our concern in relation to the form of the Certificate of Deposit. In particular the provisions relating to the terms of issue of the preference shares have been ignored in the form of the Certificate of Deposit which has been provided for the last two completions. The terms of issue of the preference shares, to the extent that they relate to the Certificates of Deposit, are as follows: 
An investor provides the subscription moneys on the terms of the Subscription Agreement.

Prior to completion EC is authorised under the Subscription Agreement to obtain the Certificate of Deposit (which is defined to be a bearer instrument).

At completion EC is obliged to deliver the Certificate of Deposit to the Paying Agent. 
Under the terms of the Paying Agency Agreement, on maturity of the Certificates of Deposit, the Paying Agent is obliged to present the Certificate of Deposit and make a demand for payment on Dresna (sic).

On the Redemption Date (as defined under the Subscription Agreement) the investor is entitled to present the preference share script (sic) to the Paying Agent and to receive from the funds held by the Paying Agent on the maturity of the relevant Certificate of Deposit One hundred dollars for each preference share which is to be redeemed.

The Paying Agent after paying to the investor One hundred dollars for each share which is to be redeemed must then notify EC (by providing to EC the relevant share scrip) and then EC must then redeem the relevant share and pay to the investor the `Income Value' referable to the shares which are redeemed.

Therefore the Certificate of Deposit must be in bearer form and be delivered to the Paying Agent at completion. We again query why the current form of Certificate of Deposit is in favour of EC. In our opinion, unless the Certificate of Deposit is issued in bearer form this will constitute a breach of the Subscription Agreement. In any event: 
Confirmation will need to be sought from Dresdner that they acknowledge the Certificate of Deposit originally represents a deposit by the Cook Islands company which deposit is subject to the entitlements and claims of the holders of preference shares in EC (in accordance with the terms of the Paying Agency Agreement and the Put Option Deed). 
Dresdner should also acknowledge that EC has no interest in the Certificate of Deposit or to any funds which rise (sic) on the maturity of the Certificate of Deposit and that Dresna (sic) has no right of set-off or deduction against the funds represented by the Certificate of Deposit. 
Finally new Certificates of Deposit concerning the first two completions should be obtained in bearer form and all further Certificates of Deposit should be issued in bearer form.

Our comments above are in addition to the taxation implications which arise if the Certificate of Deposit is issued in the name of EC. In relation to this issue we understand that Peat Marwick Mitchell have advised you that the Deed of Confirmation in its current form required that the Certificate of Deposit is issued in the name of EC. However, we understood that such advice was given on the basis that generally the Certificates of Deposit are to be issued in bearer form and that by mistake the first one was issued in the name of EC.

Finally, we note that the Cook Islands company has still not been requested to provide a first ranking charge over its assets, which charge is vital to protect the interests of the holders of the preference shares. This should be attended to as a matter of urgency.

Could you please contact Ian Lewis to discuss the above issues further." 
The two settlements to which the letter referred were the one which took place in December 1992, in which an investment had been made on behalf of Adelaide accountants, Messrs Letcher and Jeffery, and the investment on 6 May 1993, which was made by PTWA. The letter made transparently clear that the author understood completely that the Deposit Certificate had to be in bearer form and could not provide for payment to ECCC; that the failure to provide a conforming Deposit Certificate was a breach by ECCC; and that the breach should be remedied immediately. It also made clear that the delay in obtaining the appropriate bearer Deposit Certificate would be a matter of concern to
PTWA, on whose account Minter Ellison were holding original documents, and that if the matter was not rectified Minter Ellison would feel obliged to notify PTWA. The very strange thing is that whilst Minter Ellison obviously appreciated these matters they took no steps to notify their other principal, relevantly for present purposes PTWA, so that it could consider what steps it would take.

On 1 June 1993 Mr Senese sent a facsimile transmission to a director of ECCC,
Mr Gatland, stating that the fourth paragraph in Minter Ellison's letter was "of grave concern as it may ruin the Excelsior arrangement and cause the first subscription amount from Perpetual to be subject to refund/restitution".

On the same day Mr Gatland sent to Mr Lewis a document from Dresdner dated 1
June 1993 and, once again addressed to Mr Lowe, in the following terms:- "We confirm your deposit with us value for May 1993.

Our reference: 536 
Dealt date: 4 May 1993 
Principal: AUD277,000 (banked into our account with BNZ Melbourne number 00035102) 
Term: 10 years 
Maturity Date: 5 May 2003 
At maturity we confirm repayment of AUD592,200 representing principal of AUD277,000 and interest of AUD315,200." 
It was conceded that this was not a bearer certificate and hence not a Deposit
Certificate. But, on 2 June 1993, Mr Gaffney wrote to Mr Higginbotham, the
Assistant General Manager of National Registries, in the following terms:- "We refer to the paying agency agreement dated 4 December 1992 between EC Consolidated Capital Ltd and yourselves.

Pursuant to clause 3 of the paying agency agreement we enclose the following documents for your safe custody: . Deposit certificate reference 536 from Dresdner International Financial Markets (Australia) Limited dated 1 June 1993 with a maturity date of 4 May 2003 and a maturity value of AUD$592,200; . The schedule referred to in clause 3.2 of the paying agency agreement (detailing those shares which we will forward you for redemption in conjunction with the maturity of the deposit certificate referred to in item 1 above).

Would you please acknowledge receipt of the documents by signing, dating and returning the copy of this letter attached." 
A letter in similar terms was sent after each settlement. The reference to the
Deposit Certificate in the context of clause 3 of the Paying Agency Agreement was, as Mr Lewis conceded, on one reading "misleading".

On 8 June 1993 there was a facsimile transmission within the ECCC Group requesting Mr Senese to telephone Mr Lewis about the form of the Dresdner
Certificates of Deposit because:- "IGL says that because they issue in name of ECCCL, Minters need an authority from Dresdner re payment mode.

IGL says Gatland knows and has promised, but it is not yet forthcoming.

He would like you to ring him." 
On 17 June 1993 Minter Ellison wrote to PTWA for the first time in relation to the settlement on 6 May 1993. Indeed this was the first communication between the parties on this subject. The letter stated:- "EC Consolidated Capital Limited - investment in preference shares.

EC Consolidated Capital Limited has instructed us to forward to you the following original documents:- . Counterpart of the Subscription Agreement dated 4 May 1993 between EC Consolidated Capital Limited and Perpetual Trustees WA Limited.
 . Share Certificate detailing 5,922 `A' Class preference shares in EC Consolidated Capital Limited.

Could you please acknowledge receipt of the above documents by signing, dating and returning the copy of this letter attached." 
There are several aspects of the letter, which was a standard form letter thereafter sent in relation to all settlements, which require immediate attention. Firstly, it was a letter said to be written on the instructions of
ECCC. Secondly, it made no reference to the Deposit Certificate, let alone to its not conforming with the terms of the Subscription Agreement. Thirdly, although Minter Ellison had acted as PTWA's agent at settlement the letter made no reference to what Minter Ellison had done for PTWA on settlement and, in particular, it made no reference to their not having received a Deposit
Certificate, which complied with the terms of the Subscription Agreement.

The following, in my opinion, represents a fair summary of the position:- 
Minter Ellison were aware that the Deposit Certificate had to be a bearer document.

Minter Ellison were aware that the Deposit Certificate was not a bearer document.

Minter Ellison were aware that the Deposit Certificate, therefore, did not comply with the requirements of the Subscription Agreement.

Minter Ellison's letter to National Registries of 2 June 1993 implied that the document being furnished was a Deposit Certificate pursuant to clause 3 of the Paying Agency Agreement, when Minter Ellison knew full well that it was not.

Minter Ellison failed to disclose to their principal, PTWA, that they had not obtained on settlement a Deposit Certificate, which complied with the terms of the Subscription Agreement.

Minter Ellison followed this method of settlement thereafter. They never received a conforming Deposit Certificate, and they never informed National
Registries, PTWA or PT that they had not. In all those ways Minter Ellison, in my opinion, acted in gross dereliction of their duties. I shall refer to this in more detail in considering the evidence of Mr Lewis. However, I repeat that
Minter Ellison were not sued by the plaintiffs.

The Investments Made 
The first investment was made by Messrs Letcher & Jeffery on 8 December
A Deposit Certificate conforming to the definition in the Subscription
Agreement was not obtained on settlement. Thereafter, on 4 May 1993, 22 June and 12 August 1993 deposits were made by PTWA as the investor. On 24
September 1993 a deposit was made by Youyang Pty Limited and, on 19 October and 17 November 1993, two further deposits were made by PTWA.

On 23 December 1993, 4 March 1994, 6 May 1994 and 12 July 1994 four deposits were made by PT and, in each case, the same procedure was followed as with the deposits made by PTWA. On none of the settlements was a conforming Deposit
Certificate received by Minter Ellison, a fact they did not draw to the attention of PTWA, PT or National Registries.

In circumstances to which I shall have to refer in more detail the thirty five per cent of each of these deposits, which had been deposited with Dresdner to obtain Deposit Certificates, and the accrued interest, was withdrawn on 20
September 1994 and that amount, together with two further investments by PT on January 1995, which were deposited with Westpac, were placed with Westpac on 30 January 1995. On 30 March 1995 PT invested a further sum, which was deposited with NatWest, and, on 22 November 1995, the amount standing to the credit of ECCC with Westpac was withdrawn.

On 5 December 1995 PT made a further investment, which was deposited with
NatWest and, on 20 December 1995, FAI, as investor, made an investment, which was also deposited with NatWest. On 28 March 1996 the moneys deposited with
NatWest were withdrawn by ECCC. The investments to which I have referred, save for those of Messrs Letcher & Jeffery and Youyang Pty Limited, were all the deposits made by PTWA and PT and included the amounts invested on behalf of the plaintiffs.

The investments made by PTWA were made in its capacity as trustee for the
Excelsior Plan. Those made by PT were as trustee for the FlexiPlan Plan.

On 2 September 1994 PTWA and PT executed Deeds Poll, each of which was signed on behalf of those companies by Mr E.A. Grimshaw, the Manager Corporate
Trusts, and Mr R.P. Jenkins, the Divisional Manager Corporate Services, who was also Perpetual's in-house solicitor. Each Deed Poll was in the same terms and in it PTWA and PT was described as "the shareholder". The recitals recorded that the shareholder was the registered holder of identified "A"
Class Preference Shares in ECCC, that in respect of the investments it had signed Subscription Agreements with ECCC, which were identified, and that ECCC had deposited with Dresdner subscription moneys paid to it by the shareholder.
The Deeds Poll evidenced an agreement with ECCC to the variation of each
Subscription Agreement by deleting the definition of "Prime Bank" and substituting therefor "a bank as nominated in writing by" ECCC "from time to time which is Investment Grade". "Investment Grade" was defined as meaning "institutions" to which two ratings agencies had granted a rating equivalent to or better than that granted to Dresdner or any wholly owned subsidiary of it at any given time. "DAL" is a reference to Dresdner Australia Limited.

The Deeds continued:- "2. The Shareholder directs the Company that if at any time moneys are deposited with a Prime Bank that ceases to be an Investment Grade bank, the Company must: immediately arrange the withdrawal of all moneys deposited by the Company with that Prime Bank, and deposit those moneys with another bank which is rated as Investment Grade; cause such new conforming bank to issue a Deposit Certificate which as to maturity date and maturity sum is identical to that Deposit Certificate for which it is substituted; and this clause shall be an amendment to the Subscription Agreement.
 . hereby authorises, requests and instructs the Company to withdraw all moneys deposited by the Company with DAL (including all accruals and entitlements to those deposits), which the Shareholder paid to the Company under and by reference to the Subscription Agreements and to deposit such moneys with such other Prime Bank that the Company may decide; . hereby further requests and authorises DAL to release such moneys to the Company and permits DAL to release such moneys to the Company without DAL being in any way responsible to concern itself with the Company's application of the released moneys; . absolutely and unconditionally releases and discharges Dresdner Bank AG and DAL from any liability or obligation to it whatsoever; . hereby certifies to the Company and to DAL the matters set out in Recital A above; . agrees that the Company may substitute a deposit certificate issued by a Prime Bank, which as to maturity date and maturity sum is identical to the DAL certificate of deposit for which it is submitted, and that such substitution shall constitute a variation of the Subscription Agreements and that it otherwise confirms the Subscription Agreements." 
A number of matters will emerge from these documents. Firstly, the
Subscription Agreement made it clear that that portion of the invested moneys, which had been lodged with Dresdner, was to be dealt with conformably with the
Subscription Agreement and the Paying Agency Agreement by the utilisation of the Deposit Certificates. If PTWA and PT had given any consideration to the
Subscription Agreement or had read the Paying Agency Agreement, as to which latter agreement it was conceded they did not and that they did not have a copy of it, it would have been clear that the purpose of the Agreements was to ensure that ECCC did not have access to the money invested with Dresdner. The evidence made it clear that Dresdner was aware of this and that it was not prepared to release the money invested with it without the consent of PTWA and
PT. PTWA and PT misunderstood the situation to the extent that they were of the view that so long as the money was placed with a bank having a sufficiently high rating to ensure its safety, that was sufficient. This overlooked a fundamental part of the arrangement, which, however, had been overlooked from the beginning, namely that the thirty five per cent deposited with the nominated bank and accrued interest was not to be under the control of ECCC, but under the control of the party holding the Deposit Certificates.
It was the obligation of that party, albeit as agent for ECCC, to use the
Deposit Certificates, which it was anticipated would be Bearer Certificates of
Deposit, to obtain the invested funds and to utilise them conformably with the
Paying Agency Agreement. In this way the plaintiffs, as the ultimate investors, were assured, or it was intended that they should be assured, of the return of the principal amount invested, which amount had been, it was agreed, calculated on an actuarial basis so that the interest on thirty five per cent of the principal sum invested gave a guaranteed return to investors at the end of the ten year term of the principal sum. The other sixty five per cent was paid to ECCC to be used in its speculative trading activities.

Secondly, PTWA and PT completely overlooked these requirements and by the
Deeds Poll, in effect, placed the money under the control of ECCC, at least until it was reinvested, although even then, ECCC could obtain access to it.
This, however, did not change the position, which had existed prior to the entry into the Deeds Poll by virtue of Minter Ellison's failure to obtain on settlement Bearer Deposit Certificates and by virtue of PTWA's and PT's failure to ensure, in any way, that the Deposit Certificates received on settlement were Bearer Deposit Certificates. The Deeds Poll were not prepared by Minter Ellison, but by another firm of solicitors. There was no evidence that Minter Ellison were aware that the change was being effected, although they subsequently did become aware of it. As Mr Pembroke submitted, whilst the money remained with Dresdner it was safe. Dresdner had made it clear that in the absence of a document such as the Deed Poll it would not release the money to ECCC. Dresdner seems to have been the only party, from which criticism I excuse National Registries, which directed its mind to looking after the interests of the investor plaintiffs. The execution of the Deeds Poll unlocked the money such that ECCC was able to withdraw it. The purpose of Mr Pembroke's submission was to show that the chain of causation was broken.

Thirdly, it was obviously the intention of the Deeds Poll that thereafter the moneys should be invested by ECCC with another bank of "Investment Grade".
However, it was conceded by Mr Grimshaw that the Deeds Poll did not oblige
ECCC, once it had obtained the money, to immediately deposit it with another bank. In due course it will be necessary for me to consider the significance of these further transactions. Prima facie, the conduct of PTWA and PT was extraordinary. What happened was that on 19 September 1994 the money deposited with Dresdner for the ultimate benefit of the plaintiffs, inter alios, and to which ECCC was not to have access, was withdrawn by ECCC. It was not deposited with Westpac until 31 January 1995. Neither PTWA nor PT was, apparently, in the least concerned about this, and neither took any step to see that the money was safeguarded for the benefit of those for which it was held on trust. Upon the deposit with Westpac, it issued a document to ECCC in the following terms:- "Westpac Banking Corporation (hereinafter called the `Bank') hereby confirms the oral agreement made on 30/01/95 between the Bank and 
EC Consolidated Capital Limited (hereinafter called the `Investor'), whereby the Bank agrees to sell Bank Accepted Bills of Exchange/Negotiable Bank Certificates of Deposit (individually and collectively hereinafter referred to as `the Stock') to the Investor, with the Face Value $245,000 for the consideration equal to the Face Value, to finally mature on the 23 June 2003 at which time the Bank will mature the Stock for $557,713.97 yielding the return of 15.2000% over the term 31 January 1995 to and including 23 June 2003.

The first tranche of security will be: 
Sale Date Face Value Drawer or Acceptor Maturity 
Issuer Date /01/95 $245,000 To be To be 22/3/95 advised advised 
As arranged, the Bank will hold the Stock in safe custody on behalf of the Investor until the date of final maturity referred to above.

The Bank will replace the Stock from time to time on its maturity dates with Stock of the same value. The Bank, if requested, will advise the Investor of details of such replacement Stock.

In the event that the Investor for whatsoever reason, fails to fulfil any of its obligations hereunder the Investor hereby indemnifies and will keep indemnified the Bank against any losses, costs, charges or expenses which the Bank may suffer or incur as a result of the Investor's non-performance of its obligations hereunder. The Investor acknowledges that the Bank in entering into this transaction may contract with other parties in respect of the transactions contemplated herein, and may have regard to such contracts in determining its losses, costs, charges or expenses.

A Certificate from the Bank stating an amount, shall be accepted by the Investor as conclusive evidence of such losses, costs, charges or expenses having been suffered or incurred. 
Should the Investor wish to terminate this agreement the Bank will be willing to provide quotations to so terminate and if quotation is accepted and settlement for termination occurs the Bank and the Investor will be released from any further obligation under the terms of this agreement as at the date of such settlement.

Please acknowledge acceptance of the terms and conditions of this undertaking by the Bank and the obligations hereunder by signing and returning the duplicate letter attached." 
The document concluded with definitions of "Bank Accepted Bills of Exchange" and "Negotiable Bank Certificates of Deposit".

The documents issued by Westpac were forwarded to National Registries by ECCC by letter dated 23 February 1995. The letter stated:- "We write to advise that with the formal written consent of all our preference shareholders we have replaced the Certificates of Deposit issued by Dresdner Australia Limited with Certificates of Deposit issued by Westpac Banking Corporation.

The maturity dates have not changed and the maturity values remain the same (except where redemptions have been made in which case the maturity value is decreased by the amount redeemed).

You will note that the maturity value provided by Westpac is slightly higher for each Certificate of Deposit than the original. This is because Westpac's calculation is based on the Rounded up present value of the Certificate of Deposit.

We enclose for your safe keeping pursuant to the Paying Agency Agreement the ORIGINAL CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT from Westpac and ask that you replace the corresponding Dresdner Certificates with these. Corresponding schedules will follow shortly consolidating information previously provided to you.

The following is a summary for each Certificate of Deposit to assist you." 
The deposits made to that date were set out.

The two subscriptions completed on 24 January 1995 and that completed on 30
March 1995 followed substantially the same procedure save that the money provided to ECCC by Minter Ellison, prior to completion, for it to procure a
Deposit Certificate, was deposited with Westpac rather than Dresdner. Upon receipt of that money Westpac issued a document in the form to which I have referred, which was provided to Minter Ellison and forwarded to National
Registries under cover of a letter from Minter Ellison in the following terms, which was signed by Mr Lewis:- "We refer to the Paying Agency Agreement dated 4 December 1992 between EC Consolidated Capital Limited and yourselves. 
Pursuant to Clause 3 of the Paying Agency Agreement, we enclose the following documents for your safe custody: . Deposit Certificate from Westpac Banking Corporation dated 24 January 1995 with a maturity date of 24 January 2005 and a maturity value of AUD$726,121.16; . The schedule referred to in clause 3.2 of the Paying Agency Agreement (detailing those shares which will fall due for redemption in conjunction with the maturity of the Deposit Certificate referred to in item 1); and . A LETTER FROM EC Consolidated Capital Limited dated 25 January 1995 enclosing a cheque for $250 in accordance with clause 4.2 of the Paying Agency Agreement.

Would you please acknowledge receipt of these documents by signing, dating and returning the attached copy of this letter." 
It was common ground that Minter Ellison never furnished to PT or FlexiPlan the Westpac document and that those companies did not otherwise see it.
Neither Minter Ellison nor National Registries informed PT or FlexiPlan that the Westpac document was not a Deposit Certificate. PT and FlexiPlan made no enquiries as to the status or contractual conformity of the certificates.

In September 1995 the money deposited with Westpac was withdrawn by ECCC and used for its own purposes. National Registries, PTWA, PT and FlexiPlan were not advised of this.

The money released by Minter Ellison to ECCC prior to completion in respect of the subscriptions, which were completed on 18 September 1995 and 5 December , was deposited with NatWest Capital Markets Australia Limited, ("NatWest"). Upon receipt it issued a document entitled "Pricing Supplement", "Zero Coupon Medium Term Note", which showed the investor as ECCC and the "underlying instrument" as a "Zero Coupon Medium Term Note". The principal amount was A$246,000 and the redemption amount, on 19 September 2005, was
A$575,200. The "issue condition" was stated as being:- "The issue of the Zero Coupon Medium Term Note is conditional until the provision by EC Consolidated Capital Limited of its authorised signatory list and that NatWest Markets Australia Limited is satisfied that all relevant documents and forms have been duly signed by authorised officers of EC Consolidated Capital Limited." 
On 22 September 1995 Minter Ellison wrote to National Registries in essentially the same terms as the previous correspondence, save that in the paragraph numbered one the document enclosed for safe custody was that issued by NatWest. The letter was signed by Mr Lewis.

In respect of the subscription completed on 5 December 1995 NatWest provided the document directly to National Registries, which was confirmed in a letter from Minter Ellison to National Registries dated 14 December 1995. PT was not provided with, nor did it otherwise see or ask to see, the NatWest document, and neither Minter Ellison nor National Registries told PT that it was not a
Deposit Certificate as defined by the Subscription Agreements.

On 27 March 1996 the money deposited with NatWest was withdrawn by ECCC in circumstances which required some involvement by National Registries.

The Plaintiffs' Case Against Feldworth And Mr Felden 
In the Second Further Amended Summons, which was filed in Court on 25
September 1998, the plaintiffs' case against Feldworth and Mr Felden, save for the case of the thirty sixth and fortieth plaintiffs, who, I am satisfied, are not entitled to succeed against them and with which I shall deal separately, was stated in the Nature of Dispute to be:- "The plaintiffs have invested through the third defendant, the fourth defendant and the fifth defendant as their trustees in `A' class preference shares in the capital of a company called EC Consolidated Capital Limited (`ECCCL'). The plaintiffs (excluding the thirty sixth plaintiff) were induced to make the investment by reason of certain representations made by their financial planner and investment adviser, the first defendant, principally by its managing director, the second defendant. It was represented, inter alia, that the investment was safe and free of any risk whereas, in fact, it was not. The principal security for the investment was the lodgment of deposit certificates with the custodian for the life of the investment. The deposit certificates were never lodged with the custodian but were misappropriated by ECCCL and used for its own purposes. ECCCL has now been placed into official liquidation. The third, fourth and fifth defendants breached their duty as trustee for the plaintiffs by failing to ensure that the deposit certificates were lodged with the custodian upon completion of the subscription for the `A' class preference shares." 
The plaintiffs, and in referring to them I am excluding for present purposes the thirty sixth and fortieth plaintiffs, alleged that they retained Feldworth to act for them for reward as their financial planner and investment adviser; that from time to time they informed Feldworth and/or Mr Felden on behalf of
Feldworth that they required an investment which was safe and free of any risk; that from time to time Feldworth and/or Mr Felden on behalf of Feldworth made representations to them that the acquisition of the "A" Class Preference
Shares would be safe and free of any risk; that the capital invested in ECCC was guaranteed to be returned to them; that Dresdner guaranteed the return of the capital invested in ECCC; and that the investment in ECCC was an "AAA" rated investment. The plaintiffs alleged further that it was represented that the investment would return at least fifteen per centum per annum during its ten year life, that it would be fully secured and free of any risk, that Mr
Felden was mortgaging his own house to invest in ECCC, that good returns would be achieved from the investment during its ten year life, and that any positions taken in ECCC in foreign currencies were and would be fully hedged.
It was further alleged that it had been stated to them that Westpac was investing $100m in ECCC for trading purposes.

The evidence of the plaintiffs satisfies me that these various representations were made in essentially the same terms to them and, as is alleged by them, that they were made for the purpose of inducing them to subscribe for and to maintain their interests in the preference shares. I am satisfied that the plaintiffs acted on the faith and truth of the representations in applying for such shares and retaining the investments.

I am further satisfied that the allegations in paragraph 24 of the Second
Further Amended Summons, viz that the representations were false in that the investment in the Preference Shares was not safe or free of any risk, and that there was no reasonable ground for representing that the Preference Shares were an investment which would be safe or risk free, have been established. I have referred to the documentation issued by ECCC, which indicated clearly that the investment was of a speculative nature, and to the failure of
Feldworth and Mr Felden to comply with the established practices for determining whether the investment was safe and risk free. Each of the plaintiffs said:- "If I had been informed by Mr Felden, Feldworth or the trustees of the Excelsior managed superannuation plan or the FlexiSuper Fund that the investment in ECCCL was neither safe nor free of any risk, I would have instructed Mr Felden to redeem the whole of my investment in ECCCL and would not have invested any further moneys in that company." 
As there was no appearance by or on behalf of Feldworth or Mr Felden this evidence was not challenged by them and no challenge was made to these assertions by any of the trustee defendants. The evidence seems to me to be inherently probable, for the reasons to which I have referred.

I am satisfied that but for the representations, which I am satisfied
Feldworth and Mr Felden made to the plaintiffs, they would never have invested in the Preference Shares, and that had they been made aware that the investment, once it was made, was neither safe nor risk free, they would have instructed Mr Felden to redeem all the money and would not have invested further money in ECCC. The evidence is that at the time that they should have been made aware of the relevant facts, ECCC had sufficient funds to repay them, such that they would not have suffered any loss.

In the Second Further Amended Summons it was pleaded, inter alia, that
Feldworth and Mr Felden by reason of the making of the representations in or in connection with the dealing in securities, which the shares were, engaged in conduct which was misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive in contravention of s.995(2) of the Law. It was also pleaded that Feldworth and Mr Felden aided, abetted, counselled or procured the contraventions by the other of that section, and were concerned in or parties to such contraventions within the meaning of [s.79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sia1993473/s79.html) of the Law and, that by making security recommendations within the meaning of the term as defined by [s.9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sia1993473/s9.html) of that Law, Feldworth and Mr Felden engaged in conduct which contravened s.851(1).

A case was also pleaded based on the Trade Practices Act and the Fair Trading
Act but, in the final submissions made on behalf of the plaintiffs, reliance was placed principally upon the provisions of the Law.

Section 995(2) prohibits a person in or in connection with any dealing in securities from engaging in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive. The section is in Part 7.11, which also contains s.1005(1), which provides:- "Subject to the following sections of this Division a person who suffers loss or damage by the conduct of another person that was engaged in in contravention of a provision of this Part or Part 7.12 may recover the amount of the loss or damage by action against that other person or against any person involved in the contravention, whether or not that other person or any person involved in the contravention has been convicted of an offence in respect of the contravention." 
It seems to me that the engaging in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive has the same meaning as, and should be treated in the same way as, those words in s.52 of the Trade Practices Act from which they have obviously been taken. Accordingly, it does not require any intent that the recipients of the representations should be misled or deceived, but rather that they have been. The evidence satisfies me that the conduct of
Feldworth and Mr Felden, in so far as he was acting separately from Feldworth, constituted conduct prohibited by s.995(2); that but for that conduct the investments would never have been made; and that the consequence of the making of the investments was that the plaintiffs lost the money they invested. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the plaintiffs have established their entitlement to succeed against Feldworth and the measure of their damages is the whole amount which they invested in consequence of the representations.

So far as Mr Felden is concerned the submission was made that he either breached s.995(2) or that he aided, abetted, counselled or procured the contravention by Feldworth of it and, therefore, pursuant to s.79 of the Law, is involved in the contravention and is a person from whom damages may be recovered pursuant to s.1005(1) as "any person involved in the contravention".
Once again it seems to me that the words of s.79 must be read in the light of the meaning attributed to the same words in the Trade Practices Act. This is reinforced when one notes that s.82 allows recovery for a contravention of s.52 of the Trade Practices Act against, inter alios, "any person involved in the contravention".

Section 995(2) is concerned with the conduct of "a person". Section 9 defines "person" by reference to s.85A, which provides:- "In this Law, expressions used to denote persons generally (such as `person', `party', `someone' ...), include a body politic or corporate as well as an individual." 
It seems to me that s.995(2) looks both to a company, which engages in the conduct prohibited through its servants and agents, and its servants and agents, who engage in such conduct. Thus, when one comes to look at s.1005(1) the "person" engaging in the contravention may be both the company and its authorised servant or agent. In these circumstances both Feldworth and Mr
Felden are principally liable. On the other hand, if the view be taken that Mr
Felden could not, in the circumstances, be primarily liable there is no doubt on the evidence that he had the necessary knowledge to make him liable of aiding, abetting etc the breaches, which occurred. Accordingly, whichever way one looks at the matter, both Feldworth and Mr Felden are, in my opinion, jointly and severally liable for the damages the plaintiffs have sustained. I shall return to a consideration of the amount of such damages in due course.

In Yorke & Anor versus Lucas <case>; [(1985) 158 CLR 661] the High Court held that for s.75B of the Trade Practices
Act, which is the equivalent of s.79 of the Law, to apply it must be shown that the person intentionally aided, abetted, counselled or procured a contravention. It was further held that to form the necessary intent the person must have knowledge of the essential matters which made up the contravention, whether or not he knew that they amounted to a contravention.

In that case it was necessary to establish that the corporation was guilty of the conduct proscribed by s.52(1), although it was acting through Mr Lucas. It was held that the corporation was guilty of conduct, which contravened s.52, both at first instance and in the Full Court of the Federal Court. Section 52, of course, only deals with a contravention by a corporation. Section 995(2) is concerned with a contravention by a "person". At p.666 in the joint judgment of Mason ACJ, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ, their Honours expressed some doubt as to whether the finding in that case of a contravention of s.52 by the company was correct but, as there was no appeal from it, they proceeded on the basis that it was. Their Honours considered the requirements for aiding and abetting and concluded they had not been made out. Towards the end of their judgment, at p.671, they added:- "We would only add, lest it be thought that it has escaped our attention, that the appellants may, even if knowledge were not necessary to involvement under paragraph (a) or under paragraph (c) as `party to', have encountered difficulty in establishing that Lucas was involved within the meaning of s.75B in the contravention constituted by the making of the false representations, having regard to the fact that the representations, albeit made on behalf of the Lucas company, were made by Lucas himself. As Dixon J observed in Mallan versus Lee: `It would be an inversion of the conceptions on which the degrees of offending are founded to make the person actually committing the forbidden acts an accessory to the offence consisting in the vicarious responsibility for his acts.' 
It is, however, unnecessary to pursue this aspect of the matter further." 
In Hamilton versus Whitehead <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 121] the High Court considered an application for special leave to appeal in circumstances where liability was imposed on a company by s.169 of the Companies (Western Australia) Code. Their Honours held that the liability was direct and not vicarious and that, accordingly, a person who had knowledge of all the material circumstances and whose conduct constituted the commission by the company of an offence against that section may be convicted, as an accessory, of being knowingly concerned in that offence.

At p.128 Mason CJ, Wilson and Toohey JJ said:- "But as we have sought to explain, the inversion of which his Honour spoke has no application here. The company is not vicariously liable for the actions of the respondent. The company is the principal offender and the respondent is charged as an accessory." 
The "inversion" to which their Honours were referring came from reliance upon the passage from the judgment of Dixon J in Mallen versus Lee.

Their Honours returned to Yorke versus Lucas and quoted the passage at p.671 to which I have referred. They continued:- "It would seem to us, with respect, that this reservation, made no doubt out of an abundance of caution, was unnecessary. The provisions of the Trade Practices Act, like the Code in the present case but unlike s.230 of the Income Tax Assessment Act, were such that the alleged accessory was indeed a true accessory since the offence committed by the company was not the consequence of a vicarious liability for the actions of its servants carried out on its behalf. It was the consequence of actions undertaken directly by it, that is to say by a person who was the embodiment of the company": pp.129-130. 
In my opinion, these authorities support the conclusion to which I have come, viz that as the Managing Director of Feldworth, Mr Felden was personally liable for his acts and also made Feldworth liable for them.

In addition Mr Martin submitted that Feldworth and Mr Felden were liable pursuant to s.851 of the Law, in negligence and for negligent misstatement. I note these submissions, but because of the view to which I have come in relation to his primary submission I do not find it necessary to explore them further.

The Case Made Against PTWA And PT 
Although I shall consider mainly the position of PTWA and PT at this point, it is appropriate to make some reference to FlexiPlan.

In paragraph 49A of the Second Further Amended Summons the plaintiffs pleaded that it was the duty and obligation of PTWA, PT and FlexiPlan, as trustees of "the said funds", to exercise the same degree of care, skill and diligence as an ordinary prudent person would exercise in dealing with property of another for whom the person felt morally bound to provide; and to ensure that their duties and powers were performed and exercised in the best interests of their members.

PTWA and PT admitted the allegations in paragraph 49A, but asserted that the alleged duties and obligations upon them were limited by a number of circumstances pleaded in paragraph 17 of PTWA's Defence and paragraph 16 of
PT's Defence. The general nature of the allegations pleaded by PTWA and PT was that they were directed by the plaintiffs to appoint Minter Ellison as trustee for the disbursement of the subscription moneys in accordance with the terms of the Subscription Agreements, and as the agent to attend to completion of the Subscription Agreements and to enter into the Subscription Agreements. It was pleaded that by reason of those directions PTWA and PT were discharged from any duty or obligation to ensure that at completion of each Subscription
Agreement a Deposit Certificate had been deposited with National Registries in accordance with the terms of the Paying Agency Agreement and/or Subscription
Agreements. It was pleaded that they were discharged from any obligation to prevent the subscription moneys from being released to ECCC at the completion of each Subscription Agreement unless and until Deposit Certificates had been deposited with National Registries in accordance with the terms of the Paying
Agency Agreement and/or Subscription Agreements; to obtain a refund in whole or in part of the subscription moneys to ECCC on the basis that the Deposit
Certificates had not been deposited with National Registries at completion in accordance with those agreements; to make enquiries of ECCC or National
Registries as to whether Deposit Certificates had been deposited with National
Registries in accordance with those agreements or whether Deposit Certificates had been misappropriated by ECCC for its own use in breach of the agreements; to advise or warn the plaintiffs that in respect of earlier Subscription
Agreements no Deposit Certificates had been deposited with National Registries at the completion of those agreements; and to advise that there was a possibility or risk that at the completion of the Subscription Agreements no
Deposit Certificates would be deposited with National Registries in accordance with the terms of those agreements.

In paragraph 49B the plaintiffs asserted that in breach of the duties and obligations PTWA and PT as trustees failed to exercise the same degree of care, skill and diligence as an ordinary prudent person would in dealing with property of another for whom the person felt morally bound to provide; and to ensure that their duties and powers had been performed and exercised in the best interests of their members. In relation to the latter allegation of breach twelve particulars were pleaded and, on 27 October 1998, Mr Martin stated that as against PTWA and PT he was not pursuing sub-sub-paragraph (xi), namely:- ".. failure to advise or warn the plaintiffs that no deposit certificate had been lodged with National Registries on settlement in circumstances where the third, fourth and fifth defendants had imputed to them the knowledge of their agent, Minter Ellison, as evidenced in that firm's letter dated 31 May 1993 to ECCCL." 
Mr Martin also said that his clients were not pursuing, as against PTWA and
PT, claims for breach of warranty implied by s.74(1): (paragraph 49H); breach of warranty implied by s.74(2) of the Trade Practices Act: (paragraph 49L); claims in relation to misleading and deceptive conduct as pleaded in paragraphs 49M and R; and a claim for breach of duty of care on the part of PT as pleaded in paragraph 43.

At the end of the evidentiary day the essential case made by the plaintiffs against PTWA and PT was that they were in breach in two essential respects.
Firstly, it was submitted that they were in breach of their duties as trustees in appointing Minter Ellison to act as their agent on settlement, by which the submission meant all facets of the settlement and completion. This submission was based on their failure to ascertain whether and/or to appreciate that
Minter Ellison had a conflict of duty or interest, which they should have ascertained or appreciated, and by reason of that conflict, they should not have appointed Minter Ellison as their agent. Secondly, it was submitted that
PTWA and PT were in breach of their duty in failing to ensure that the Deposit
Certificates were Bearer Deposit Certificates and thus complied with the
Subscription Agreements. PTWA and PT made no attempt to sight the certificates nor to obtain confirmation from either Minter Ellison or National Registries that the Deposit Certificates were Bearer Certificates. Nor did they obtain, independently of any steps they took, any such confirmation from either Minter
Ellison or National Registries. Further, they failed to call for or read the
Paying Agency Agreement.

I think it is also important to note immediately that Mr Martin disclaimed expressly any reliance on the entry by PTWA and PT into the Deeds Poll as constituting a breach of their trust obligations, and that Mr Heydon expressly disclaimed any reliance on the entry into the Deeds Poll as breaking the chain of causation, which led to the loss.

In his written submissions Mr Heydon stated the obligations of PTWA and PT thus:- "2. The obligation of PTCL/PTWA was, in making the investment in ECCCL, to exercise the degree of care that an ordinary prudent man would take if he were minded to make an investment for the benefit of other people to whom he felt morally bound to provide: Re Whiteley (1886) 33 ChD 347, 355. After the making of the investment, there was no obligation on PTCL/PTWA to investigate any aspect of the investment unless put on inquiry: see Rawsthorne versus Rowley [(1907) 24 TLR 51]; [1909] 1 Ch 409(N)." 
It is clear from reading the pleadings as a whole, and from the way in which the case was conducted, that the parties accepted that in so far as it was asserted that there were failures by the defendants in relation to the Deposit
Certificates, that reference was to Deposit Certiciates as defined in the
Subscription Agreements, viz Bearer Deposit Certificates. Thus the questions were whether PTWA and PT were obliged not to appoint Minter Ellison as their agent and to ensure that such Deposit Certificates were obtained and, if they were, whether they failed to perform those obligations.

In his opening submissions Mr Heydon accepted that Minter Ellison was the agent for his clients, the agency being limited to the extent of their paying money to ECCC to enable it to obtain the Deposit Certificates and to pay the balance to ECCC on completion. It was asserted it was ECCC's duty to deliver the Deposit Certificate to National Registries, and that Minter Ellison had no authority from his clients to make any representations as to what was handed over. He further submitted that his clients were bound to follow the instructions they received and that, in relation to the Subscription
Agreements, a reasonable trustee was entitled, acting under the Trust Deed, to rely on the duties imposed on Minter Ellison and National Registries. He also submitted that PTWA and PT were not put on notice that Minter Ellison were not suitable to act as agent, save for the potential conflict of interest. I note that in his final submissions Mr Heydon expressly conceded that the defence pleaded in paragraph 19.3 by PTWA and in paragraph 18.3 by PT, namely that certain clauses in the Trust Deeds provided a defence, were no longer relied on by his clients.

The Evidence Of Mr Shaw 
The witness statements of Mr George Shaw of 25 August 1998 and 6 and 8 October , became Exhibit AR. Mr Shaw has had extensive experience as a senior executive of various trustee companies, and is presently the Executive
Director of George Shaw Financial Services Pty Limited, which is an investment consultant and trustee adviser. In that capacity he, on behalf of that company, provides advice to trustees concerning their requirements, duties and obligations. His qualifications to speak about the general practice of trustees was not in issue, and was supported by his experience as a tutor and examiner in the subject of trusts and trustee activities at a very senior level. He reviewed the documents relevant to the present case and, in paragraph 19 of his first witness statement, he said that the term "Bearer
Deposit Certificate" is one used in the investment and trustee industries. He continued:- "It means a certificate which entitles the person in possession of it to payment by the issuing bank or financial institution of a specified sum of money on a particular date. The certificate can be transferred by delivery from one person to another." 
He was of the view, and this was not in issue, that no Bearer Deposit
Certificates were issued in any of the present transactions.

Mr Shaw expressed the opinion that a trustee, in the position of PTWA, PT and
FlexiPlan, would have read and understood the Preliminary Information
Memorandum, the Information Memorandum, the Paying Agency Agreement and the
Subscription Agreement. He said that the trustee would have specifically noted that Minter Ellison were the solicitors for ECCC; that the Deposit Certificate was a Bearer Deposit Certificate; that at completion the trustee would give to
ECCC a duly executed application for Preference Shares and a written authorisation from Minter Ellison to pay to ECCC the aggregate of the subscription moneys; that at completion Minter Ellison, from the funds it held, would pay to ECCC the aggregate of the subscription moneys remaining after the provision of the Bearer Deposit Certificate; that at completion ECCC would procure the appropriate Share Certificates under seal detailing that the allotment be delivered to the trustee and that the Bearer Deposit Certificate be delivered to National Registries; and that the trustee was not obliged to complete the subscription for the shares and was entitled to have the moneys paid by it under the Subscription Agreement refunded in full without deduction, if, at completion, the Bearer Deposit Certificate had not been delivered to National Registries in accordance with the Subscription
Agreement.

In paragraph 28 he said that within two business days of each settlement the trustee would have sought and obtained from Minter Ellison written confirmation that the Bearer Deposit Certificate had been delivered on settlement to National Registries in accordance with clause 4.4(d) of the
Subscription Agreement, and that the trustee would have also sought and obtained, within five business days of settlement, written confirmation from
National Registries that the Deposit Certificate had been so delivered on settlement in accordance with that clause. He added that at least every year, the trustee would have sought and obtained written confirmation from National
Registries "and its auditors" that it still held as custodian the Bearer
Deposit Certificates in accordance with the terms of the Paying Agency
Agreement.

I rejected most of his statement of 6 October 1998, although I granted Mr
Martin leave to adduce oral evidence in admissible form. His statement of 8
October 1998 was mainly in reply to a statement of a Mr Keith Ernest Carson, which was not read.

In his evidence in chief Mr Shaw said there was a usual practice of a reasonable and prudent trustee between 1993 and 1995 when dealing with bearer securities, which required a trustee to exercise extreme caution, by which he said he meant that because of the nature of such securities they would have to be "properly recorded and retained and secured": Tp.19.

At Tp.19 Mr Shaw was asked about the usual practice of a reasonable and prudent trustee in appointing agents to act at the settlement of purchase transactions. He said that the trustee would consider whether there was a conflict of interest, whether real or potential, before making an appointment, and that the usual practice was not to appoint the agent who had any such conflict.

At Tp.20 he said he had had experience of a trustee purchasing bearer securities and appointing agents to act on the completion of such purchases.
He said the usual practice was not to use an agent who had a conflict or a potential conflict of interest. He continued that the usual practice of a trustee in appointing an agent would be, firstly, to ascertain whether the agent had an actual or potential conflict of interest by asking the agent whether there was a conflict and, if there was, how the agent would deal with it. He said that the usual practice was to record any such conversation, and that if a law firm was involved, a request would be made in writing that it provide confirmation that it could act and, if there was a conflict, how the law firm would satisfy the trustee that the conflict was resolved. He said it was usual that another partner from that law firm would act for the trustee and:- "The trustee would then have to make a decision as to whether he still wished to appoint that firm and it would depend on the type of transaction whether the trustee made a decision for or against": Tp.21. 
Mr Shaw said that if the law firm said there was no conflict of interest the trustee "would feel quite comfortable in appointing that agent", and that it would be the usual practice to obtain verification from the law firm that it could act without a conflict of interest. In this case no such enquiries were made of Minter Ellison, although it was submitted that had they been Minter
Ellison would have confirmed there was no conflict, which would have been accepted by the trustees. I am not satisfied this is so. On the facts of this case Minter Ellison would have had to provide an answer as to how they would deal with the conflict, and the obligation would have been on the trustees to decide whether they accepted it. The trustees took no such steps, which, in my opinion, they should have.

At Tp.22 Mr Shaw said that the usual practice of a reasonable and prudent trustee was to enquire of its agent, which had attended at the settlement of a purchase by the trustee involving a bearer security, that the settlement had taken place very shortly thereafter and "certainly no longer than two business days" later. He said that such confirmation would have to be, as a matter of usual practice, in written form, and that if at settlement the exchange of a bearer security to be held by a third party custodian was involved the usual practice would have been to obtain written confirmation from the agent and the custodian. This, in my opinion, accords with a commonsense approach in looking after the trust assets, or ensuring that that had been done. He said that if there was a six weeks' delay after settlement in reporting to the trustee the usual practice of a trustee would have been to have sought from the agent written reasons for the delay. The reason for this is obvious and was hardly challenged. A trustee, having sent off a reasonable sum for investment, would wish to know, if acting prudently, that the investment had been made, and would wish to know that within a short time.

At Tp.23 he was asked about the usual practice upon a trustee retiring and a new trustee being appointed. He said it involved the preparation of a check list to go through each aspect of the trust and to seek written verification that the trust assets existed. If any trust assets were in the possession of a custodian, the usual practice would have been to have sought confirmation from the custodian that the security existed. He said, Tp.24, that where there was an in specie transfer of assets from one trust to another the usual practice was to prepare a check list, go through the assets individually, and receive confirmation in writing that they existed and who held them.

Mr Shaw was cross-examined firstly by Mr Downes. He confirmed that a prudent trustee would have read all the transaction documents, including any referred to in other documentation but with which it was not supplied originally. This led him to agree that a reasonable trustee, seeing a reference to a Paying
Agency Agreement but not being provided with it, would call for that document.
He said he considered the Paying Agency Agreement was one to which the trustee would attach extreme importance:- ".. simply because this tells the trustee how his investors are going to get their money back, to whom to look to. It's really the most important one of those documents that you refer to." 
As with all his evidence whilst this no doubt represented the usual practice it also corresponded with a commonsense approach, having regard to the duties created and what was involved.

Mr Shaw was nextly cross-examined by Mr Pembroke. At Tp.29 Mr Shaw said that so far as he was concerned there was no difficulty in distinguishing between a confirmation of a fixed term deposit and a negotiable certificate of deposit.

At Tp.32 Mr Shaw said that trustees usually sought to avoid handling bearer securities, because they did not have the facilities to protect large amounts of cash. Therefore it was usual to use another security organisation.

Mr Shaw was referred, Tp.33, to his evidence to the effect that usual practices and standards in the present case would have led to Minter Ellison's not being appointed to act as the trustees' agent. He was asked to read clause .4 and Schedule 4 of the Subscription Agreement. He agreed that a trustee acting reasonably in accordance with the practice he had described would have read those clauses and paid attention to them and, at Tp.34, he said that where there was a conflict or a potential conflict the usual practice was not to appoint an agent:- ".. because the obligations of that agent are usually to the person who first retained them." 
He identified the conflict arising from clause 3.4 and Schedule 4 to the
Subscription Agreement as the release of Minter Ellison. Mr Shaw was of the view that there was a conflict, which he described thus:- "If you read the very first document, the Information Memorandum, and it clearly says that Minter Ellison are the solicitors for the promoter, ECCCL, then when you read the Subscription Agreement Minter Ellison is seeking to be released from any obligation to the investors subscribing the funds.

Q. So, as you saw it, what was the tension or the conflict? 
A. That Minter Ellison would be acting for ECCCL, so they could not act for the investor." 
In these circumstances, and having regard to clause 3.4 and Schedule 4, he was asked what a trustee acting reasonably in accordance with usual practice would have done to safeguard the interests of the investors before entering into the agreement, to which he replied:- "A. Usual practice would not to have appointed Minters but to appoint another agent or if possible acted for itself.

Q. I think you expressed an opinion to the same effect earlier this afternoon in connection with the existence of a conflict? 
A. Yes.

Q. Does the presence of clauses 3.4 and Schedule 4 add to or detract from that opinion? 
A. It adds to the opinion.

Q. Why is that? 
A. It just reinforces the understanding that Minters are the agent of ECCL": Tp.36. 
Mr Shaw said that clause 3.4 and Schedule 4 were "most unusual" and "would send alarm bells to the trustee" requiring it to "exercise extreme caution.
Certainly do not appoint that party to be your agent for the settlement":
Tp.37. He said the reason for that was that he would not be confident that he could rely on the assumption of any responsibility by the agent towards the trustee, and he would not regard it as reasonable practice on the part of the trustee to assume that any responsibility could be discharged by the agent to the trustee.

He was asked about the change of solicitors in relation to the Deeds Poll, they having been prepared by Wantrup & Associates, rather than by Minter
Ellison. He said the trustee acting reasonably would have treated the Deed
Poll extremely seriously and read not only it, but also the Notice to
Shareholders, and would have obtained the advice referred to in that notice.
He was of the view that the trustee would have looked very carefully at the draft Deed Poll, and that in addition to seeking copies of the advices referred to in the Notice to Shareholders, the trustee acting reasonably would have sought an external legal opinion on the document to see whether by executing it he was acting in the interests of his beneficiaries. He also said that if the securities were being changed or substituted the usual practice of a trustee would be to get verification of the substituted securities, which should be done very shortly or immediately after the transaction was completed and in writing. He added that he would be asking why another firm of solicitors was associated with the transaction, and he said that the request for the execution of the Deed Poll would make the trustee feel "very uneasy" because there was a moving away from the security, which the investors believed they had, with the result that there was a substituting of a prime security with a secondary security. He added that the trustee would obtain confirmation from National Registries that it held the substituted securities.

Mr Shaw said, Tp.44-45, that on a change of trustees the new trustee would familiarise itself with the assets and investments taken over and would read the constituent contractual documents. He said it would have been fundamental to the trustee's role and the verification process to establish which of the three types of Deposit Certificate was being used and:- "Q. If it established that purportedly the security consisted of Bearer Certificates of Deposit, what precisely would it have done as part of the verification process? 
A. It would have sought from the holder of the Bearer Certificates - in this case National Registries - confirmation that it was holding those certificates on behalf of the investors." 
He was of the opinion that they were trust assets, because they were the underlying security from which the Preference Shares achieved their value:
Tp.45.

At Tp.49 Mr Shaw had been taken back to the question of the substitution of securities, which he said "should be immediate".

At Tp.55 Mr Shaw agreed that a reasonable trustee in 1993 would be aware that
Minter Ellison were a national law firm with a large number of partners and employed solicitors, who would have a wide range of legal skills. He agreed that partners of Minter Ellison played a commercial role in the community and that the reasonable trustee would have perceived Minter Ellison as containing within their ranks all the necessary skills to act in the fashion that the
Subscription Agreements contemplated. He agreed Minter Ellison had a high reputation for honesty, all round legal competence, and the capacity to detect potential conflicts of interest. He said that Minter Ellison would be prone to conflicts, and that his experience was that they took careful steps to try to detect and guard against them. He said:- "Q. In other words, if a firm like Minter Ellison perceived such a conflict of interest, the reasonable trustee would expect them to take some step of that character? 
A. The usual practice would be to inform the party that there was a conflict and, if they were still to be retained, offer another partner within the firm to handle the other side of the transaction.

Q. And sometimes they say, don't they, that you have to go to another firm? 
A. Of course": Tp.57. 
Minter Ellison, in this case, did no such things.

Mr Shaw said that if a trustee asked about a conflict and received an answer that there was no conflict, the trustee would be comfortable in appointing that party the agent. However, he continued, Tp.59:- "Q. Would it not be the normal practice, or in accordance with the normal practice, of a reasonable and prudent trustee to expect solicitors who perceived a conflict between two of their clients to act of their own volition in drawing it to the reasonable trustee's attention? 
A. Mr Heydon, I'm not quite sure if this is a chicken and egg situation. A professional trustee should recognise that. Equally a legal firm of the reputation of Minter Ellison. Between the two of them, it shouldn't have been a problem to recognise that there was a conflict. Now who acts first? It has been my experience that it is usually the trustee who would act - would ask the question, but it's reasonable also to expect that major law firm to proffer that there is a conflict." 
I accept this evidence. I regard the failure of PTWA and PT to advert to the potential of a conflict as extraordinary. Equally, and for reasons which will become clearer when I analyse the evidence of Minter Ellison, their failure to recognise the potential for conflict, or in so far as they did recognise it to do something about it, should be similarly characterised.

At Tp.62 Mr Shaw was asked whether he would agree that a reasonable trustee, acting in accordance with the usual practice in 1993, would expect that Minter
Ellison would be able to determine whether any document given to it as a
Deposit Certificate conformed to the Subscription Agreement. He said he would expect that, an expectation I am sure everyone connected with the transaction would have had.

Mr Shaw said, Tp.67, that the scrip for the Preference Shares was valueless unless the underlying security, being the Deposit Certificate, was in place.
Mr Shaw insisted, not unreasonably in my view, that it should have been recognised that there was a potential conflict of interest and that it would be necessary for the agent, i.e. Minter Ellison, to determine whether in truth or in law the Bearer Certificate was a Deposit Certificate as defined, and then for Minter Ellison to be sure that it reached National Registries.

Mr Shaw was cross-examined by Mr Heydon about the effect that clause 3.4 may have upon him and he said, Tp.70, that a reasonable trustee would have some concern that Minter Ellison were seeking to exclude themselves from liability, and:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. What is the concern though, from the trustee's point of view, leaving the legalistic matters out of it? 
A. Simply, your Honour, that here is a major firm looking to excluding itself from liability in a transaction which is fundamental to the security which the trustee is relying on. 
Q. What would you have done if you had been confronted with that situation? 
A. Your Honour, I would have perceived there, I would have been concerned about a potential conflict because the known fact is that Minters were acting for ECCCL. I believe that a reasonable trustee, in those circumstances, should have attended the settlement himself or had someone independent attend the settlement, to ensure that the prime security reached the proper destination." 
At Tp.75 Mr Heydon cross-examined Mr Shaw about the time within which an enquiry would be made, which Mr Shaw had said was within two working days after completion. He was asked what would be the position when the trustee did not know when completion was to take place. Mr Shaw said that the trustee would expect its agent to inform it of the completion date and, if it was not informed, to enquire. Once again this accords with commonsense. The agent was handing over money to be held by the trustee in trust. For the trustee not to know what was happening, and to know that within a reasonable time, seems to me inexcusable. He was then asked:- "Q. If a letter came in enclosing the redeemable Preference Share scrip, which was one of the documents of title that the investors were trying to get, would you agree that a reasonable trustee could infer from that that completion had happened satisfactorily? ...

A. I would find it hard to agree, simply by getting the Preference Certificate, that it would be sufficient to satisfy the trustee that proper settlement had taken place.

Q. Even though the Preference Share Certificate wouldn't have been handed over without all other proper steps occurring on settlement? 
A. Even so." 
In my opinion certain important matters emerged from the evidence of Mr Shaw, which I accepted without reservation. Firstly, I am satisfied that in the circumstances of this case a prudent trustee acting reasonably would have appreciated that there was, at the least, a potential for a conflict of interest, and would have either taxed Minter Ellison about this to find out how they would handle the matter and/or used an agent other than Minter
Ellison. If this had happened I am satisfied that only a Bearer Deposit
Certificate would have been accepted on settlement. Secondly, I am satisfied that a report on what had occurred on settlement should have been furnished within two working days of settlement. In the case of the settlement on 6 May this could not be achieved because Minter Ellison had not received a
Deposit Certificate and were giving ECCC the chance to remedy the situation without telling PTWA, a quite extraordinary situation showing the effect of the conflict of duty. On the other hand had PTWA been acting reasonably in accordance with the established procedures and followed the matter up, it would have been informed quickly that the Bearer Deposit Certificate had not been furnished, that Minter Ellison were having difficulty in obtaining it from ECCC, and that, in these circumstances, the investment was somewhat dubious. Certainly, Minter Ellison would have had to disclose that it had paid over the money to obtain a Bearer Deposit Certificate, but had not received one, and, further, that they had paid over the balance of the money to be used by ECCC notwithstanding the failure by it to comply with the Subscription
Agreement. I am prepared to infer that confronted with these most basic questions Mr Lewis would have given or ensured that honest answers were given.
However, I am satisfied that Mr Lewis was prepared to conceal the true position in the absence of a direct question. The only explanation for this conduct was that he was preferring the interest of ECCC. Probably he thought that ECCC would rectify the matter, but, none-the-less, he was preferring the interest of ECCC. I am also satisfied that it was PTWA's obligation to ask the direct question, particularly because of the potential conflict. Because of
PTWA's dereliction in not asking Minter Ellison, Mr Lewis appears to have thought, wrongly in my opinion, that he was acquitted of his duty of advising
PTWA that Minter Ellison had failed to perform its duties properly on completion and settlement. It must be kept steadfastly in mind that Minter
Ellison then knew of their breaches.

Even without the evidence of Mr Shaw it seems to me inconceivable in the present case that Minter Ellison did not appreciate the conflict of duty or interest and, having done so, did not take the most rudimentary step to seek to overcome it by having, at the least, different partners in the firm act on the transaction. However, for present purposes, that must be looked at in the light of the conduct of PTWA and PT. As Mr Shaw pointed out a reading of the documents, which in his opinion PTWA and PT should have read with care, would have disclosed the position of Minter Ellison and the potential conflict of interest. That should have led the trustees to enquire of Minter Ellison how that conflict was to be reconciled and resolved, and to require a written explanation from them on that matter. It would then have been a matter for
PTWA and PT to determine whether they accepted that explanation, although, as
Mr Shaw said, in the circumstances Minter Ellison should not have been appointed as agent.

I think it is appropriate, at this point, to note what Mr Heydon submitted in his final submissions, was the content of the obligations of Minter Ellison acting as agent. He said that there was an obligation to get the share scrip and the Subscription Agreement and to hand them over to his clients. He agreed that part of the obligation of Minter Ellison was to inspect the Deposit
Certificate and confirm that it was a conforming document and, further, that they had a duty to report. He conceded that if Mr Shaw's evidence was accepted it provided a strong argument of breach of duty on the part of the trustees for which he acted, to which "the counter" was that they expected Minter
Ellison to advise them. Inherent in this submission was the proposition that
PTWA, having appointed an agent, albeit with a conflict of interest, was not obliged to do anything more. In my opinion this cannot be right. The trustee's duty was to ensure that the agent fulfilled its role properly. The further difficulty with this latter submission was Mr Shaw's evidence that a trustee, acting reasonably, would have sought information from Minter Ellison within two business days of the settlement as to what had happened and, if this was not obtained, a reasonable trustee would have enquired about the matter. In my opinion PTWA and PT have provided no answer to why they did not take the various steps which Mr Shaw said were appropriate and, further, they called no evidence from an independent expert to suggest that Mr Shaw's evidence was not in conformity with the reasonable practice of a prudent trustee at the relevant time.

Mr Heydon submitted that if it was not sufficient for his clients to rely on their expectation that Minter Ellison would advise them if there were any problems, it would be "very difficult" for them to "escape liability". He further conceded that if the question of breach was answered adversely to them that would preclude their relying on acting honestly and reasonably, and therefore deprive them of the defences provided by ss.53 and 75 of the
Trustees Act of Western Australia.

For reasons upon which I shall elaborate after I have considered all the evidence, I do not consider that PTWA and PT have shown that they acted as reasonable and prudent trustees should have acted. The evidence establishes that they acted with high disregard for their obligations, for the performance of which, of course, they were receiving fees. In my opinion their appointment of Minter Ellison as their agent, notwithstanding the potential conflict of interest and without having satisfied themselves as to how Minter Ellison proposed to overcome that problem and their having considered whether that was appropriate, was a clear breach of how a reasonable and prudent trustee should have acted. That breach was compounded by the inexplicable failure of PTWA and
PT to make any enquiry from Minter Ellison or National Registries whether settlement had been completed in the proper way and, in particular, whether the crucial Deposit Certificates had been received. Nor did they seek to inspect them. The very fact that Minter Ellison did not advise that conforming
Deposit Certificates had been received should, in my opinion, have alerted
PTWA and PT to the prospect that that may not have occurred and, at the very least, have caused them to make enquiries. It will be appreciated that my criticisms are directed at PTWA and PT, at this stage, because I am considering the plaintiffs' case against them.

It cannot be emphasised enough that the Deposit Certificate was a critical document to protect the investors. It was, on any reading of the relevant agreements, which clearly PTWA and PT should have undertaken, the document which would secure to the investors the return of their principal, and it was the document, so long as it was kept by National Registries in safe custody, which would have precluded ECCC obtaining access to the invested part of the funds. In my respectful opinion, the failure by PTWA and PT to make any enquiry about the existence of the Deposit Certificates or their conformity with the terms of the agreement, leaving aside for the moment their failure to ask to inspect so critical a document for themselves, all of which has to be viewed in the light of the absence of any information being provided to them by their agent, Minter Ellison, that any such document had been received, compels the conclusion that they were guilty of gross derelictions of their duties, a conclusion which is emphasised when I turn to the evidence called on their behalf.

The Evidence Of Mr Grimshaw 
Mr Ernest Alan Grimshaw, whose witness statement is Exhibit 3&4D 1, commenced employment with the Perpetual Group in about February 1989 as a
Corporate Trusts Manager in Perth. In September 1989 he became the
Administration Manager of "Perpetual's" office in Perth, and from October 1992 until May 1993 he held the position of Corporate Trust Manager. From May 1993 to May 1996 he was the Assistant Manager Superannuation Services. In May or
June 1993 he assumed responsibility for the Excelsior Plan and the FlexiPlan
Plan.

It appears that he, in effect, took over the presently relevant trusts from Mr
Michael Stuart Thorne, whose witness statement is Exhibit 3&4D 2, consequent upon his resignation in May 1993, which took effect at the end of
June 1993.

Mr Grimshaw said that in about May 1993 he read the documents, which PTWA had relating to ECCC, and, in paragraph 16, he said that he was aware, in respect of the return of the capital investments, that the investors were offered "AAA" rated security of Dresdner or one of its wholly owned subsidiaries. He continued, in paragraph 17:- "I formed the view that the transactions would take place in accordance with the procedure set out in the Information Memorandum and the Subscription Agreement, and particularly that: the trust moneys invested would only be disbursed if the correct security documents were obtained and held by the Paying Agent for safe keeping; and 
National Registries would hold the correct security in safe custody for the benefit of the preference shareholders until maturity or redemption." 
In paragraph 18 he set forth the documents he recalled being placed before
PTWA by the Plan manager and he referred to the various transactions, which took place. Save for one on 5 December 1995 he was the signatory on behalf of
PTWA or PT. He said, in paragraph 23, that in completing the Subscription
Agreements and the schedules attached to them he understood PTWA and PT were carrying out the investors' instructions and directions, and he believed that by signing the schedules to the Agreement and Confirmation he was, on behalf of the trustee companies:- ".. authorising Minter Ellison to effect the transaction in accordance with the terms of the Subscription Agreement." 
He concluded:- "In particular, I expected the Subscription Moneys to be disbursed only if the correct security documents were obtained from the `AAA'-rated Bank." 
In paragraphs 24 and 25 he said:- "24. I felt some assurance from the involvement of Minter Ellison because, while not knowing anyone personally at Minter Ellison, they were a reasonably well known and reputable law firm. I had no concerns in authorising Minter Ellison to disburse the trust moneys in accordance with the Subscription Agreement and the forms I had signed on behalf of the Trustee. I believed that with a reputable law firm involved, the security promised to investors would be put in place.
 . I expected and relied on Minter Ellison to ensure that the correct security for the investors' capital was in place before releasing the subscription moneys. I expected that they would inform the Trustee or the trust manager if that was not done. In my experience, solicitors acting on behalf of the Trustee in a transaction do not proceed with a transaction unless the Trustee's requirements for the disbursement of trust moneys are met." 
This paragraph pointed up the attitude of PTWA and PT, viz that if Minter
Ellison did not advise that anything was wrong, they were entitled to assume, without more, that everything was in order. This, in my opinion, is a totally unacceptable attitude for a trustee, whose duty it was to see that the trust funds were invested properly, to take.

He said, in paragraph 26, that he was not aware of the reputation of National
Registries, but he believed its role as an independent paying agent led him to believe that the capital invested in ECCC Preference Shares "was secure and that the security documents for the capital return would be held by National
Registries until maturity or redemption of the preference shares". He advanced no reason for any such belief, and his lack of knowledge of National
Registries negates in my view his entitlement to hold it, bearing in mind the duties of a trustee.

He continued, in paragraph 27:- "If I had been verbally informed by National Registries, Minter Ellison or the Trust Manager that the correct security for the investors' capital, as required in the Subscription Agreement and in ECCCL's Information Memorandum, was not being obtained and delivered to National Registries, I would have requested that this information be put in writing, with relevant documents, for the Trustee to consider. I would also have re-read the material on ECCCL held by the Trustee. It was important to me that the investors were in fact obtaining the security promised for their investment and that it was held in safe custody." 
Once again Mr Grimshaw was taking the attitude that he would not seek to find out if things had been attended to properly, but rather he would await information from those, who and which had failed to act properly to advise him.

In paragraphs 28 and 29 he opined that on receipt of such correspondence and documents he would have discussed the matter with Mr Jenkins, who was the company's solicitor and worked in the corporate trust area, and shown him the correspondence and documents and:- "28. It would have been my recommendation that Perpetual seek external legal advice. To do so, I would have called Michael O'Connor and made that recommendation. If Michael had agreed and suggested that we instruct local solicitors, I would have briefed Parker & Parker as they were used by Perpetual for various matters. . I would have instructed Parker & Parker to advise on what position the Trustee should take, and specifically whether the Trustee should immediately recover the subscription moneys." 
Pausing at that point it is clear that had Mr Grimshaw been made aware of the matters to which he referred he would have taken some action, which could only have led, in my opinion, to the failure by ECCC to provide and the failure by
Minter Ellison to obtain Deposit Certificates being exposed. That would have led to the conclusion that there had been breaches of the Subscription
Agreement, and that there had been breaches by Minter Ellison of their obligation to pay over the moneys conformably with their trust and agency obligations.

Mr Grimshaw continued:- "30. I would not have permitted the Trustee to sign any more Subscriptions Agreements until I had received advice that the security acquired by ECCCL for investors matched the security promised to the investors. If the advice received was that the security documents were not those required in the Information Memorandum and Subscription Agreements and that ECCCL was in breach of those Agreements, then subject to contrary advice I would have demanded from ECCCL repayment of the Subscription Moneys. I would not have permitted the Trustee to make any further investments in ECCCL.
 . At no stage did I see what purported to be a `certificate of deposit' in relation to investments in ECCCL preference shares. After signing the Subscription Agreements and associated documents, the next step for the Trustee was the receipt by it of a letter from Minter Ellison enclosing a copy of the share certificate and a counterpart Subscription Agreement ..." 
All these statements make it very difficult to understand why Mr Grimshaw did not make the most rudimentary enquiries to satisfy himself that Deposit
Certificates had been sighted and handed over. He seems to have proceeded on the basis that having been told nothing about those matters, there was no duty on him to enquire. In my opinion, this was a totally wrong basis on which PTWA and PT should have proceeded given the duty they accepted.

He said these documents were held in safe custody. Thereafter he dealt with the transfers from Excelsior to FlexiPlan and the circumstances leading up to the entry into the Deeds Poll. He was particularly concerned with the identity of the Prime Bank and in paragraph 53 he said:- "At no point did I have any reason to believe that any party involved in the transaction, including National Registries, would not or might not undertake its obligations. I relied upon National Registries to perform its obligations in keeping the security issued by the Prime Bank in safe custody for the benefit of preference shareholders pending maturity or redemption." 
There was an air of unreality about much of Mr Grimshaw's evidence. I have already referred to the duty of the trustee, which Mr Heydon accepted. What Mr
Grimshaw was saying was that he was allowing money deposited with PTWA and PT to be paid over to Minter Ellison, on the basis that Minter Ellison and other parties would carry out a number of steps, yet he was taking no action to ensure either that the steps were carried out or to receive credible confirmation that they had been. He was simply acting on beliefs as to what he thought would happen, to which I would add "assuming that everything was done correctly". He had absolutely no rational basis for making any such assumptions. A moment's consideration of the information he did receive from
Minter Ellison would have put him on notice that they were neither writing to
PTWA or PT as their agents, nor were they confirming, in any way, that conforming Deposit Certificates had been received.

In paragraph 55 he said that at all times he believed that the ECCC Preference
Share transactions had been properly effected, that the correct security documents were procured by using subscription moneys, and that the securities were held in safe custody by National Registries. He provided no evidence of any basis for this belief and concluded:- "This belief and understanding to this effect was confirmed by the letters received from Minter Ellison and the fact that I was not informed to the contrary." 
This, if I might say so with respect, is an extraordinary statement. He proffered no reason for his asserted beliefs and he sought to obtain some comfort from the letters from Minter Ellison, which were written on the instructions of ECCC and made no reference to the Deposit Certificates. His reliance upon the fact that he was not informed to the contrary is equally difficult to accept. If parties are not acting conformably with agreements they are hardly likely to inform the trustee of that fact.

In cross-examination Mr Grimshaw was somewhat hesitant and before he answered a number of questions, which at least prima facie seemed to be without complexity, there were lengthy delays. I gained the distinct impression that he appreciated that in relation to many matters he was seeking to defend the indefensible, which I am satisfied was a correct understanding. He was cross- examined, firstly, by Mr Pembroke, who ascertained that he took over responsibility for the relevant trusts in late May or early June 1993 in consequence of Mr Thorne's impending retirement. Mr Grimshaw felt justified in assuming that Mr Thorne and the officers responsible to him had subjected the relevant documentation to careful scrutiny, and he said that in so far as his signature was on the Subscription Agreement of 4 May 1993 he signed the document as attorney, although, at that time, he did not have any responsibility over Mr Thorne. He said that the policy was that officers of
Perpetual could execute a document as an attorney, provided the person responsible had approved that execution and without knowing, necessarily, the details.

After Mr Grimshaw took over responsibility he looked at the documentation to obtain "an overall understanding of what the investment product was" because it appeared to him different from the normal "run of the mill documentation", but he took comfort from the fact that others had approved it. He clearly did not understand what a Deposit Certificate was, although I think he understood its general significance, and he did not call for the Paying Agency Agreement.
His failure to take those steps was inexcusable. The person controlling the matter, from PTWA's and PT's point of view, did not know what he was supposed to be doing. This may seem a harsh statement, but the evidence shows that it is justified, and the defences PTWA and PT have raised require me to make it, satisfied as I am that it is wholly justified.

He said he did not consider whether Minter Ellison had a conflict of interest, that being a matter which did not occur to him, in itself a somewhat remarkable statement. He did not put the Subscription Agreement "under the microscope", but only read it from the viewpoint of familiarising himself with the overall scope of the product and how it was structured. He did this because, to his mind, the trustee's obligation to scrutinise the agreement to satisfy itself that it was in the interests of the beneficiaries of the various Plans had been undertaken already. Apparently it did not occur to him that as he was now assuming control he should satisfy himself. He did not recall whether clause 3.4 "stood out or I considered it in any special way".
He agreed that if he had read Schedule 4 to the Subscription Agreement he did not attach any particular significance to its terms and, in particular, to the last sentence.

He said that he had not had any experience of negotiable Certificates of
Deposits, and he only had a broad idea of what such an instrument represented.
However, he understood:- ".. that it was of vital importance to the security of the investment and I understood that that certificate was required to be obtained and required to be lodged." 
One may be forgiven for thinking that in these circumstances he had a clear obligation to satisfy himself that he knew what form such a document should take, so that he could be aware whether ECCC was fulfilling its obligation to provide the Deposit Certificate.

Accordingly, and notwithstanding that Mr Grimshaw only took over the matter after the documentation had been scrutinised initially, he appreciated the essential significance of the Deposit Certificate to the security of the investment. This, in my opinion, made it essential that he satisfied himself in an appropriate way that such documents were being obtained from ECCC and lodged with National Registries. However, it was clear that Mr Grimshaw was not certain of the terms of such a document although he said he thought he would probably have recognised it "for what it was by reading it". He agreed he had not seen one before, but he had seen negotiable instruments such as
Bills of Exchange, Letters of Credit "and that type of instruments before". It gives me little pleasure to say that Mr Grimshaw was neither competent to, nor did he seek to make himself competent to, control this trust, but I am satisfied that is the fact.

Mr Grimshaw was shown the document dated 1 June 1993 from Dresdner, after being shown the definition of "Deposit Certificate" in the Subscription
Agreement, and was asked whether, had he seen a copy of that document, he would have formed the view that it complied with the definition. He said he would have sought advice or confirmation as to compliance from PTWA's internal legal officers. He gave his reason thus:- "A. Well, because myself, because of my lack of experience with, obviously, deposit certificates as such, I certainly on looking at this, wouldn't have been prepared personally to have taken that view that this complied. It may or may not. I wouldn't have known. I would have sought advice on that": Tp.86. 
This threw up the stark question as to why he did not call for a Deposit
Certificate so that he could obtain advice whether it was a conforming document.

The position thus was that the person put in charge of the matter after Mr
Thorne's resignation conceded that he would not have been able to recognise the document, which he had said earlier he regarded as of vital importance to the security of the investment.

Mr Grimshaw did not return to the Subscription Agreement, save for one specific occasion, and he did not have it considered by Messrs Parker &
Parker for review and advice. It never occurred to him that PTWA should appoint independent solicitors or agents to represent it at completion, nor an officer of the Perpetual Group in Melbourne to attend at any settlement, because Minter Ellison was acting "as our agent".

Mr Grimshaw said that he would imagine that he had the power to renegotiate the terms of the Subscription Agreement and:- "Q. Any assurance that you may have felt about the involvement of Minter Ellison was in circumstances, was it not, that, firstly, someone before you within the company had approved the transaction or the form of it? 
A. Correct.

Q. Secondly, in circumstances where, as far as you could see, there was no conflict in Minter Ellison's role? 
A. I didn't consider the matter of conflict.

Q. Thirdly, in circumstances where, from your perspective, you didn't attach any particular significance to the terms of clause 3.4 or the terms of Schedule 4 in the agreements? 
A. Correct": Tp.88. 
At Tp.89 he said his view was that it was important to ensure that the terms of the Subscription Agreements were complied with and, at Tp.90:- "Q. If someone told you, or you became aware, that in some respects relating to the provision of the underlying security there had been a failure to comply with the precise requirements of the agreement, the first thing you would have done, I suppose, was to insist on performance of the agreement in accordance with its terms? 
A. Yes. If I had been aware that something wasn't happening, or hadn't happened, as required, that would have immediately raised alarm bells.

Q. Not only would it have raised alarm bells, but your immediate reaction would have been to say that what was not done in accordance with the agreement should be done in accordance with the agreement? 
A. Exactly, and find out why it wasn't done and what lay behind it.

Q. To be more precise, if someone told you that an instrument had been delivered to the Paying Agent which was not precisely in accordance with the requirements of the agreement, your reaction would have been to say that the correct instrument should be provided? 
A. Yes, well, my - yes.

Q. And you would have communicated that immediately to the relevant party? 
A. Certainly.

Q. To ECCCL? 
A. Certainly.

HIS HONOUR: Q. To anyone else? 
A. Yes. I would have spoken internally within Perpetual and if it was just conveyed to me verbally initially I would have asked for something in writing to establish exactly what was going on, and then it would unfold, depending on what we found. It might even involve us going and seeking outside advice." 
This evidence made it clear that if Mr Grimshaw had become aware of the problem he would have taken action and, subsequently, at Tp.90, he said that ultimately instructions would have come from the Sydney office, and he agreed that throughout the time that he was primarily responsible for the investment moneys in these trusts from about May 1993 to December 1995 there was no system in place for ensuring that he received, or requested, any direct confirmation that a Deposit Certificate had been lodged with National
Registries. There was no communication between PTWA and PT and National
Registries in relation to the existence or form of the Deposit Certificate, and there was no communication between PTWA and PT and Minter Ellison dealing with those matters. He said it never occurred to him to request a copy of the
Deposit Certificate, and there was no system for undertaking any form of follow up check, either immediately after settlement or at periodic intervals thereafter, to ensure that the existence and form of the Deposit Certificate complied with the Subscription Agreement, or to ascertain where it was. He was unaware that the form of security changed from an instrument issued by
Dresdner to one issued by Westpac and later one issued by NatWest. He was also unaware that after he executed the Deeds Poll in September 1994 the money, which was released from Dresdner, was used as part of the working capital of the ECCC Group of companies. He said he did not have any idea that after four months the money was reinvested and the instruments were issued by Westpac, and:- "Q. For all you know, the moneys could have been swimming around anywhere in the world during that period? 
A. I wasn't aware.

HIS HONOUR: Q. So far as you were aware, was anybody in your company aware as to what was happening? 
A. To my knowledge no.

Q. Does that strike you as a little odd? 
A. Well, I had taken comfort from the fact that Minter Ellison had been involved, and was involved, as an integral part of the particular investment. We had received the Share Certificates via Minter Ellison to confirm the allocation of shareholdings following each buy. I had taken comfort from the fact that we had received those certificates via Minter Ellison, and relied on the basis that we had got the certificates and that all things had been done in accordance with the requirements. As to what happened later on with the movement of the funds, I just can't respond to that because I wasn't aware of what was going on.

Q. That was what led to my question as to whether, so far as you were aware, anyone in your company was aware as to what was going on. I think you said not so far as you were aware? 
A. Well, as far as I was aware, no one knew what was going on within the company. 
Q. That then led to the next question I asked you: whether that seemed a little odd to you, that no one knew what was happening to the money? 
A. Now that I know what has happened, I think it was odd that someone hadn't informed us.

Q. You do not need the benefit of 20/20 hindsight for it to be appear odd, do you? 
A. I don't really know how to answer that, your Honour.

Q. What is the problem? It's a fairly simple question, or is it just one incapable of any rational answer? 
A. Well, I mean, it is certainly odd that we didn't know what was going on": Tpp.91-92. 
In my opinion, it was more than odd. It was the result of a total failure by
PTWA and PT to take the most elementary steps to perform the trustee duties with which they were charged and for the purported performance of which they were paid a fee.

Mr Pembroke referred Mr Grimshaw to the Deeds Poll and put to him that it was obvious that their provisions did not provide protection against the misappropriation of the money that was to be released by Dresdner to ECCC. He said that was obvious in hindsight, but he did not notice it at the time nor take legal advice. He said, Tp.93:- "Q. Do you agree, in hindsight, that the oversight which you made in relation to that matter was a failure by you to exercise the diligence and vigilance which the beneficiaries were entitled to expect from Perpetual Trustee company? 
A. In hindsight, probably, yes." 
Mr Grimshaw said he did not regard the three to four weeks' delay in obtaining the first notification of the first settlement as "extraordinary". He was then taken to the letters from Minter Ellison and he agreed that they did not specifically mention the Deposit Certificates, and that "it is not mentioned in the letter". It was put to him that was obvious when he read the letter, to which he replied that it was not mentioned in the letter. The question was put to him again to which he gave the somewhat evasive answer:- "I don't know whether I was expecting anything specifically in the letter about the Certificates of Deposit." 
The question was put to him a third time and he replied:- "It just wasn't a question in my mind. I mean, I know the letter does not mention the Certificates of Deposit. I'm not too sure exactly how you are wanting me to answer this but I wasn't thinking ..

PEMBROKE: Q. Can I stop you and ask you another question that perhaps might help you? 
A. Yes.

Q. If you turned your mind carefully to the terms of the letter when you received it, and you may not have for various reasons, but if you did do that, it would have been obvious to you, would it not, that the letter was telling you nothing about the Certificate of Deposit? 
A. No, the letter told me nothing about the Certificate of Deposit.

Q. And that was the attitude and understanding which you had when you received each of those letters from Minter Ellison? 
A. When I received the certificates I was under the understanding at that point that all other matters leading up to the provision of those certificates would have been attended to.

Q. That was an assumption which you made, wasn't it? 
A. It was my understanding.

Q. And your understanding was based upon an assumption? 
A. It was based upon my understanding of the process involved.

Q. But the letter did not tell you the information which formed the basis of your assumption, did it? 
A. It didn't, but it didn't either exclude the fact that it didn't include it.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Does that mean then that you just didn't know, one way or the other, what the situation was about the Certificate of Deposit? 
A. I was under the understanding that, with Minter Ellison acting as our agent, as part of the processes, they would have dealt with the matter. It would have been attended to in accordance with the requirements, and the issuing of the certificate - or the Share Certificate - was via Minter Ellison, which would have been confirmation of the fact that all other requirements required under the terms of the Subscription Agreement would have been dealt with.

Q. But there was no certification from Minter Ellison that they had seen a Certificate of Deposit. Correct? 
A. No.

Q. There was no certification from Minter Ellison that the Certificate of Deposit was in proper form. Correct? 
A. Correct.

Q. As Mr Pembroke has put to you now, on a number of occasions, there was no mention by Minter Ellison of the Certificate of Deposit at all? 
A. That's correct": Tpp.94-95. 
Mr Grimshaw agreed that Minter Ellison were stating that they were acting on instructions from ECCC, but he relied on the fact that there was no reference that Minter Ellison had not seen the Deposit Certificate. He agreed the letter from Minter Ellison was not "an independent certification by them of anything" and:- "Q. Do you recognise now, in hindsight, that following each of the settlements, you ought to have taken steps to satisfy yourself, on behalf of the beneficiaries of Perpetual, that the form of security required under the Agreement had, in fact, been provided and delivered to the Paying Agent? 
A. No, I believe it was reasonable for me to rely on Minter Ellison, because the funds were provided to Minter Ellison for disbursement, and they were provided in accordance with the requirements of the Subscription Agreement, and, in my view, Minter Ellison, being an integral part in the set-up of this particular investment, I believe it was appropriate for me to place reliance on a firm with some obvious standing, legal standing": Tp.95. 
At Tp.96 Mr Grimshaw agreed that in placing reliance on Minter Ellison he had not taken into account clause 3.4 or any question of conflict of interest, and that he had relied on Mr Thorne's having previously approved the scheme and:- "Q. So, the assurance which you had was a very warm, loosely formed, assurance wasn't it? 
A. Well, it was the assurance of Minter Ellison being involved. That was the assurance.

Q. That's all it was. It's involvement? 
A. Yes." 
I have referred to the fact that the beliefs and assumptions to which Mr
Grimshaw referred in his statement were, generally speaking, unsupported by any factual material. The answers to which I have just referred indicate that the only basis for any such belief or assumption was the involvement of Minter
Ellison in the context of all the evidence Mr Grimshaw had given to that point. He continued that it did not occur to him to respond to the letters from Minter Ellison by asking them to advise what they had done on settlement or completion for PTWA or PT, and he said that the fact that Minter Ellison did not render fees to PTWA and PT did not cause him to think that they were not providing any legal services to them. He said he did not think of it.

At Tp.98 Mr Grimshaw said he was aware that Minter Ellison were the solicitors for ECCC, but that it did not cross his mind that there was a conflict arising out of that role. He said his belief that the assets of the trust were secure arose because he believed he was implementing settlements pursuant to a scheme or transaction which had been approved already. He accepted the analogy that it was like a sausage machine being processed, and that it did not require the exercise of independent judgment in relation to the terms of the scheme or the constituent documents. This was an extraordinary concession. He, as the representative of trustee companies which had undertaken to act in a trustee capacity and to invest money in accordance with certain agreements, treated the matter as nothing more than a mechanical process, which required no independent thought, consideration or verification by him or, so far as he knew, any other representative of PTWA or PT. In my opinion, it is difficult to conceive of a more gross dereliction of duty by a trustee, which either alone or in combination with the admitted breaches and negligence of Minter
Ellison has caused a number of people, including the plaintiffs, to suffer serious financial loss.

In my opinion, having regard to the test Mr Heydon accepted which a prudent trustee should meet, the evidence of Mr Grimshaw, thus far, was totally unsatisfactory. He was not endeavouring, in any way, to oversee the transactions or to satisfy himself that the documents, which he appreciated were vital for the security of the transaction, were obtained. He had no regard to the possibility of a conflict of interest and he made no enquiries to confirm that the Deposit Certificates had been received. This was notwithstanding the failure by Minter Ellison to advise PTWA and PT that this had occurred.

He was cross-examined nextly by Mr Downes. He agreed he knew nothing of the reputation of National Registries, save what he learnt from its name. On being pressed he said that all he could say was that he did not know the company.
This emphasised his lack of concern for what was happening.

At Tp.103 Mr Downes put to Mr Grimshaw that he had never read the Subscription
Agreement with sufficient detail to form a view as to precisely what was required as a Deposit Certificate. Mr Grimshaw gave a non-responsive answer, which I directed be struck out. The question was re-read and Mr Grimshaw replied "Correct". This underscored what I said earlier, viz that Mr Grimshaw did not know what the trustees or their agents were supposed to be doing.
Accordingly, Mr Grimshaw conceded, as I think he had conceded earlier to Mr
Pembroke, that he was not aware of what was required. None-the-less, this left
PTWA and PT in the situation where the officer in charge of the matter was unaware, at least from a reading of the Subscription Agreement, of the requirements for the vital Deposit Certificate. He was shown a document, which was not a Bearer Certificate of Deposit. He said he would not have been prepared to accept that as he would have required it to be confirmed by someone else. He also said that he would have required the one genuine Bearer
Certificate of Deposit in evidence, which had nothing to do with the present case, to be considered by someone else. He did say that if the Deposit
Certificates had been sent to him by Minter Ellison, and if Minter Ellison had said that they were Deposit Certificates "then I would have, in all probability, relied on Minter Ellison": Tp.105. He continued:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. Does that mean, Mr Grimshaw, that had you received documents purporting to be Certificates of Deposit, you would have required them to be checked out by someone? 
A. That's correct.

Q. That means, does it not, that it was important in your mind to make sure that the documents you received were Certificates of Deposit? 
A. Correct.

Q. Yet your company never received a Certificate of Deposit? 
A. Correct.

Q. Nor did it ever receive confirmation from National Registries that it had received a Certificate of Deposit? 
A. Correct.

Q. Nor did it ever ask National Registries to check that the documents, if any, that National Registries had received conformed with the Agreement? 
A. Correct.

Q. Nor did it ever ask Minter Ellison if the documents conformed with the Subscription Agreement? 
A. Correct": Tp.105. 
Whilst I accept this evidence, I considered it bordered on the unbelievable in the sense that it indicated, as clearly as could be, that Mr Grimshaw never took any steps to either see a Deposit Certificate and, if he had, to have it checked; nor did he ever seek any confirmation that a Deposit Certificate had been received.

At Tp.106 he gave the following evidence:- "Q. If someone had told you that the Certificate of Deposit for the first transaction was in a form which was not correct, that the Certificate of Deposit should be in another form, would you have got in touch with ECCCL or Minter Ellison? 
A. I suppose it depends on who I was informed from. If I was informed - I don't know. Possibly Minter Ellison.

Q. Wouldn't you have said: `Look, the wrong Certificate of Deposit has been issued. Please fix it up with the correct Certificate of Deposit straightaway'? 
A. Certainly action would have been taken.

Q. And that's the action that would have been taken, isn't it? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Assuming that it had been fixed up promptly, that would have been an end to the matter? 
A. Yes." 
Mr Downes and Mr Pembroke relied very heavily upon the evidence I have quoted from Tp.90 and this piece of evidence. They submitted that the proper inference to draw was that if PTWA or PT had been advised that the correct
Deposit Certificates had not been issued they would have taken action to have the matter rectified and, if it had been "fixed up promptly" "that would have been an end to the matter". The reason for this submission was to seek to establish that even if the problem had been exposed PTWA and PT would have required it to be "fixed up" and would not have advised the investors.

It is by no means clear what "the matter" was in that question. I think a fair reading of it indicates that, at most, it would have solved a problem in relation to that particular incident. However, the cross-examination did not grapple with the statement by Mr Grimshaw, in paragraph 30, that if there had been a breach and subject to contrary advice he would have demanded repayment from ECCC of the Subscription Moneys, nor with his statement that he would not have permitted PTWA and PT to make any further investments in ECCC. Nor, in my opinion, did it confront the evidence he had given earlier that in the event of a non-conforming certificate it would have been necessary to take final instructions from Sydney office, or the evidence of Mr O'Connor that he should be kept informed. In so far as the answer to the last question is relied on I have difficulty in accepting it as an accurate statement by Mr Grimshaw. In my opinion Mr Grimshaw never directed his attention to ensuring that the transaction was carried out in accordance with the Subscription Agreement. He was unaware of what was required pursuant to it, and he had put in place no steps whereby PTWA or PT could be in any way assured that the requirements of the Subscription Agreement had been met. It was obvious from his evidence that if he had perceived any problems, he would have referred it to other people in
PTWA and/or PT, and, thereafter, possibly to outside advisers. In all these circumstances, and having regard to the vagueness and uncertainty of Mr
Grimshaw's evidence and understanding of what was happening, I do not accept that his answer to that question represents an accurate response.

Mr Grimshaw agreed with Mr Downes that his concern, at the time of the execution of the Deeds Poll, was to ensure that the investments had the same or better backing than they had with Dresdner. He said he did not concern himself with the possibility of a fraudulent misappropriation by ECCC, and that he appreciated that the execution of the Deeds Poll allowed it to withdraw the money from wherever it was deposited, a provision upon which he insisted.

The Evidence Of Mr Thorne 
The witness statement of Mr Michael Stuart Thorne dated 11 September 1998 became Exhibit 3&4D 2. Mr Thorne was employed by PTWA from April 1992 to
June 1993 as Corporate Trust Manager. He had the initial responsibility for the subject trusts and, whilst it was his usual practice to read documents relating to new investment proposals to obtain a general understanding and then allocate them to one of his staff for a detailed reading, his usual procedure was to obtain from his staff a detailed analysis of the investment before executing the relevant documents. He said that if any issues of a legal nature arose from his general review of the investment proposal or the detailed review by his staff member, it was his usual practice to seek legal advice from Messrs Parker & Parker. He then said how he had considered the various proposals. He considered the ECCC Investment Proposal and the fact that the investment was for a ten year period, which he said was of particular importance given the frequent need of members for access to superannuation and other funds. It was therefore of concern to him that the capital would be "locked away" for that period and he took some time considering the proposed agreement between ECCC and PTWA on partial early redemptions, as he wanted to be sure that the terms upon which members of the Plan could obtain partial early redemption were satisfactory. He considered ECCC's business was speculative and he would not have approved the Manager's proposal without the presence of the capital guarantee offered by the "AAA" bank security. He referred the matter to one of his staff, Mr Brendan Whiteley, and he instructed Messrs Parker & Parker to advise on the proposed agreement for partial early redemption of ECCC shares.

It is quite obvious that the matter causing Mr Thorne concern was the ability to make early redemption and, more generally, he was interested in the superannuation aspects of the transaction.

In relation to the transaction in early May 1993 Mr Thorne said he could not recall whether he read the Subscription Agreement in any detail when he signed it, because it was his usual practice to have such documents read in detail by a member of his staff "to ensure that it accorded with the investment proposal approved by the Trustee". He said, however, he had a general understanding of how the transaction would proceed, and he recalled that he understood that the security documents would be acquired from the Subscription Moneys and deposited with National Registries and that PTWA would receive share scrip in return.

He referred to the letter from Minter Ellison of 17 June 1993, but said that he could not recall receiving any other communication relating to the transaction. He added:- "If the transaction could not be effected properly I would have expected, based on my experience with solicitors acting for the Trustee, that it not proceed." 
In paragraph 52 he set forth a number of assumptions he was asked to make, the principal one being that he had been informed by either Minter Ellison or
National Registries that the Deposit Certificate did not conform with the definition thereof in the Subscription Agreement and, in effect, that ECCC had not, in consequence thereof, deposited with National Registries the security document in the form required by that Agreement and the Paying Agency
Agreement and, therefore, was in breach of the former. He was also asked to assume that Minter Ellison provided him with copies of documents being letters from Dresdner to ECCC dated 4 May 1993 and 1 June 1993. He said that it is likely, in those circumstances, i.e. that Minter Ellison provided those letters to him, that he would have asked for copies of them. He said, in paragraph 54, that if he had been provided with that information and those documents he would have re-read the Subscription Agreement and the ECCC
Information Memorandum relating to the Deposit Certificate and:- "It was vital that the security represented to investors was in place. If any doubts had arisen regarding the terms of the deposit certificates, I would immediately have instructed Andrew Shearwood of Parker & Parker to advise the trustee on: whether either of the Dresdner letters was a deposit certificate within the meaning of the Information Memorandum and the Subscription Agreement of 4 May 1993; and if they were not, what steps the trustee should take." 
He said he would have acted on the advice of Messrs Parker & Parker and, until he had received it, he would not have permitted PTWA to enter into any further Subscription Agreements with ECCC. He continued, in paragraph 56:- "If the Parker & Parker advice was that the Dresdner letters were not deposit certificates as required under the Subscription Agreement, I would have formed the view that the central feature of the ECCCL investment scheme was not present and, subject to any strong contrary advice from Parker & Parker, would have sought to recover the subscription moneys in full from ECCCL. In those circumstances, I would not have permitted the trustee to invest any further trust moneys in ECCCL preference shares." 
In cross-examination, at Tp.114, Mr Thorne made it clear that he was more concerned about the superannuation side of the investment and that it was Mr
Whiteley who became involved in the minutiae of the transaction. Mr Thorne said that when he signed off on the transaction he really had no idea what part National Registries was to play, and he was not provided with, and so far as he was aware PTWA and PT were never provided with, a copy of the Paying
Agency Agreement. He agreed, in relation to the various assumptions he was asked to make, that at the time when the events the subject of the assumptions occurred he was no longer involved, Mr Grimshaw being the appropriate officer.
However, it seems to me, that it is not inappropriate for Mr Thorne to have expressed an opinion, as an officer of the trustee, of the steps he would have taken had he still been the appropriate officer for the purpose of determining whether the actions of the trustees were, in all the circumstances, reasonable.

In my opinion the evidence of Mr Thorne shores up the view to which I have come that the appropriate action by the trustees was to obtain, at the least, confirmation that Deposit Certificates had been obtained and, if there was any doubt about their validity as securing the investment to have obtained legal advice.

I am also of the opinion that there can be little doubt that responsible legal advice, which I am prepared to assume Messrs Parker & Parker would have furnished, would have indicated to PTWA and PT that the documents were not
Deposit Certificates in accordance with the Subscription Agreements and did not provide the essential security to which the investors were entitled. There was no evidence that anyone came to a contrary view. In these circumstances it seems to me highly probable that Mr Thorne, if he had been the decision-maker, would have taken the course to which he referred. Indeed he was not challenged on that point. It also seems to me that the taking of that course would have been consistent with the duty of the trustees, which duty Mr Heydon accepted.

Further Evidence On Behalf Of PTWA And PT 
Witness statements were tendered on behalf of PTWA and PT, being of Mr Michael
Patrick O'Connor dated 24 September 1998: Exhibit 3&4D 3; Mr Robert Peter
Jenkins dated 15 September 1998: Exhibit 3&4D 4; Ms Robyn Armstrong dated December 1998: Exhibit 3&4D 5, and Mr Douglas Sydney Dickinson dated 18
September 1998: Exhibit 3&4D 6. None of these witnesses was required for cross-examination.

Mr O'Connor commenced working for PTWA on 3 August 1990 as Assistant General
Manager, Corporate and Legal Services, his role being the overall management of the Corporate Services Division. On 1 January 1993 he took up the position of National Superannuation Manager based in Sydney and he introduced a reporting structure, which required each of the Perpetual companies to report to Sydney on superannuation business. In about April 1993 he re-assumed direct control of the Western Australia superannuation business via this reporting process. Mr O'Connor said he was asked to make a number of assumptions, which, put shortly, were that Mr Grimshaw had been informed by a firm of solicitors or a paying agent with which the Deposit Certificate should have been deposited that the document was not a Deposit Certificate as defined by the
Subscription Agreement and, as a result, that there had not been compliance with the Subscription Agreement, such that Mr Grimshaw believed it was necessary to obtain external legal advice on the matter in relation to the rights flowing therefrom. Mr O'Connor said he would have agreed to such advice being obtained and he would have asked Mr Grimshaw to keep his immediate manager and himself informed of developments. This emphasised that Mr
Grimshaw's view, whatever it may have been, would not have concluded the matter.

Mr Jenkins was employed, at all material times, as a Company Solicitor by
PTWA. He was asked to make similar assumptions to those Mr O'Connor was asked to make and, additionally, to assume that Mr Grimshaw provided him with the
Information Memorandum dated 31 March 1993, the Subscription Agreement, the
Investment Summary and the letter from Dresdner to ECCC dated 1 June 1993. Mr
Jenkins concluded that in those circumstances "or even if I had simply been informed by Alan Grimshaw that ECCCL had failed to adhere to an obligation under the Subscription Agreement, I would have asked if Alan had spoken to his superior with a view to obtaining legal advice".

What these two statements make clear, in so far as it was not completely clear from the evidence of Mr Grimshaw and Mr Thorne, was that if PTWA and/or PT had taken any real interest in what was going on they would, in all probability, have become aware of the breach of the Subscription Agreement because of the non-conforming Deposit Certificate and would have taken legal advice. As I have said, it is difficult to imagine that the legal advice would not, at the least, have demanded that the proper certificates be obtained and, in addition, an explanation why the improper certificates had been furnished.

Ms Armstrong was, at all material times, the Supervisor of Settlements for
Dresdner and it was her responsibility to oversee the work flow in the settlements area. She set out how deposits with it in Sydney were handled and, after referring to various documents, she exhibited to her statement "a sample
Certificate of Deposit issued by Dresdner Bank AG". She said that an important part of a Deposit Certificate is that it is in bearer form and is negotiable, as a result of which the party who purchases or holds it is not named on the certificate. She said that the letters issued by Dresdner were not
Certificates of Deposit "as they were merely letters confirming ECCCL's deposits with" Dresdner.

Mr Dickinson was shown copies of two letters from Dresdner to ECCCL dated 4
May and 1 June 1993; a letter from Westpac to ECCCL dated 23 January 1995; and a letter from NatWest dated 18 September 1995. He was asked to provide an opinion, based on his experience, whether those documents met the description of Bearer Certificates of Deposit drawn against and with full recourse to the institution which issued them. He said none of them did.

Mr Heydon's Submissions 
I find it convenient, in considering whether PTWA and PT are liable, it not being suggested that there is any relevant difference between them on this question, to consider firstly the submissions of Mr Heydon. I have noted his statement as to the duties of his clients, but I think it bears repetition here. He agreed that their obligations were, in making the investment in ECCC, to exercise the degree of care that an ordinary prudent man would take if he were minded to make an investment for the benefit of other people to whom he felt morally bound to provide. The case the plaintiffs sought to make against the trustees was, firstly, that they should have perceived the conflict or potential conflict of duty on the part of Minter Ellison and, therefore, either taken the steps to which I have referred or not appointed them as their agents and, secondly, that they should have taken steps to ensure either that conforming Deposit Certificates were obtained on each settlement or, alternatively, to have been reasonably assured either by Minter Ellison or
National Registries that this had occurred. Mr Heydon further submitted that after the making of the investment there was no obligation on his clients to investigate any aspect of the investment unless put on enquiry. In so far as this may give rise to a different duty, on the facts of this case, the issue is whether, having received the letters from Minter Ellison, which stated that they were written on the instructions of ECCC and which made no mention of the
Deposit Certificates, that was sufficient, taken with the absence of any other notification to them about the Deposit Certificates, to put the trustees on enquiry. In having regard to these matters the Court must look to all the circumstances of the case and, in particular, to the form of investment being made, the security being given for it and the position of the trustee. PTWA and PT held themselves out as trustee companies, which were competent to carry on business as such for a fee. The care and skill to be expected from such trustees may well be higher.

In Australian Securities Commission versus AS Nominees Limited & Ors <case>; [(1995) 62 FCR 504] Finn J, at p.156, dealt, inter alia, with the standard of care to be expected of trustee companies and their directors in the conduct of the trust business.
His Honour accepted the test laid down in Speight versus Gaunt  <case>, and a gloss on that being the "requirement of caution". He emphasised that requirement which he said was "often enough" "used to differentiate the expectations properly to be had of trustees and of directors respectively": p.517.

His Honour emphasised, at p.517, that the requirements of care and caution are in no way diminished because the trustee is a company and, at pp.517-518, he continued:- "The standard of trustee care and caution of which I have been speaking so far does not differentiate between types of trustee. It is of general application. That standard, moreover, was settled a century ago and during a period when trust corporations were not used for the trading and investment purposes that are the commonplace in this country today. There is, in my view, a substantial question now to be answered as to whether a higher standard is not to be exacted from at least corporate or professional trustees (a) which hold themselves out as having a special or particular knowledge, skill and experience, and (b) which, directly or indirectly, invite reliance upon themselves by members of the public in virtue of the knowledge etc they appear so to have.

In Bartlett versus Barclays Trust Co Limited (No 1) [[1980] Ch 515] at 534 Brightman J was prepared to impose such a higher duty of care on a trust corporation: `a professional corporate trustee is liable for breach of trust if loss is caused to the fund because it neglects to exercise the special care and skill which it professes to have'.

This decision has been cited with apparent approval, although not in terms relied upon, by Gleeson CJ in Gill versus Eagle Star Nominees Limited (unreported, Supreme Court, NSW, Gleeson CJ, 22 September 1993). It is, in its own way, consistent with observations of the Privy Council in the Australian appeal National Trustees Co of Australasia Limited versus General Finance Co of Australasia Limited [[1905] AC 373] where the question is recognised but not answered by the Supreme Court of Canada; and see G.G. Bogert, Law of Trusts and Trustees (2nd Revised Edition 1977), paragraph 541.

If it were in fact necessary for me so to do (which it is not), I would be prepared to apply to the trustee companies in these proceedings a standard of care higher than that of the ordinary prudent business person." 
I consider that the position in this case is the same as that to which Finn J referred in the concluding paragraph.

Mr Heydon's written submissions contended that the alleged breaches of duty fell into two relevant categories, namely those occurring at or before the investment, and those occurring after it. He identified the former breaches as being the failure to ensure the deposit of Deposit Certificates with National
Registries at completion; the failure to prevent the release of funds until the lodgment of Deposit Certificates with National Registries; the failure to advise or warn of the possibility of non-lodgment of Deposit Certificates; the failure to appoint an independent agent on completion; the failure to appoint
ECCC's solicitor as agent on completion; the failure to recognise the incapability of those solicitors to act as agent by reason of conflict; and the failure to enquire of those solicitors whether they could properly act.

The submission continued that his clients did not attend personally on settlement and that, in those circumstances, they could only be liable for such alleged breaches if either they were not entitled to appoint an agent, or, if they were entitled to appoint an agent, they were responsible for the agent's default or obliged, notwithstanding such appointment, to independently perform the role of ensuring compliance or preventing breach. It was accepted that the provisions of the [Trustees Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/) of Western
Australia were applicable. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s53.html) permits a trustee to employ agents. In Jacobs "The Law of Trusts" (6th
Edition) it is stated that the power provided by the Western Australian section confers on the trustee a general power to delegate any of his powers or duties, including the receipt and payment of money, to any person, so that in Western Australia "the old principle that a trustee may not delegate has virtually disappeared": para 1730.

The authors continue:- "Ex parte Belchier and Speight versus Gaunt are examples of cases where the trustees under the previous law were entitled to employ agents and in the course of so doing to permit the agents to receive or pay moneys belonging to the trust. The similar English section" [(s.23)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s23.html) "(like those in Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia) extends the principle laid down in these cases to those occasions where the employment of an agent does not arise out of virtual necessity, because it gives to trustees power to employ agents to transact any business including the receipt and payment of money. The express words of [s.53(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s53.html) must be taken to apply to all agents other than banks, where the employment of an agent is permissible under the old rule of virtual necessity or under the extended permission given by the section." [Section (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s53.html) provides:- "A trustee shall not be chargeable with a breach of trust by reason only of his having made, or concurred in making, any appointment such as is mentioned in sub-section (3) of this section; but nothing in that sub-section exempts a trustee from any liability that he would have incurred if this Act and any enactment replaced by this Act had not been passed, where he permits any money, valuable consideration or property therein mentioned to remain in the hands or under the control of the bank or solicitor for a longer period than is reasonably necessary to enable the bank or solicitor, as the case may be, to pay or transfer it to the trustee." 
In paragraph 1713 the authors point out that the trustee must still ensure that a suitable agent, acting within the scope of his business, is employed.
In the present case it could not be suggested, I think, that save for the possible conflict of duty, Minter Ellison were not a suitable agent. However, it seems to me that if there was a conflict or potential conflict of duty or, as it was generally referred to in these proceedings, a conflict of interest, the evidence of Mr Shaw supports the view, which would accord in my respectful opinion with commonsense, that the appointment of an agent with such a conflict or potential conflict did not constitute the appointment of a suitable agent.

From this point Mr Heydon submitted that a trustee, who employs an agent, is not liable for the agent's misconduct or defaults: Speight versus Gaunt at p.4;
Bennett versus Wyndham (1862) 4 DeGI&J 259; and Fry versus Tadson [(1884) ChD 268.] 
He submitted this position was reinforced by [s.53(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s53.html) and s.[75](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s75.html) of the Act, the latter section providing:- "A trustee shall be chargeable only for money and securities actually received by him, notwithstanding his signing any receipt for the sake of conformity, and shall be answerable and accountable only for his own acts, receipts, neglects or defaults, and not for those of any other trustee, nor those of any bank, broker or other person with whom any trust money or securities may be deposited, nor for the insufficiency or deficiency of any securities, nor for any other loss, unless the insufficiency, deficiency or loss occurs through his own wilful default." 
Speight versus Gaunt confirmed the decision in Ex parte Belchier, The Earl of Selborne LC saying, at p.4:- "In the early case of Ex parte Belchier, before Lord Hardwicke, it was determined that trustees are not bound personally to transact such business connected with or arising out of the proper duties of their trust, as, according to the usual mode of conducting business of a like nature, persons acting with reasonable care and prudence on their own account would ordinarily conduct through mercantile agents; and that when, according to the usual and regular course of such business, moneys receivable or payable ought to pass through the hands of such mercantile agents, that course may properly be followed by trustees, though the moneys are trust moneys; and that if, under such circumstances, and without any other misconduct or default on the part of the trustees, a loss takes place through any fraud or neglect of the agents employed, the trustees are not liable to make good such loss." 
At p.5 his Lordship noted that this did not authorise a trustee to delegate the execution of his trusts and the care and custody of trust moneys to strangers where there was no "moral necessity for the usage of mankind" for the employment of such an agency.

The same principle was applied in Fry versus Tadson. Kay J, at p.280, said:- "Speight versus Gaunt did not lay down any new rule, but only illustrated a very old one, namely, that trustees acting according to the ordinary course of business, and employing agents as a prudent man of business would do on his own behalf, are not liable for the default of an agent so employed. But an obvious limitation to that rule is that the agent must not be employed out of the ordinary scope of his business. If the trustee employs an agent to do that which is not the ordinary business of such an agent, and he performs that unusual duty improperly, and loss is thereby occasioned, the trustee would not be exonerated." 
It seemed to be accepted by Mr Martin that it was not inappropriate for PTWA and PT to appoint an agent to carry out the settlement, although this was questioned by Mr Shaw, who could not understand why the trustees did not attend on settlement. Even accepting Mr Martin's implied concession, a question is what the duty of the trustees would have been if their own officers had attended on settlement. I consider that paramount obligations would have been to be aware of the documents, which should have been received or sighted on settlement, and to have ensured that conforming Deposit
Certificates were received, or if not received, were sighted and forwarded to
National Registries. If these were the obligations of the trustees if they had attended personally on settlement, it does not seem to me that they can deny that in appointing an agent it was part of their duty, in exercising the degree of care to which I have referred, to receive a firm assurance from the agent that the agent had sighted or received such a Deposit Certificate, and confirmation from National Registries that it had received the Deposit
Certificate. By taking these two steps the trustees would have, at least arguably, satisfied themselves that the critical security documents had been both received and lodged for safe keeping conformably with and on the terms provided for in the Paying Agency Agreement. In the present case PTWA and PT received no assurance from Minter Ellison that they had received any Deposit
Certificate, let alone a conforming one, or that such certificate had been sent to National Registries. Nor did they receive any assurance, (or indeed any communication), from National Registries that such a certificate had been received. In saying that the trustees received no such assurance I include that the trustees did not actually seek any. They contented themselves with sending off the investors' money and receiving, in due course, the counterpart
Subscription Agreements and the share certificates. They did not seek any confirmation that the vital security provision had been put in place.

Mr Heydon submitted that it followed that PTWA and PT sufficiently discharged their duties by employing an agent and, accordingly, were not liable for the misconduct or defaults of the agent unless guilty of "wilful default". In regard to "wilful default" he relied on the decision of Maugham J in Re
Vickery. Vickery versus Stephens [[1931] 1 Ch 572.] The facts in that case were that an executor employed a solicitor to get in the trust assets. There was some suggestion that the solicitor was not a satisfactory solicitor. In the end the solicitor misappropriated the trust funds. Section of the English [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/) was in similar terms to [s.53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/s53.html) in so far as it allowed for the appointment of an agent. [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/s30.html) was in the same terms as s.70.

His Lordship, at p.581, noted that the trustee was no longer required to do any actual work himself, but may employ an agent whether there is any real necessity to do so or not. He added:- "No doubt he should use his discretion in selecting an agent, and should employ him only to do acts within the scope of the usual business of the agent; but, as will be seen, a question arises whether even in these respects he is personally liable for a loss due to the employment of the agent unless he has been guilty of wilful default." 
At p.582 his Lordship commenced his consideration of [s.30(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/s30.html)
After referring to its history and the phrase incorporating the words "his own wilful default", he said:- "To avoid misconception I wish to say that, having regard to the numerous decisions since the enactment of Lord Cranworth's Act in relation to the liability of trustees for innocent breaches of trust, it is impossible now to hold that the words `for any other loss' are quite general, with the result that no trustee is ever liable for breach of trust unless the breach is occasioned by his own wilful default. In my opinion the words are confined to losses for which it is sought to make the trustee liable occasioned by his signing receipts for the sake of conformity or by reason of the wrongful acts or defaults of another trustee or of an agent with whom trust money or securities have been deposited, or for the insufficiency or deficiency of securities or some other analogous loss." 
It was accepted by the parties, as I understand the submissions, that PTWA and
PT were not liable for the acts of Minter Ellison, acting as their agent, unless the trustees were guilty of "wilful default". In his submissions Mr
Heydon stated that wilful default required either a conscious appreciation of breach or recklessness and that neither had been pleaded nor proved. He submitted that in particular it had neither been pleaded nor proved that PTWA and PT were guilty of wilful default in the appointment or supervision of
Minter Ellison as agent.

The plaintiffs' case against PTWA and PT had been opened on the basis that
Minter Ellison should not have been appointed as agent. The amendments incorporated in the Second Further Amended Summons also referred to the inappropriateness, in various ways, of the appointment. Further, the issue of appointing an agent where there was a potential conflict of duty or interest was the subject of evidence and, in my opinion, was clearly joined by the parties: Dare versus Pulham <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 658.] 
It was nextly submitted by Mr Heydon that if PTWA and PT were aware that there would not be compliance with the Subscription Agreement they had a duty not to proceed with it, rather than a duty to advise or warn. The submission continued that no such awareness had been alleged or proved. The particulars in relation to the Deposit Certificates and the issues propounded relating to their conforming to the Subscription Agreement were defined in the pleadings.
In his opening oral submissions, Mr Martin submitted that on settlement a prudent trustee would have taken steps to see that settlement was carried out in accordance with the contractual documents, and sought confirmation that that had happened. He further submitted that the trustees should have sought confirmation from National Registries that Deposit Certificates had been received, and that the first and only communication between Minter Ellison and
PTWA in relation to the first settlement was the letter dated 17 June 1993. Mr
Martin submitted that on reading it a prudent trustee would not have been satisfied that the Deposit Certificate was lodged with National Registries as there was no reference to it and that that should have put PTWA on notice. In the same vein he submitted that PTWA should also have sought confirmation from
National Registries that it had received the Deposit Certificate. No objection was taken to any part of this opening and I am satisfied that the case was fought on these bases. I refer to these various matters because of the submissions by Mr Heydon that certain matters were not pleaded. So far as the defences are concerned they raised factual issues that the trustees had been discharged of any duty or obligation for reasons to which I shall refer.
Further it was pleaded that Minter Ellison were employed as the trustees' agent and that, in so far as the breaches of trust arose out of their default, the trustees had employed Minter Ellison in good faith and were not responsible for any default either by reason of [s.53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s53.html) or s.[75](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s75.html) of the [Trustees Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/). These assertions necessarily raised the issue of wilful default. In the result I am satisfied that the issues propounded were sufficiently pleaded and, in so far as they may be thought by others not to have been, they were fought at the hearing on both a factual and legal basis.

In Re Vickery at p.584 Maugham J said that the trustee will not be liable for loss occasioned by the misconduct of the agent:- ".. unless the loss happens through the wilful default of the executor, using those words as implying, as the Court of Appeal have decided, either a consciousness of negligence or breach of duty, or a recklessness in the performance of a duty." 
On the same page his Lordship warned against judging the conduct of a trustee "in the light of subsequent events".

In Re Lucking's Will Trusts. Renwick versus Lucking & Anor [[1968] 1 WLR ],
Cross J noted what was said in Re Vickery, but did not consider that "wilful default" was relevant to that case. His Lordship was of the view that the conduct of the trustees was to be judged by the standard applied in
Speight versus Gaunt namely:- ".. that a trustee is only bound to conduct the business of the trust in such a way as an ordinary prudent man would conduct a business of his own": p.874. 
The decision in Re Vickery has been subjected to some criticism. Before turning to that I shall consider two authorities in this State. In Perpetual
Trustee Co versus Watson (No 2) <case>; [(1927) 28 SR 43]
Harvey CJinEq considered whether trustees were, in the circumstances of that case, guilty of wilful neglect and default so as to make them accountable for a loss. He held they were not and applied City Equitable Fire Insurance Co [[1925] Ch 407] and In re Munton [[1927] 1 Ch 262.] The issue in that case was whether, in the particular factual circumstances, the trustee should be made to pay any interest personally for breach of trust in not making the investment. His Honour found that the advice the trustee received was wrong and that it should have made the investment. He propounded the question, at p.46, as being whether not making the investment was due to the wilful neglect and default of the trustees. His Honour was of the view that unless it was due to that he could not hold the trustees liable in view of the terms of [s.59](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s59.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/) , although he was not prepared to say that the decisions of the Court had always been uniform on that question. He continued:- "Whatever may have been the definite rule of practice of the Court, I think I am now bound to look to the words of this section and this section only, and it does become a question as to what is the meaning of this language `wilful neglect and default'. In the interpretation of that language I think the Court must pay the greatest possible respect to the decision of Romer J and the Court of Appeal in the case of In re The City Equitable Fire Insurance Company [[1925] Ch 407], where identically the same words had to be considered in the interpretation of the article commonly used by companies limiting the liability of directors - identically the same words are used, i.e., they are not to be liable except for their wilful neglect and default." 
His Honour noted that the trustees referred a matter of law to counsel and that they were justified in thinking that he was in a position to give them advice on it. It was not a case in which, having a discretion, they referred that discretion to counsel for advice as to how they should exercise it. His
Honour was of the view that under those circumstances the next move lay with the beneficiary, and that if it was advised, as apparently it was, that the advice the trustees had received was wrong it should have taken out an originating Summons for a direction that the investment be made. His Honour held that the trustees could not be said to be guilty of wilful neglect or default when they acted on the advice of responsible counsel.

In Dalrymple & Ors versus Melville & Ors [(1932) 32 SR 597]
Long Innes J considered the matter. There were two trustees, one of whom was a solicitor. They decided that certain shares, which were part of the trust estate, should be sold to provide for the payment of legacies. The non- solicitor trustee allowed the solicitor trustee to put himself in a position where he was able to misappropriate the proceeds of the sale of the shares and two bearer cheques drawn on the estate trust account to pay certain legatees.
The non-solicitor trustee acted honestly throughout and, although he did not suspect that the solicitor trustee was dishonest, he had at least a certain amount of suspicion that there was an element of risk attaching to his conduct and, at the material dates, he knew that the solicitor was omitting to perform his duty to protect the trust estate and to safeguard the interests of the beneficiaries and he took the risk of such omission. It was held that the non- solicitor trustee was guilty of wilful neglect and default within the meaning of [s.59(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s59.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/), and that he was not safeguarded from responsibility for his breach of trust by the provisions of that sub-section. It was further held that although the non- solicitor trustee had acted honestly throughout, he had not acted reasonably and, accordingly, he was not entitled to the protection of [s.85(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s85.html) of the Act.

At pp.601-602 his Honour said:- "In regard to the law I accept the position that the law as to what constitutes wilful neglect or default laid down in Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Company Limited applies to trustees as well as directors, notwithstanding any doubts which may have been expressed or entertained in that regard." 
His Honour noted that that was the approach taken in Perpetual Trustee Co v
Watson, In re Munton and In re Vickery.

He quoted from the headnote in Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Company
Limited:- "Wilful neglect or default - an act, or an omission to do an act, is wilful where the person who acts, or omits to act where the person who acts, or omits to act, knows what he is doing and intends to do what he is doing, but if that act or omission amounts to a breach of that person's duty, and therefore to negligence, he is not guilty of wilful neglect or default unless he knows that he is committing and intends to commit, a breach of his duty, or is recklessly careless in the sense of not caring whether his act or omission is or is not a breach of his duty." 
His Honour adopted, at p.602, the submission made in In re Munton to the following effect:- "A person is not guilty of `wilful neglect or default' unless he is conscious that in doing the act complained of, or omitting to do the act that he thought he ought to have done, he is committing a breach of his duty, or is recklessly careless whether his act or omission is a breach of duty or not." 
At p.603 his Honour identified the question for determination as whether the non-solicitor trustee, in acting as he did and in omitting to do what he ought to have done, "was conscious that he was committing a breach of his duty or was recklessly careless as to whether his act or omission was a breach of duty or not".

He continued at pp.603-604:- "Mr Melville certainly did not suspect that his co-trustee, who was a solicitor of this Court, was a thief, or would yield to temptation and become a thief, but that does not conclude the matter. He admits that he knew that it was his duty to protect the estate and safeguard the interests of the beneficiaries. Whatever his previous experience may have been, I see no reason to doubt that he had the ordinary knowledge of an ordinary citizen. He knew that it was his duty, as I have said before, to protect the estate and the interests of the beneficiaries, and he did not protect that estate or those interests. In omitting to take the precautions or do the acts which he must have known were available, he was grossly negligent. I am of opinion that he must have known that he was negligent; if so, he must have known that in omitting to take the precautions which he ought to have taken, he was committing a breach of his duty, and whether he was recklessly careless or not is immaterial. He was, I think, prepared to take the risk, and to allow the estate to take the risk." 
The conduct which founded these assertions was stated earlier at p.603 in the following terms:- "No loss in fact occurred by reason of the transfers being signed in blank; but it is perfectly obvious, and should have been obvious to any person in the least degree concerned to see that the proceeds of these shares were protected, that a simple precaution that might have been taken would have been to have informed the brokers that the shares which were for sale were being sold on the joint account of the trustees, and to give a direction either that their joint receipt would be required as a discharge to the brokers, or at least that the cheques representing the proceeds should be drawn in favour of both trustees or to their order and crossed and marked not negotiable." 
His Honour noted, at p.604, a submission that it was not suggested that the non-solicitor trustee was dishonest. However, at pp.604-605, he continued:- "Mr Melville's" (the non-solicitor trustee) "own evidence indicates at least a certain amount of suspicion in his mind as to there being an element of risk attaching to his conduct in the matter, and confirms me in the view, which I would have taken in any case and have already expressed, that at the material dates he knew he was omitting to perform his duty and was content to take the risk of such omission. 
Reliance has been placed on the decision of Maugham J in Re Vickery ... That decision, in the result was, however, only a decision on the facts." 
His Honour referred to the facts and continued:- "His" (Mr Melville's) "business experience may not have been very great, but from what I have seen of him and have heard of his career I should certainly regard him as being at least up to the ordinary standard. He was perfectly competent, in my opinion, to know, and I am confident he did know, what precautions might have been taken by an ordinary prudent man, and what precautions should have been taken by him in the present case." 
In these circumstances his Honour found that the non-solicitor trustee had been guilty of wilful neglect and default within the meaning of [s.59(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s59.html), and was not entitled to the protection of [s.85(2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s85.html) 
In Re Hodgekiss [[1962] SR 340], albeit in a different context, the Full Court of this State considered the meaning of the phrase "wilful failure" in s.43 of the Legal Practitioners Act.
Hardie J referred to In Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co Limited and
In Re Vickery. He was of the view that that provided an appropriate test for measuring "wilful failure" and continued:- "Applying those principles, I am of the opinion that the section deals with personal breaches of the statutory provisions in question on occasions when the solicitor knew or believed that he was committing such breaches or was recklessly careless in that regard. It is thus essential in an enquiry as to whether or not there have been wilful breaches by a solicitor of the provisions of ss.41 and 42 to examine the facts and circumstances relevant to his state of mind, knowledge and intention at the material dates." 
In Bartlett & Ors versus Barclays Bank Trust Co Limited (No 2) [1980] 2 ALL
ER 92 Brightman LJ had to consider the form of an order, which was to be made in consequence of his finding that the bank, as trustee, was guilty of wilful default in certain respects by its omission to do what a prudent trustee ought to have done. At p.97 his Lordship said:- "Wilful default by a trustee in this context means a passive breach of trust, an omission by the trustee to do something which, as a prudent trustee, he ought to have done, as distinct from an active breach of trust, that is to say, doing something which the trustee ought not to have done. If an instance of such wilful default is pleaded and proved, as are a number of such instances in the present case, the Court is entitled to order an account on the footing of wilful default. It is otherwise if the plaintiff has merely alleged and proved one or more active breaches of trust." 
In Ford & Lee "Principles of the Law of Trusts" at paragraph 9680 the authors dealt with the protection afforded to trustees for agents' defaults.
At paragraph 9690 they considered the meaning of "wilful default" and noted the distinction between that concept and accident or negligence. They stated:- "Accordingly a trustee is in wilful default only if `he knows that he is committing, and intends to commit, a breach of his duty, or is recklessly careless in the sense of not caring whether his act or omission is or is not a breach of duty." 
Subsequently they said:- "In any case, whether there is wilful default is a question of fact, and even where a literal meaning has been attributed to the phrase, Judges have not been deterred from charging trustees where they think it proper to do so. Thus in Dalrymple versus Melville ... a non-solicitor signed transfers of shares in blank and gave them to his co-trustee who was a solicitor. He took no precautions to ensure that his co-trustee did not abscond, and the moneys were lost to the trust." 
It was noted that Long Innes J adopted the "modern definition of wilful default" and found on the facts that it had occurred.

In Pettit "Equity and the Law of Trusts" (8th Edition 1997) at p.433 the author, after referring to the problem as to the meaning of "wilful default" noted that in Re Vickery the definition, albeit in a different context, in
Re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co had been adopted. He continued:- "Whether or not the right result was reached, there is much to be said for the view that Maugham J was wrong in adopting this definition of wilful default and that the definition in the earlier trustee cases should have been the one applied." 
In the Laws of Australia, the authors suggested that the classic formulation of "wilful default" is that of Romer J in Re City Equitable Fire
Insurance, and stated that mere negligence or error of judgment does not come within the narrow definition of wilful default, it being suggested that what is required is some degree of "moral turpitude". They further suggested that the narrow meaning attributed to the phrase has not deterred Courts from finding liability in circumstances which, on their face, are devoid of such "malignancy". Dalrymple & Ors versus Melville & Ors is cited. They continued:- "Conversely, by reason of the traditional strictness of the concept of `wilful default', a claim against a trustee for breaches by his or her co-trustees may be more likely to succeed upon the ground that the former has not exercised the degree of care expected of an ordinary prudent business person ... Interestingly, both early and recent English authority defines `wilful default' in terms of `want of ordinary prudence', lending support to the contention that the statutory wilful default requirement is no more than an expression of the accepted trustees' standard of care." 
In his article "Wilful Default" (1979) (43) (Conveyancer and Property Lawyer) Professor Stannard referred to the fact that the meaning of those words has long been "an embarrassment to Judges and a stumbling block for students of equity". He suggested that a commonsense definition would be "a deliberate failure to perform some legal requirement", which, in his view, is "obviously far more than mere neglect". He continued that the orthodox view seems to be that this is the correct definition of the words. He referred to a number of texts which, however, cited as authority Re City Equitable Fire Insurance
Co. He set forth that formulation and continued:- "It is hoped to show, however, that this definition is not correct. A review of the authorities will show that `wilful default' was always interpreted by Courts of Equity to include some degree of neglect, and that the `commonsense' definition has no basis in equity but derives purely from a set of cases in the late 19th Century relating to exemption clauses." 
At p.349 the author considered the standard clause pursuant to which a trustee is not to be liable for the acts of others "unless the same shall happen through (his) own wilful default". He continued:- "It would seem only sensible to ask what sort of `wilful default' has been held to make trustees liable for the acts of others. The cases indicate quite clearly that the trustee will be liable for failure to safeguard the trust fund, either by remaining completely passive as in Mucklow versus Fuller, or by leaving trust money too long in the hands of his colleague without enquiry as in Brice versus Stokes; or by giving one of his colleagues a power of attorney and failing to supervise him as in Hanbury versus Kirkland, or by leaving money in the hands of a bank whose solvency had become doubtful as in Johnson versus Newton. Again and again the Courts have affirmed that a trustee who entrusts another with the funds cannot wash his hands of the matter but must keep a wary eye on the trust funds. The trustee must not be negligent." (My emphasis.) 
At p.350 he expressed the view:- "These cases taken in conjunction with the undeniable fact that `wilful default' in the account cases clearly includes negligence, surely indicate that the `wilful default' referred to in the indemnity clause was the failure to act as a prudent man of business with regard to the activities of agents. The effect of the clause would then be quite simply to state the existing law as it had stood since the case of Townley versus Sherborne, that law knows no vicarious liability for agents, but that in this field as in others there is a duty to act with some degree of diligence." (My emphasis.) 
He concluded by suggesting that the more sensible view is that of Lindley LJ in Re Chapman [[1896] 2 Ch 763] that:- ".. `wilful default' includes lack of reasonable care; in fact it includes any default of the trustee with regard to the acts of others for which he may be held liable, and thus simply connotes any default. The indemnity clause then while re-affirming the old rule excluding vicarious liability makes it clear that the trustee is still liable as before for his own `wilful default': that is to say for his own default. That the Courts of Chancery regarded `wilful default' in this way will become clear from our review of the interpretation of `wilful default' in contract cases." 
After a consideration of those cases Professor Stannard said, at p.356:- "Certainly there was no explicit interpretation, but the argument cited above remains; it is not possible to make any sense of the trustee indemnity clause unless the `wilful default' referred to in that clause relates to the failure of a trustee to safeguard the trust funds and supervise his agents and co-trustees. And for this the standard as we have seen is that of a prudent man of business." (My emphasis.) 
In my opinion it is not necessary for me to resolve the ambit of reasonable fault for the purposes of deciding this case. However, if I may say so with respect, it seems to me that a reasonable interpretation would be that there must be default, which is that of the trustee, rather than the agent, and, accordingly, is wilful in the sense accepted in Re Vickery and Dalrymple & Ors versus Melville & Ors. I have come to the conclusion that taking this approach the conduct of PTWA and PT viewed against the factual background which applies, constituted wilful default.

Some assistance as to the meaning of "recklessness" can be derived from the decision of the Court of Appeal in SS Pharmaceutical Co Limited & Anor v
Qantas Airways Limited (1991) 1 LLR 288, in which the majority, Gleeson CJ and Handley JA, adopted what had been said in Goldman versus Thai Airways
Limited [[1983] 1 WLR 1186] as to the meaning of the word "recklessly". This was done in the context of an article in an international air carriage convention.
Their Honours considered that the word meant that the person concerned "acts in a manner which indicates a decision to run the risk or a mental attitude of indifference to its existence ...".

The question which arises is whether the trustees had a consciousness of breach of duty or negligence, or were reckless in the performance of a duty in the sense to which I have referred. I have come to the conclusion that the trustees acted with complete indifference to their obligations. I am satisfied that they were never aware what these full obligations were, that they made no attempt to ascertain what they were, and that they were content to pay over money held in trust without taking any steps to seek to ensure that the contractual documents, which underpinned the trusts, were ever received. The circumstances which lead me to these conclusions are:- 
There is no evidence that any officer of PTWA or PT considered the terms of the constituent documents with a view to ascertaining what they involved.
Mr Thorne committed that task to Mr Whiteley. There is no evidence that Mr
Whiteley performed it, either from him or, as one might expect, from any document produced by PTWA. Mr Thorne, in these circumstances, was forced to say that he signed off because he believed Mr Whiteley had considered the matter properly. There is no evidence that Mr Whiteley was competent to consider this arrangement, that he did consider it and, if he did, to what view he came.

Mr Thorne did not consider the matter for himself, save in relation to the early redemption provisions. He was content to sign off on the basis that Mr
Whiteley told him it was in order to do so. However, he did nothing to satisfy himself that Mr Whiteley had done his task properly.

Neither Mr Whiteley nor Mr Thorne had access to the Paying Agency
Agreement, which, on any view, was an important document. Mr Shaw pointed out its significance. Even a cursory reading of the documentation would have indicated the existence of that agreement and, as Mr Shaw said, and this, if I may say so with respect accords with commonsense, a prudent trustee, acting reasonably, would have called for that document.

Mr Grimshaw, in taking over from Mr Thorne, obviously directed little attention to the documentation. I think the proper inference from his evidence is that he assumed that everything was in order because the procedures had already been put in place. He did not attempt to ascertain for himself the position and, more particularly, although he said he appreciated the criticality of the Deposit Certificate as the investors' security, he made no attempt to either see such a certificate or to obtain confirmation from Minter
Ellison or National Registries that such a certificate had been provided on settlement and lodged with National Registries.

Minter Ellison were appointed as the agent for PTWA notwithstanding that the briefest glance at the documents would have indicated that they were also acting for ECCC. This raised, as Mr Shaw pointed out, the prospect of a conflict of duty or interest which, according to Mr Shaw's evidence, which I accept, should have been investigated with Minter Ellison. Irrespective of the answer given by Minter Ellison there was still an obligation on the trustee to satisfy itself that the conflict would not adversely affect Minter Ellison's performance of their duties on behalf of the trustee.

PTWA received no communication from Minter Ellison as to what Minter
Ellison had done on its behalf at settlement and it had no communication at all with National Registries.

In respect of the settlement on 6 May 1993 PTWA made no enquiries as to whether settlement had taken place and it received no information in this regard until 17 June 1993. The evidence of Mr Shaw, which once again I accept, was that the agent should have reported within two business days of settlement.

In the context of a consideration of the suitability of Minter Ellison to act as agent PTWA apparently took no notice of the provisions of clause 3.4 and Schedule 4 to the Subscription Agreement. The consequence was that, at least arguably, PTWA was releasing Minter Ellison from any liability or obligation and furnishing it with an indemnity against any loss for which it may be found liable. That is certainly the position for which Minter Ellison has argued.

All of these matters indicate to me a complete indifference on the part of
PTWA to the performance of its obligations as trustee. I am satisfied that this indifference amounted to recklessness and, accordingly, that there was "wilful default" on its part. The same comments apply to PT. They apply, of course, to the specific breaches alleged, viz the appointment of Minter
Ellison as agent, and the failure to take any reasonable steps to ensure that
Deposit Certificates were sighted and received. My conclusion is strengthened by the evidence of Mr Grimshaw and Mr Thorne as to what they would have done if they had received information, which indicated that there was some failure to comply with the terms of the Subscription Agreement. They would have immediately recommended that legal advice be obtained and, according to evidence from more senior officers in the Perpetual Group, that recommendation would have been accepted and, on the view of the evidence I prefer, no further transactions would have been entered into. As I have said it is inconceivable that independent legal advice would not have pointed out to PTWA and PT that the certificates were not Bearer Deposit Certificates. Everyone involved in this case either appreciated that the Deposit Certificates were not bearer documents, or was highly suspicious about them. This would have raised the question as to what steps should have been taken to rectify the situation. For reasons to which I shall refer I am of the opinion that the proper inference to draw is that ECCC would not have provided conforming Deposit Certificates.
Essentially my reason for coming to that conclusion is that when the requirement to issue Bearer Deposit Certificates was brought forcefully to its attention by Minter Ellison, in circumstances where ECCC recognised that the failure to do so could bring about a situation whereby the investors may call for a return of their money, ECCC did not even then produce the requisite certificates, and it was only the admitted continuing negligence on the part of Minter Ellison, together with the indifference of the trustees which allowed this situation to continue.

I have noted the concession by Mr Heydon that if Mr Shaw's evidence is accepted, as, in my opinion, it should be, it provides a strong argument of breach of duty, to which the counter was that PTWA and PT expected Minter
Ellison to advise them. Further, if that were not a sufficient answer, it would be, as Mr Heydon conceded, very difficult for PTWA and PT to escape liability and the decision on the negligence question would preclude their reliance on ss.53(4) and 75.

I am satisfied that PTWA and PT were guilty of gross and inexcusable neglect and default. On any view of the meaning of "wilful default" their conduct constituted it. That conduct led to the loss, and it was not suggested that the loss did not include all the money invested. It was not submitted that so far as the trustees were concerned there was a break in the causative chain.
They cannot rely on ss.53(4) or 75.

The Position Of The Thirty Sixth And Fortieth Plaintiffs 
The thirty sixth plaintiff is Ms Patricia Mary Mann, whose witness statement is Exhibit AK. She had no communication with Feldworth or Mr Felden and, accordingly, did not invest in consequence of any representations made by them. Therefore, she is not entitled to succeed against them. Paragraphs 10 and 11 of her statement were not read against PTWA, PT or FlexiPlan. These were the paragraphs, which stated what Ms Mann would and would not have done had she been aware that the investment was not safe nor free from risk.
However, I am satisfied that she suffered loss by virtue of the breaches of
PTWA, which I have identified. It was not suggested her money was not invested by it in ECCC shares, nor that there was any absence of causation. But for
PTWA's breaches she would not have lost her money and she is entitled to recover against it.

The fortieth plaintiff is Ms Alison Howgrave Corfield, whose witness statement is Exhibit AO. Initially neither Feldworth nor Mr Felden made any recommendations to her, although she received certain correspondence on
Feldworth's letterhead about her investment in ECCC Preference Shares.
However, on 29 August 1994, she received a letter from Feldworth, which was signed by a Mr Robbert Klomp, which advised that she transfer from the
Excelsior Master Trust to the FlexiPlan Australia Limited Master Trust, which she did. This transfer did not change the nature of the original investment. I am not satisfied that Ms Corfield invested or maintained her investment in consequence of anything that Feldworth or Mr Felden did or said to her. On the other hand I am satisfied she is entitled to succeed against PTWA for the same reason as Ms Mann is.

Damages As Against Feldworth And Mr Felden 
In addition to the return of the principal sum, save for any redemptions, Mr
Martin has submitted that the plaintiffs are entitled to recover compound interest on the amounts lost: Hungerfords & Ors versus Walker & Ors [(1990) 171 CLR 124.] In that case the plaintiffs had been deprived of the use of their money, which they would have used in the course of their business. In the present case the plaintiffs invested money for the purpose of earning income and they will, by my judgment, be recompensed for the money they have lost and for interest thereon, at least on a simple interest basis, and which they presumably would have used in maintaining themselves. There was no suggestion in the evidence that the interest would have been reinvested in additional income earning activities. Nor was there any evidence that because the interest was not received any of the plaintiffs were required to borrow from another source at an interest cost, to provide living expenses.
Accordingly I do not consider that the plaintiffs have established that there has been "incurred expense" and "opportunity cost", which constitute something more than late payment of damages. The damages to which each plaintiff is entitled are, therefore, the principal sum lost and simple interest thereon in accordance with the document handed up by Mr Martin on 2 November 1998. The plaintiffs should bring in Short Minutes of Order to reflect the amount to which each plaintiff is entitled, and that the first and second defendants pay the successful plaintiffs' costs.

There is no other basis, in my opinion, which would entitle the plaintiffs to compound interest.

Damages As Against PTWA And PT 
The plaintiffs are entitled to recover as against PTWA and PT the principal amounts and compound interest on the trustee basis.

Mr Martin submitted that the plaintiffs were entitled to interest at the rate prescribed under s.94(1) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and not at the trustee rate because the investments were commercial investments. The question of the appropriate rate of interest was considered in Hagan &
Ors versus Waterhouse & Ors [(1992) 34 NSWLR 308.] Kearney J commenced his consideration of this topic by referring to the statement of
Street J in Re Dawson (1966) 84 WN [(Pt )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s1.html) at 408, namely:- ".. the general principle is that where a trustee has, through his breach of trust, occasioned loss to the trust estate then he is liable to make good that loss, together with interest." 
His Honour noted that until recent times the rate adopted was four per cent as a matter of policy and as the trustee rate, and that the effect of inflation had markedly increased government stock interest rates by which the trustee rate was fixed.

After considering the various rates his Honour noted the plaintiffs' submission that commercial rates should apply and that bank overdraft rates provided the appropriate scale. He continued:- "In England, the Court of Appeal, in Wallersteiner versus Moir (No 2) [[1975] QB 373] In Australia a flexible approach has generally applied. In Southern Cross Commodities Pty Limited (In Liquidation) versus Ewing (1987) 11 ACLR 818 ... the Supreme Court of South Australia adopted the Wallersteiner versus Moir (No 2) formula." 
His Honour referred to the fact that there was no evidence of the mercantile rate, and:- "It may be said in favour of the plaintiffs' contention that the bank overdraft rate represents a more realistic approach to changes in monetary conditions, particularly having regard to the volatility of interest rates in recent times. Wallersteiner versus Moir (No 2) and the Southern Cross Commodities case can be seen as responses to this reality, as are the rates of interest allowable in respect of common law claims: Hungerfords versus Walker ... Against this stands the comment of Dixon J in Re Tennant (at 507-508): `But changes in monetary conditions led to what may be described as judicial movements, first to reduce and afterwards to raise the rate. Experience of the market fluctuations in interest rates has rather confirmed the policy of the Court in fixing for its purposes a rate which over a long period represents a fair or mean rate of return for money.' 
This statement referred to the `trustee' rate, but Street J in Re Dawson (at 409-411) .. regarded it as reflecting a judicial attitude, and adopted and applied `the policy of the Court' in fixing five per cent as the mercantile rate in accordance with the established practice of the Court in 1966." 
Kearney J thought that in view of the dramatic increases in interest rates following the inflationary cycle since the 1970's, two points required consideration. Firstly, the cases adopting the bank overdraft rate were essentially commercial rather than trust cases and, as Needham J had pointed out, the practice of the Court in commercial transaction cases was to order a higher rate of interest than in trustee type situations. His Honour, however, thought it odd that delinquent directors should pay more than defaulting trustees of whom the highest standard of probity is expected.

Secondly, his Honour considered whether the judicial attitude mentioned by
Street J should continue to apply in the then existing context of high and fluctuating interest rates, particularly in view of the flexible response to which he had referred. He thought that the volatile range of fluctuations in such rates in recent times ought to be taken into account in applying to these changed conditions "the policy of the Court which was settled in times of greater monetary stability". His Honour was of the view that the mercantile rate should reflect the reality of the market place "as it exists under a regime not in contemplation at the time of the foregoing pronouncement of the judicial attitudes".

Since his Honour wrote that the position has changed again to one where relatively stable and low interest rates have been experienced. This change has been noted by the Court, Schedule J to the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) reducing interest rates gradually from 28 February 1997, for several years prior to which they had been twelve per centum per annum, to 9.5 per centum per annum after 31 August 1998.

It seems to me that adopting his Honour's reasoning and having regard to the approach of the Court in reducing interest rates conformably with what is happening in the market, that the appropriate rate to apply would be, if this was the appropriate rate, the rate provided for by the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/).

Before passing from this case I note that at p.393 his Honour also considered that interest should be awarded on a compound basis calculated at yearly rests.

Mr Heydon's sole submission was that interest should be awarded at the trustee rate only. He relied upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in Alemite
Lubrequip Pty Limited & Ors versus Adams & Ors [(1996) 41 NSWLR .]
In that case there was an honest but mistaken misapplication of trust funds, which the trustee was required to repay. It was held there was no principle which supported the view that in those circumstances the trustee, who has been guilty of gross negligence, is, for that reason, liable to pay interest at a higher commercial rate. The appeal was from an order that a trustee pay simple interest on equitable compensation awarded to a non-beneficiary at the trustee rate of eight per centum per annum.

The trial Judge summarised the principles in relation to interest thus:- "Where the situation is more analogous to trustee responsibility than a commercial one and the trustees have acted honestly and in good faith but have made a mistake or error of judgment or been negligent (but not grossly so) and have not: profited from the breach of trust; or used the moneys for their own purposes; or been guilty of fraud, serious misconduct or gross negligence; or received compound interest on the moneys in question; simple interest at the trustee rate is usually selected." 
In support of the appeal it was submitted that the respondents had been guilty of gross negligence and, on the principles thus enunciated, interest at the higher mercantile rate should have been awarded. Reliance was placed upon the reasons of Gleeson CJ in an earlier appeal for upholding the trial Judge's decision to refuse the defendants relief under [s.85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s85.html) of the [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/).

The judgment of the Court was given by Handley JA with whom Gleeson CJ and
Sheller JA agreed. His Honour said, at p.47:- "The liability of trustees for interest was carefully considered by Street J in Re Dawson; Union Fidelity Trustee Co Limited versus Perpetual Trustee Co Limited (1966) 84 WN [(Pt 1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s1.html) 399 ..., and by Kearney J in Hagan versus Waterhouse [(1991) 34 NSWLR 308.] In my opinion, the statements by those Judges of the principles which are applied in determining the rate at which trustees should be ordered to pay interest on moneys they are bound to recoup to the trust estate are correct and should be followed by this Court.

Those principles do not support the view that trustees who have been guilty of gross negligence are for that reason liable to pay interest at the higher mercantile rate." 
At p.392 Kearney J had said that:- "The `mercantile' rate is applied as a means of recovering profit received or presumed to have been received by the trustee as a result of misapplication of trust funds." 
If I may say so with the greatest respect it is by no means clear to me that that was the reason that Kearney J determined to apply the mercantile rate. He took into account the two factors to which I have referred.

In the present case whilst I am satisfied there was gross negligence on the part of PTWA and PT, Alamite establishes that there is no authority for the proposition that that made the trustees liable for the higher mercantile rate of interest. There was no suggestion in the present case that the trustees profited from their breaches and, as the authorities presently stand, it seems to me that the correct rate of interest is the trustee rate.

The dismissal of the appeal in Alamite meant that the Court of Appeal upheld the trial Judge's decision that simple interest should be awarded.
However, the learned trial Judge had come to that conclusion because he did not consider there was gross negligence. In the present case I consider that the conduct of PTWA and PT constituted a gross breach of trust and, in the exercise of my discretion, I propose to order PTWA and PT to pay compound interest: Jacobs "The Law of Trusts in Australia" (Sixth Edition) para
The plaintiffs should bring in Short Minutes of Order to reflect the amount to which each is entitled, based on the calculations contained in the document handed up by Mr Martin on 2 November 1998, being the principal sum on which compound interest on yearly rests at the trustee rate is calculated.

The Case Against FlexiPlan 
The plaintiffs pleaded as against FlexiPlan the various steps which were taken to make it the trustee, which are admitted, and, further, FlexiPlan admitted that it had the duties contained in clause 38.1 of the FlexiPlan Trust Deed as trustee of the FlexiSuper Fund and the FlexiRollover Fund on and from 1 July , but said that there was no clause 38.9(a) in that Deed when it became trustee. FlexiPlan denied the allegations made in paragraph 49B, in so far as it related to it, and otherwise did not admit the balance of the allegations therein.

It pleaded that if, which it denied, it was found to have committed any of the breaches of trust alleged in paragraph 49B it acted reasonably and honestly at all material times, and ought to be excused from any liability to the plaintiffs pursuant to the provisions of s.75; that it was entitled to act and rely upon the opinion or advice of Minter Ellison and National Registries relating to the obtaining and holding of the Deposit Certificates referred to in the Subscription Agreements, pursuant to the provisions of clauses 25.4 and .6 of the Trust Deed; and that in so far as any of the alleged breaches of trust arose out of the default of Minter Ellison, it was entitled to rely upon the provisions of s.53 and, accordingly, is not liable to the plaintiffs with respect to any such default.

Mr Martin, in his opening submissions, stated that FlexiPlan, when it was appointed in lieu of PT, should have sought and obtained from PT and National
Registries written confirmation that the Deposit Certificates had been obtained and were held, but that it had not. In his opening submissions Mr
Finch noted that the plaintiffs' case against FlexiPlan was restricted to the proposition that it had an obligation on 1 July 1994 to obtain written confirmation from PT and National Registries or its auditors that the Deposit
Certificates were obtained and held. This was consistent with the concession made by Mr Martin: Tp.4.

In his final submissions Mr Martin put that on 1 July 1994, when PT retired as trustee of the FlexiSuper Fund and the FlexiRollover Fund, FlexiPlan became trustee of them and, on the same day, appointed Perpetual Trustees Australia
Limited the custodian of those funds which, in turn, appointed PT as its sub- custodian. He submitted that the higher standard of conduct applied to
FlexiPlan in managing the funds but if, however, the usual standard of a prudent business person applied, FlexiPlan's conduct fell below it. In paragraph 72 he submitted that in relation to each in specie transfer from the
Excelsior Trust to the FlexiSuper Fund and the FlexiRollover Fund, FlexiPlan breached its duty by failing to seek and obtain from the outgoing trustee,
PTWA, and National Registries written confirmation that the latter still held the Deposit Certificates in accordance with the terms of the Subscription
Agreements and the Paying Agency Agreement which, on the basis of Mr Shaw's evidence, it should have done. He further submitted that FlexiPlan was not relieved of this duty because PT had been appointed a sub-custodian of these
Funds.

Pausing there it is correct, as Mr Finch pointed out in his final written submissions, that the plaintiffs' case against FlexiPlan was for alleged breach of trust and that no other allegations made against it were pressed. Mr
Martin confirmed this was so.

Mr Finch did not dispute that FlexiPlan owed a duty to perform and exercise its duties and powers as trustee in the best interests of the members of the
Fund, and he noted that the only breach of trust pressed against his client was a failure, as the incoming trustee on 1 July 1994, to obtain written confirmation of the existence and whereabouts of trust assets from the outgoing trustee, National Registries, and National Registries' auditors. For this submission he relied on paragraph 72 of Mr Martin's submissions, and the concession at Tp.4.

Mr Finch submitted that in considering the position of FlexiPlan it is necessary to consider the relevant provisions of the Trust Deed, it not being disputed that some of the plaintiffs were "members" of the FlexiSuper Fund and could rely upon and enforce the terms of that Deed.

Mr Finch noted that the only plaintiffs suing FlexiPlan are those whose ECCC's shares were transferred in specie from the Excelsior Trust to the FlexiPlan
Trust after 1 July 1994, being the plaintiffs identified in Exhibit SPT 6 to the witness statement of Miss Susan Thomas dated 28 September 1998: Exhibit
D1. There are ten plaintiffs who fall into this category. The total number of
ECCC shares held by them is 6,179, reflecting an investment of $617,900. It was submitted that on the case now pressed against it FlexiPlan cannot be liable to any other plaintiffs for any other sum. That must, in my opinion, be correct.

The submission then traced the transfer of the ECCC shares from Excelsior into the FlexiSuper Fund and continued that the investment, which had been entered into previously, was the purchase of shares in ECCC. The submission continued that there was no doubt that PT received the Share Certificates reflecting that investment, which were held by or on behalf of PT at all relevant times.
The Share Certificates were the assets of the trust, which the trustee held.
FlexiPlan, on the transfer in specie, was under no obligation to look behind the Share Certificates to ensure that ECCC had performed its contractual obligations under the Subscription Agreements, or that Minter Ellison and
National Registries had performed or were performing their roles. The submission continued that FlexiPlan was entitled to assume that on and from receipt of the Share Certificates each of those entities had performed their obligations. In particular, FlexiPlan was entitled to assume that on and from receiving the Share Certificates from Minter Ellison, without any qualifying comment, all prerequisites necessary to be complied with prior to receipt by
Minter Ellison of such Share Certificates had been met.

Mr Shaw had asserted, as I have noted, that the Deposit Certificates were trust assets within the meaning of the Trust Deed. It was submitted, correctly
I think, that that was "simply wrong" as the trustee investor did not have any right to possession or title to the Deposit Certificates. That does not derogate from the significance of the role of the Deposit Certificates, or the obligations of PTWA and PT to take the steps in relation to them in entering into the arrangements to which I have referred. But those activities were quite different from those which FlexiPlan undertook.

It was submitted by Mr Finch that in these circumstances Mr Shaw failed to appreciate the significance of the Deposit Certificates qua FlexiPlan and, in any event, FlexiPlan never dealt with them. The submission went on that
FlexiPlan had no right to call for the Deposit Certificates, to see them, or to insist that they be dealt with in any way, and that as they were purchased with money belonging to ECCC it could not be said that, even for "practical purposes", they should be treated as assets of the trust.

When looked at in totality the handing over by PTWA and PT of the money to
ECCC for the purchase of the Deposit Certificates was to bring about a situation whereby the return of the investors' principal sum would be guaranteed by the presentation of the Bearer Deposit Certificates. Pivotal to the whole arrangement was the existence of such certificates. The question is whether it is correct to assert that the obligations being undertaken by
FlexiPlan extended to its satisfying itself that there had been compliance by the outgoing trustee with the contractual requirements the outgoing trustee was obliged to put in place.

Mr Finch's submissions continued that the "failure to enquire" case had a number of problems. He noted that when FlexiPlan replaced PT on 1 July 1994 there were no relevant plaintiffs, who had arranged for a transfer of the ECCC shares, in specie, to FlexiPlan. All such transfers, on the evidence, postdated 1 July 1994, so that, it was submitted, there was no plaintiff who could have been the subject of any meaningful inquiry of PT when FlexiPlan replaced it. Nextly, it was submitted the shares were transferred by PTWA and not PT and that no case, in relation to queries of the outgoing trustee, was pleaded against FlexiPlan. Nor, so it was submitted, was any case pleaded that any duty arose to ask questions at the time of each successive transfer.

It was submitted that even if there was an obligation to enquire in respect of either PT or PTWA, there could be no suggestion that any such enquiry would have resulted in anything other than an affirmative answer. Although Mr Finch put forward various reasons, the only reason I think the evidence supports for assuming that there would have been an affirmative answer is the gross failure on the part of PTWA and PT to ascertain what the true position was. However, the submission was that in those circumstances there could be no causative link between FlexiPlan's failure to ask such questions and any damage. A similar submission was made in relation to any enquiry of National Registries.

In response to Mr Finch's submissions Mr Martin said that if FlexiPlan was obliged to make any enquiry it was not correct to ask:- "Has the security been received in accordance with the Subscription Agreement?" 
The correct question, so he submitted, was:- "Please confirm that you hold the Bearer Certificates." 
Mr Martin relied on the following evidence from Mr Shaw, Tpp.44-45:- "Q. Should the new trustee have taken any particular steps, in your view, upon assuming its role as trustee of the FlexiPlan? 
A. It is the usual practice, when any new trustee assumes from an old trustee, to prepare a check list of the relevant things that need to be attended to, and included in that check list would be the documentation pertinent to the trust that was being taken over and details of the assets and investments taken over, and on the check list would be to verify the existence of those assets.

Q. Would the new trustee familiarise itself with the underlying scheme, pursuant to which the investments were made? 
A. Yes, it would.

Q. Would it read documents for that purpose? 
A. Yes, it would.

Q. Would it read the constituent contractual documents? 
A. Yes, it would." 
Mr Shaw said that would include reading the Subscription and Paying Agency
Agreements.

Had the enquiries for which Mr Shaw contended been carried out FlexiPlan would have become aware that there should have been Deposit Certificates. Although I think Mr Martin conceded that PTWA and PT would not have been aware of the deficiency in those documents, he submitted, and Mr Higginbotham's evidence supports this, that if an enquiry had been made of National Registries, Mr
Higginbotham would have stated that to be the position, i.e. that the documents were not bearer documents.

I think, on analysis, that it has to be appreciated that there were essential differences between the position of PTWA and PT, on the one hand, and
FlexiPlan, on the other. PTWA and PT were involved in a series of transactions, in their role as trustees, including the receipt of money from the investors and the payment of money by them to Minter Ellison to be disbursed in conformity with the Subscription Agreement. The next necessary step was that in return for that money PTWA and PT should have received the counterpart Subscription Agreement and the Share Certificates, and National
Registries should have received the Bearer Deposit Certificates. It was part of the duties of PTWA and PT to ensure that all these things occurred.
However, by the time FlexiPlan stepped in the only assets it was to acquire were the shares in ECCC, which had been issued well before. It was not involved in any other transaction and had no obligations, such as PTWA and PT did, to pay over money and to ensure that the various steps were taken.
Further, the nature of the trust was different in that the only trust assets were the ECCC shares. I appreciate the significance of the submission that these shares had to be acquired in some way and whilst I consider the method of their acquisition was very relevant to the way in which PTWA and PT performed their duties, the only obligation of FlexiPlan was to receive and hold the shares on trust. That did not occur when PT was replaced by FlexiPlan as trustee, but subsequently, and in any event the shares were not transferred to FlexiPlan by the outgoing trustee, but by PTWA I think it is correct, as Mr
Finch submitted, that Mr Shaw's evidence was predicated on there being a transfer from an outgoing trustee to an incoming trustee of the whole fund. In all these circumstances I do not consider that the plaintiffs have established the very limited breach asserted against FlexiPlan.

It was submitted on behalf of FlexiPlan that if this is incorrect, those plaintiffs who were affected must show that loss resulted from the breach of trust, whereas the evidence was that they had acquired a beneficial interest in the ECCC shares in 1993 and transferred them to the FlexiSuper Fund in the second half of 1994. It was submitted that the plaintiffs had not shown that the loss occurred when ECCC could have recompensed them and, accordingly, on the case propounded against FlexiPlan it could only be liable to compensate those plaintiffs for the sums that should have been used to acquire conforming
Deposit Certificates.

FlexiPlan also relied on [s.75](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s75.html) of the [Trustees
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/), but not on [s.53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s53.html) because of the limited nature of the plaintiffs' claim as pressed against it.
In the circumstances the provisions of [s.53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ta1962140/s53.html) were submitted to be no longer relevant to FlexiPlan's defence.

The Position Of The Plaintiffs 
I am satisfied that the plaintiffs, other than the thirty sixth and fortieth plaintiffs, are entitled to judgment against Feldworth and Mr Felden, on the basis I have stated, and that all the plaintiffs are entitled to judgment against PTWA and PT, on the basis I have stated. The plaintiffs are entitled to costs against those defendants. FlexiPlan is entitled to judgment against the plaintiffs and to an order for costs. I shall hear submissions as to which of the plaintiffs should pay those costs, and whether they are entitled to be indemnified in respect of them by any other party. This concludes my consideration of the plaintiffs' case.

The Case Made Against Minter Ellison 
In its Amended Second Cross-Claim PTWA sued Minter Ellison for breach of trust, negligence, and misleading and deceptive conduct in breach of the Fair
Trading Act (Victoria) in dealing with the Subscription Money. It sought restoration of trust funds or equitable compensation for breach of trust; damages for negligence and breach of the Fair Trading Act; interest and costs.
The claim for the restoration of the trust funds was not limited to the amount invested by the present plaintiffs, but to all amounts, which PTWA invested.

The case pleaded against Minter Ellison was that the various Subscription
Agreements entered into between PTWA and ECCC prescribed a procedure for subscription for the ECCC shares; that Minter Ellison were aware of the terms and conditions of the Subscription Agreements; that in accordance with clause .1 of those Agreements PTWA provided the Subscription Moneys by way of an unendorsed non-negotiable bank cheque to Minter Ellison on each occasion that it signed a Subscription Agreement; that the Subscription Moneys were held by
Minter Ellison on trust to be disbursed only in accordance with the provisions of the Subscription Agreement and, if requested by ECCC, for an amount to be released by Minter Ellison to it prior to completion up to but not exceeding the amount defined in the Agreements as the Deposit Certificate purchase limit. It was pleaded that Minter Ellison were only to release that amount to enable ECCC to purchase a Deposit Certificate, and if on completion a Deposit
Certificate so purchased was delivered to National Registries, Minter Ellison were to pay from the funds held in trust the facility fee of the Manager and the balance of the Subscription Moneys after the provision of the Deposit
Certificate. It was further pleaded that if on completion the Deposit
Certificate was not delivered to the Paying Agent Minter Ellison would forthwith pay to PTWA the whole of the balance of the Subscription Moneys held in its trust account, and that Minter Ellison would not deal with those moneys other than in accordance with the provisions of the Subscription Agreement.

It was pleaded that in carrying out the terms of the trust it was the duty of
Minter Ellison to exercise the same diligence and prudence as an ordinary prudent person would in the conduct of that person's own affairs, and that it would inform PTWA forthwith of any matter coming to their attention whereby the Subscription Moneys held in trust by Minter Ellison might be put at risk of loss if completion of the Subscription Agreement were effected.

The breaches alleged were that upon completion Minter Ellison released the balance of the Subscription Moneys to ECCC when a Deposit Certificate had not been provided to the Paying Agent in accordance with clause 4(d) of the
Subscription Agreement, and, in the circumstances, failed to pay the whole of the balance of the Subscription Moneys held in its trust account forthwith to
PTWA, but rather released them to ECCC in circumstances where the Deposit
Certificates did not conform with the requirements of the Subscription
Agreements. The pleading continued that at completion Minter Ellison knew that a Bearer Deposit Certificate had not been provided by ECCC in compliance with the requirements of the Subscription Agreement but, none-the-less, they failed to deal with the moneys properly. It was pleaded that Minter Ellison failed to take reasonable care in performing the trust and, notwithstanding their knowledge of the status of the Deposit Certificates furnished, failed to inform PTWA "of such matters at any time". Neither of these matters was in issue.

It was pleaded that by reason of the breaches of trust PTWA suffered and will suffer loss and damage in that the Subscription Moneys were not invested upon the security required by the terms of the trust and have been lost; and that had Minter Ellison informed PTWA of the matters alleged PTWA would have ceased immediately to enter into further Subscription Agreements with ECCC whereby, in relation to the various trusts, there was loss. The claim thus made was for a restitution to the trust estate of the moneys lost by Minter Ellison's alleged breach of trust. The breach of trust claim propounded by PTWA and PT was their principal claim.

In the alternative there was a claim made in negligence, based essentially on the same matters. The compensation, in such circumstances, would be by way of common law damages.

There was a claim made under the Fair Trading Act of Victoria, which alleged
Minter Ellison represented to PTWA that Deposit Certificates as defined in the
Subscription Agreements had been procured by ECCC; that ECCC had deposited with National Registries those Deposit Certificates; that Minter Ellison had released to ECCC prior to completion of the Subscription Agreement an amount which ECCC had used to purchase a Deposit Certificate; that on completion
Minter Ellison had paid the balance of the Subscription Moneys to ECCC after the provision of a Deposit Certificate; and that Minter Ellison had not dealt with the Subscription Moneys other than in accordance with the provisions of the Subscription Agreement. The particulars were:- "The representations were implied in that Minter Ellison, in acting as agent and trustee for PTWA for the purpose of effecting completion of each of the said transactions, had a duty of care to inform PTWA if ECCCL proposed that completion be effected otherwise than in strict conformity with the requirements of the Subscription Agreements. In effecting completion of the transactions without informing PTWA of the matters in paragraphs (a) to (e) of the Particulars to paragraph 37, Minter Ellison impliedly represented that completion had been in strict conformity with the requirements of the Subscription Agreements." 
It was also pleaded that Minter Ellison made representations to National
Registries.

In relation to the representations it was pleaded that they were not true in fact and were thereby misleading and deceptive in breach of s.11 of the Fair
Trading Act of Victoria; that PTWA relied on them by permitting completion of the Subscription Agreement on or about 4 May 1993, and by entering into and permitting completion of subsequent Subscription Agreements.

The Amended Third Cross-Claim was that of PT in which it raised essentially the same claims as those asserted by PTWA.

In the Defences to those Cross-Claims, Minter Ellison pleaded that whilst admitting the receipt from PTWA and PT and the disbursement to ECCC of the
Subscription Moneys, they denied that those moneys were received upon or disbursed in purported performance of the trusts alleged.

Minter Ellison further pleaded in answer to the whole of those Cross-Claims that they denied that the alleged conduct by them caused the loss and damage and, further, relied upon the terms of clause 3.4 and Schedule 4 of the
Subscription Agreements.

Minter Ellison relied upon the provisions of [s.67](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ta1958122/s67.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ta1958122/) (Victoria) in asserting that if, which was denied, they acted in breach of trust, they acted honestly and reasonably given the terms of the Subscription Agreements and ought fairly to be excused.

It was also pleaded that any causal connection, which was denied, between the conduct of Minter Ellison and the loss and damage was severed by PTWA's and
PT's own conduct or, alternatively, was caused or materially contributed to, by their own conduct. The conduct was particularised as the failure of PTWA and PT at any time to make any enquiries concerning, or to satisfy itself about, the existence, terms or security, of the investment required to be made by PTWA and PT in Deposit Certificates to be held by the Paying Agent pursuant to the Subscription Agreement; their entry into the Deeds Poll dated 2
September 1994; and their failure to seek or obtain legal advice in relation to both the entry into the Deeds Poll and the continuing security of the investment required to be made in the Deposit Certificates.

It was pleaded that in these circumstances no loss or damage was recoverable from Minter Ellison or, alternatively, such loss or damage as had been suffered should be apportioned in equity or the liability of Minter Ellison should be reduced or diminished pursuant to [s.10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/s10.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/) and [s.26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wa1958111/s26.html) of the [Wrongs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wa1958111/) , to reflect the proportion of responsibility of PTWA and PT.

An understanding of the stance taken by Minter Ellison at the hearing will be assisted by tracing through their submissions. In those furnished on 28
October 1998 it was conceded that Minter Ellison, upon completion, released the balance of the Subscription Moneys to ECCC notwithstanding that a Deposit
Certificate had not been obtained. It was also conceded that the trust imposed on Minter Ellison by clause 2.1 was an express written trust of which ECCC and
Perpetual were the beneficiaries, and that its terms required Minter Ellison to disburse the funds in accordance with the terms of the agreement, subject to the particular exclusions, indemnities and releases contained in the agreement. These were references to clause 3.4 and the statement in Schedule .

It was acknowledged that as Minter Ellison acted as the solicitor for ECCC and as agent for Perpetual on completion, there was the potential for a conflict of intrest, which Mr Lewis recognised and for which he sought to provide in clause 3.4 and Schedule 4.

The submission continued that Minter Ellison conceded a breach of trust in releasing the balance of the Subscription Moneys to ECCC on completion because, at that time, a Deposit Certificate as required by the Subscription
Agreement had not been obtained or provided to National Registries. The defence to the breach of trust are the terms of clause 3.4 and Schedule 4.
Further Minter Ellison contended that if the non-conformity of the Deposit
Certificate caused loss, that loss was limited to the amount represented by it and not the total amount invested. The difficulty with this submission is that if a conforming Deposit Certificate had been obtained, the thirty five per cent of the invested funds used to purchase it would have grown, by the end of then years, to the total amount invested. Further, if a non-conforming Deposit
Certificate was offered, the balance should not have been paid to ECCC.
Reliance was also placed on an absence of causation.

In his written submissions of 27 October 1998 Mr Pembroke, whilst conceding the breaches, submitted that they resulted from Mr Lewis' losing sight of the need to obtain conforming Deposit Certificates, or failing to appreciate the significance of them, or thinking, erroneously, that the investors were otherwise protected. Even assuming this was correct, it did not excuse the breaches of trust and negligence. However, Mr Pembroke submitted that Mr
Lewis' evidence to this effect was not challenged. He also noted, in his submission of 29 October 1998, that Mr Lewis frankly conceded his error in failing to inform Perpetual at the time of ECCC's failure to obtain bearer certificates, and in failing to seek to amend the Subscription Agreement. He added that Mr Lewis, while recognising the conflict position, sought to cure it by clause 3.4 and Schedule 4.

In response Mr Finch asserted that the quality of Minter Ellison's conduct was relevant because they asserted that the Fair Trading Act claim must fail because the conduct was inadvertent, and because an answer to the reliance on clause 3.4 and Schedule 4 was that Minter Ellison acted unconscionably or unconscientiously. It is in these circumstances, which Mr Heydon supported, that it becomes necessary to examine in detail the evidence of Mr Lewis, notwithstanding his concessions, to see whether his explanations, or the categorisation of them, should be accepted. This may well require a more critical view of his evidence than would otherwise have been necessary in the light of the concessions.

The Submissions On Behalf Of PTWA And PT 
Mr Heydon submitted that clause 2.1 of the Subscription Agreement created an express purpose trust over the Subscription Moneys of which trust Minter
Ellison were the trustees. He submitted Minter Ellison had a duty to hold the trust property to procure the provision of Deposit Certificates; to pay certain expenses and commissions and to pay the balance to ECCC to be used as its working capital; and in the event that those two purposes were not achieved on trust for the investor. Ultimately none of this was in issue.

The submission was that the Subscription Moneys were correctly treated by
Minter Ellison as trust moneys by being paid into their trust account for which receipts were given, and the moneys paid out to obtain the Deposit
Certificates were paid by trust account cheques. It was submitted that from that it flowed that if the document, which was procured under clause 3.3, was not a Deposit Certificate, Minter Ellison's duty was not to disburse the
Subscription Moneys, up to the Deposit Certificate purchase limit, and, if the document procured using part of the Subscription Moneys was not a Deposit
Certificate, their duty was not to part with the balance of the Subscription
Moneys on completion.

In my opinion these submissions, including the trustee position of Minter
Ellison, must be correct and, as I have indicated, they were hardly in issue.

Mr Pembroke conceded that Minter Ellison were wrong in not appreciating that a
Bearer Deposit Certificate was required under the terms of the Subscription
Agreement, and in not obtaining such a Deposit Certificate. He further conceded that it was no part of Minter Ellison's case to say that Mr Lewis did not make a mistake, or that as at 31 May 1993 he should have been aware of that. Accordingly, the liability of Minter Ellison for breach of trust and negligence, subject to the defences raised by clause 3.4 and Schedule 4, and the issue of causation, was not in issue. However, Mr Pembroke submitted that after 31 May 1993 he lost sight of or failed to appreciate the fact that the
Deposit Certificates should be bearer documents. In relation to paragraph 10 of Mr Lewis' statement, Mr Pembroke submitted that Mr Lewis was not cross- examined on the following explanation he gave:- "I did not intend to conceal any information from Perpetual in connection with the disbursement of funds held pursuant to the Subscription Agreements. I did not inform Perpetual that, as a result of the certificates being addressed to `ECCCL' and not to `bearer', there was a failure to comply with the Subscription Agreements, notwithstanding an irrevocable direction from ECCCL to Dresdner, because although the 31 May 1993 letter stated that the Subscription Agreements required certificates in bearer form, I lost sight of that fact or failed to appreciate its significance, and from June I thought that the investors' interests would be protected by the Deed of Confirmation, the Paying Agency Agreement and an irrevocable direction from ECCCL to Dresdner." 
It may be that Mr Lewis either lost sight of or failed to appreciate the significance of the fact, but that merely had the consequence, as Mr Pembroke agreed, that he did not know what he should do, so that there was a breach of trust and/or negligence by the continued disbursement of the money. Even making the assumption that the evidence was unchallenged, the explanation was not consistent. It is one thing to lose sight of a matter. It is another to fail to appreciate its significance, particularly in the present context.

So there can be no doubt of the role of Minter Ellison Mr Pembroke conceded that they acted as solicitors for ECCC; that they acted for PTWA and PT at completion and remitted documents to them; that they should have obtained a
Deposit Certificate as defined; and that in failing to do so Minter Ellison were in breach of trust and, subject to there being a duty, which was denied having regard to clause 3.4 and Schedule 4, negligent. It was submitted that they were protected by clause 3.4 and Schedule 4 from any breach of trust.

In relation to the nature of the conduct of Mr Lewis, which may well become relevant when regard is being had to the Fair Trading Act claim, Mr Pembroke submitted that whilst Mr Lewis was negligent his conduct did not have the necessary quality to attract the provisions of s.11. Mr Pembroke submitted that all that Mr Lewis was coming to Court to say was that he made "an egregious error but I did not appreciate what I was doing". At least one difficulty with this submission was the answer of Mr Lewis at Tp.254:- "Q. Isn't the best explanation of you having failed to contact the trustee that this was not said to you, and that you simply did not notice the defects in the Certificate of Deposit? 
A. No." 
Further, as I have noted earlier the purpose of calling Mr Lewis could only have been to seek to advance Minter Ellison's case in some way. Hence, a critical appraisal of his evidence is required.

I shall recount the evidence of Mr Lewis in some detail for the reasons to which I have referred. I have come to the conclusion that in performing the duties on behalf of PTWA and PT Mr Lewis was grossly negligent. He was, in my opinion, aware at all times that there was a requirement that the Deposit
Certificate should be a bearer document; that such a document was critical to the whole arrangement and, particularly, to the protection of the investors; and that ECCC not only did not provide such a document, but even when the matter was drawn to its attention forcefully by Minter Ellison, it continued to refuse to supply it. There was, in my opinion, an obvious duty on his part to advise PTWA and PT that this was occurring, with which he failed to comply.
What is more, I agree with his concession that on one reading of the letter to
National Registries, in so far as it referred to a certificate pursuant to clause 3 of the Subscription Agreement, it was misleading. Minter Ellison raised the right to be excused as trustees but on the view to which I have come there is no basis for the granting of such relief.

His statement in paragraph 10 about losing sight of or failing to appreciate the significance of the requirement for certificates in bearer form, apparently from some time in June 1993, is inconsistent with his knowledge of the transaction and its requirements, with what he said he was told between 31
May and 21 June 1993 as recorded in paragraph 9 of that statement, and with paragraph 38 of his statement to ASC. It is also inconsistent with other evidence of his to which I shall refer and sits uneasily with the assertion in paragraph 5 of his witness statement that, as he understood it, the investment structure proposed by ECCC "never required the provision of a negotiable financial instrument which could be traded". That evidence was clearly wrong and must, having regard to all his evidence, have been wrong to his knowledge.

The Evidence Of Mr Lewis 
In his witness statement, Exhibit ME 1, Mr Lewis said that in the period between 4 May 1993 and December 1995 ECCC was a client of Minter Ellison and he was the responsible partner, under whose supervision and control all work in connection with the drafting of the contractual documents relating to the subscription for Preference Shares was carried out. That included the
Information Memorandum, the Paying Agency Agreement, the Subscription
Agreements and various other documents. He was also the responsible partner under whose supervision and control the funds held by Minter Ellison, pursuant to clause 2.1 of the Subscription Agreements, were disbursed.

He identified Mr Gaffney as a Senior Solicitor specialising in securities industry law, who had most of the day to day control subject to his supervision. Mr Shaw was an Articled Clerk and Ms Lightfoot was a Junior
Solicitor.

Mr Lewis said that prior to these transactions he had no professional or personal dealings in relation to Deposit Certificates. As he understood it, the investment structure proposed by ECCC "never required the provision of a negotiable financial instrument which could be traded", but that the deposit was to be held by a bank under the control of the Paying Agent until maturity.
He thought that a Deposit Certificate, i.e. the document required by the various agreements, "was a document from the bank certifying that it held the moneys on deposit and stating the terms on which the moneys were held". In view of the fact that the documentation drafted under his supervision required a Bearer Deposit Certificate this, if I may say so with respect, was an extraordinary statement.

In paragraph 6 he said that during the period between 4 May 1993 and 8
December 1995 he believed that the documents referred to as "Certificates of
Deposit" provided to National Registries following each of the settlements were Certificates of Deposit, i.e. Deposit Certificates, issued by Dresdner,
Westpac and NatWest respectively. In the light of the totality of his evidence and the concessions made I do not accept this.

In paragraph 7 he said that until the commencement of these proceedings he did not turn his mind to the fact that there would be a failure by ECCC to comply with the strict requirements of the Subscription Agreements, if the Deposit
Certificate was addressed to it and not to bearer. He said it never crossed his mind that there was any trust or duty owed to Perpetual, or any possible breach of trust or breach of duty by Minter Ellison, by reason of the Deposit
Certificates being addressed to ECCC and not to "bearer", or by reason of his failure to inform PTWA or PT of that fact. Once again this evidence is incredible. If it is correct the only reasonable conclusion is that Mr Lewis never directed his attention to the form and implementation of the commercial arrangements, which he had the final responsibility for setting up, or to the duties Minter Ellison were undertaking. Such a posture is at odds with the evidence that clause 3.4 and Schedule 4 were inserted to shield Minter Ellison from the potential conflict of interest. None-the-less he continued that the letter dated 31 May 1993 from Minter Ellison to ECCC was written by Mr Gaffney and initialled by Mr Gaffney alongside his signature. He said, paragraph 8:- "I did not give the letter critical attention, because I had a high regard for Mr Gaffney. I did not notice the inconsistency between the letter dated 13 May 1993 and the letter dated 31 May 1993 relating to the person in whose name the Certificate of Deposit should be issued. Nor did I appreciate the significance of the failure to comply with the `bearer' requirements in the definition of `Deposit Certificate' to which the letter referred." 
He continued, in paragraph 9, that between 31 May and 21 June 1993 he believed he was informed by Mr Gatland, Mr Senese or Mr Gaffney in words to the effect that:- "It has not been intended that the Certificates of Deposit be in bearer form because of the tax advice from KPMG. In order to protect the investors, there will be the Deed of Confirmation, which you have already drafted, and an irrevocable direction from ECCCL to the bank." 
He said it did not occur to him that it was necessary to amend the form of
Subscription Agreement to effect this change to the investment structure and, if he had realised it was necessary to do so, he would have requested that the definition of "Deposit Certificate" be amended. This evidence, if it is to be accepted, means, once again, that Mr Lewis was not paying any attention to the matter.

In paragraph 10 he said:- "I did not intend to conceal any information from Perpetual in connection with the disbursement of funds held pursuant to the Subscription Agreements. I did not inform Perpetual that, as a result of the certificates being addressed to `ECCCL' and not to "bearer", there was a failure to comply with the Subscription Agreements, notwithstanding an irrevocable direction from ECCCL to Dresdner, because although the 31 May 1993 letter stated that the Subscription Agreements required certificates in bearer form, I lost sight of that fact or failed to appreciate its significance, and from June I thought that the investors' interests would be protected by the Deed of Confirmation, the Paying Agency Agreement and an irrevocable direction from ECCCL to Dresdner." 
A fair reading of paragraphs 8 and 10 indicates that as at 31 May 1993 Mr
Lewis understood that there was non compliance with the Bearer Deposit
Certificate requirement, but did not appreciate the significance of the
Deposit Certificate. This evidence is very difficult to accept in the light of all the documentation and Mr Lewis' knowledge of the transaction. I do not accept it.

He said that between June and 18 October 1993 he did not turn his mind to what, if any, was his precise legal duty to Perpetual, i.e. PTWA or PT. He was conscious that ECCC was his client, but he added that he would have informed
Perpetual if he thought there were any material deficiencies in the Deposit
Certificates procured by ECCC and lodged with the Paying Agent. The fact is he did know of this and did not inform Perpetual. He added that before informing
Perpetual he would have first informed ECCC and requested that the deficiency be explained or corrected and, if he did not receive a satisfactory response, he would have told ECCC that he proposed to inform Perpetual of the deficiency and only then would he have informed Perpetual. This merely highlights the preference for the interests of ECCC to those of PTWA and PT, which Mr Lewis displayed.

As I have said it was not in issue that Minter Ellison acted in breach of trust and were negligent, subject to the defences to which I have referred.
Minter Ellison failed, in acting as agent for PTWA and PT as it was conceded they were, to obtain the Deposit Certificates in the correct form. Mr Pembroke conceded the negligence, but said that it resulted from Mr Lewis' overlooking the requirements of the Subscription Agreement. Mr Pembroke made the submission on several occasions that Mr Lewis was a "big picture" man, who did not condescend to the particularity of the documentation with which he was dealing. This position of Mr Lewis was by no means accepted by other parties.
They submitted that he was aware at all material times of the problem and pointed, firstly, to his statement to ASC of 25 February 1998: Exhibit &4D 7. Mr Lewis said that this statement was prepared by ASC, but he agreed that before signing it he read it and satisfied himself it was true.

In paragraph 38 of that statement Mr Lewis said:- "In dealing with the settlements arising in the initial investments in ECCC, Gaffney and I were concerned in relation to the form of the Deposit Certificates. These Deposit Certificates appeared to be in the name of ECCC and did not appear to be in bearer form. A letter was sent to Senes, dated 31 May 1993, expressing a number of concerns including the form of the Deposit Certificate. We advised that confirmation should be sought from Dresdner as to the interest of the preference shareholders in the Deposit Certificates and that all future Deposit Certificates should be in bearer form. Now produced and shown to me and marked ... is a letter from Minter Ellison to Senes dated 31 May 1993." 
There was no reference in that paragraph, nor elsewhere in that statement, that he lost sight of that fact or failed to appreciate its significance. The statement is also inconsistent with paragraph 5 of his witness statement.

Mr Lewis was cross-examined, firstly, by Mr Downes. He accepted responsibility for the letter of 31 May 1993 and, after being shown it, he confirmed that it was the letter referred to in paragraph 8 of his witness statement. He agreed that in the third line on the last page of that letter a reference was made to the fact that all further Deposit Certificates should be issued in bearer form, and he said he thought it was correct that that contained within it the implied statement that prior certificates were not in bearer form. He agreed he was aware of that when he signed the letter and:- "Q. So that at the time this letter was sent to EC Consolidated, you personally were aware that certificates until that point of time, were not in bearer form? 
A. Yes." 
He said he was concerned about that fact and that he expressed that concern in his statement to ASC. He said, Tp.129, that he believed that to comply with the Subscription Agreement they should have been in bearer form and that, on 2
June 1993, he signed a letter sending a Deposit Certificate to the Paying
Agent. It was put to him that in the letter nothing was said about the concerns that he had as to whether the Deposit Certificate complied with the
Subscription Agreement, with which he agreed. He was asked whether he would agree that his letter was misleading, which question I allowed after objection was taken. He replied "It could be, on one reading of it". He denied that it was deceptive.

Mr Finch commenced to cross-examine Mr Lewis at Tp.131. He said that he had been advising Mr Senes and the ECCC Group of Companies for approximately two years prior to May 1993. He was taken through the various proposals for the arrangement which had been put forward, including the various changes in the proposed structure and, at Tp.150, he was asked whether he recalled that the idea of a bank guarantee for providing security was replaced in June 1992 by what were called bearer securities. He did not recall the timing, but he did recall that there was a change away from the bank guarantee. He said that he did not become involved in any detailed consideration of the type of documentation, his involvement being as the supervising partner "at that stage".

At Tp.151 he said that when he received Mr Gaffney's memorandum of 29 June he had a general understanding of what a bearer document was, and that he would have understood generally that a bearer certificate included a financial instrument negotiable by delivery. He said the major work in preparing the
Preliminary Information Memorandum would have been carried out by Mr Gaffney and he could not recall reading it, but he believed he may well have done so.
He was referred to the definition of Deposit Certificate in it, and he said he thought he would have understood that definition, namely that a Bearer
Certificate of Deposit was one negotiable by delivery. He said he recalled that he understood the intention was that the Deposit Certificate was to be issued by a Prime Bank. It is obvious, that by this stage a number of documents were being prepared by Minter Ellison. Mr Lewis agreed that by 21
September 1992 he had received and looked at the latest drafts of the
Subscription Agreement, the Articles of Association and the Paying Agency
Agreement.

At Tp.158 he agreed that by September 1992 he had considered what the Deposit
Certificate was and, at Tp.159, he said he understood what it was. He added that he knew what a Deposit Certificate "was going to be". Thus from an early stage he had this appreciation, which is inconsistent with his evidence in paragraph 5 of his witness statement. His evidence that thereafter he lost sight of it, or failed to appreciate its significance, is difficult to accept because, inter alia, it remained a constant topic for consideration. He said he regarded the Deposit Certificate as better than a guarantee because one had to enforce a guarantee, whereas a Deposit Certificate enabled one to produce it to the bank and "get paid". He considered the bearer nature of the instrument an important but not essential facet. Mr Lewis also agreed that in considering the possible insolvency of ECCC, Minter Ellison were seeking to make sure that the Deposit Certificate would not be an asset of ECCC, which arose by transferring the ownership from it to a Cook Islands company.

Mr Lewis agreed, Tp.164, that on settlement he envisaged that Minter Ellison would attend, hold certain moneys and disburse them upon "a Complying Deed being sighted", and that it was plain to him that it was important for Minter
Ellison to understand what was required by the Subscription Agreement by way of Deposit Certificate, so that they knew what to do and, if there was not that understanding Minter Ellison could not properly discharge their obligations at completion: Tp.164. So much was obvious and makes less likely the prospect that he lost sight of or failed to appreciate the significance of the Deposit Certificate.

Mr Lewis was referred to a Certificate of Deposit, which was issued towards the end of 1992, which he agreed was not a Bearer Certificate of Deposit. Mr
Lewis agreed it would have been prudent for Minter Ellison to have responded to the letter by stating that the document was not a Bearer Deposit
Certificate. He said he did nothing about it personally, and he agreed that either he or Mr Gaffney should have done something to indicate to those sending the document that it did not comply with the requirements of a Deposit
Certificate. This showed a clear understanding on his part of the essential characteristics of a Deposit Certificate. At Tp.166 Mr Lewis agreed that the adequacy of the Deposit Certificate had to be considered before completion took place.

He was referred to the first transaction, which occurred on 4 December 1992, and to a letter he wrote stating that Minter Ellison were pleased to confirm their being able to act as agent in relation to the completion of the acquisition by Letcher & Jeffery Nominees of shares pursuant to the
Subscription Agreement. He said that conformed to his recollection and evidence that it was his understanding of Minter Ellison's role that they acted at completion as the agent of the shareholder: Tp.167. He was taken through the letter and referred to the passage which said that Minter Ellison would disburse the balance of the Subscription Moneys in accordance with clause 4.3 of the Subscription Agreement, and that ECCC would procure that the appropriate Share Certificate was sealed and delivered and that the Deposit
Certificate was delivered to the Paying Agent. He continued:- "Q. Do you recall that that accurately sets out the allocation of responsibilities, according to your understanding at the time? 
A. Yes.

Q. And that, so far as you understood it, responsibility for delivery of the Deposit Certificate for the paying agent was ECCCL's responsibility as set out there? 
A. Correct.

Q. Responsibility for sighting the CD, confirming it was a CD, and then disbursing, was Minter's? 
A. Yes": Tp.168. 
Thus Mr Lewis accepted the responsibility of Minter Ellison's confirming that the Deposit Certificate was one which conformed with the Subscription
Agreement.

In that letter it was stated that a representative of Minter Ellison's Sydney office "has been provided with a Certificate of Deposit". It is clear that there was some confusion about the form of the Deposit Certificate to be obtained in that transaction, although Mr Lewis agreed that if it was to be a
Deposit Certificate under the terms of the Subscription Agreement, it had to be a Bearer Deposit Certificate. He also agreed that failing to indicate that it had to be a bearer document left the Sydney representative, who had to collect the document, at a disadvantage, if he or she had not independently read the definition, and that the document furnished to the Sydney office was not sufficient to disclose the requirements of a Bearer Certificate, which was essential to enable the person attending at settlement to perform the task properly. However, Minter Ellison sent that document to National Registries and described it as Deposit Certificate Reference 447. He agreed it was not a
Bearer Deposit Certificate. Mr Lewis was obviously in a difficult position at this stage and he had to agree that Mr Gaffney had not conveyed the instruction to obtain a Bearer Deposit Certificate. He gave some somewhat strange evidence: Tpp.174-175:- "Q. He ought to have? 
A. On one view, yes.

Q. On a view that he was conforming with the Subscription Agreement? 
A. On a view that if he was to comply with the definition of a Deposit Certificate in the Subscription Agreement, yes.

Q. He should either have said: make sure this is a bearer document or he should have annexed a bearer document as an example? 
A. If he was complying with the definition in the Subscription Agreement, yes." 
This evidence was evasive. There was never any suggestion that there did not have to be compliance with the requirements of the Subscription Agreement in relation to the Deposit Certificate.

I said the evidence was somewhat strange because there was no suggestion that the definition had been changed or that Minter Ellison were entitled to obtain anything other than a conforming Deposit Certificate. There was no excuse for not complying with the requirements of the Subscription Agreement. Mr Lewis agreed that he was not aware of a reason why Minter Ellison should have departed from the definition in the Subscription Agreement, although he said he was aware of a reason why they did, namely:- "That is that the structure of the investment scheme has changed and that it was not intended by the client that they purchase a bearer certificate.

Q. Where does that appear in the Subscription Agreement? 
A. It's not in there.

Q. Where does that appear in any instruction from the trustee to Minters? 
A. It does not appear in any instruction from - well, there was no trustee at that stage.

Q. From the shareholder to Minters? 
A. It did not appear in the Subscription Agreement. It was not in the Subscription Agreement.

Q. Was not in any instruction from the shareholder to Minters? 
A. No." 
Mr Lewis then continued that the reason the Deposit Certificate was not in bearer form was "the decision of our client", namely ECCC, and:- "A. And the decision was that it would not be a bearer certificate. That it was to be a certificate issued by an off-shore bank and it was to be in the name of ECCCL in trust for the Cook Islands company, I believe. The time of when all that happened, I can't help you.

Q. So that there was a substantial fundamental change, on your evidence, to the definition of the security as a result of the decision of ECCCL? 
A. Correct." 
Mr Lewis said he could not be certain when the decision was made but it was communicated to Minter Ellison and "we were aware of it in January 1993".

Mr Lewis agreed that a decision to alter the characteristics of the security would have affected the accuracy of a number of documents in the proposal and it would have rendered the Information Memorandum, the Preliminary Information
Memorandum, the Subscription Agreement and the Paying Agency Agreement all "wrong". He said, Tp.177, that as he had said in his statement he did not put his mind to that fact. He was referred to paragraph 9 of his statement, which stated that between 31 May and 21 June 1993 he was informed in the terms to which I have referred, and he was asked whether that was the change of policy about which he had been giving evidence, to which he replied "Yes": Tp.178.
That meant that he was saying in his witness statement that he was not told until May or June 1993, which he said he believed to be true and he could not recall being told prior to that date. He then said that by looking at the documentation he was aware that there was a change in the structure, so far as the intent of ECCC was concerned, from late December 1992 and certainly early and:- "The first that I can remember becoming aware of it was after on or about and after 31 May between those dates." 
It was put to him that at the end of May 1993 he and Mr Gaffney thought that the Deposit Certificate still had to be in bearer form. He said he did not agree with that. He was referred to paragraph 38 of the statement he made to
ASC, which I have quoted. He was asked, Tp.179, whether at least at 8 December he was still of the view that the Deposit Certificates had to be in bearer form. He denied that, although he said he was saying "there" that he and Mr Gaffney were concerned about the form of certificates on that day: "It's not that we knew. It was the use of your word `knew' that causes me not to be able to agree with you". The evidence continued:- "Q. But the use of your expression in the second sentence of paragraph 38 makes it plain that the reason you were concerned is because they were not bearer certificates? 
A. That was one of the reasons that we were concerned.

Q. Let's concentrate on that one alone. You would not have had that concern, neither would Mr Gaffney, had there been a change in policy communicated to you by that time? 
A. What happened was that the policy was communicated to us in January, December/January. On 31 May, I did not - I had forgotten about the change - if I knew and if Mr Gaffney knew we had forgotten about the change of policy or structure and we raised the question of why were these not in bearer form, it was subsequently answered by the client as to why it was not in bearer form.

Q. Pausing there. You say that the change in policy was communicated to you in December/January? 
A. It was communicated to us, yes.

Q. Who at the firm received that communication? 
A. The first time it was discussed was on 24 December, I think - and I am only going by reading the memo. I can't recall the discussion.

Q. You don't put that discussion in your statement? 
A. No, I don't, because I don't recall that discussion. There is only a memo on the file mentioning it": Tp.179. 
The evidence of Mr Lewis, if I may say so, was very confused on this aspect.
He was making a number of contradictory assertions, which included his having forgotten about it. At Tpp.179-180 he continued:- "Q. I will come back to all of that in a moment. Let's go back to 8 December. On no view of your evidence as you give it this afternoon can Minters have thought to have taken the view at that settlement that anything other than a Deposit Certificate conforming to the Subscription Agreement should have been received? 
A. I agree that we should have got a certificate in accordance with the Subscription Agreement.

Q. There was simply no reason why Minter Ellison could and should have received the document? 
A. No reason, bearing in mind the Subscription Agreement. As I said, I understand that the reason - I gave you the reason why.

Q. The problem with that reason is, of course, that if you receive a document which is not a conforming Certificate of Deposit prior to being informed of any change, you would agree, would you not, that you simply breached the obligation to receive a conforming Certificate of Deposit? 
A. If that was, correct.

Q. It is so as at 8 December? 
A. I can't agree with you on that. I'm not certain.

Q. Can you give us the evidence about what it was that relieved Minters of the obligation to receive a conforming Certificate of Deposit at the 8 December settlement? 
A. I can't. I can't recall it. And as we don't have our file, I can't be certain. There's nothing on our file. And the documentation I have seen, is nothing that I've ever seen.

Q. By way of performing a cross-check on the existence of any change in security, had ECCCL informed Minters that it had decided to alter the security, you have already agreed that a number of the central documents in the proposal would be wrong? 
A. Yes." 
He agreed that those errors could not be cured unilaterally by ECCC or Minter
Ellison, and that as 8 December 1992 none of the other parties had consented to any change so that there was no basis on which Minter Ellison could properly have received anything other than a Bearer Certificate of Deposit. In these circumstances Mr Lewis agreed, Tp.181, that it was simply not correct to say to National Registries that Minter Ellison were enclosing a Deposit
Certificate pursuant to clause 3 of the Paying Agency Agreement. At this stage
Mr Lewis became slightly desperate:- "Q. Does it not say that pursuant to clause 3 of the Paying Agency Agreement `we enclose the following documents: (1) deposit certificate'? 
A. Yes. But I think if you - I mean I just noticed that it says small d, small c. I'm not suggesting that that has any particular relevance.

Q. You are not suggesting that any reasonable person reading this could think otherwise than what was enclosed was purported to be the Deposit Certificate in relation to the Agreement? 
A. No, I'm not suggesting that": Tp.181. 
I said that Mr Lewis was becoming somewhat desperate because he was apparently, at least momentarily, prepared to clutch at the straw of small case "d" and small case "c". It seemed to me at the time, and still does, that he immediately realised the futility of that approach, but the fact that he had even resorted to the suggestion showed how difficult he was finding the evidence.

Mr Lewis was referred to Minter Ellison's letter to Mr Jeffery of 10 December in respect of the first settlement. He agreed that was the first example of Minter Ellison's reporting to the shareholder pursuant to their obligations under the Subscription Agreement. He said the letter forwarded certain documents and advised that Minter Ellison were instructed not to give a copy of the Deposit Certificate. He confirmed his earlier evidence that Minter
Ellison were not to disburse moneys on behalf of the shareholder until they had sighted a conforming Deposit Certificate, and he agreed that he would not have sent a Share Certificate to the shareholder:- ".. if you thought that you had not received a conforming Certificate of Deposit": Tp.182. 
He also agreed that he would not, in the normal course:- ".. simply attempt to mislead a shareholder by pretending that a Certificate of Deposit had been received when it hasn't." 
He agreed a letter written on 8 December 1992 envisaged, as part of the discharge of Minter Ellison's obligations as agent, the sending to the shareholder of, amongst other things, a copy of the Deposit Certificate, and further that the letter of 12 December 1992 recorded that ECCC told Minter
Ellison not to send a copy to the shareholder, although he was unable to recall the circumstances in which that occurred, and:- "Q. Will you not agree that Minters should have asked ECCCL why it should not send a copy of the Certificates of Deposit to the shareholder? 
A. In hindsight, I think that's right.

Q. There was, in the absence of sending a copy, room for considerable doubt about the motives of ECCCL in making such a request, was there not? 
A. I wouldn't put it as high as that.

Q. There was certainly room for the possibility of error being made? 
A. Certainly, yes.

Q. Can you think of any good reason, looking at the document, why no copy could be made? 
A. I cannot think of any good reason.

Q. Can you think of any good reason why Minters should have complied with this request from ECCCL? 
A. Because we're instructed to do so by our client, I think.

Q. What Minters did is confirm that a Certificate of Deposit had been provided for the Paying Agent with the stated value and a maturity date which is set out? 
A. Yes. 
Q. What Minters don't do is tell the shareholder that it wasn't a bearer document? 
A. Correct.

Q. And that at that date it had to be a bearer document? 
A. Yes.

Q. There was simply no reason why Minters should not have told the shareholder that was not a bearer document? 
A. There could have been a reason if there had to have been a decision of ECCCL": Tp.183. 
Mr Lewis was asked whether it was a possibility that Minter Ellison may not have told the shareholder that it was not a bearer document because Minter
Ellison, by then, knew of a change of policy by ECCC as to what security it would be offering. He said he thought the change came later, and:- "Q. If the reason was that Minters was aware of a change in policy by ECCCL which had not been reflected in any agreement by any of the shareholders? 
A. It was an error. It was an error." 
Mr Lewis was referred to a diary note of Mr Gaffney, which recorded "prefer bearer CDs", although he did not appear to have any knowledge of the diary note, and to a meeting on the date that note bore, namely 24 December 1992, about which he had spoken in paragraph 32 of his statement to ASC: Exhibit &4D 7. He said he did not have a recollection of the full details of the discussions when he made that statement, but was relying on the file note.
Paragraph 32 stated:- "On 24 December 1992, Gaffney and I had a telephone conversation with Senese and Jenny Clarke (`Clarke') of KPMG Peat Marwick. Clarke stated for taxation purposes ECCC and Bullion should enter into a further agreement relating to the deposit certificates. The areas to be dealt with in the agreement involved a confirmation that ECCC would act as the agent for Bullion in relation to the deposit certificates and give an irrevocable direction to National Registries in favour of Bullion in relation to the deposit certificate. Clarke stated that the deposit certificates should be in bearer form. Now produced to me and marked `M00109282' is a copy of a file note prepared by Gaffney of our telephone conversation with Senese and Clarke on 24 December 1992. Minter Ellison was involved in drafting a Deed of Confirmation between ECCC and Bullion. Now produced to me and marked M00100042 is a copy of a Deed of Confirmation between ECCC and Harper dated 4 May 1993." 
The statement to ASC was signed by Mr Lewis on 25 February 1998. Mr Lewis said that the statement was made on the basis that ASC drafted it and produced it to him without an interview, but with all the documents attached, which he read in association with the statement "and I believe that to be correct". Mr
Lewis did not seek to resile from his acknowledgment that the statement was true and correct and he said, Tp.186, that the statement was prepared as a result of his looking at the documents "and then being satisfied that that was correct". From that point he agreed that having looked at the file note he was satisfied that what was said in paragraph 32 was correct.

Mr Lewis was cross-examined as to whether Ms Clarke said that the Deposit
Certificate should be in bearer form. He said he thought that she would not have said that and:- "Q. Precisely. Mr Senese didn't want to have a bearer CD did he? He wanted to change the security? 
A. I think that would have been true at that time.

Q. And Ms Clarke didn't want bearer CD because it was inconvenient for her tax arrangement? 
A. I think that's correct.

Q. The only people there who could have said Deposit Certificates should be in bearer form was either you or Mr Gaffney? 
A. Yes, I think that is correct. Therefore, I was in error, in paragraph 32 of my statement to the ASC": Tp.187. 
Therefore, as from at least 24 December 1992, Mr Lewis and Mr Gaffney were aware that neither Mr Senese nor Ms Clarke wanted the Deposit Certificate to be in bearer form, whereas Mr Gaffney, apparently, was stating that it should be. At that stage both Mr Lewis and he must have been aware of that requirement and its significance.

This makes it clear to me that as from the end of 1992 there was an issue as to whether the Deposit Certificates should be in bearer form, which was raised quite starkly, and in circumstances where Mr Lewis appreciated that if the
Deposit Certificates were not in that form it would be necessary to amend the
Information documentation, the Subscription Agreement and the Paying Agency
Agreement.

Mr Lewis was referred to a file note of Mr Gaffney of 24 December 1992. He was asked whether, by the end of the first transaction in December 1992, Minter
Ellison had been informed of any effective change in the definition of the
Deposit Certificate, and he replied that there was nothing in the documents at which he had looked to suggest that. He also agreed that Minter Ellison had not told the shareholder in that first Subscription Agreement of any such change, and that had Minter Ellison thought there had been such a change it would have been an essential obligation for them to tell the shareholder.

Mr Lewis agreed he would have been concerned if he had seen ECCC marketing the product with the document continuing to use a definition of Deposit
Certificate, which was not applicable, if that had been brought to his attention and he had put his mind to it. He also agreed he would have expected any competent solicitor at Minter Ellison to take the same view.

At this point Mr Lewis' position, and thus that of Minter Ellison, was becoming difficult. Minter Ellison had prepared the documentation on the basis that the Deposit Certificate would be a bearer document. That documentation included not only Agreements, but Information Memoranda to the public on the basis of which, inter alia, the public were being asked to enter into such
Agreements. Notwithstanding the significance of the Deposit Certificate in bearer form, Mr Lewis had become aware that ECCC and its tax advisers did not favour Deposit Certificates in bearer form and that, on the first transaction, no such Deposit Certificate had been handed over. There can be no doubt the situation was drawn to his attention and, in my opinion, there can be no doubt that he should have directed his mind to it. Certainly Mr Gaffney did. The difficulty from Minter Ellison's point of view was that they were acting as agent for the investors and, as was not in issue, had a duty to ensure that conforming Deposit Certificates were provided. Alternatively, if the Deposit
Certificates were not, they had a clear duty to advise their trustee principals.

Mr Lewis was taken to the transaction in early May 1993 at which time he agreed Minter Ellison continued acting as the agent, that nothing had changed about that, and that nothing ever changed about that so far as all the
Subscription Agreements were concerned: Tp.189.

Mr Lewis agreed that the Certificate of Deposit proffered at the May settlement did not conform with the requirements for a Deposit Certificate and:- "Q. This document should not have been accepted as a CD on settlement on 4 May? 
A. It was not correct.

Q. It should not have been accepted, as I said? 
A. And it wasn't sent to the Paying Agent accordingly.

Q. Before one reaches that point, it shouldn't have been accepted by Minters as a CD conforming? 
A. I think that's correct." 
In took three questions to elicit a frank answer to the first.

Mr Finch put to Mr Lewis that Minter Ellison should not have gone ahead with the settlement or disbursed any moneys pursuant to the receipt of that document, to which he asked, somewhat unresponsively, whether it had been forwarded to the Paying Agent and:- "Q. I am not so much worried about forwarding it to the Paying Agent. What I am concerned about, at the moment, is participating at all in the settlement, on the basis that this did not constitute a valid document? 
A. Yes. We shouldn't have collected the money.

Q. Nor taken any other step on completion on the assumption or basis that this was a conforming Certificate? 
A. I agree with you." 
This highlighted the problems Minter Ellison confront in this litigation, which, I appreciate, on one view, is sought to be explained by the admission of breach of trust and negligence. As Mr Pembroke put it, at one stage, Mr
Lewis appreciated that there was negligence on the part of Minter Ellison and sought to "purge" that by giving evidence. I think the more appropriate analysis is that Minter Ellison, through Mr Lewis and, perhaps to a lesser extent, Mr Gaffney, were not merely negligent, but derelict in their duty as agent for the investors, which constituted a breach of trust, in circumstances where Minter Ellison owed a duty both to ECCC and the investor and, in these circumstances, clearly preferred the interest of ECCC. The continued failure of Minter Ellison to advise the investor that conforming Deposit Certificates were not being obtained was, in my opinion, inexcusable. I do not accept there was any excuse for it, nor that it was a result of oversight. In saying that I have regard to the criticality of a conforming Deposit Certificate so far as the investor, and those who stood behind the investor i.e. the ultimate investors, was and were concerned.

Mr Lewis was taken to what the documents recorded as happening at settlement.
He agreed the Deposit Certificate was not "a correct Certificate of Deposit" and that in hindsight Mr Gaffney ought not to have allowed settlement to take place. He agreed that the documents showed that Mr Gaffney was to hold the
Deposit Certificate, which was to be forwarded to National Registries by
Minter Ellison as solicitor for ECCC.

Mr Lewis read a memorandum from Mr Gaffney to him of 13 May 1993, which, he conceded, raised the possibility of a problem regarding the insolvency implications of the provision of a Deposit Certificate to National Registries.
He said he would have considered the problem, and:- "Q. What he was telling you was that the security provisions in the Subscription Agreement, which had been fine tuned over the last more than a year perhaps, still had possible adverse solvency implications and required attention, wasn't he? 
A. Yes. What we were attempting to do, what this letter was attempting to do, was to make certain that if certain things happened in terms of the insolvency of the entities the CDs weren't going to be attacked by an insolvency practitioner appointed to that entity." 
The letter of 13 May 1993 called for a Deposit Certificate to replace the letter from Dresdner received at settlement as a matter of urgency, and Mr
Lewis agreed that between 6 and 13 May 1993 someone from Minter Ellison spoke to Mr Senese about that. He also agreed that it "was absolutely plain" that the document dated 4 May 1993 was not a Deposit Certificate, and that Minter
Ellison were writing "a fairly stiff letter" to ECCC requiring it to provide "a correct form".

Mr Lewis agreed the matter was important, that the implications of it were that the security required to support the investment had not been obtained, that moneys had been disbursed without the required security, and that the letter from Dresdner dated 4 May was "unsatisfactory" and "was not in a form which we considered was correct": Tpp.195-196.

Mr Lewis said he thought it was correct that the sending of the incorrect
Deposit Certificate was postponed until the matter was resolved.

Mr Lewis was taken to the letter of 17 June 1993 to PTWA, which he agreed was in a very different form from that sent after the December 1992 settlement. Mr
Lewis could not remember why the change had been made, but he agreed that
Minter Ellison did not tell PTWA that a Deposit Certificate had been received nor that ECCC had instructed Minter Ellison not to "copy the Certificate of
Deposit to anybody". He said that unlike what had occurred in December 1992 thereafter Minter Ellison, as agent for the shareholder on completion, made no report to the shareholder, but just forwarded the documents as ECCC's solicitors, pursuant to its obligation to do so. He did not know why there was a change in policy, and repeated that he did not know the answer to the question why Minter Ellison decided not to report at all as agent for the shareholder about what happened at completion. He said he would not entirely agree that that was an essential part of the agent's duty because he thought that the principal would have realised, once it received the Subscription
Agreement, that there had been a settlement. Of course, that may well be so, but the essential and critical question was whether there had been an effective settlement and, without a Bearer Deposit Certificate, there had not been. Therefore, failing to tell the principal that no such Deposit
Certificate had been received, but merely sending out the counterpart
Subscription Agreement and the Share Certificate and leaving the principal to assume that there had been a settlement, was misleading. Mr Lewis insisted that the letter sent to the shareholder was written by Minter Ellison as solicitors for ECCC and, Tp.201:- "Q. As I understand it, you regarded Minter Ellison as acting for two parties at the settlement? 
A. No. We acted - sorry, no is not quite the right answer. We acted as solicitor for ECCCL. We agreed that we could not act as solicitor for any other party. So, because they wanted us to attend at the settlement for the purposes of undertaking the obligations of the company's solicitors in the Subscription Agreement, we agreed to act as the agent for the investor so as to create a responsibility for the - so that we could deal with the moneys in accordance with the Subscription Agreement as the company's solicitors, as ECCCL's solicitors. So we were at the settlement in our capacity as solicitors for ECCCL, but we also had a role as the agent for the investor.

Q. That's what I put to you, I think? 
A. We had different obligations to two different parties, I think. 
Q. Nobody from the investor was there? 
A. No, not that I am aware.

Q. At settlement? 
A. No, not that I am aware.

Q. Did you ever report to the investor as to what you had done on the investor's behalf? 
A. No, not that I am aware.

Q. Do I take it from that, that you do not regard the letter of 17 June 1993 as telling the investor anything about what happened on settlement? 
A. No, I don't regard that as telling them anything." 
The result of this evidence is that the letter of 17 June 1993, and its various counterparts which followed, were not regarded by Mr Lewis as communicating anything to the investor about what happened at settlement. This would include, of course, not telling the investor whether settlement had been completed in a regular or an irregular fashion. However, he continued that he thought it may be correct that by not telling the investor that anything had gone wrong, Minter Ellison represented to it that nothing had gone wrong, and he added:- "They might have assumed that": Tp.201. 
The evidence continued, Tpp.201-202:- "Q. Indeed, you saw nothing wrong as a solicitor, in attending the meeting in the dual capacities to which you have referred? 
A. We were concerned about that and that's why we went to such lengths to make it clear that we were not acting as solicitors for the investor and we were acting as agent and that's why the Subscription Agreement was tabled in the manner in which it was as well.

Q. As Minters saw it, and I mean you and others concerned within Minters, there was a clear bright line between what it was doing for ECCCL and what it was doing for the shareholder? 
A. Correct.

Q. At the settlement? 
A. Correct.

Q. And as Minters saw it, there wasn't conflict involved in doing that and Minters thought about that and decided to ..

A. We did think about that and decided to proceed.

Q. If you thought there was a conflict involved in acting in the dual capacities identified, you would have said so? 
A. The same way we said we couldn't act as solicitors for two parties.

Q. So, had you perceived the problem in attending as agent for the shareholder, for the purposes set out in the Subscription Agreement, and attending as solicitors for ECCCL for the purposes set out in the various documents, you would have said to both parties that you could not do so because of a conflict, had you perceived it? 
A. Had we perceived it.

Q. We can take it that you didn't perceive it? 
A. We didn't perceive that there was a conflict at that time.

Q. The reason you didn't think there was a conflict was not because you hadn't thought about the issue, it was because you had thought about it and decided that you couldn't properly act in the dual capacities? 
A. That was back when this structure was first established, yes. We didn't consider that position at any subsequent time.

Q. You didn't perceive any investors requiring you to reconsider that? 
A. Not that I can recall, but we certainly gave consideration in June as to what we had to do." 
Mr Lewis accepted that Minter Ellison were acting as agent for the investors on settlement. He seemed to draw a distinction between their acting as solicitors for ECCC and as "agent" for the investor, but he acknowledged, as I understand his evidence, that there were obligations to both parties and the difficulty in relation to those conflicting obligations had become clear by at least June 1993 when, according to Mr Lewis, Minter Ellison "certainly gave consideration" to what should be done. At that point there was a clear conflict of duty and Mr Lewis' answer indicates that was appreciated.

Mr Lewis also agreed that as and when Minter Ellison received information from
ECCC that it intended to act on the basis that the security definition in the
Subscription Agreement would not be adhered to by it, Minter Ellison would, as soon as practicable, have communicated that intention of ECCC to all relevant parties and in particular the shareholder and National Registries. His reply was:- "I agree, and we did not do that": Tp.203. 
He continued:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. Do you mean by that you came into a situation where you would have had to consider you should have done it and did not do it or you did not do it because no such situation arose? 
A. I think the situation did arise that there should have been an amendment to those documents and I did not cause it to be done." 
Whilst I concede, readily enough, that my question was inelegant, the answer made it obvious that Mr Lewis considered a situation had arisen, by at least
June 1993, although, in all probability, before, whereby ECCC did not intend to conform with the terms of the Subscription Agreement by providing the requisite Deposit Certificate, such that there should have been an amendment to the various documents, which Mr Lewis did not cause to be effected.

The implications of this situation were that Minter Ellison were aware, through Mr Lewis, that ECCC was not complying with the Subscription Agreement.
None-the-less Minter Ellison failed to advise the shareholders; continued to accept non-conforming Deposit Certificates; and continued to send out letters making no reference to the situation but from which Mr Lewis agreed the assumption could be drawn that the investor might have assumed that nothing was wrong: Tp.201. Minter Ellison continued sending certificates to National
Registries inferring that they complied. In my opinion there was not only breach of fiduciary duty and negligence involved on the part of Minter
Ellison, but there was a degree of misleading conduct perpetrated by those letters.

The only way in which this was sought to be overcome was that, in some way, Mr
Lewis lost sight of or failed to appreciate the significance of what was required, and from June thought that the investor's interests would be protected by the Deed of Confirmation, the Paying Agency Agreement and the irrevocable direction from ECCC to Dresdner.

At Tp.205 Mr Lewis agreed that Minter Ellison thought about the question of conflict and decided that given the differing roles that they perceived they were carrying out for ECCC and the shareholder there was none. It is very difficult to accept this conclusion because it was that situation which gave rise to the conflict.

Mr Lewis agreed that clause 2.1 required Minter Ellison to hold the
Subscription Moneys on trust, as to which he said there was no doubt in his mind at that time, and that when Minter Ellison first received the
Subscription Moneys from the shareholder they held it as trustee for the shareholder. Mr Lewis was taken back to the settlement in early May 1993. He said the Deposit Certificate received originally was not satisfactory, but he thought the one dated 1 June 1993 did conform. At Tp.208 Mr Lewis said it was not apparent to him, as at 13 May 1993, that the Deposit Certificate had to be a Bearer's Deposit Certificate. In itself that was a strange answer bearing in mind that Minter Ellison had drafted the Agreement. Mr Lewis was referred to paragraph 38 of his statement to ASC and, in particular, the first line:- "In dealing with the settlements arising in the initial investments in ECCC, Gaffney and I were concerned in relation to the form of the Deposit Certificates. These Deposit Certificates appeared to be in the name of ECCC and did not appear to be in bearer form. A letter was sent to Senese, dated 31 May 1993 expressing a number of concerns, including the form of the Deposit Certificate. We advised that confirmation should be sought from Dresdner as to the interests of preference shareholders in the Deposit Certificates and that all future Deposit Certificates should be in bearer form ..." 
He agreed that was a true statement of his appreciation at the time of the initial investments, and that it was apparent to him in December 1992 and May that the Deposit Certificates did not appear to be in bearer form. Having agreed with that proposition he said that he could not recall that it was apparent to him, and that he did not recall having examined the two Deposit
Certificates and coming to the conclusion that they were not in bearer form.
That led to his being asked what he intended to convey by the second sentence of paragraph 38 of his statement to ASC, and he said that referred to the letter of 31 May 1993. He continued:- "Q. Your evidence today is that it's possible that your concern as to the lack of a bearer characteristic of the Certificates of Deposit possibly did not arise until 31 May 1993? 
A. I believe that it's possible that that is so. I can't recall but I believe that that is possible." 
Mr Lewis was then referred to other documentation, including the letter of 13
May 1993 requesting a replacement as a matter of urgency.

At this point Mr Lewis' evidence, in my opinion, became unacceptable. The evidence to which I have referred, including his statement to ASC, makes it clear that Mr Lewis was aware from at least late December 1992 that ECCC had not furnished conforming Deposit Certificates and was disinclined to do so.
His evidence that he did not recognise that the Deposit Certificates were not in proper form or the problem to which that gave rise, or that he simply lost sight of or failed to appreciate those matters, is not credible.

He said he appreciated one of Minter Ellison's roles at settlement was as agent for the investor, and that that compelled Minter Ellison not to disburse the money until a conforming Deposit Certificate had been obtained; although he then said it was understood by those present when the money was released on May 1993 that it was a Deposit Certificate, although subsequently it was realised that was not correct. His evidence continued:- "Q. You appreciate, do you not, that the shareholder would have had a great interest in knowing that its moneys had been disbursed otherwise than in accordance with the Subscription Agreement? 
A. I can't speak for the shareholder.

Q. You expect they would have had such an interest, do you? 
A. No, I would have expected that, but they didn't.

Q. And as you record in later correspondence, you knew that it was at least a possibility that a shareholder might take the opportunity of rescinding the arrangement upon being informed that completion had not gone according to the requirements? 
A. A shareholder may have done that.

Q. And you accept, do you not, that you should have given the shareholder that opportunity, even on the limited appreciation you had as at 13 May 1993 of the defects in the document which had been provided on 4 May? 
A. I believe that we gave the opportunity to our client to correct the position because - that was our first obligation to our client.

Q. Is that how you appreciated that ECCCL's interests took precedence over the interests of the shareholder in so far as your role at completion was concerned? 
A. I wouldn't say that it took precedence, what we attempted to do was have our client correct its obligation to produce what we thought was a good certificate, and then if it hadn't have done that within a reasonable time we would have then probably taken different action.

Q. Why not inform both the shareholder and ECCCL; let the shareholder know that there had been, according to your understanding, a defective performance of your obligation at completion, and let ECCCL know that it could try to remedy that defect if the shareholder would allow it to? 
A. We didn't do that.

Q. Why not? 
A. I don't recall why we didn't do it. I think I believe it would have been to give the opportunity to our client to correct the position.

Q. There is no good reason that you can think of why Minters should not have given the shareholder notice, as it gave ECCCL notice, of the defect? 
A. Whether it's a - you think it's a good reason or not, the reason was that we asked our client to correct the position because it was - it was our client's obligation to buy the Certificate of Deposit under the Subscription Agreement": Tpp.212-213. 
Mr Lewis would not agree that Minter Ellison preferred the interests of ECCC to those of the shareholder, because, so he said, eventually a certificate was obtained, "that we considered was correct by our action". His reasoning was that Minter Ellison were attempting to obtain "a correct certificate", and he added that if Minter Ellison had not been able to obtain one "then we would have done something about it, but the client had clearly been indicating to us that he was getting the correct certificate". It was not in issue that a conforming Deposit Certificate was never furnished.

The difficulties were obvious. Mr Lewis said that nothing was done to protect the interests of the investor whilst ECCC considered whether it would give a correct certificate and, when pressed about this, Mr Lewis said that in hindsight "maybe we should have told the investor quicker".

The difficulties in which Mr Lewis placed Minter Ellison by not having the shareholder protected were fully exposed. It was also clear that Mr Lewis did not consider in any realistic way the position of the investor. Mr Lewis was left with his statements that Minter Ellison were giving ECCC every opportunity to correct the position whilst leaving the investor unsecured and at risk. He sought to explain this by saying Minter Ellison had an obligation to ECCC to allow it to produce "a better certificate" and he added:- "A. Our client was ECCCL, and we owed our obligations to ECCCL and we made that clear all along that we were not acting for the investor": Tp.216. 
This answer was simply incorrect, although Mr Lewis sought to reinforce it by saying that it was made clear that Minter Ellison were not in any way acting for the investor and:- "That is why the releases and the indemnities were in the document." 
This answer was also incorrect. The releases and indemnities were, on the case propounded by Minter Ellison only relevant if Minter Ellison were acting for the investor. As an experienced solicitor Mr Lewis must have realised this.

In a manner totally inconsistent with the evidence he had just given, he agreed that Minter Ellison were acting as the shareholder's agent on completion, and that there was nothing in the documentation to indicate to the shareholder that had a non-conforming Deposit Certificate been provided to
Minter Ellison, as their agent, they would have accepted it and given ECCC a chance to remedy the default before telling the investor.

Mr Lewis agreed that the letter of 31 May 1993 raised serious matters going to the heart of compliance with both Minter Ellison's obligations as agent for the shareholder and ECCC's obligations pursuant to the Subscription Agreement.
He said he did not agree a matter of that importance would inevitably be drawn to his attention and discussed in detail with him, and he said that the letter would have been drafted by an employed solicitor and he would have agreed to its being sent "because the person who drafted the letter believed that we needed to follow this matter up and I agreed with them". The concept of such agreement necessitated knowledge of the problem.

He was taken through the letter in some detail, which he agreed was a "fairly serious letter" for him to be signing to a client: Tp.221. Mr Lewis, who said he had little recollection of the letter, did recall a discussion in which it was said that something had to be done to rectify the situation, Tp.222, which
I infer to be prior to or at the time of his signing the letter.

Mr Lewis did not resile from his evidence that, in hindsight, Minter Ellison should have told the investor earlier about the inadequacy of the documentation: Tp.224, and, ultimately, he agreed that in hindsight the investor should have been told about the position so that it could make a decision whether to rescind and have the money returned: Tp.225.
Notwithstanding that Mr Lewis agreed that by 31 May 1993, at the very latest, it was clear that the investor had a crystallised right to rescind the agreement and to have its money back, he still maintained that there was no obligation to tell the investor that at that time, and he was unable to offer any reason, which I found to be acceptable, as to why that course was not followed: Tp.225.

Mr Lewis agreed that as at 31 May 1993 one of the most important things about the Deposit Certificate was, and continued to be, that it was a bearer document: Tp.227. He was unaware that the investor had agreed that it should not be in bearer form, although he said that he was not aware that it was still a requirement, notwithstanding that the letter of 31 May 1993 said so often. His attempted explanation of that was that there was confusion in the letter, although that confusion was not in relation to that matter. He then said he was aware of the reason the representative of Minter Ellison, at settlement, accepted a non-bearer certificate, which was:- ".. that there had been a decision taken for tax reasons, on tax advice from the tax adviser to ECCCL that a Bearer Certificate would not work for tax purposes": Tp.228. 
He said he believed that decision had been communicated to the person who attended at settlement, but he could not be certain when the change occurred, although it was some time between December 1992 and May 1993 and he believed it was recorded by reading the tax advice that ECCC had received. This evidence simply remitted Mr Lewis to the difficulty about the absence of any knowledge, so far as he was aware, in the investor of the change of policy and the necessity to change the various Agreements to accommodate it. It also created the very serious difficulty that to his knowledge Minter Ellison were receiving non-conforming Deposit Certificates, without any authority from the investors but because it suited ECCC, and were not only not advising the investors but were putting forward those Certificates as conforming. The breach of trust was blatant.

The letter of 31 May 1993, of course, made it transparently clear that what was being sought was a Bearer Deposit Certificate. He agreed a Bearer Deposit
Certificate was not provided and that neither the breach nor the demand on
ECCC was communicated to the investor, and that the investor should have been advised of those matters "in hindsight": Tp.232.

At Tp.234 Mr Lewis repeated that it was the position of ECCC that, based on tax advice, the Deposit Certificate was not to be a Bearer Certificate.

Mr Lewis agreed that the document received on 1 June 1993 from Dresdner was in precisely the same form as that received on settlement on 8 December 1992 and was not a Bearer Deposit Certificate. Thus, he acknowledged it did not comply with the request in the letter of 31 May 1993. He then gave some very strange evidence:- "Q. Yes. You, having received a document which did not comply with the requirements of the letter of 31 May, you should have immediately carried out the threat which was included in the letter of 31 May of telling the trustee? 
A. So that I would have then become aware that it was not intended that it be a Bearer Certificate.

Q. I'm sorry? 
A. But the client did not intend it that it would be a Bearer Certificate.

Q. You say that you were then aware? 
A. Say that I was apparently then made aware that it was not intended to be a Bearer Certificate.

Q. When were you made aware of that? 
A. I can't recall the exact time. It was certainly around here, otherwise we would have carried out the threat.

Q. Are you saying that the reason you didn't carry out the threat is that you were told that your client didn't wish to provide the security set out in the Subscription Agreement? 
A. No. What I was told around this time was that it was intended that the Certificate of Deposit from Dresdner not be a Bearer Certificate for tax purposes.

Q. But that the client did not intend complying with the Subscription Agreement? 
A. He didn't say that and I didn't realise that at the time.

Q. But you had just written, two days or one day before, a letter which analysed in the closest and most unimpeachable of terms the requirements of the Subscription Agreement? 
A. I now understand that.

Q. And it's plain from that letter that nobody who saw it or had any hand in drafting it or approving its terms could have thought that there was a different arrangement about what the certificate had to be? 
A. I understand that. I can't explain it other than that we were told - we were told that things had changed because the Bearer Certificate would not result in the end financial return that was intended by the scheme." 
The second question "I'm sorry" indicated the cross-examiner's understandable surprise at the previous answer, to my observation.

The difficulties with this evidence were, firstly, that there had never been any change in the contractual arrangements Minter Ellison had put in place, in accordance with ECCC's instructions. Secondly, there had never been any change in their obligations as the investor's agent on settlement to obtain a Bearer
Deposit Certificate. Thirdly, from the end of 1992 Mr Lewis had been aware that neither ECCC nor its accountants wanted a Bearer Deposit Certificate but, as at 31 May 1993, Minter Ellison were, rightly enough in the circumstances, insisting upon it. Fourthly, there is not a skerrick of evidence to suggest that between 31 May and 1 June 1993 Mr Lewis became aware of any changed requirement and, of course, that suggestion is totally inconsistent with the letter of 31 May 1993.

If Mr Lewis' evidence is to be accepted on this point, he was not merely breaching the trust duties and being negligent but he was, in my opinion, acting in complete disregard to the interests of the investor, and in a way which, on any view of the matter, could not be justified.

Mr Lewis had, in the course of his evidence, referred to a Deed of
Confirmation. He was taken to it, Tp.240, and asked to identify where it changed the requirement that the Deposit Certificate not be a bearer document.
He said he thought it was in clause 2 and clause 3 "to an extent", but when asked a fairly straightforward question about that he responded that he did not think the Deed of Confirmation changed what was said in the Subscription
Agreement, although he added that it:- ".. would indicate that it was intended that the certificate was going to be in the name of the company and it was acknowledging or confirming that it would act as the undisclosed agent of the Cook Islands company." 
Mr Lewis, in what I found to be a totally unconvincing piece of evidence, sought to say that one implied from the Deed of Confirmation that the Deposit
Certificate was not to be a bearer document. I have come to the conclusion that the evidence Mr Lewis gave in relation to this matter, (Tpp.240-242), is unacceptable and I reject it. In any event it in no way assisted the contractual position as between ECCC and the investor. Once again I think this was an attempt by Mr Lewis to clutch at a straw in an endeavour to make good the proposition that there had been some change in the arrangement, which justified or, perhaps, put in a better light, notwithstanding their breach of trust and negligence, Minter Ellison's conduct. In my view it was a futile attempt. Further cross-examination confirmed this: Tp.243. It was quite clear that wherever Deposit Certificate was referred to it was referred to in the context of a Bearer Deposit Certificate. None-the-less, Mr Lewis clung to the suggestion that "another interpretation" was possible: Tp.244. However, having given that answer, he agreed that there was no document referred to in the
Deed of Confirmation, which defined a Deposit Certificate other than in bearer terms. None-the-less Mr Lewis clung on and, in the end, was forced to say:- "I just don't think that was intended." 
I regret to say that this evidence did no credit to Mr Lewis. It tended to point up the view I had formed earlier that he was prepared, on several occasions, to say anything that came into his mind that might, as he saw it, assist his position. However, he frankly conceded, at Tpp.244-245:- "Q. So that by the time the 31 May letter was written Minter Ellison was correct to say that there was a subsisting requirement that the Deposit Certificate be a bearer document? 
A. Correct; the Subscription Agreement made it quite clear.

Q. And nothing had changed by 31 May to affect that analysis? 
A. In the documentation, correct.

Q. And even had something changed to affect that analysis, that something would have had to have involved consent by the shareholder? 
A. I agree with that now.

Q. And there was no such consent obtained either then or ever? 
A. Not that I am aware of." 
Mr Lewis agreed that the document dated 1 June 1993 did not accord with the requirements of the letter of 31 May 1993, and that, accordingly, the threat to tell the investor should immediately have been carried out. He also agreed that not even the mildest protest was made by Minter Ellison to ECCC about the receipt of that document, and that notwithstanding the emphatic terms of the letter of 31 May 1993, and the clear non-conformity of the document of 1 June , Minter Ellison sent the document to National Registries describing it as a Deposit Certificate provided pursuant to clause 3 of the Paying Agency
Agreement. That was done in the letter of 2 June 1993 and Mr Lewis agreed that in hindsight it should not have happened. This was the letter he had agreed was, on one reading of it, misleading. It was clearly misleading.

The problem Mr Lewis then had to confront was the failure to do anything about the matter in relation to the future transactions. He agreed that it was an inevitable result of continuing to settle and sending the Share Certificates to the investor without comment, that the investor would assume that the completion meeting had occurred in accordance with the requirements. He said he thought that was a reasonable assumption, as was the assumption that had
Minter Ellison observed the problem in connection with that matter it was reasonable for the trustee to expect them to tell it.

Once again Mr Lewis encountered difficulty when he suggested that Minter
Ellison believed the problem was corrected on 1 June 1993 by the document
Dresdner then issued. He agreed they were wrong in accepting a non-bearer certificate and he said the error Minter Ellison made was that the arrangement connected with the taxation advice was something which could be accepted in lieu of a Bearer Deposit Certificate. That answer compelled him to agree that that state of mind required an appreciation that the Bearer Deposit
Certificate would not be provided, and:- "Q. So it was quite plain to Minters that if this new arrangement existed, it involved a different security arrangement? 
A. It should have been plain, but unfortunately it wasn't.

Q. I am putting to you that it was plain by virtue of the very appreciation of this arrangement that the Bearer Certificate was not going to be provided? 
A. If it had been plain, we would have done something about it": Tp.248. 
It is very difficult to accept that neither Mr Lewis nor Mr Gaffney appreciated what was happening and that the numerous settlements, which happened after May 1993, proceeded without any proper appreciation of the position, and I do not accept it.

At Tp.249 Mr Lewis was referred to paragraph 9 of his witness statement and, in particular, to that portion which noted that between 31 May and 21 June he was informed that it was not intended that Deposit Certificates be in bearer form because of tax advice, but that there would be a Deed of
Confirmation and irrevocable directions from ECCC to the Bank. Mr Lewis adhered to that evidence but said he could not tell the exact time. He agreed that such an understanding by Mr Gaffney prior to 31 May 1993 would be inconsistent with his involvement in drafting the letter of that date. At
Tp.250 Mr Lewis said:- "Q. That should have caused you immediate and grave concern, shouldn't it? 
A. In hindsight, I agree.

Q. And if you weren't caused that immediate and grave concern, the only explanation you can proffer is that you had forgotten what the Subscription Agreement and the other documents said? 
A. That is the only explanation, that it just didn't come to my mind." 
This led to his being cross-examined about the terms of the letter of 31 May and, at Tp.251:- "Q. We could only assume, can we, if you had looked at it at all, that you noticed the requirement for a Bearer Certificate? 
A. Yes. I don't deny that when I signed that letter I was of the mind that it had to be a Bearer Certificate. It was subsequent to that letter that I was told that it was not intended to be a Bearer Certificate.

Q. That made it more serious, didn't it, not less serious that it had to be a Bearer Certificate? 
A. In hindsight it was serious, and I agree." 
Mr Lewis agreed that "in hindsight" if he was told that the certificate was not to be a Bearer Certificate the seriousness of what had occurred and been recorded on 31 May 1993 would have been highlighted.

At Tp.254 Mr Lewis rejected as the best explanation of his having failed to communicate with the trustee that which appeared in paragraph 9 was not said to him, and that he simply did not notice the defects in the Deposit
Certificate. Inherent in this rejection was an acceptance that he was told, and that he noticed or was aware of the defects, but did nothing about them.

Mr Lewis also agreed that the intended replacement procedure had fundamental defects, which were not communicated to the investor, and that there should have been a change in the whole structure of the documents and that the investor should have been told. What he was unable to explain was why these steps were not taken.

On 13 July 1993 Minter Ellison wrote again to Mr Senese seeking a Deposit
Certificate and stating that in the absence of a response it would be necessary for them to communicate with the investor. This showed the concern in relation to that matter then.

At Tp.258 I asked Mr Lewis about his frequent answers that he would or would not have done something "in hindsight". He said:- "Q. Right, so when you are giving these answers about `in hindsight', that is not to remove from the arena the fact that the various matters about which you are being asked should have occurred to you as an experienced and prudent commercial solicitor at the time they were happening? 
A. I agree with that your Honour." 
Thus, he was relating his conduct to when events were happening.

A response was received to the letter of 13 July 1993, but Mr Lewis agreed it did not remove the fundamental difficulty, and that it should have been followed up. He further agreed that a prudent solicitor would have seen that the matter was fixed or that the procedure was permissible. He offered no explanation why he did not attend to the matter. At Tp.260 Mr Lewis identified the error as not changing the definitions, and he said Minter Ellison should have insisted that the documents be changed to reflect that it was not a
Bearer Certificate "so then the investor could make up his own mind whether he proceeded or not". This was a belated recognition of the rights of the investor and it was a damaging answer so far as Mr Lewis was concerned, because, at least impliedly, it conceded that the investor should have been advised that the Deposit Certificates were not bearer documents, so that it could have made up its own mind whether to proceed. Yet this was what Mr Lewis failed to do. The matter was compounded by the following evidence:- "Q. And that Minters should, if they had been attending to their obligations as the agent of the shareholder on completions after this time, have noticed and reported that in respect of those subsequent settlements, there was lacking an essential element of the security, even in so far as Minters then understood it? 
A. Yes, I think that is right." 
The cross-examination by Mr Finch concluded with Mr Lewis' agreeing that none of the Deposit Certificates conformed with the Subscription Agreement, and they should have. This included the documents issued by Westpac and NatWest.

Mr Heydon commenced to cross-examine Mr Lewis at Tp.273.

He asked him, Tpp.287-288, what he would have said to a representative of PTWA if he had enquired between 4 and 6 May 1993 whether settlement had gone through satisfactorily. He suggested to him he would have replied that he would have to ask Mr Gaffney, but he expected settlement to take place soon.
Mr Lewis said he may have said that, but he could not recall. On an hypothetical basis he answered the question "Yes".

He was asked the same question in relation to the period from "sometime before May until 1 June". He said that on that hypothesis he would have replied that he was not certain of the position, and that he would have to find out and telephone back, or he may have put the enquirer through to Mr Gaffney. He said that had he known of the problem he "may well have spoken to them about the problem at the time". He agreed he did not telephone and tell them of the problem. He was taken through various periods and, on the hypothesis on which the questions were asked, he said he probably would not have disclosed the problem, at least until such time as he thought it had been corrected.

Mr Lewis agreed that the documents sent to National Registries were described as Deposit Certificates, save in the case of NatWest, and, at Tp.292, he said:- "Q. May we take it that the statements in those letters corresponded with Minter Ellison's then belief as to the correct description of what was being sent? 
A. I don't believe so.

Q. May we take it that in internal conversations within Minter Ellison and internal communications with Minter Ellison from at least May 1993, it was usual to refer to these documents supplied on settlement as Certificates of Deposit? 
A. Yes. I think the words were interchanged. Sometimes it was `Certificates of Deposit', sometimes it was `CD', sometimes it was `Deposit Certificate'.": Tp.292. 
There was some dispute as to whether the answer to the first question I have just quoted was as transcribed or "I believe so". The matter was checked with the Court Reporter, whose note she informed the Court, in open Court, accorded with the transcription.

The matter was not taken further in cross-examination and the following question and answer, which I have only set out to give content to the disputed answer, does not suggest that Mr Lewis had made any damaging admission. Indeed the further evidence, on this point, tends to corroborate that Mr Lewis, who at times spoke quickly and at times quietly, may have been misheard by the
Court Reporter. In saying that, of course, I accept implicitly that the Court
Reporter took down what she heard. I think the most satisfactory way to deal with this matter is not to place significance on the disputed answer. It is not necessary for me to do so for the purposes of coming to the conclusions his evidence, in my opinion, demands.

The re-examination of Mr Lewis commenced at Tp.293. At Tp.295 he was asked to explain why the Subscription Agreement was drafted in the manner in which it was and he said:- "A. Because we wished to make it clear we were accepting no responsibility because we acted as solicitors for ECCCL and the Subscription Agreement provided that we were released and indemnified in acting as agents for the investor because we wanted to make it clear that we were not acting as solicitors for the investor. We were merely attending to a role for them." 
Subsequently Mr Lewis said that Minter Ellison clearly understood that they could not act as solicitors for two parties "and so the new role was established to enable us to do that", i.e. to act as the agent for the investor.

Mr Lewis' evidence confirmed beyond doubt the concessions that Minter Ellison acted in breach of trust and negligently. It also established that such breaches were gross and occurred in circumstances where the interest of ECCC was preferred to that of the investor. Mr Lewis was unable to provide an explanation for his failure to do a number of things. I found certain of his evidence unsatisfactory, contradictory and unacceptable, and I have referred to those portions in my review. I do not accept, for the reasons I have given, that Mr Lewis lost sight of or failed to appreciate the significance of the requirement for Bearer Deposit Certificates. Such a conclusion would be totally at odds with all the other evidence to which I have referred, and the appropriate inferences to be drawn from it.

The Effect Of The Exclusion Clauses 
Minter Ellison relied upon clauses 3.4 and Schedule 4, which I have quoted, but which it is convenient to restate at this point. Clause 3.4 provided:- "The parties agree and acknowledge that the Company's Solicitors have no liability for disbursement of the funds held pursuant to clause 2.1 and the parties indemnify and hold the Company's Solicitors harmless for any claim, demand, action or cost arising out of or in connection with the disbursement of any funds under this Agreement." 
The letter in Schedule 4, relevantly, stated:- "Further, I absolutely and unconditionally release and discharge you from any liability or obligation to me arising under the Subscription Agreement." 
In their opening submissions Minter Ellison asserted:- "2. The release and indemnity given in clause 3.4 and Schedule 4 to the Subscription Agreement are valid and operative in the circumstances.
 - Armitage versus Nurse <case>; [(1997) 3 WLR 1046.] . The release and indemnity do not require that all obligations under the Subscription Agreement have been met; that construction would eviscerate the exclusion, and does not accommodate the wide terms of the first clause of clause 3.4.
 . Ample consideration for that protection was given by Minter Ellison agreeing to allow its facilities and staff to be used for effecting completion. Minter Ellison became privy to the provision at the very least by the terms of the Authorisation for Payment (Schedule 4)." 
In his opening submissions Mr Heydon submitted that so far as clause 3.4 was concerned, as a matter of construction, the exemption only applied where
Minter Ellison acted in accordance with the Subscription Agreement and, therefore, as Minter Ellison had not done so, they were not within the first part of that clause.

As to the second part he submitted it was either repetitive or provided an indemnity and, if the indemnification had a separate operation, it depended on the disbursement of funds "under this Agreement". In relation to the Schedule point he submitted that nothing happened "under the Subscription Agreement".

Mr Heydon elaborated on these submissions in his final submissions. He considered, firstly, the question of construction. He submitted that clause .4 did not apply because the provision that Minter Ellison "have no liability for disbursement of the funds held pursuant to clause 2.1" depended upon the terms of that clause, which required the disbursement to be "in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement". Therefore, it was submitted, any disbursement of funds, which was not in accordance with the provisions of the
Subscription Agreement, was not protected by clause 3.4.

If effect is given to this construction then, on one view, the opening words of the clause have no work to do because if the moneys were disbursed conformably with the Subscription Agreement then, at least prima facie,
Minter Ellison could not be liable. If this was the meaning intended to be attributed to the words they were unnecessary although, perhaps, as a matter of abundant caution, they may have been inserted. However, I think the better construction is that any disbursement, which clause 2.1 required to be a disbursement "in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement", would not give rise to a liability in Minter Ellison if, in consequence of it, the moneys were lost. Therefore, if Minter Ellison did all that they were obliged to do under the Agreement, but the moneys were none-the-less lost, the exempting words precluded their being held liable. Conversely, if Minter
Ellison were doing something, which they were not authorised to do under the
Subscription Agreement, the exempting words would not have that effect.

Although Mr Pembroke sought to divide the two portions of clause 3.4, I think reading them as a whole supports the construction, which I favour. The concluding or indemnifying portion only indemnifies Minter Ellison from any claim, demand, action or cost arising out of or in connection with "the disbursement of any funds under this Agreement". Those words indicate to me, quite clearly, that the payment is to be made conformably with the Agreement.
Unless that were to occur it could not be a payment "under" the Subscription
Agreement.

If this construction of the indemnifying portion of clause 3.4 is correct then, in my opinion, it supports the construction of the first portion of the clause to which I have referred.

Accordingly, I have come to the conclusion that clause 3.4 is intended to protect Minter Ellison only in so far as they were carrying out correctly their obligations under the Subscription Agreement, in the event of any loss which occurred notwithstanding that they acted in that way. Clause 3.4 is not, on its proper construction, directed to the situation where Minter Ellison have ignored their obligations under the Subscription Agreement. Not only do the words of the clause lead me to that conclusion, but it seems to me that it would be extraordinary for the parties to agree that Minter Ellison would not be liable or could be indemnified for the disbursement of the funds, where they were acting in a completely unauthorised manner, e.g. to take a hypothetical example, losing the moneys in consequence of gross negligence. In the course of submissions I put to Mr Pembroke that on one view his construction would lead to the result that if Minter Ellison, (and this was put purely hypothetically and for the purpose of argument), misappropriated the moneys clause 3.4 would provide a defence. Mr Pembroke conceded that misappropriation would be beyond its terms, although as a matter of language I do not understand why that is so, unless it be that a misappropriation was not a disbursement.

Mr Heydon relied on the decision of the High Court in Chan versus Cresdon Pty
Limited <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 242] at p.249. In their joint judgment at p.249 Mason CJ, Brennan,
Deane and McHugh JJ said:- "The word `under', in the context in which it appears, refers to an obligation created by, in accordance with, pursuant to or under the authority of, the lease. The obligation which arose under the common law tenancy at will does not answer this description." 
It will be recalled that the words being considered were "under this lease".
In my respectful opinion those words apply to the word "under" in clause 3.4 and thereby support the conclusion to which I have come.

Schedule 4 provides an absolute and unconditional release and discharge from any liability or obligation of the trustees arising "under the Subscription
Agreement". As a matter of English I do not consider that the liability or obligation asserted against Minter Ellison arose "under" the Subscription
Agreement. It did not arise by virtue of Minter Ellison's having complied with the terms of that Agreement. It is only in those circumstances, in my opinion, that the liability or obligation arose "under" that Agreement. Once again the type of liability or obligation must be one arising notwithstanding that the conduct was sanctioned by the Agreement.

I also think that the construction which appeals to me is supported by the context and circumstances of the Agreement. The money was held by Minter
Ellison in trust and, therefore, prima facie should only have been paid out in accordance with the express instructions of the party on whose behalf it was held in trust. That party never agreed to the money being paid out other than conformably with the Subscription Agreement. Therefore, to suggest that
Minter Ellison would be excused if the money was paid out other than conformably with the Subscription Agreement would, in my opinion, fly in the face of the very basis on which the money was paid. The same reasoning applies to the Acknowledgment in Schedule 4.

Mr Pembroke submitted that the words in clause 3.4 "arising out of or in connection with the disbursement of any funds under this Agreement" have a wide meaning: Francis Travel Marketing Pty Limited versus Virgin Atlantic Airways
Limited [(1996) 39 NSWLR 160.] In that case the Court of Appeal was considering an arbitration clause, which referred any dispute or difference "arising out of this Agreement" to arbitration. The primary issue was whether the claims made by the appellant concerning the termination, or purported termination, of the agency agreement, having regard to the alleged conduct of the respondent, gave rise to a dispute or difference "arising out of" the agency agreement within the meaning of the arbitration clause. At p.165 Gleeson CJ, in whose judgment Meagher and Sheller JJA agreed, concluded that the expression "arising out of" "has usually been given a wide meaning". His Honour continued:- "When the parties to a commercial contract agree, at the time of making the contract, and before any disputes have yet arisen, to refer to arbitration any dispute or difference arising out of the agreement, their agreement should not be construed narrowly. They are unlikely to have intended that different disputes should be resolved before different tribunals, or that the appropriate tribunal should be determined by finding shades of difference in the legal character of individual issues, or by the ingenuity of lawyers in developing points of argument." 
Allowing for that construction, in those particular circumstances, his Honour was of the view that the dispute arose out of the agency agreement. Whilst acknowledging the width of the words "arising out of or in connection with", the question is still, in relation to each agreement, what work the words are intended to do in the context in which the agreement was entered into. For the reasons I have sought to give I do not consider that the exemption provisions apply in the present case.

As Gibbs J said in Australian Broadcasting Commission versus Australian
Performing Rights Association Limited <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 99] at p.108:- "On the other hand, if the language is open to two constructions, that will be preferred which will avoid the consequences which appear to be capricious, unreasonable, inconvenient or unjust, `even though the construction adopted is not obvious, or the most grammatical' ....." 
In the present case if there is any ambiguity, which I doubt, it should be resolved, in a way which will preclude Minter Ellison's being able to rely on the clause.

Mr Pembroke nextly referred to various cases in which exclusion clauses for the benefit of trustees had been given their natural and ordinary meaning by the application of principles, which govern exclusion clauses in contracts. In
Helvetic Investment Corporation Pty Limited versus Knight [(1982) 7 ACLR ] a question arose in circumstances where a family trust guaranteed the indebtedness of a company, the guarantee being signed:- "The John Knight Family Trust; J.C. Knight, Trustee." 
The company became indebted and the guarantee was called upon, the plaintiff suing "John Knight (as Trustee of the John Knight Family Trust)" for the amount in question. Mr Knight asserted that it was the Family Trust which was liable and that if he had any personal liability it was only to an amount equal to the value of the trust assets at the date of the issue of the
Statement of Claim. There was a clause in the Deed of Family Trust which permitted the trust to guarantee the indebtedness of a specified beneficiary, which the company was not. The case did not, if I may say so with respect, touch on the subject matter of the present dispute. It was concerned with determining whether the trustee, in his personal capacity, or the trust estate was liable upon a proper construction of the agreements.

In McLean versus Burns Philp Trustee Co Pty Limited [(1985) 2 NSWLR 623], Young J was concerned with whether the clause of a Trust Deed, which purported to exempt unit holders from liability, was effective. His Honour stated, at p.640:- "It is also clear that by the appropriate clause in a trust deed or contract, a person may limit his liability to a specific fund: see e.g. Muir versus City of Glasgow Bank [(1879) 4 AppCas 337] ..; Helvetic Investment Corporation Pty Limited versus Knight ..." 
At p.641 his Honour continued:- "The plaintiff referred to Scott on Trusts, 3rd Edition (1967) paragraph 223-3, at 1782-1784 as indicating that there might be public policy provisions that would prevent a trustee or a beneficiary being able to limit its liability. However, in my view, that passage in Scott does not go to the instant problem at all, but deals with the situation where trustees try to exempt themselves from the consequences of a breach of trust. I do not believe that there is any matter of public policy which militates against a party limiting its liability except in two situations, and this is borne out by cases such as Head versus Kelk and the other cases cited above. The two exceptions are that where the exclusion of liability is with respect to negligence or breaches of trust, Courts will be very careful in approaching the clause and will read it as strictly as possible (see e.g. Hollier versus Rambler Motors (ANC) Limited <case>; [[1972] 2 QB 71] at 78), and the Courts will not allow such clauses to be used as a cloak for fraud." 
This decision, in my opinion, makes the very important point that where a trustee seeks to limit its liability Courts will approach the clause with caution. The first point to which his Honour refers seems to me to be the proper approach to the construction of the Clause and the provision in the
Schedule with which I am dealing.

Mr Pembroke nextly submitted that exclusion clauses should be given their natural and ordinary meaning: Darlington Futures Limited versus Delco Australia
Pty Limited <case>; <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 219.] This is obviously so in a commercial context, the question being what that meaning is using the permissible aids to construction.

Mr Pembroke nextly relied upon the decision of the Privy Council in Hayim & Anor versus City Bank NA & Anor [[1987] 1 AC 730.] By clause 10 of his will the testator directed that if at his death he owned a residence in
Hong Kong and his brother or sister or both survived him, the first defendant:- ".. shall have no responsibility or duty with respect to such property .. and my executor's and trustee's only duty and responsibility with respect thereto shall arise upon its receipt of the proceeds of said residence or upon the death of the survivor of my said brother and my said sister, whichever shall first occur .." 
The testator appointed the second defendant executor and trustee of his Hong
Kong will. The plaintiffs instructed the second defendant to sell the property but, in the interests of the testator's brother and sister who were not beneficiaries under either will, the first defendant directed the second defendant not to do so, although that was not in the interests of the beneficiaries of the American estate. During the postponement of the sale the value of the house fell and the plaintiffs instituted proceedings claiming damages against the second defendant for breach of trust in delaying the sale.
The Court of Appeal of Hong Kong reversed a decision finding against the second defendant and an appeal from that decision was dismissed.

It was held that by the terms of the Hong Kong will the second defendant held the house on trust for the first defendant and not the beneficiaries interested under the American will, so that the second defendant was under a duty to exercise its powers to sell or postpone the sale pursuant to the lawful instructions of the first defendant, and that clause 10 to the American will absolved the first defendant from any duty to the beneficiaries with regard to the house thus enabling the first defendant to disregard the interests of the beneficiaries and direct the second defendant to postpone the sale in the interests of the testator's brother and sister.

The headnote continued:- ".. therefore, since the first defendant had properly carried out its duties in relation to the house as trustee of the American will, there were no special circumstances entitling the plaintiffs to bring proceedings directly against the second defendant, but that in any event no breach of the trusts of the Hong Kong will have been committed by the second defendant in implementing the lawful instructions of the first defendant, and the plaintiffs' action had properly been dismissed." 
In my opinion this case is a decision on the particular facts and does not provide authority for the proposition for which Mr Pembroke submitted, namely that the release and indemnity provided in clause 3.4 and Schedule 4 were necessary because of the dual capacity in which Minter Ellison acted at settlement.

Nextly Mr Pembroke referred to the decision of the English Court of Appeal in
Armitage versus Nurse & Ors <case>; [[1997] 3 WLR 1046.] Clause 15 of a settlement provided:- "No trustee shall be liable for any loss or damage which may happen to Paula's fund or any part thereof or the income thereof at any time or from any cause whatsoever unless such loss or damage shall be caused by his own actual fraud ..." 
If I may say so with respect to the detailed submissions made by Mr Pembroke the difference between this clause and clause 3.4 or, for that matter, the provision in Schedule 4, is immediately obvious. The clause there under consideration was quite general and, prima facie, is sufficiently wide to accommodate any loss, save that occasioned by the actual fraud of the trustee.
Millett LJ traced the history of the clause, commencing at p.1052, and considered the meaning of the words "actual fraud".

At p.1054 his Lordship turned to consider the permitted scope of trustee exemption clauses in the light of the submission that a clause, which purports to exclude all liability except for actual fraud, is void, either for repugnancy or as being contrary to public policy. His Lordship quoted a passage from the consultation paper of the Law Commission and continued:- "This passage calls for two comments. First, the expression `wilful default' is used in the cases in two senses. A trustee is said to be accountable on the footing of wilful default when he is accountable not only for money which he has in fact received but also for money which he could with reasonable diligence have received. It is sufficient that the trustee has been guilty of want of ordinary prudence: see e.g. In Re Chapman; Cocks versus Chapman [[1896] 2 Ch 763.] In the context of a trustee exclusion clause, however, such as [s.30](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ta1958122/s30.html) of the [Trustee Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ta1958122/), it means a deliberate breach of trust: In Re Vickery ... . The decision has been criticised, but it is in line with earlier authority .. . Nothing less than conscious and wilful misconduct is sufficient." 
His Lordship then cited the passage from In Re Vickery with approval and, at p.1055, said:- "A trustee who is guilty of such conduct either consciously takes a risk that loss will result, or is recklessly indifferent whether it will or not. If the risk eventuates he is personally liable. But if he consciously takes the risk in good faith and with the best intentions, honestly believing that the risk is one which ought to be taken in the interests of the beneficiaries, there is no reason why he should not be protected by the exemption clause which excludes liability for wilful default." 
I would pause here to note that there is no suggestion that PTWA or PT consciously took the inherent risks, in good faith and with the best intentions, in failing to satisfy themselves that conforming Deposit
Certificates had been furnished and lodged with National Registries, and they certainly did not turn their minds, let alone reach an honest belief, that there was a risk which ought to be taken in the interests of the beneficiaries. In the present case there is no basis on which it could be said that there was any justification for PTWA and PT taking any risk.

At p.1056 his Lordship said:- "I accept the submission made on behalf of Paula that there is an irreducible core of obligations owed by the trustees to the beneficiaries and enforceable by them which is fundamental to the concept of a trust. If the beneficiaries had no rights enforceable against the trustees there are no trusts. But I do not accept the further submission that these core obligations include the duties of skill and care, prudence and diligence. The duty of the trustees to perform the trusts honestly and in good faith for the benefit of the beneficiaries is the minimum necessary to give substance to the trust, but in my opinion it is sufficient. As Mr Hill pertinently pointed out in his able argument, a trustee who relied on the presence of a trustee exemption clause to justify what he proposed to do would thereby lose its protection: he would be acting recklessly in the proper sense of the term." 
This passage, in my opinion, cuts across the submission previously made by Mr
Pembroke that Mr Lewis explained that the release and indemnity provided in clause 3.4 and Schedule 4 "were necessary because of the dual capacity in which Minter Ellison acted at settlement". It makes clear that Minter Ellison were not entitled to rely on those clauses as justifying whatever they might do in acting in their dual capacities.

The judgment went on to deal with questions of public policy but, in view of the conclusion to which I have come as to the proper construction of the clause and Schedule 4, it is not necessary for me to pursue that. Mr Heydon submitted that the provisions were contrary to public policy. I should note, for completeness, that a petition for leave to appeal to the House of Lords in
Armitage versus Nurse was dismissed: [[1998] 1 WLR 270.] 
Another point raised in relation to the exemption provisions was that Minter
Ellison relied on them defensively and offensively to recover all their costs of defending the actions brought by the trustees and National Registries pursuant to the indemnity. I do not consider they cover either situation.

An issue was raised as to privity of contract. Minter Ellison were not parties to the Subscription Agreement, although it was submitted they were parties to the Authorisation for Payment in Schedule 4.

In response Mr Heydon submitted that the Authorisation for Payment was not an instrument of a bilateral character, but rather a unilateral authorisation, albeit one which the investor had promised ECCC would be given. However, nothing in it incorporated the terms of the Subscription Agreement by reference.

It was nextly submitted by Mr Pembroke that Minter Ellison's making available of their trust account, staff and other facilities constituted services performed in the course of their retainer by ECCC and, accordingly, were requested or bargained for. It was noted that the request was implicit in the
Confirmation by which Minter Ellison acted as agent for PTWA and PT at completion.

In response to this Mr Heydon submitted that if the services were performed in the course of Minter Ellison's retainer by ECCC they were pre-existing contractual duties owed to it and requested or bargained for by it, but not by
PTWA or PT, and, further, that the Subscription Agreement contained no further contractual assurance by Minter Ellison that they would carry out the duties already promised to ECCC. Secondly, it was submitted that the Confirmation was not mentioned in the Subscription Agreement "and cannot be said to have been `bargained for'". The Confirmation was that Minter Ellison were to act as the trustees' agent at completion to receive the Share Certificates and, given that they were already to attend completion as solicitor for ECCC, no additional services were performed.

I have come to the view that these submissions are correct. They are supported by the distinction Minter Ellison sought to draw between their acting as the solicitor for ECCC and as "agent", but not as "solicitors", for the trustees.
The Subscription Agreement required the payment by the trustees to Minter
Ellison of the Subscription Moneys, which Minter Ellison were then bound to use in conformity with that Agreement and, accordingly, pursuant to the pre- existing contractual duties owed to and requested or bargained for by ECCC.

Detailed submissions were provided in relation to consideration. Because of the conclusion to which I have come it is unnecessary for me to delay these reasons further by pursuing them further. My view is that there was no consideration.

Mr Heydon submitted that conformably with the decision in Grant versus John Grant & Sons Pty Limited <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 112], Minter Ellison were not entitled to rely upon the exemptions or "releases" if it was unconscientious to rely on the general words. He also submitted that that case established that a release should not be construed as applying to something of which the party executing it was ignorant.

From that Mr Heydon submitted that Minter Ellison knew that the Deposit
Certificate furnished in December 1992 failed to conform with the Subscription
Agreement, and of the non-conformity of the Deposit Certificate furnished pursuant to the Subscription Agreement of 4 May 1993. He also submitted that the trustees were unaware that it was not the intention that the Deposit
Certificates should be in bearer form. In these circumstances he submitted that the relevant principles were but an instance of equity's refusal to permit unconscientious reliance on legal rights. In Muschinski versus Dodds <case>; [(1985) 160 CLR 583], at pp.619-620, Deane J said:- "Like most of the traditional doctrines of equity, it operates upon legal entitlement to prevent a person from asserting or exercising a legal right in circumstances where the particular assertion or exercise of it would constitute unconscionable conduct: cf Story, Commentaries on Equity Jurisprudence, 12th Edition (1877 Perry ed) Volume 2 paragraph 1316; Legione versus Hateley. The circumstances giving rise to the operation of the principle were broadly identified by Lord Cairns LC, speaking for the Court of Appeal in Chancery, in Atwood versus Maude: where `the case is one in which, using the words of Lord Cottenham in Hirst versus Tolson, a payment has been made by anticipation of something afterwards to be enjoyed (and) where .. circumstances arise so that future enjoyment is denied'. Those circumstances can be more precisely defined by saying that the principle operates in a case where the substratum of a joint relationship or endeavour is removed without attributable blame and where the benefit of money or other property contributed by one party on the basis and for the purposes of the relationship or endeavour would otherwise be enjoyed by the other party in circumstances in which it was not specifically intended or specifically provided that that other party should so enjoy it. The content of the principle is that, in such a case, equity will not permit that other party to assert or retain the benefit of the relevant property to the extent that it would be unconscionable for him so to do: cf Atwood versus Maude, and per Jessel MR Lyon versus Tweddell." 
In Stern & Anor versus McArthur & Anor <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 489], at pp.526-527, Deane and Dawson JJ said:- "These elements do not, however, exhaust the scope of unconscionable or unconscientious behaviour; they are referred to in this context to emphasise that a strong case must be made out to warrant departure from the general approach, which is to hold the parties to their bargain. The general underlying notion is that which has long been identified as underlying much of equity's traditional jurisdiction to grant relief against unconscientious conduct, namely, that a person should not be permitted to use or insist upon his legal rights to take advantage of another's special vulnerability or misadventure for the unjust enrichment of himself ..." 
These are but examples and, in addition, Mr Heydon referred to State of
Western Australia versus Wardley Australia Limited [(1991) 30 FCR 240] at 270 and
Jedda Investments Pty Limited versus Krambousanos [(1997) 72 FCR 138] at 148.

In the present case I am of the opinion that it would be unconscionable or unconscientious for Minter Ellison to seek to rely upon the exemption provisions, where the necessity to do so arises from breaches by Minter
Ellison of their obligations, of which breaches Minter Ellison were aware and did not communicate to the other parties, in circumstances where, without such communication, the other parties would, in all probability, not become aware of the breaches. The misleading nature of the correspondence from Minter
Ellison to the trustees and National Registries emphasises this point.

In paragraph 16 of his written submissions of 29 October 1998, Mr Finch put the matter thus:- "Unless the Court is willing to accept a proposition that Mr Lewis (and indeed Mr Gaffney and anyone else involved in the drafting or settlement or signature of the letter) was unconscious at the time they performed those activities, the conclusion is compelled that, at the very latest, on 31 May 1993 ME appreciated that there was a subsisting breach of the Subscription Agreement, that they contemplated informing the trustee investor of that matter and that they chose to give ECCCL the opportunity to correct the deficiency. Mr Lewis conceded (T225.21-27) that it was very clear that he had concluded, at the very latest by 31 May 1993, that the shareholder/trustee had a crystallised right to rescind the agreement and have their money back. Instead of telling the trustee, ME told ECCCL. Doing so involved, inevitably, choice. The option of informing the trustee of breach was expressly canvassed in the letter. This is not a matter of inadvertence at all. It involves, as a matter of necessity, a conscious concealment of the breach." 
Mr Finch submitted orally that there could not be a plainer case of unconscionability than obtaining exculpation, by reliance on the exemption clauses, from knowing and continuing breaches. In my opinion the submission is well made.

For all these reasons I am of the view that Minter Ellison are not entitled to rely on the exemption provisions even if, contrary to the view to which I have come, they were applicable as a matter of construction.

The Fair Trading Act Claim 
It was accepted that the relevant Fair Trading Act was the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/fta1985117/) of
Victoria, s.11 of which provides:- "(1) A person shall not in trade or commerce engage in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive.

Nothing in the succeeding provisions of this Part shall be taken as limiting by implication the generality of sub-section (1)." 
I have set out the pleadings and, in his written submissions of 27 October , Mr Heydon submitted that Minter Ellison had represented that they had released to ECCC prior to completion of each Subscription Agreement an amount which it used to acquire a Deposit Certificate; that Deposit Certificates, as defined in the Subscription Agreements, had been procured by ECCC; that on completion, Minter Ellison had paid the balance of the Subscription Moneys to it after the provision of the Deposit Certificate; that ECCC had deposited the
Deposit Certificates as defined in the Subscription Agreements with National
Registries; and that Minter Ellison had not dealt with the Subscription Moneys other than in accordance with the provisions of the Subscription Agreement.

He submitted that Minter Ellison engaged in misleading conduct by an advertent failure to disclose the above matters.

It was submitted that the "silence" cases fell into the following categories, namely where there is some duty to disclose; where there is something said or done which, without more, communicates only a half truth; and where there is at least a reasonable expectation that silence will be broken in the circumstances. This was the analysis by Hill J in Warner versus Elders Rural
Finance Limited <case>; [(1993) 41 FCR 399], which I respectfully accept.

Mr Heydon submitted there was a duty to disclose the deficiencies of the documents purporting to be Deposit Certificates, which arose from the trust and agency relationship and the duty of care owed by Minter Ellison. In my opinion this must be correct, and the letter of 17 June 1993 was submitted to have only communicated a half truth. That letter, as will be recalled, stated it was written on the instructions of ECCC, enclosed the counterpart of the
Subscription Agreement and the original Share Certificates, but made no reference to the Deposit Certificate.

In my opinion the letter was plainly misleading and, as at 17 June 1993, it could not have been written in those terms having regard to the knowledge of
Mr Lewis and Mr Gaffney. The evidence of Mr Lewis that he lost sight of the problem or failed to appreciate its significance fits most uneasily with his statement in paragraph 38 to ASC, the strident terms of the letter to ECCC of May 1993, his general knowledge of the transaction brought about by his acquaintanceship with it, and the other evidence to which I have referred.
However, even if it be accepted that because it was never put directly to Mr
Lewis that he did not lose sight of the requirements or failed to appreciate their significance, that does not exculpate Minter Ellison from the terms of their letter in which, on Mr Lewis' evidence, he, in all probability, only played a small part. The letter was plainly misleading in so far as it sought to and did convey the impression that the transaction had proceeded conformably with the Subscription Agreement. It was not necessary that it should be intentionally misleading.

In his submissions in response Mr Pembroke relied heavily upon the failure to cross-examine Mr Lewis directly about his statement that he "lost sight of that fact or failed to appreciate its significance", i.e. to put to him that neither of those inconsistent events occurred, and that from June 1993 he thought "that the investor's interests would be protected by the Deed of
Confirmation, the Paying Agency Agreement and irrevocable authority from ECCCL to Dresdner". For the reasons to which I have referred this evidence was somewhat incredible. It is also inconsistent with the evidence of Mr Lewis, at
Tp.251, that when he signed the letter of 31 May 1993 he was "of the mind that it had to be a Bearer Certificate", and that it was subsequent to that letter "that I was told that it was not intended to be a Bearer Certificate". I have pointed out other evidence with which it is in conflict. I would add that it would be extraordinary for a person such as Mr Lewis, who I accept to be an intelligent person with good legal insight, to have lost sight of or failed to appreciate the significance of so fundamental a fact in such a short period and when the matter was still very much alive. He also had continuing assistance from Mr Gaffney, who was acutely aware of the problem and in July was seeking to have it remedied in a letter Mr Lewis signed.

The rule in Browne versus Dunn requires allegations to be put fairly to witnesses to enable them to deal with them. A fair reading of the whole cross- examination of Mr Lewis leads me to the conclusion that, firstly, it was put to him that the circumstances of his knowledge at the relevant time made it improbable that he could have lost sight of or failed to appreciate the effect of the Deposit Certificates and, further, that his subsequent actions and statements were inconsistent with that having happened. In the light of the whole cross-examination, which was lengthy and covered all relevant aspects of the matter, I am of the view that there was clearly raised for Mr Lewis' consideration, and it was clearly put to him, that this was not a truthful explanation. I have come to the conclusion that it should not be accepted. Nor was it a view sought to be corroborated by Mr Gaffney. I draw no Jones v
Dunkel inference from that, but simply note that no evidence was sought to be called from him as to his knowledge.

Hunt J put the basic proposition thus in Allied Pastoral Holdings Pty
Limited versus Commissioner of Taxation [(1983) 1 NSWLR 1] at p.16:- "It has in my experience always been a rule of professional practice that, unless notice has already clearly been given of the cross-examiner's intention to rely upon such matters, it is necessary to put to an opponent's witness in cross-examination the nature of the case upon which it is proposed to rely in contradiction of his evidence, particularly where the case relies upon inferences to be drawn from other evidence in the proceedings. Such a rule of practice is necessary both to give the witness the opportunity to deal with that other evidence, or the inferences to be drawn from it, and to allow the other party the opportunity to call evidence either to corroborate that explanation or to contradict the inference sought to be drawn. That rule of practice follows from what I have always believed to be rules of conduct which are essential to fair play at the trial and which are generally regarded as being established by the decision in the House of Lords in Browne versus Dunn (1894) 6 R 67." 
In my opinion, all these requirements were adequately met in the detailed cross-examination of Mr Lewis and, in particular, the material from which the other inference could be drawn was put to him expressly. The contrary of the propositions for which he was contending was clearly put to him.

Even if that view is not correct the letters emanating from Minter Ellison, of which that of 17 June 1993 was the first, were none-the-less misleading and, as I have said, in the absence of my acceptance of Mr Lewis' evidence on this point and any evidence from others, who on Mr Lewis' evidence participated in the drafting of the letters, the only view to which I can come is that they were misleading.

Mr Pembroke submitted that Minter Ellison did not make any positive representation to Perpetual as to the Deposit Certificates being of a bearer nature and, as Mr Grimshaw recognised, the standard form letters from Minter
Ellison said nothing positively as to what had occurred at completion and were expressed in terms of instructions from ECCC. He submitted that accordingly, any claim based on misleading or deceptive conduct must be based on an allegation of such conduct by silence. He referred to the provisions of s.5(2) of the Act, which provide that "engaging in conduct" means "doing or refusing to do any act" and that "refusing to do any act" includes:- ".. a reference to:- refraining (otherwise than inadvertently) from doing that act; or making it known that the act will not be done." 
If one pauses there and links these words to s.11 the engaging in conduct may arise from the doing of an act, i.e. the writing of a letter, which does not tell the true position, or it may "include" refraining from doing an act. That may mean refraining from writing a letter, which sets out the full position.
From this point Mr Pembroke submitted that liability for misleading and deceptive conduct arising from silence requires a deliberate omission to speak or an inadvertent failure to disclose: Rhone-Poulence Agrochimie SA versus UIM
Chemical Services Pty Limited [(1986) 12 FCR 477.] 
He also referred to the decision in Spedley Securities Limited versus Bank of New
Zealand [(1991) ATPR 41-143] where Cole
J said:- "One cannot fail to inform of a matter of which one was not aware. ... Concepts of `refusal' or `refraining' involve some mental process of decision-making, or at least, the existence of circumstances where a body may be reasonably taken to be required to make a decision. There can be no such actual or deemed decision-making in the absence of knowledge of facts in respect of which such decision is to be taken." 
In Rhone-Poulence Bowen CJ, at pp.489-490, said:- "Where silence is relied on in order to show a breach of s.52 it will depend upon the circumstances whether the silence constitutes conduct which is misleading or deceptive. As in the case of other sections of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) the Court may gain assistance from a consideration of cases at common law and in equity dealing with related types of situations. However, the Court is not confined by such cases because it is concerned with the interpretation and application of the words of the particular statute.

Dealing with the question of misrepresentation constituted by silence, there are cases which show, for example, that an omission to mention a qualification, in the absence of which some absolute statement made is rendered misleading, is conduct which should be regarded as misleading. So too is the omission to mention a subsequent change which has occurred after some statement which is correct at the time has been made where the result of the change is to render the statement incorrect so that thereafter it becomes misleading. This also may be regarded as constituting misleading conduct. However, the general position between contracting parties has been expressed in the following way: `The general rule, both of law and equity, in respect to concealment, is that mere silence with regard to a material fact, which there is no obligation to divulge, will not avoid a contract although it operates as an injury to the party from whom it is concealed.' ... Under the general law it is important to consider whether there is a legal obligation to divulge. There are particular relationships which have been held to raise an obligation of disclosure. Contracts uberrimae fidei come to mind as examples of this type of relationship. Indeed, there are many particular relationships which raise duties of disclosure. These include trustee and beneficiary, solicitor and client, principal and agent and guardian and ward. Where an obligation to disclose arises an omission to inform the person to whom the obligation is owed may, perhaps on the basis that that person is entitled to assume some fact or circumstance which does not exist, constitute or be an ingredient in misleading conduct.

The notion of relationships giving rise to an obligation to make disclosure is one which may well prove useful in determining some of the cases which may arise under [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). However, the Court will not be restricted to cases where such a relationship has already been held to exist at common law or in equity. The Court is likely to be faced with situations under [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) between particular parties, where it will feel bound to hold that such an obligation to disclose arises from the circumstances." 
At p.504 Lockhart J said:- "It is difficult to conceive how mere silence by an alleged contravener could be sufficient to attract the operation of [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), but when all the relevant circumstances of a case are analysed silence of the alleged contravener may be the critical matter upon which reliance is placed to establish misleading or deceptive conduct." 
Jackson J, who dissented in the result, said, at p.508:- "The ultimate question in each case is whether in the particular circumstances the respondent's conduct whether constituted by act or omission, by communication or by silence, is or is likely to be misleading or deceptive.

It follows from what I have said that a vendor's silence in circumstances where the common law would not impose on him a duty to speak may constitute conduct which is, or is likely to be, misleading or deceptive in terms of [s.52(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) ... Of course, not every instance of silence on the part of a vendor means that he is engaged in conduct which is misleading or deceptive. It must be the conduct of the vendor, that is, the vendor's silence, which induces or is likely to induce the mistaken view on the part of the potential purchaser." 
In my opinion the correct analysis is that where there is a duty to speak and there is a failure to comply with that duty, whether that be in consequence of advertence or inadvertence, (although assuming there is knowledge), it is wholly consistent with the provisions of [s.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s11.html) that there may be misleading or deceptive conduct, which, for the purposes of that section, does not require intent. The relationship between Minter
Ellison, on the one hand, and PTWA and PT, on the other hand, was one of trust and of principal and agent. It was not in issue that the Subscription Moneys should not have been handed over save to obtain a conforming Deposit
Certificate and, thereafter, on the basis that such a certificate had been obtained. On the facts as I find them, and in the circumstances of this case,
I am satisfied the letters to PTWA and PT constituted misleading and deceptive conduct.

Mr Pembroke nextly submitted that any assurance, which Mr Grimshaw may have felt about the involvement of Minter Ellison, was flawed because he was content to proceed on the basis that someone else had approved the transaction; he did not perceive there was any conflict in Minter Ellison's role; and he did not attach any particular significance to the terms of clause .4 or Schedule 4. Those matters, however, do not, in my opinion, relieve
Minter Ellison of the obligation to make truthful statements or, put more accurately, they do not acquit Minter Ellison of engaging in misleading conduct.

Mr Heydon submitted that the conduct of Minter Ellison was advertent and consisted of non-disclosure of known facts in the context of a considerable amount of positive conduct on their part. He submitted Mr Lewis knew of the non-conforming character of the December 1992 Deposit Certificate and, at all times on and after 31 May 1993 he submitted he must have been conscious of the fact that the Deposit Certificates were not Bearer Certificates and were not conforming. He continued that the submissions on behalf of Minter Ellison appear to assume that in order to contravene [s.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s11.html) on the grounds of silence it is necessary for the person who did not speak to make a conscious decision not to disclose a particular matter, which Mr Heydon submitted was not correct. He submitted that what must be adverted to is the matter not disclosed, but that it is not necessary to make a positive decision not to disclose it. This really gives rise to Mr Pembroke's point as to Mr
Lewis' knowledge, although Mr Pembroke did not deal with the knowledge of Mr
Gaffney.

Mr Heydon submitted that even if it was necessary to make a positive decision not to disclose, which he did not accept, that requirement was satisfied by the letter of 31 May 1993, which reflected a conscious decision not to disclose the non-bearer character of the Deposit Certificate. In my opinion that is correct. His submissions concluded that the case is not one of "mere silence", but rather one of silence in circumstances where many positive acts were performed, where conventional trust and agency duties were owed and breached, and where the parties were in contact frequently.

In my opinion when one looks at the whole of the circumstances, the letters from Minter Ellison to PTWA and PT amounted to misrepresentations by silence in so far as they conveyed the impression, on a fair reading of them, that settlement had taken place conformably with the Subscription Agreements whereas it had not. There was a clear duty on Minter Ellison, even if writing on behalf of ECCC, to advise PTWA and PT of the true position, and all the material necessary for them to fulfil that obligation was in their possession.

Causation 
Mr Pembroke submitted that if Minter Ellison were guilty of any of the breaches alleged, no damage flowed from them because the chain of causation was broken. This submission proceeded on the basis that there were two events, either of which brought about that result. Firstly, he submitted that had PTWA and/or PT become aware that conforming Deposit Certificates were not being furnished, they would have insisted that they should be and, upon that happening, ECCC would have issued such certificates in which case the loss would not have occurred. I do not accept this submission, essentially for the reasons I have given. Notwithstanding the persistent efforts by Minter Ellison to have ECCC provide conforming Deposit Certificates, it failed to do so. That occurred in the context that it had received tax advice that such certificates would not provide the best result, and that in any event Minter Ellison were of the view that the Deed of Confirmation and Irrevocable Authority would provide equivalent security to the conforming Deposit Certificates. I am not satisfied that these circumstances broke the chain of causation or, in the context of the breaches of [s.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s11.html), constituted a severance between them and damage: Garvey & Anor versus Vamamu
Pty Limited (Court of Appeal , 2 September 1998).

Secondly, Mr Pembroke relied on the entry by PTWA and PT into the Deeds Poll.
He submitted, correctly in my view, that absent compelling reasons Dresdner would not have released the money invested with it and, as Mr Pembroke put it, whilst the money remained with Dresdner it was "as safe as houses". However,
PTWA and PT, by their execution of the Deeds Poll, did what Dresdner required to enable the money invested with it to be paid to ECCC and, thereafter, to be utilised by it for its own purposes. There was no evidence to establish that
Minter Ellison were aware that this was happening and, it will be remembered, the Deeds Poll were prepared by other solicitors. Accordingly, the submission of Mr Pembroke was that but for the entry into those Deeds the invested money would have remained with Dresdner and, ultimately, have been paid out to
National Registries to be disbursed by it in accordance with the Paying Agency
Agreement.

These submissions were linked with the further submission that the only loss caused by any breach by Minter Ellison was the loss of that portion of the investments represented by the amounts of the Deposit Certificates because, so it was submitted, the balance of the investment was lost through ECCC's trading losses. This submission, if I may so with respect, overlooks the fact that Minter Ellison were only authorised to pay out the balance of the money on receiving a conforming Deposit Certificate, and that had a conforming
Deposit Certificate been obtained the interest on the amount invested would have been sufficient to repay the principal. It also overlooks the evidence that had PTWA and/or PT been advised of the situation earlier they would have been in a position to call for the return of all the money and, at least to a certain point, ECCC would have been able to comply with that request.

The question of causation has to be considered in relation to the breaches of equitable obligations and the breaches of the common law in so far as there was negligence. It also has to be considered in the light of the breach of [s.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s11.html), by reference to the authorities to which I have referred.

The Position So Far As Equitable Compensation Is Concerned 
In Beach Petroleum NL versus Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy [(1997) 26 ACSR ], commencing at p.280, I considered the question of causation in relation to breach of fiduciary duty, rather than in the context of a breach of a trustee's duties. I set out the well known passage from the opinion of the
Privy Council in Brickenden versus London Loan & Savings Co [[1934] 3 DLR ] at p.469.

I noted, at p.285, that in Target Holdings Limited versus Redferns <case>; [[1996] AC ] Lord
Browne-Wilkinson had limited the principles of causation referred to in
Brickenden "only to breaches of true fiduciary obligations and not to breaches of the equitable obligation on the part of a trustee or director to exercise reasonable skill and care". In Abbott Tout I was dealing with the former situation.

I nextly referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Greater Pacific
Investments Pty Limited (In Liquidation) versus Australian National Industries
Limited [(1996) 39 NSWLR 143] in which the judgment was given by McLelland AJA, with whom Priestley and Meagher JJA agreed. I quoted from the judgment of McLelland AJA and in particular the sentence:- "The assessment is of the loss to the victim caused by the breach on a commonsense view of causation: see Target .. applying Canson .. ." 
I then referred to the High Court's decision in Maguire & Anor v
Makaronis & Anor (which is now reported in <case>; [(1997) 188 CLR 449).] 
I formed the opinion, for the reasons there stated, that the correct principle to apply in the circumstances of that case, in considering causation, is to assess loss caused by the breach on a commonsense view of causation, or by considering whether there was "an adequate or sufficient connection between the equitable compensation claimed and the breach of fiduciary duty":
Maguire p.286.

The matter was most recently considered by the Court of Appeal in O'Halloran v RT Thomas & Family Pty Limited (Court of Appeal , 13 October ). The judgment of the Court was given by Spigelman CJ, with whom
Priestley and Meagher JJA, who had agreed with McLelland AJA in Greater
Pacific Investments, agreed. That case involved breaches of fiduciary duties by a director, who submitted that there was no causal link between any breach of that duty and any loss occasioned by the decline in the value of certain shares. Prima facie that would seem closer to the breach of fiduciary duty, than to the breach of the equitable obligation imposed on a trustee.

At p.11 the Chief Justice identified the crucial issue as being whether it could be said, as a matter of causation, that the wrongful registration of the share transfer led to the loss of the opportunity to sell the shares before their fall in value.

At p.16 his Honour referred to the speech of Lord Hoffmann in Environment
Agency (formerly National Rivers Authority) versus Empress Car Co (Abertillery)
Limited <case>; [[1998] 2 WLR 350.] He noted that his Lordship had stated that the first matter to be determined was the purpose for which the question of causation was being asked, and that before answering questions about causation it is necessary to identify the scope of the relevant rule. At pp.17-18 his Honour said:- "The case against O'Halloran is based on a breach of fiduciary duty. It has long been established that questions of causation of loss said to arise from breach of fiduciary obligation are to be determined in a different way from breach of common law obligations. Specifically, the remedy of equitable compensation differs from damages in common law. It also differs from damages under a statutory regime where the Court is concerned with, and confined by, the construction of the statute." 
After noting the object of equitable compensation and referring to Target
Holdings and Canson his Honour expressed the view that the portion of the judgment of McLachlin J, which I quoted at p.284 in Beach, represents the law in Australia.

The Chief Justice then went on to consider causation and breach of fiduciary duty by a director, in the course of which he referred to Maguire v
Makaronis and, at p.24, he quoted from the speech of Lord Browne-Wilkinson in Target Holdings at p.434, where his Lordship concluded:- "However, there does have to be some causal connection between the breach of trust and the loss to the trust estate for which compensation is recoverable namely the fact that the loss would not have occurred but for the breach." 
There was no reference to the earlier Court of Appeal decision in Greater
Pacific Investments Pty Limited.

The test, which his Honour considered appropriate, was would loss have occurred if there had been no breach: p.30. He said that an application of that test compelled the conclusion that the act of registration meant that the other party lost the capacity to deal with the property by way of sale to a third party, and it was of no avail to the appellant to say that there was another cause of its failure to make such a sale. This, as I would understand it, is an application of the "but for" test which, at least prima facie, does not necessarily seem, in my respectful opinion, to accord with the statement of McLachlin J in Canson, which, at p.19, the Chief Justice said represented the law in Australia.

Priestley JA was of the view that the decision in Brickenden should be followed unless and until the High Court says otherwise. If that is so then it would seem that his Honour was applying the "but for" test. His Honour makes no reference to the earlier decision in Greater Pacific.

Meagher JA, in agreeing with the judgment of the Chief Justice, said:- "By committing many and serious breaches of the fiduciary duties he owed R T Thomas & Family Pty Limited, he deprived that company of its ability to deal with one of its main assets, namely its shares in Jeffreys. In such a situation, no court exercising equitable jurisdiction would debate whether the loss arose from the wrongful transfer, the retention or non-retention of share certificates, the failure to record the transaction, continuing attempts to sell the shares, or anything else. The company had a valuable asset, O'Halloran neutralised it. Equity will see to it that the value of the asset is restored." 
This approach, so it seems to me, confined the difficulties to those created in breach of the fiduciary duty and made it unnecessary for his Honour to consider which breach of fiduciary duty led to the loss because all the breaches had been committed by the person against whom damages were awarded.

In the instant case the breach of duty was the failure by Minter Ellison to obtain conforming Deposit Certificates. Had such certificates been obtained it would still have been open to PTWA and PT to agree that the moneys invested with Dresdner should be withdrawn from it. However when one goes to the Deeds
Poll, although "Deposit Certificate" is not defined, reference is being made, in my opinion, to a Deposit Certificate as defined in the Subscription
Agreement. In paragraph 7 of the Agreement there is a requirement for a substitute Deposit Certificate "which as to maturity date and maturity sum is identical to the" Dresdner Certificate of Deposit for which it is substituted "and that such substitution shall constitute a variation of the Subscription
Agreements and that it otherwise confirms the Subscription Agreements".

In my opinion the intention was to have a Deposit Certificate in the same terms as that provided by the Subscription Agreement. If that be correct the breach by Minter Ellison would, irrespective of the Deeds Poll, have led to the loss, because what should have happened after their execution was that a conforming Deposit Certificate be obtained from the Prime Bank. That would, in my opinion, have happened if there had been conforming Deposit Certificates originally and, hence the deposits would have remained safe.

Mr Heydon submitted, on the authority of In Re Dawson, that the principles applicable "do not appear to involve any enquiry as to whether the loss was caused by or flowed from the breach. Rather the enquiry in each instance would appear to be whether the loss would have happened if there had been no breach". This, provided the situation is one of breach by a trustee of obligations, rather than the wider breach of fiduciary duty as, in my opinion, it was in the present case, accords with Lord Browne-Wilkinson's statement in
Target.

If I may pause there the second sentence seems to beg the question, unless it is read as meaning that one must determine whether, in the relevant context of breach, it was causative of the loss. As I have said earlier even the "but for" test requires it to be established that the action was a cause of the loss. Mr Heydon also placed reliance on the decision in O'Halloran versus R T
Thomas & Family Pty Limited.

In my opinion the answer to the present matter is that the Deeds Poll contemplated that Deposit Certificates in the same terms as those issued by
Dresdner would be obtained. If those certificates had been conforming Deposit
Certificates then conforming Deposit Certificates would have been obtained from the substituted bank. Minter Ellison's breach in failing to obtain conforming Deposit Certificates led to non-conforming certificates being obtained. Accordingly, the breach continued to infect the situation and, but for that breach, the loss would not have happened. Looked at in a manner I find more satisfactory, viz from a commonsense point of view and with the benefit of hindsight, the failure by Minter Ellison to obtain conforming
Deposit Certificates continued to be the cause, or, which I think is only necessary, "a cause", of the loss.

I also consider that re Dawson, Target and O'Halloran provide another method of deciding this issue. Minter Ellison owed trust obligations, which they breached. After the breaches, and I have no doubt because of them, the losses were suffered. The authorities support the proposition that that provides a sufficient causal nexus.

For these reasons I am satisfied that the breach by Minter Ellison was causative of the loss.

Contribution 
Mr Pembroke submitted that as between PTWA and PT, on the one hand, and Minter
Ellison, on the other, there have been respective breaches of trust "giving rise to a co-ordinate liability (subject to questions of causation and the exclusion clauses in favour of Minter Ellison)". He submitted such breaches gave rise to the same loss, subject to the special defences available to
Minter Ellison and that, in the circumstances, apportionment is available.
Before considering these submissions, I think it useful to point out the position thus far reached. Firstly, I am satisfied that the plaintiffs are entitled to recover from PTWA and PT by reason of their breaches of trust.
Secondly, I am satisfied that PTWA and PT are entitled to recover from Minter
Ellison by reason of their breaches of trust to PTWA and PT. This is not a case, as Mr Pembroke's submissions recognise, where two trustees are liable to a plaintiff. In such a case the trustees would be, generally speaking, jointly and severally liable and, in those circumstances, entitled, inter se, to contribution.

In the present case PTWA and PT are liable for certain breaches to the plaintiffs, and Minter Ellison are liable for certain other breaches to PTWA and PT. The question is whether there should be any apportionment. Mr Pembroke relied on Meagher, Gummow & Lehane, Equity Doctrines and Remedies, (Third Edition) at pp.290-297.

The authors deal with co-ordinate liabilities, which they state may be joint, joint and several, or several. They note, paragraph 1006:- "In particular there are lacking judicial pronouncements as to whether liabilities are not co-ordinate unless they are of the same nature and attract the same remedies for enforcement. Clearly two unsecured personal covenants of guarantee would satisfy any such criterion. But would the position differ if one of the guarantees were supported by security from the guarantor in favour of the creditor? Further, for example, do an unsecured guarantee and third party mortgage by deposit of title deeds so differ, both in their nature and as to the remedies of the claimant on default, as to render inequitable contribution between the co-obligors? The occasion for the inattention to these questions in the authorities may be their concern with liabilities (particularly those of co-guarantors) which arise under the one instrument and so bear the same incidence. While the liabilities of co-insurers will arise in the ordinary course under separate instruments, they will present no distinction between secured and lesser degrees of obligation. Be that as it may, the proper view appears to be that contribution may be recovered where the liabilities of the co-obligors to the principal claimant are such that enforcement by him against either co-obligor would diminish that obligor in his material substance to the value of the liability. Any alternative or additional requirement in the doctrine of contribution of similarity or consubstantial nature between the liabilities to which the co-obligors are exposed would produce intolerable uncertainty and obscure the true object of the doctrine." 
The authors are concerned with the circumstances in which two or more parties have the same obligation to a third party. That is not this case.

Mr Pembroke also referred to my decision in Beach Petroleum NL at pp.281-285 and 304. I was dealing, in the first series of pages, with causation, although, at p.281 I referred to the criticism of the decision of the New Zealand Court of Appeal in Day versus Mead <case>; [[1987] 2
NZLR 443] by Meagher, Gummow & Lehane at p.2304. The authors were considering "equitable compensation". They noted, firstly, that the monetary sum awarded may be computed by reference to any profit made by the defendant, or by reference to the detriment suffered by the plaintiff. Secondly, that the obligation to pay imposed by equity is not fettered by the usual common law notions, which serve to diminish the quantum of an award of damages at common law. In this consideration they stated:- "It is therefore surprising that the New Zealand Court of Appeal has held in Day versus Mead .. that contributory negligence is a ground for reducing compensation in an action for breach of fiduciary duty. This decision is also suspect on another ground. As Handley JA has said, extracurially: `The decision is clearly wrong. Contributory negligence has never been a defence to an action for legal or equitable fraud. A plaintiff is entitled to relief if the fraud was "a cause" of the loss, "even there were other more weighty causes for in this field the Court does not allow an examination into the relative importance of contributory causes". The same principles must apply to that species of equitable fraud which comprises breaches of fiduciary duty.'" 
The third feature, which the authors noted, was that there is no element of penalty involved in equitable compensation.

At p.304 I was considering contributory negligence. However, that was in the context of an alternative claim made in negligence.

In my respectful opinion the authorities to which I have been referred, albeit very generally, do not support the proposition that there is any entitlement to apportionment, whether that word be used to seek to indicate some form of equitable distribution of the loss, or to indicate a consideration of contributory negligence.

Mr Pembroke relied also upon [s.23B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wa1958111/s23b.html) of the [Wrongs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wa1958111/) of
Victoria. I shall assume, for the moment, that that is applicable. [Section
A(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wa1958111/s23a.html) thereof provides:- "For the purposes of this Part a person is liable in respect of any damage if the person who suffered that damage, or anyone representing the estate or dependants of that person, is entitled to recover compensation from the first-mentioned person in respect of that damage whatever the legal basis of liability, whether tort, breach of contract, breach of trust or otherwise." [Section
B(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wa1958111/s23b.html) provides:- "Subject to the following provisions of this section, a person liable in respect of any damage suffered by another person may recover contribution from any other person liable in respect of the same damage (whether jointly with the first-mentioned person or otherwise)." 
For the reasons I have given I do not consider this is a case in which the principles of contribution arise. The amount recoverable on the cross-claim by
PTWA and PT will be more than they are obliged to pay under the principal claim, although it includes that amount. It is not "the same damage". The damage springs from different breaches and there is no co-ordinate liability.

If the case turned on the negligence of Minter Ellison then, in my opinion, it would be appropriate to consider whether PTWA and PT had been guilty of contributory negligence. If that was a matter I had to consider I would have come to the conclusion, essentially for the reasons I have given in articulating why they are liable to the plaintiffs, that they had been guilty of contributory negligence and, as between them and Minter Ellison I would have apportioned the damages as to forty per cent and sixty per cent respectively.

If I had come to the conclusion that the matter turned on the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/fta1985117/), I would have found that Minter Ellison engaged in misleading conduct and it would have been necessary for me to mould relief conformably with the decision of the
Court of Appeal in Akron Securities Limited versus Iliffe [(1997) 41 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281997%29%2041%20NSWLR%20353 "View LawCiteRecord" ) My inclination, prima facie, would have been to grant relief reflecting the culpability between the parties in the terms to which I have referred in considering contributory negligence. It is not necessary to reach a final conclusion on this point.

In my view, the highest duty owed by Minter Ellison to PTWA and PT was as trustee and, accordingly, I am of the view that PTWA and PT are entitled to judgment against Minter Ellison for the full amount required to replenish the trusts, together with compound interest on yearly rests on the trustee basis and for costs. The conduct of Minter Ellison makes it appropriate that compound interest should be awarded on yearly rests on the trustee basis in accordance with the principles to which I have referred.

Further Cross-Claims 
FlexiPlan brought an Amended Fourth Cross-Claim against Minter Ellison and
National Registries. As I have come to the conclusion that FlexiPlan is not liable to the plaintiff, it is unnecessary, save for the question of costs, for me to consider it.

A Fifth Cross-Claim was brought by National Registries against Minter Ellison, and a Sixth Cross-Claim was brought by National Registries against PTWA, PT and FlexiPlan. I shall deal with these cross-claims after I have considered whether National Registries is liable. PTWA and PT brought a Cross-Claim against National Registries.

An Amended Seventh Cross-Claim was brought by Minter Ellison against PTWA, PT and National Registries, seeking as against PTWA and PT:- ".. an indemnity against any liability in these proceedings, including an indemnity for all legal costs in these proceedings", and as against National Registries contribution pursuant to [s.5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s5.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/) and [s.23B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wa1958111/s23b.html) of the [Wrongs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/wa1958111/) (Vic).

The claim for the indemnity against PTWA and PT arose out of clause 3.4 and, in my opinion, must fail for the reasons I have stated.

The claim for contribution against National Registries is based on allegations that it failed properly to determine its obligations under the Paying Agency
Agreement and other related documents; failed to take reasonable care by failing at any time to satisfy itself about the documents held by it pursuant to the Paying Agency Agreement; failed, upon receiving replacement
Certificates of Deposit from ECCC on 25 February 1995 to enquire of it how the
Dresdner Deposit Certificates had been exchanged by it without National
Registries' involvement; failed to obtain a copy of the formal written consent of the preference shareholders referred to by ECCC; failed to review the circumstances surrounding the release of the funds represented by the Dresdner
Certificates, including questioning other parties to the transaction; and by its entry into a Registry Service Agreement dated 22 July 1994 with NatWest, and an Instrument dated 22 July 1994 for NatWest's Registered Medium Term Note
Programme, it assumed obligations inconsistent with its obligations under the
Paying Agency Agreement.

PTWA based its cross-claim against National Registries on the Paying Agency
Agreement and the allegation that National Registries knew that the Deposit
Certificates referred to in it were intended to provide security for the holders of ECCC shares. It was further alleged that National Registries knew, or ought to have known, that PTWA, having purchased those shares, would rely on the skill and expertise of National Registries in acting as Paying Agent to protect it from foreseeable loss, and that National Registries, at all material times, knew, or ought to have known, that if it failed to exercise reasonable skill and care in acting as the Paying Agent, PTWA would suffer loss and damage.

It was pleaded that, in the premises, National Registries owed a duty to PTWA to ensure that any documents purportedly provided to it pursuant to the Paying
Agency Agreement were, in fact, Deposit Certificates; to hold Deposit
Certificates for safe custody pending maturity in accordance with the provisions of the Paying Agency Agreement; not to accept documents as Deposit
Certificates which were not Deposit Certificates as defined in that Agreement; to inform PTWA if documents provided to it and described as Deposit
Certificates were not, in fact, Deposit Certificates; to require ECCC, or its agents, to obtain and provide to it Deposit Certificates in circumstances where ECCC or its agents had provided documents which were not, in fact,
Deposit Certificates; and not to accept documents other than Deposit
Certificates. The breaches alleged were that National Registries failed to fulfil those duties in consequence of which it is pleaded that PTWA suffered loss and damage.

PTWA also cross-claimed under [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) alleging that
National Registries represented to PTWA that ECCC had deposited with it
Deposit Certificates as defined in the Subscription Agreements. The representation was alleged to be implied by reason of the reliance which PTWA would, to the knowledge of National Registries, place on the performance by
National Registries of its duties under the Paying Agency Agreement; the duty to inform PTWA as alleged; and the fact that National Registries participated in completion of each of the transactions by accepting documents purporting to be Deposit Certificates without informing PTWA of the matters alleged.

By its Amended Third Cross-Claim PT raised, as against National Registries, essentially the same allegations of negligence and under [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).

Although I have set out the provisions of the Paying Agency Agreement, which I consider relevant, I think it appropriate to summarise them.

ECCC and National Registries were the only parties to it.

It recited that National Registries had agreed to act as Paying Agent "for the redemption of these preference shares on and subject to the terms and conditions set out" in the Agreement.
 "Agency" was defined as the agency on the part of National Registries contemplated by the Agreement.
 "Deposit Certificates" were defined in the terms to which I have referred.

Clause 2.1 provided that ECCC appointed National Registries to act as paying Agent on its behalf "in respect of the Shares and any Redemptions" on and subject to the terms of the Agreement.

Clause 3 defined the Agency Obligations. Clause 3.1 provided: "From time to time Deposit Certificates will be lodged with the Paying Agent for safe custody pending maturity." 
Clause 3.2 provided for the furnishing of Schedules.

Clause 3.3 stated: "On the maturity of each Deposit Certificate the Paying Agent will if required by the terms of the Deposit Certificate present the relevant certificate to, or make demand on, the Prime Bank, collect the maturity funds as agent for and on behalf of ECCCL and deposit the maturity funds into the Deposit Account on trust .." for the purposes stated. (My emphasis.) 
The balance of clause 3 was concerned with what should happen on maturity.

Clauses 5.1 and 5.2 required ECCC and National Registries respectively to deal with the Deposit Certificates in accordance with the Agreement.

Clause 12 made National Registries the agent solely of ECCC.

The contractual obligations imposed on National Registries were to receive
Deposit Certificates for safe custody pending maturity, and deal with them on maturity as specified. The obligation to present the Deposit Certificates to or make demand on the Prime Bank was qualified by the words "if required by the terms of the Deposit Certificate".

Each Deposit Certificate or other document was forwarded to National
Registries under cover of a letter from Minter Ellison stating that this was being done pursuant to clause 3 of the Paying Agency Agreement, and that where the document purported to be a Deposit Certificate that it was.

The Evidence Of Mr John Garry Higginbotham 
In his witness statement, Exhibit NR1, Mr John Garry Higginbotham, who is currently employed by National Registry Services Pty Limited as General
Manager Victoria and who was, from 1988 until April 1996 employed by National
Registries as Assistant General Manager and General Manager, stated that
National Registries provided fixed interest and share registration services.
He set out his qualifications, which included those of a Bachelor of Economics and a Fellow of the Australian Society of Certified Practising Accountants, and he stated that as Assistant General Manager he was, at various times, responsible for the day to day operations of the business. He referred to the entry by National Registries into the Paying Agency Agreement on 4 December
He was aware that National Registries and ECCC were the only parties to the agreement and he said, without objection, that he understood ECCC "to be our client". He continued, in paragraph 10:- "I understand the main role for NR was to act as paying agent, and as such to record investor entitlements and administer the making of payments to investors when required." 
He saw the roles of holding Deposit Certificates for safe custody as ancillary to National Registries' main role of acting as Paying Agent, and he said that the fee structure reflected the way in which he saw the role. A consideration of the Paying Agency Agreement shows that these understandings were justified.

In paragraph 12 he said he knew there were various types of documents, which may be Deposit Certificates within the meaning of the Paying Agency Agreement, and that he did not believe he had any particular expectation as to the form such documents would take. He did not believe that prior to receipt of documents from Minter Ellison he had previously dealt with Bearer Deposit
Certificates, Guarantees or Letters of Credit, and:- "In general terms I had an understanding that a bearer document could be presented by anyone to the financial institution issuing it so as to access funds. I believed that some deposit certificates may be bearer certificates and that others may not." 
He also had in mind arranging with Westpac to keep any Bearer Certificates in safe custody if they were supplied. Presumably this was for security reasons having regard to the negotiability of such certificates. He understood that
Minter Ellison were the solicitors for ECCC, and he knew them to be a large and reputable Melbourne law firm, who had drafted the Paying Agency Agreement.

He received the letter from Minter Ellison of 9 December 1992, which referred to the Paying Agency Agreement and stated that pursuant to clause 3 of it
Minter Ellison enclosed various documents "for your safe-custody". The documents included Deposit Certificate Reference 447 from Dresdner dated 8
December 1992.

In paragraph 17 Mr Higginbotham said that he read the letter and believed the
Dresdner Deposit Certificate was not a bearer document and, therefore, that he did not need to make arrangements to have it held by a bank. He said he understood from the letter that the Deposit Certificate was provided pursuant to clause 3 of the Paying Agency Agreement, and that National Registries was to hold it in safe custody pursuant to its obligations under that Agreement.
He said:- "I accepted from the Minters letter that the Dresdner Deposit Certificate was what NR were required to hold pursuant to the Paying Agency Agreement." 
I have no difficulty accepting this statement. Mr Higginbotham had no reason to believe that Minter Ellison were not telling National Registries the truth, unless he concluded, which I am satisfied he did not, that a non bearer
Certificate of Deposit could not be a Certificate of Deposit as defined in the
Paying Agency Agreement.

Mr Higginbotham went through the further transactions and referred to the fact that the subsequent letters to National Registries were similar to that dated December 1992.

In paragraph 25 Mr Higginbotham referred to the variation in the Paying Agency
Agreement in relation to the definition of Prime Bank.

On or about 30 January 1995 he received a letter from Minter Ellison attaching a Deposit Certificate from Westpac, from which he understood that the Westpac
Certificate was the Deposit Certificate National Registries was required to hold pursuant to clause 3 of the Paying Agency Agreement. He did not review the Westpac Certificate in detail "given the assertion in the Minters letter that the document was provided pursuant to clause 3". He accepted that.

A further Westpac Certificate was received on 30 January 1995, which he accepted as the Deposit Certificate to be held by National Registries and, on February 1995, he received a letter from ECCC:- ".. which attached replacement Certificates of Deposit issued by Westpac to replace the Dresdner Certificates of Deposit".

The letter stated:- "We write to advise that with the formal written consent of all our preference shareholders we have replaced the Certificates of Deposit issued by Dresdner Australia Limited with Certificates of Deposit issued by Westpac Banking Corporation. ... We enclose for your safe keeping pursuant to the Paying Agency Agreement the ORIGINAL CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT from Westpac and ask that you replace the corresponding Dresdner Certificates with these. Corresponding schedules will follow shortly consolidating information previously provided to you." 
Thereafter further Deposit Certificates were received from Minter Ellison, including the documents from NatWest. Mr Higginbotham made it clear that he did not regard any of the certificates received by National Registries as
Bearer Deposit Certificates.

Mr Higginbotham was cross-examined firstly by Mr Heydon. He was asked, hypothetically, whether if an officer of "Perpetual" had telephoned after receipt of the letter dated 2 June 1993 and asked whether a Certificate of
Deposit had been received from Minter Ellison in relation to a transaction between Perpetual and ECCC what his response would have been. He said he would have answered in the affirmative, and that that would have been his answer in respect of subsequent transactions. There would have been nothing extraordinary about this response. The more pertinent question, which on the evidence he never was likely to have been asked, was whether National
Registries had received a bearer Deposit Certificate.

At Tp.303 Mr Higginbotham was cross-examined about the definition of Deposit
Certificates, which he agreed used the expression "bearer". He recalled seeing that, and he took the view that the Deposit Certificates may be or may not be "Bearer" Deposit Certificates. He said he appreciated that clause 3.3 placed an obligation on National Registries, if so required by the terms of the
Deposit Certificate, to present it to the Prime Bank and collect funds maturing from that Bank, which were then to be placed into the deposit account to pay the holders of the redeemable Preference Shares, who presented their shares for redemption, and, if anything was left, to be devoted to expenses and thereafter paid to ECCC. This was the primary obligation.

Mr Higginbotham said he formed the view "in the early period" that the Deposit
Certificates received from Minter Ellison fell within the definition, which was his continuing view. This was notwithstanding that they were not Bearer
Deposit Certificates and, at Tp.307, he was asked:- "Q. Did it occur to you to say to Minter Ellison: Our job is to look after Deposit Certificates as defined, meaning thereby, inter alia, Bearer Deposit Certificates, but what you are giving us are not Bearer Deposit Certificates? 
A. No, that didn't occur to me.

Q. Are you able to indicate any reason why it didn't occur to you? 
A. Well, I guess - two reasons. One is that I didn't believe that the definition of Deposit Certificates necessarily meant that they would be Bearer. It meant that they may be Bearer, and the obligation under clause 3.3 suggested that if required, if I can perhaps go to that clause - clause 3.3 goes to say `if required by the terms of the Deposit Certificate present the relevant certificate'. That indicated to me that the certificate would not necessarily be a Bearer Certificate and the second reason was that it was that it was presented to me, that the Deposit Certificate was a Deposit Certificate within the terms of the Paying Agency Agreement." 
He was asked about the first reason and, in particular, what it was about the words he had quoted which made it optional for the certificate to have a bearer characteristic, to which he replied:- "A. I would have expected that a Bearer Certificate would clearly state that it has to be presented before maturity. The certificates presented to me didn't have those words or words to that effect.

Q. You are saying that the certificates presented to you didn't have words requiring them to be presented to the Prime Bank, is that what you are saying? 
A. That's correct, yes." 
Although it was submitted that this was fanciful, I do not agree. The words in clause 3.3 did not demand that the Deposit Certificates would have to be presented to the Prime Bank, as Mr Higginbotham believed a Bearer Deposit
Certificate would have to be, and the Deposit Certificates imposed no such obligations on their face. Bearing in mind that until maturity National
Registries only had to hold the Deposit Certificates in safe custody, and that part of that involved deciding whether they were or were not Bearer Deposit
Certificates, it does not seem to me unreasonable that Mr Higginbotham did not pursue the matter further. Certainly I do not consider he had any obligation either under the Paying Agency Agreement or otherwise to do so.

Mr Higginbotham said that he did not direct his attention to what was to happen on maturity and he repeated, Tp.308, that he considered the certificates were within the meaning of the definition, notwithstanding that they were not Bearer Certificates, and that he did not read into the definition that they had to be Bearer Certificates. This answer had to be taken with his reading of clause 3.3.

At Tpp.309-310 Mr Higginbotham made it clear that he formed the view that the certificates he received were not Bearer Deposit Certificates. At Tp.315 he said that he did not believe it was National Registries' role to police the form of the certificates, nor did he see it as necessarily a role that
National Registries undertook so that it would be possible to obtain payment at the end of the tenth year, although he agreed that "in the certain circumstances" its role was to present the relevant certificate to the Prime
Bank and collect the maturity funds. He said he did not turn his mind to that side of the transaction "because it was ten years hence": Tp.315. He agreed it was somewhat unsatisfactory not to have turned his mind to that matter, looking at the matter with the benefit of hindsight. He made it clear that he was much influenced by the words in clause 3.3 "if required by the terms of the Deposit Certificate".

Mr Higginbotham agreed, Tp.317, that if Minter Ellison had presented a piece of paper that seemed to relate to some transaction totally unrelated to clause .3 he would have made enquiries of them and, if he had not received a satisfactory answer, he would have raised the matter with ECCC. He said he did not think he would have raised the matter with the investor.

After the Westpac Deposit Certificates were furnished the Dresdner Deposit
Certificates were retained, although Mr Higginbotham did not pay any attention to the effect of having two sets of certificates.

At Tp.322 Mr Higginbotham said he did not appreciate that any documents supplied by Minter Ellison would have economic value, even though they were not Bearer Deposit Certificates.

Mr Pembroke commenced to cross-examine Mr Higginbotham at Tp.323. At Tp.325 Mr
Higginbotham said that he did not notice that the documents furnished by
Minter Ellison did not comply with the definition in the Paying Agency
Agreement "at all". It was somewhat incongruous that Minter Ellison, who appreciated the Deposit Certificates were not conforming certificates and who were representing to National Registries that they were, should be criticising
Mr Higginbotham for accepting them in the terms Minter Ellison described them.
He repeated that he did not believe the definition required a Bearer
Certificate, and he confirmed that belief sprang from his reading of clause .3, which had been drafted by Minter Ellison. He did not check that with
National Registries' legal advisers, although no one pointed to any obligation on National Registries to do so. He said that even looking at the matter now it was not obvious to him that the conclusion he reached about the definition of Deposit Certificate and its connection, if any, with clause 3.3, required expert legal advice, and he maintained that because of clause 3.3 there was compliance with the definition of "Deposit Certificate" in the Paying Agency
Agreement. He said he did not recognise that proposition as quite erroneous, although he said it was not one which he concluded at the time.

It was put to Mr Higginbotham that the preference shareholders would, in his view, be able to rely on National Registries if a non-conforming instrument was provided. He said he did not see that that was National Registries' role in relation to preference shareholders. Nor do I. The preference shareholders' interests should have been protected by the trustees and by Minter Ellison, all of which and whom failed dismally to do so, save to the extent of the limited role National Registries had to play.

At Tp.329-330 Mr Higginbotham agreed that as he knew the Deposit Certificates were not bearer documents, the definition of "Deposit Certificates" would only be met if they were a Guarantee or a Letter of Credit, although he did not turn his mind to whether they were Letters of Credit or a Guarantee.

He was then taken to clause 3.3. He agreed that he recognised "now" that it imposed obligations on National Registries to either present the relevant certificate or make a demand on the Prime Bank, and to collect the maturity funds consequent on presentation or demand. He continued:- "Q. So there is nothing about the requirements of the obligations imposed by clause 3.3 which could reasonably lead to the conclusion that there had been compliance with the definition of `deposit certificate' in the agreement, is there? 
A. I don't believe so." 
Mr Higginbotham had not said that the obligations to which he was referred led to that result. The words on which he fixed presupposed there was such a requirement. His point was that they also presupposed there may not be such a requirement. He also referred, in relation to the obligations of National
Registries, to clause 12.

At Tp.332 Mr Higginbotham was referred to an agreement between National
Registries and NatWest. He agreed another agreement was entered into on 22
July 1994, and that both of those agreements were entered into under his general supervision and control and were intended to give content to National
Registries' Service Agreement.

At Tp.335 Mr Higginbotham said that he regarded the notes issued by NatWest and Westpac as conforming to the definition in the Paying Agency Agreement, although he agreed that he did not think they were Letters of Credit,
Guarantees or Bearer Certificates of Deposit. He said he thought they were "because they are evidence of a deposit at a Prime Bank": Tp.336. This was consistent with the view to which he had come, a view which, in my opinion, was not unreasonable in all the circumstances.

Mr Higginbotham said that the Westpac Certificates were accepted in place of the Dresdner Certificates and were of equal or greater value, but he did not see that that could not happen without the consent or involvement of National
Registries. He said he did not turn his mind, at the time, to how the money represented by the negotiable instruments could have been obtained without the consent or involvement of National Registries, and it did not occur to him that it would have been prudent and reasonable to seek verification of the obtaining of consent from the preference shareholders. Once again it seems to me that National Registries was far removed from those interests, its obligations being to hold the documents in safe custody and to perform the obligations on redemption.

At Tpp.337-338 Mr Higginbotham said:- "Q. I asked you a moment ago about the Registries' Service Agreement and the Instrument, both of which were between NatWest Markets and National Registries? 
A. That's correct.

Q. You understood, didn't you, that one of the important components of those Agreements was that the Instruments issued pursuant to them, namely Medium Term Notes, could be transferred on the Registry which your company maintained without consent or notice to NatWest or National Registries? 
A. In terms of that Agreement, I can't recall it in that Agreement but that's generally the way the market operates, yes.

Q. Did it not occur to you that entering into an agreement to facilitate the transfer of notes in that way was entirely inconsistent with your obligations to hold the Deposit Certificates in safe custody pursuant to the Paying Agency Agreement? 
A. No, it did not.

Q. Do you recognise now that it is? 
A. No I don't." 
He was asked how he reconciled that and he said:- "A. My belief is that from time to time preference shareholders could be repaid and that over the years there are a number of transactions passed to us in terms of reductions in the number of preference shares, so I expected that the funds were not required." 
I accepted Mr Higginbotham as a witness of truth. As I have said, the role of
National Registries was limited both as to the obligations it had undertaken and the party to which it had undertaken the obligations. It was not bound, in my opinion, to ascertain that its principal, which had the obligation of obtaining conforming Deposit Certificates, had done so, and it was not obliged, so far as any other party was concerned, to check the nature of the
Deposit Certificates, save in so far as it was necessary, for the purpose of holding them in safe custody, to determine whether or not they were Bearer
Deposit Certificates. If one simply confines the obligations of National
Registries to those emerging from the Paying Agency Agreement I do not consider that it can be said that National Registries did not perform those obligations.

The attempt to extend the obligations to cover the obvious defaults of PTWA and PT and Minter Ellison should, in my opinion, be rejected. Each of PTWA, PT and Minter Ellison had an obvious obligation to ensure that the Deposit
Certificates were Bearer Deposit Certificates. They were all aware that the security of the Investors' money depended on that. National Registries had the far more limited role to which I have referred and, in addition, pursuant to clause 3.5, it was not liable to effect any redemptions from its own fund, but to immediately advise ECCC if the Deposit Account funds were or appeared likely to be insufficient to meet any scheduled redemptions. Accordingly, the
Paying Agency Agreement contemplated that the Deposit Certificates may not provide sufficient finance to bring about the redemptions.

Much time was spent at the hearing debating ways in which National Registries could be made liable in negligence for failing to advise parties that the
Deposit Certificates did not meet the contractual requirements. I found this a somewhat arid argument, because I formed the view that the duties of National
Registries were confined by the contractual obligations it had undertaken, in the sense that any negligence would have to arise from those obligations, or from some other obligations, which National Registries undertook.

On behalf of Minter Ellison it was submitted that National Registries should bear a relatively large proportion of any liability because Mr Higginbotham noticed that the word "bearer" was included in the definition of "Deposit
Certificate" and that that was very fresh in his mind. Further, he formed a view that the documents sent by Minter Ellison were not bearer documents. Mr
Pembroke placed great weight upon the cross-examination in relation to clause .3 at Tp.329 to which I have referred. In essence each and every matter Mr
Pembroke raised was a matter of which his clients were fully aware. National
Registries could not have told Minter Ellison anything about the documents, which they did not understand fully. One would add to this that Minter Ellison were representing that the Deposit Certificates were conforming documents.

Even if I had come to the view that National Registries owed some duty in tort to Minter Ellison, I would have dismissed the cross-claim based on negligence on the ground that the failure by National Registries to advise Minter Ellison that the Deposit Certificates were non-conforming did not cause Minter Ellison any damage and, accordingly, the tort of negligence has not been made out. In the result I consider that Minter Ellison's cross-claim against National
Registries should be dismissed with costs.

So far as PTWA's and PT's cross-claims against National Registries are concerned, they were premised on the assertion that National Registries either knew, or ought to have known, that PTWA and PT would be relying on National
Registries' skill and expertise as paying agent "to protect it from foreseeable loss". The cross-claims then asserted that National Registries owed a duty to PTWA and PT, in essence, to ensure that the Deposit
Certificates were conforming Deposit Certificates. I reject this contention.
Neither PTWA nor PT knew anything about National Registries. They never bothered to communicate with it to ascertain whether Deposit Certificates had been received and, if they had, whether they were Bearer Deposit Certificates.
At best they relied on National Registries to hold the certificates. They placed no other reliance on it, nor was there any evidence that PTWA or PT thought National Registries understood they were. On the view I take of the way in which PTWA and PT approached the matter, I do not consider that their officers would have been in a position to articulate a question, which would have elicited any useful answer from National Registries. But quite apart from that the obligation was on PTWA and PT to satisfy themselves that the Deposit
Certificates conformed to the definition in the Subscription and Paying Agency
Agreements. National Registries was never made aware that PTWA and PT was taking no real interest in the matter, nor was it ever suggested to it that they were relying on it to carry out the very function, which they should have been undertaking. In these circumstances I consider that the pivotal allegation that National Registries "knew or ought to have known" about the reliance PTWA and PT were supposed to be reposing in it has failed. Of course it was not suggested by PTWA or PT that they had placed any reliance on
National Registries. In view of the fact that their officers were unaware of the company and had never read the Paying Agency Agreement such a submission would have been fanciful. I reject PTWA's and PT's cross-claim based on negligence.

So far as the claim based on [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) is concerned that depends on whether there was any duty on National Registries to speak. I have dealt with the circumstances in which such a duty arises. In my opinion no such duty arose on the facts of the present case. In dealing with the cross-claim based on negligence I have referred to a number of matters which, in my opinion, support this view. However, at the risk of some repetition, I would refer to the complete absence of any knowledge on the part of PTWA and
PT of National Registries; the complete absence of any knowledge of the agreement under which it was working; and the complete failure by officers of
PTWA and PT to communicate in any way with National Registries. If National
Registries was entitled to make any assumption it would have been that PTWA and PT had satisfied themselves that the documents received were conforming documents, i.e. that PTWA and PT had carried out a fundamental part of their obligations, which, in my opinion, they should have.

The Submissions On Behalf Of National Registries 
Mr Downes submitted that the cross-claims based on negligence were for purely economic loss, and that the duties on which Minter Ellison, PTWA and PT relied were duties to inform. He submitted this included the alleged duty to examine and reject Deposit Certificates.

Mr Downes then dealt with a number of authorities giving rise to the duty to inform and he submitted, correctly in my view and essentially for the reasons to which I have referred, that those duties did not arise on the facts of the present case.

Mr Downes referred to the position of Minter Ellison and the trustees, and the contractual relationships between ECCC and National Registries. He noted, in addition to the matters to which I have referred, that Mr Grimshaw's evidence did not rise above the obligation of National Registries to hold Deposit
Certificates. I would add that Mr Wall gave similar evidence. Mr Grimshaw, and no one else called on behalf of the trustees, suggested there was an obligation on National Registries to check or reject Deposit Certificates. Mr
Downes submitted further that even if reliance was established, which I am satisfied it was not, it was not reasonable.

Mr Downes made detailed submissions to the effect that even if National
Registries was guilty of any breach it was not causative of loss.

In paragraph 43 of his written submissions Mr Downes submitted, correctly in my opinion, that the problem with the cross-claims by PTWA and PT against
National Registries was their failure to acknowledge that PTWA's and PT's losses were caused by failures on their own part and on the part of Minter
Ellison. He dealt with the position as between principal and agent, and, in paragraph 48, he considered whether any duty was owed by National Registries to PTWA and PT. He submitted there was not because they had not relied on
National Registries; because any reliance must have been reasonable; and because there could be no duty to check or inform when the principal, through its agent, already had the requisite knowledge of the deficiency in the
Deposit Certificates.

His submissions dealt with causation, estoppel, and misleading and deceptive conduct. He considered contributory negligence of the trustees and, were it necessary to come to a conclusion on that point, I would be satisfied that there was such a high degree of contributory negligence on the part of PTWA and PT as, in effect, to exculpate National Registries of any negligence.
However, it is not necessary for me to deal with that because, in my opinion,
PTWA and PT have not established that National Registries was negligent.

Mr Downes considered the case against National Registries based on misleading and deceptive conduct. The case was, of necessity, one of silence and, for it to succeed, it must be established that there was either a duty to disclose, or a communication which amounted to a half truth, or a reasonable expectation that silence would be broken. In my opinion no such duties were imposed on
National Registries in the circumstances of this case for all the reasons to which I have referred. I would only repeat that PTWA and PT took no interest in National Registries or its obligation and never communicated with it.

Mr Downes also set forth in his submissions the arguments in favour of
National Registries' cross-claims but, as I am of the view that it is not liable, it becomes unnecessary to consider them, save as to the question of costs.

Several Further Matters 
Mr Pembroke submitted that if the plaintiffs succeeded in their claim for equitable compensation, as they have done, a term of relief, which should be imposed, is that they assign to PTWA and PT their causes of action against
Feldworth, Mr Felden and their insurer. He further submitted that PTWA and PT should be required to hold those causes of action on trust for PTWA and PT in its personal capacity, Minter Ellison, if liable, and National Registries in proportion to the extent of their respective liabilities. I shall hear submissions on this matter, which can be addressed in the context of my findings.

The other matter concerns the agreed position in respect of Life Track
Management Limited, ("Life Track"), which is the current trustee of each of the Funds within the Excelsior Plan known as Divisions I, II, III, IV and V.
The agreed statement stated that there are members of these funds who invested in ECCC through PTWA when it was trustee of those Funds.

It continued: "A claim is made by PTWA in these proceedings against Minter Ellison and National Registries Pty Limited which includes these monies. The effect of the correspondence from Life Track which was tendered is: the authorisation by Life Track of PTWA to maintain the claim; and the agreement of Life Track to be bound by the result (including the terms of any relief) in the proceedings.

Minter Ellison and National Registries Pty Limited, accordingly, do not dispute the entitlement of PTWA to maintain a claim in its own name in these proceedings in respect of monies invested by members of the Funds administered presently by Life Track." 
The relevant documents are Exhibit 3&4D 8. I have sought to accommodate this agreement in Order 4 and, if necessary, I shall hear further submissions on the form of the order.

Proposed Orders 
I propose to order:-
Judgment for the plaintiffs, other than the thirty sixth and fortieth plaintiffs, against the first and second defendants jointly and severally together with simple interest thereon at the rates provided by the [Supreme
Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). The plaintiffs should bring in Short Minutes of Order to reflect the amount to which each plaintiff is entitled. Those Short Minutes of Order should provide for the necessary amendment to accommodate the position of the thirty first plaintiff, who has died since the institution of the proceedings. The first and second defendants are to pay the plaintiffs' costs, other than those of the thirty sixth and fortieth plaintiffs.
Judgment for the plaintiffs against the third and fourth defendants together with compound interest on yearly rests calculated on the trustee basis. The plaintiffs should bring in Short Minutes of Order to reflect the amount to which each plaintiff is entitled. Those Short Minutes of Order should provide for the necessary amendment to accommodate the position of the thirty first plaintiff. The third and fourth defendants are to pay the plaintiffs' costs.
Judgment for the fifth defendant against the plaintiffs. This will leave for consideration against which plaintiffs an order for costs in the fifth defendant's favour should be made, whether those plaintiffs are entitled to recover the costs from any other party, and the fate of the Amended Fourth
Cross-Claim including the question of its costs.
Judgment for the third and fourth defendants on their Cross-Claims against
Minter Ellison for equitable compensation for breach of trust to the full extent necessary to replenish the trust funds including money invested by members of the Funds within the Excelsior Plan know as Divisions I, II, III,
IV and V of which Life Track Management Limited is the trustee together with compound interest on yearly rests calculated on the trustee basis. The third and fourth defendants should bring in Short Minutes of Order to reflect the amounts to which each is entitled. Minter Ellison are to pay the third and fourth defendants' costs of the Cross-Claims.
Judgment for National Registries Pty Limited on all Cross-Claims brought against it and the cross-claimants are to pay its costs. The Short Minutes of
Order should provide for this. This will leave for consideration the fate of the Cross-Claims brought by National Registries Pty Limited including the question of costs.
 * * * 
