

Gullo and Anor versus Cklamovski and Anor Matter No 11959/97 [1997] NSWSC 544 (5 November 1997) 
Gullo & Anor versus Cklamovski & Anor /97 November 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Gullo & Anor versus Cklamovski & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: By Lease dated 17 February 1992, the plaintiffs granted a Lease for a term of five years of certain shop premises at Earlwood (the premises). The defendants took an Assignment of the Lease. The term of the Lease expired on 15 November 1996. The plaintiffs have served a Notice to Quit. It expired on 17 May 1997. 
These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 30 June 1997.
A claim is made for possession of the premises.

On 12 August 1997, the defendants filed a Defence. On 11 September 1997, they filed a Cross-Claim.

The Lease contained an option for renewal for a further period of six years.
The Defence pleads an exercise of an option to renew for a further period of five years. The Cross-Claim pleads, inter alia, the making of a representation (see paragraph 6).

The Cross-Claim was filed subsequent to the making of an application by the plaintiffs for summary judgment. The plaintiffs' Notice of Motion was filed on September 1997.

The Notice of Motion came before a registrar and the application underwent the usual processes followed for the purposes of ensuring that it was ready for hearing. A special fixture was allocated on the basis of the usual assurances (including the assurance that only affidavits on file when the matter is specially fixed may be read).

The plaintiffs have relied on a number of affidavits. The defendants are husband and wife. They elected to proceed to a hearing relying on one affidavit only (an affidavit sworn by the first defendant on 8 September ).

The affidavit sworn by the first defendant contained material that was inadmissible. The plaintiffs objected to the tender of this material and it was rejected. An application was made to adduce supplementary material. This application was opposed. For the purposes of ensuring that the defendants had every opportunity to present their evidence, the Court departed from its usual practice and gave the defendants an opportunity to adduce supplementary material. The leave was restricted to the adducing of material in admissible form for that which had been rejected because of inadmissibility. The defendants were allowed a short adjournment and a handwritten affidavit was prepared. Leave was given to file that document in Court. It contained material that was inadmissible. The plaintiffs objected to the tender of that material and it was rejected.

The Court has a discretion to grant summary relief. The discretion is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The onus of demonstrating an entitlement to relief rests on the plaintiffs.

The approach to be taken by the Court on applications of this nature is now well established. Relief is only given in what may be described as clear cases. It must be shown that there is no real question to be tried between the parties (see General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner For Railways <case>; <case>; [116 ALR 545).] 
Whilst reference has been made to the evidence throwing up many real questions, the defendants concentrated on two questions. Firstly, there is the question of the exercise of the option. Secondly, there is the question of the making of the representation.

In respect of both questions, the case for the defendants labours under considerable difficulty. The Court acts on the material that the parties choose to place before it. There is a deficiency of evidence to found a contention of any arguable question.

I shall first turn to the question of the exercise of the option. The defendants contend that the option was exercised by the leaving of a handwritten document in the letterbox of the plaintiffs. There is no evidence as to the authorship of the document. The first defendant merely says that he delivered a handwritten notice. He did not keep a copy of the notice. He does not recall the precise date on which it was delivered. He is only able to say that it was on a date after 15 May 1996 and prior to 15 August 1996. Despite the opportunities had by the defendants, there is no admissible evidence as to the contents of the document. For completeness, I should add that material contained in paragraph 7 of the handwritten affidavit (which was rejected) would not have assisted the defendants. There is evidence from the plaintiffs that no such document was received by them.

It seems to me that when regard is had to the material placed before the
Court, it cannot be said that there is any real question thrown up as to the exercise of the option.

I now turn to the question of the representation. This contention relies on what was deposed to by the first defendant in paragraph 8 of his original affidavit. The paragraph reads as follows:- "8. As I had not heard from the Lessors or their agents in or about August , I approached the Lessors' agents, Earlwood Real Estate, and spoke to a person named Patrick who informed me that the Lessors were overseas. He said words to the effect to me, `Don't worry Mr Cklamovski, when they come back from overseas we will fix it up. Send another letter to the landlord and give me a copy.' " 
It is glaringly obvious that this material fails to throw up the existence of an arguable question as to the making of the representation which would found an estoppel as alleged by the defendants. I should add that there is evidence from the agent (Patrick Bernard Clarke) which denies that any such conversation took place.

It seems to me that, when regard is had to the material placed before the
Court, it cannot be said that there is any real question thrown up as to the making of a representation which will assist the defendants by way of defence or cross-claim in these proceedings.

I consider that the plaintiffs have demonstrated an entitlement to summary relief. The plaintiffs are to have judgment for possession of the premises described in the Schedule to the Statement of Claim. The defendants are to pay the costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
