

Winron P/L and Anor versus The Shell Company of Australia Ltd [1996] NSWSC 213 (20 June 1996) 
WINRON PTY LIMITED & ANOR V THE SHELL COMPANY OF AUSTRALIA LTD /96 
Thursday 20 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs seek an order pursuant to <case>(b) of the NSW Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross Vesting) Act 1987 removing proceedings under <case> of the Industrial Relations Act 1991 now pending before the Industrial Court of New South Wales to this Court. It is then further sought that this Court should under <case> of the Cross Vesting Act, transfer those proceedings to the Federal Court of Australia. 
The application is made by consent. However, there are various problems which cause me to consider my decision.

When the matter first came into the list on 4 June 1996, no evidence had been filed. I declined to make a consent order under the Cross Vesting legislation in a doubtful case, without an affidavit of the essential facts. The matter was adjourned for a week and one of the solicitors made an affidavit as to the background circumstances.

The solicitor's affidavit shows that by proceedings G255 of 1996 commenced in the Federal Court, the plaintiffs sought orders against the defendant with respect to a declaration that its conduct infringed ss 51AA and 52 of the
Trade Practices Act and an order varying the contract between the plaintiffs and the defendant with respect to a service station, newsagency, shop and post office at Kariong.

On 20 May 1996, the plaintiffs commenced proceedings in the Industrial Court of New South Wales under <case> of the Industrial Relations Act for orders in respect of the same business at Kariong.

All parties want the Federal Court to deal with the whole of the matter at the same time. This is quite understandable. The question is whether that consent is sufficient for this Court merely to rubber stamp what might otherwise be a completely irregular procedure leaving the parties to the decision of the
Federal Court as to whether it had jurisdiction to deal with the matter that originated in the Industrial Court of New South Wales.

There is no doubt that there have been orders made by this Court doing what the plaintiffs seek. This occurred by consent in the case that was later dealt with in the Federal Court in both its Trade Practices and its <case> aspect,
Gallagher versus Pioneer Concrete Pty Ltd <case>; [(1993) 113 ALR 159], see esp 194. An order was also made by consent by Santow, J in ECC Lighting Ltd versus McGurk - 15 June 1995, unreported. In neither of those cases does it appear that this Court considered the problems involved in the relevant legislation.

Those problems were, however, dealt with by McLelland, CJ in Eq in Wood v
Boral Resources Pty Ltd - 28 October 1993, unreported. In the Wood case, the plaintiff had commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court and had been unsuccessful in obtaining injunctive relief. He had then applied in the
NSW Industrial Court with no result and then he had applied to the Federal
Court.

The application was contested. The defendant argued that it should be refused on the grounds that (a) the Industrial Court proceedings involved the exercise of powers of a non-judicial kind which cannot be exercised by the Federal
Court; and (b) it would be unjust and inappropriate for those proceedings to be transferred to the Federal Court. The Chief Judge notified the NSW and
Commonwealth Attorneys General, both of whom were represented, but he decided the matter on the second point and refused an order for transfer.

In the course of his reasons, the Chief Judge said about <case>, "It is apparent that the legislature considered it appropriate that the wide discretionary powers arising under s 275 should, at least primarily, be exercised by a Court whose members had specialised knowledge and experience in the area of industrial relations. It is significant that the powers of the Industrial Court under <case> cannot be exercised by any other New South Wales court including the Supreme Court. It would therefore be somewhat anomalous if the mechanism of the Cross-Vesting
Act were to be used to transfer proceedings properly pending in the Industrial
Court to which its specialised nature is highly relevant, to another Court of relevantly unspecialised jurisdiction or composition, whose eligibility to receive such a transfer depends upon the fact that it is not a New South Wales
Court." 
The first matter that needs to be considered is the terms of <case> of the Cross
Vesting Act itself.

This section provides that where a proceeding is pending in a court or a tribunal established under a State Act and it appears to the Supreme Court that the relevant proceeding is related to another proceeding pending in the
Federal Court, the Supreme Court may make an order removing the relevant proceeding to the Supreme Court. I have omitted parts of the section which are not applicable to the present problem.

Although I first had some doubts as to whether there could be removed into the
Supreme Court under <case> a proceeding with which the Supreme Court had no power to deal, it seems on more mature consideration, that the section does contemplate that there may be cases where it is expedient for the Supreme
Court to remove into the Supreme Court proceedings over which it has no jurisdiction but which might be transferred to a Federal Court.

The second problem is whether the Federal Court has any jurisdiction to hear the matter. I have very strong doubts as to whether the Federal Court can entertain a matter where the jurisdiction is given by a State statute to a
State arbitral body that is to make its decision not according to any judicial power, but according to its executive power to make rulings which will be compatible with the industrial relations policy of New South Wales. The
Federal Court is a statutory court set up by the Commonwealth to exercise the judicial power of the Commonwealth and its ability to deal with a matter under s 275 of the State Industrial Relations Act would appear to be questionable.
Some of the limits of power were recognized in West Australian Psychiatric
Nurses' Association versus Australian Nursing Federation [(1991) 30 FCR .] 
However, if I were to make a decision on this matter, it would be necessary to involve both the Federal and State Attorneys General as happened in the matter before the Chief Judge in Equity. The practicalities of the current matter are that the plaintiffs at least appear to be small traders in the outskirts of a provincial town and it is most questionable whether the court should require such persons to be involved in expensive litigation involving constitutional law. A fortiori is this so where the defendant consents to the transfer.

Although, as a general rule, the Court should adopt the unauthorised maxim "Do anything by consent", there is a time for standing back and examining whether it is proper merely to acquiesce in the parties' consent order. However, there is also a time when it is proper merely to do what is asked. One of those latter occasions will include situations where all parties consent, no party can be injured and there will be the opportunity in the Federal Court for that
Court to decide whether or not it should hear the matter. An additional factor in the instant case is that, as I have said, on at least two occasions such orders have been made by consent, and on at least one of those occasions the
Federal Court actually dealt with the <case> application, though it would not appear the question of power was considered.

The worst that can happen, I think, is that if the Federal Court comes to the view that it has no jurisdiction, the <case> matter can filter its way back to the NSW Industrial Court.

Accordingly, I will make orders 1 and 2 in the summons. The costs of these proceedings are to be costs in the proceedings which are being transferred to the Federal Court.
 * * * 
