

Walker versus Government Service of New South Wales State Transit Authority
Division [2017] NSWSC 519 (28 April 2017) 
Last Updated: 3 May 2017 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Plaintiff referred to the Registrar for referral to a barrister or solicitor on the Pro Bono Panel  
JUDGMENT
HER HONOUR: Before the Court is an application by Mr Craig Walker for referral to a barrister or solicitor on the pro bono panel for legal assistance. The application is made in respect of proceedings commenced by Mr Walker by statement of claim filed 7 December 2016.
The statement of claim names a number of defendants. The document appears to have been prepared by Mr Walker without the benefit of legal assistance. The burden of the claim appears to be a complaint as to Mr Walker's employment conditions whilst he was employed by the State Transit Authority and what appears to be a claim of resultant personal injury, perhaps confined to an allegation of stress due to bullying and harassment. The very fact that it is difficult to discern the precise cause of action sought to be prosecuted supports the application for pro bono referral.
Mr Walker has filed an affidavit to support the application in which he states that he has been refused legal aid and refused pro bono assistance by The Law Society. His personal and financial circumstances are such that I am satisfied it would not be practicable or feasible for him to fund retaining a lawyer from his own resources. I am further satisfied in the circumstances that the Court and the parties would be assisted by his receiving legal assistance if it is available.
Pursuant to r 7.36 of the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) , I refer Mr Walker to the registrar for referral to a barrister or solicitor on the pro bono panel for legal assistance. The kind of assistance I specify is, in the first instance, advice in relation to the proceedings and consideration of amendment to the statement of claim.
 * * * 
