

R versus Smith [2012] NSWSC 38 (8 February 2012) 
Last Updated: 7 May 2012 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
R versus Smith  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): /12/2011  
Decision Date: February 2012  
Jurisdiction: 
Common Law - Criminal  
Before: 
Mathews AJ  
Decision: 
The offender is convicted of the manslaughter of David Wayne Boyce. 
Offender sentenced to imprisonment consisting of a non-parole period of three years, commencing on 10 October 2011 and expiring on 9 October 2014, with a balance of term of three years, commencing on 10 October 2014 and expiring on October 2017.  
Catchwords: 
CRIMINAL LAW - Sentence - Manslaughter - excessive self-defence - affray involving two groups of young people - single stab wound - no intention to kill - strong subjective circumstances - discount for offering to plead guilty  
Legislation Cited: [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/)  [Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/)  
Cases Cited: 
R versus AH <case> 
R versus Bargachoun <case>  
Texts Cited: 
Category: 
Sentence  
Parties: 
Crown 
Joey Aaron Smith (Offender)  
Representation  - Counsel: 
BH Hughes SC (Crown) 
NM Steel (Accused)  - Solicitors: 
Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown) 
Phillip Ryan (Accused)  
File number(s): /57975  
Publication Restriction: 
SENTENCE 
On 2 November 2011 Joey Aaron Smith was charged by way of indictment that, on 25 April 2009, at Busby NSW, he murdered David Wayne Boyce. The accused pleaded not guilty. Accordingly, a jury was empanelled and the trial proceeded. The substantial issue raised at the trial was self-defence. On 1 December 2011 the jury found the accused not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter. 
Factual Background 
I should preface my remarks by noting that a number of the people involved in the events leading up to the tragic death of Mr Boyce were under 18 years of age at the time. As such, s.15A [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/) provides that they should not be identified. I will therefore be referring to them and members of their families by using their initials only. Those that are fully named were over 18 at the time. 
The following is a very brief summary of the factual background. 
The deceased, Wayne Boyce as he was generally called, was 23 years old at the time of his death. The circumstances leading to his death had their genesis in a dispute between two young men (both of them under 18 at the time) called JT and AH. The offender was a friend of AH's and Mr Boyce was a friend of JT's. On the evening of Friday 24 April 2009 JT was at his home in T ... Street, Busby together with two friends, JP and JP's girlfriend RM. JT's parents were also at home at the time. RM was a friend of two girls called Danielle and Natalie, both of whom were, by chance, with AH that evening, as was the offender, Joey Smith. The offender had known AH for many years, and they were close friends. At one stage quite early in the evening, JT intervened in a telephone conversation between RM and Danielle, and demanded to talk to AH. The two young men then had an argument over the phone. Not long afterwards AH and his three companions drove to Busby, parking their car around the corner from the T home. AH and the offender walked around to the home, and JT and JP came out to the front garden to meet them. There JT and AH became involved in a verbal confrontation. Each of them was challenging the other to throw the first punch, but neither of them did so. The situation was defused when JT's father came out of the house and apologised to AH on behalf of his son. He shook AH's hand, and JT shook hands with the offender. AH, together with the offender and the two girls, then returned to their car and drove off. 
It is worthy of note here that the evidence indicates that the offender, Joey Smith, occupied something of a peace-making role during this episode. Having seen that JP was carrying a metal pole, he took it from him and threw it away, over a fence. 
Unfortunately, the way this confrontation ended only served to fuel JT's anger. He was concerned that AH and his friends would see it as a backing down on his, JT's, part. He was saying: "Now they will think they can walk all over me." Thereafter more telephone calls were made between the two groups. JT was told that AH and his companions would be returning to the T house in order that the two of them, JT and AH, could have a "one-on-one" fight, as they put it. JT was concerned that AH would bring more people with him as supporters. So he telephoned his friend Wayne Boyce, and asked him to be on the alert to come and assist when called upon. 
JT was correct in his apprehension that AH would get more people to accompany him on his second trip to the T home. By the time AH returned, at about 3.00 on the Saturday morning, there were eleven in his group, all travelling in a very large van which parked around the corner from the T home. These eleven comprised the four people who had been there previously, and seven others. Amongst the new additions were two whom I will be referring to later, namely Jamie Bargachoun and Alecks Tukacovic. By that time also there were seven people in the T home, as they had been joined by two of JT's friends, a male and a female. 
When JT first saw AH's group approach, he telephoned Mr Boyce and asked him to come immediately. The deceased at that time was with five friends, three males and two females, in an apartment at Wentworthville. They left straight away in the deceased's four-wheel-drive vehicle, and arrived at the T home not long afterwards. The deceased, who was in the front passenger's seat, was the first to get out. He jumped out as the vehicle was still coming to a stop outside the house. By that time there were quite a number of people in the front yard, although by no means the total number of the two groups. Most of the T group, including JT himself, stayed inside the house for much if not all of this confrontation, and several of the AH group stayed well away from the house and its precincts. 
When the Mr Boyce got out of the vehicle he was carrying a baseball bat which he had brought from the apartment in Wentworthville. He walked, or ran, virtually straight across the front garden to a point near some trees. There he had a confrontation with the offender which culminated in the offender inflicting a single stab wound to the deceased's left side. Tragically, the wound penetrated the right ventricle of the deceased's heart, and he immediately fell to the ground. Subsequent attempts to revive him, first by JT's mother, and later by paramedics, were unsuccessful. The post mortem examination showed that he died of blood loss. 
Almost all of those who were present at or around the T house at the time gave evidence for the Crown during the offender's trial. The two exceptions, apart from the offender himself, were AH and Jamie Bargachoun, both of whom had pleaded guilty to manslaughter as a result of Mr Boyce's killing, and were still awaiting sentence. Accordingly, 20 eye-witnesses were called to give evidence for the Crown: all seven who had been in the T house, eight of the eleven in the AH group, and the five people who had accompanied Wayne Boyce to the T house. 
Not surprisingly, given the speed at which the events occurred, together with the time of night and the considerable alcohol which had been consumed by many of those present, there were significant disparities between the various accounts of what happened when Mr Boyce first arrived outside the T home. Indeed, fourteen of the twenty Crown witnesses did not see what happened immediately before the stabbing. They were either inside the house, or outside the precincts of the house and garden, or looking in another direction. Accordingly, only six Crown witnesses described the events immediately preceding the stabbing. Given that self-defence was the principal issue in the trial, it was the events at that time which were of crucial importance to the jury's deliberations. In addition to the Crown witnesses, the then accused, Joey Smith, gave evidence in his own case. I think it is appropriate to commence with the account which he gave in his evidence, and then attempt to link it to the evidence given by the Crown witnesses. I propose to do this very briefly. The actual evidence went into a great deal of detail, which is unnecessary to traverse here. 
The offender said that the intention of AH and his companions, when they returned to the T house that night, was to watch AH and JT have a one-on-one fight. After they had left the van and were walking towards the house, he had a conversation with AH, during which the latter lifted his T-shirt and revealed a knife underneath. The offender immediately grabbed it from him, and put it in his own waistband. His intention, he said, was to avert a situation where a dangerous weapon might be used during the anticipated fight involving AH. In fact, no fight between AH and JT took place at all that night. JT stayed inside the house almost the whole time. 
The offender said that when he first arrived at the edge of the garden, he saw someone standing beside a car in the driveway. He, the offender, asked him whether JT was there. The person replied that he was inside. The offender asked him to go and get him. Then, the offender said, he walked up to where Jamie Bargachoun was standing. While he was there the four-wheel-drive arrived, and he saw someone with a baseball bat walking into the middle of the yard. This was clearly Wayne Boyce. RM, the girl who had been in the T home all evening, went up to Mr Boyce and said: "Stop, they haven't done anything yet. Relax." But, according to the offender, Mr Boyce took no notice of her and walked straight up to him, the offender. They had never met before, but he said that Mr Boyce immediately took the baseball bat with both hands and swung it at him, just missing his head. He raised it over his head to swing it again, and at that stage the offender took out the knife and swung it at his attacker. Mr Boyce immediately fell back, and the offender realised that the knife had gone into him. He had acted defensively, he said, and certainly did not intend to kill Mr Boyce. 
I do not propose to go through the details of what happened after the stabbing of Mr Boyce. There were a number of further altercations between various members of the different groups. The offender himself displayed a degree of aggression after the stabbing. First, he swung the knife at a group of people, saying "Go back inside the house and get the fuck away from me or I'll shank you." A little later, after JT had briefly emerged from the front door of the house and had struck AH in the back of the head, the offender assisted AH in smashing the front window of the T house with a pole which he had picked up from the ground. Shortly after this the entire AH group left the T house. They returned to the van and drove off. Police and paramedics were called but, as indicated, were unable to revive Mr Boyce. 
Interestingly, none of the six eye-witnesses in the Crown case who saw the events leading up to the stabbing, described Mr Boyce as having swung his bat towards the offender. Three of them said that he had swung it towards Jamie Bargachoun, and that the offender had intervened in order to protect Mr Bargachoun. The jury was accordingly directed that the same principles applied to a killing done in defence of another person as to a killing done in self-defence. 
Moving on in time, it is apparent that after leaving the T home, the offender started to realise the enormity of what had happened. He was described as saying, in the van: "I think I stabbed him ... fuck, fuck, fuck!" He told Alecks Tukacovic, who had driven the van to the T house, but who had remained in it while the others went to the house, that he had stabbed a man in order to stop him hitting Jamie Bargachoun. Later again, after the van had been driven to Alecks Tukacovic's house, Mr Tukacovic spoke to the offender and offered to dispose of the knife. The offender gave it to him and Mr Tukacovic concealed it in a drain in front of his home where it was later recovered by the police. 
It is unnecessary for present purposes to describe the offender's movements later that night. The following afternoon he was arrested at AH's home. On the way to the police station he told police that they had the wrong person, and that he had been at home watching movies all of the previous night. Later he admitted that this was a lie, but said that he was panicking at the time, when he realised that the victim of the stabbing had died. 
The offender was later charged with the murder of Wayne Boyce. He offered to plead guilty to manslaughter before the Local Court committal proceedings commenced. This offer was renewed shortly prior to trial. Clearly he is entitled to a discount on sentence on this account, and I will be returning to discuss it later. 
Meaning of Jury's Verdict 
In my view by far the most likely basis for the jury's verdict is that the offender used excessive force when seeking to defend himself. During the sentencing proceedings Mr Steel, who appeared for the offender, submitted that the jury might have had a reasonable doubt as to whether the offender intended to cause grievous bodily harm to Mr Boyce. However, given that the offender admitted to deliberately stabbing Mr Boyce in order to defend himself, I cannot accept this to be a realistic possibility. I therefore propose to sentence him on the basis of excessive self-defence. 
Accordingly I accept, for the purposes of sentencing, that the stabbing was done in circumstances where the offender genuinely believed that he was under attack and that it was necessary to do what he did in order to protect himself, but the force he in fact used was excessive in the circumstances. 
Seriousness of the Offence 
The starting point in the offence of manslaughter is that a human life has been taken, in this case the life of a young man who did nothing more than agree with his friend JT to come and protect him and his group if necessary, and who was perhaps a little over-zealous in his attempts to do so. As the Crown prosecutor has pointed out, the fact that a knife was used is an aggravating factor. I have to accept, however, that the offender did not deliberately bring the knife with him intending to use it during this affray, but that he had it in the circumstances described in his evidence, namely that he had taken it from AH in order to ensure that AH could not use it in his anticipated fight with JT. Accordingly, I cannot regard this as a significant aggravating factor. 
It is pertinent here to refer to the proceedings against AH and Jamie Bargachoun. As already mentioned, both were charged with criminal offences as a result of the killing of Wayne Boyce. They were initially charged with murder and other minor offences. Both of them pleaded guilty to manslaughter, which plea was accepted by the Crown. On 13 December 2011 they were sentenced by Justice Johnson of this Court. Both were sentenced on the basis that they participated in an extended joint criminal enterprise in that they took part in an unlawful and dangerous act, an affray, in circumstances which objectively carried with it an appreciable risk of serious injury being occasioned to a person. 
Dealing first with A H: he was only 16 years and eight months old at the time of the offence, and was sentenced under the [Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/). His Honour commented in his sentencing remarks that AH was responsible for setting in train the conflict which led to the groups of young men clashing outside the T house. AH was armed with a metal pole during the confrontation, although he did not in fact use it. His Honour considered that in his case the offence was an objectively serious one. After applying a discount of 20% for his plea of guilty, his Honour sentenced him to four years imprisonment with a non-parole period of two years. In this regard, his Honour found that there were special circumstances which justified a departure from the statutory ratio between the head sentence and the non-parole period. (R versus AH  <case>) 
As for Mr Bargachoun, his Honour pointed out that he also was armed with a metal pole when he emerged from the van. Unlike AH, Mr Bargachoun actually used his pole, striking one of the men from the T home very heavily on the shin. There was no evidence that Mr Bargachoun engaged in any personal confrontation with Mr Boyce. However his Honour concluded that he was a willing participant in the overall confrontation and he himself used violence in the course of the confrontation. On that basis, his Honour considered that his crime was an objectively serious one. After applying a discount of 20% for his plea of guilty, his Honour sentenced him to four years imprisonment with a non-parole period of two years and three months. Again, his Honour made a finding that special circumstances existed. (R versus Bargachoun  <case>) 
Mr Steel accepts that the objective criminality of the present offender must be greater than that of AH or Mr Bargachoun, given that it was he who actually inflicted the stab wound which killed Mr Boyce. 
With this background I return to discuss the circumstances of the present offence. Mr Steel submitted that the offender should be sentenced on the basis that he did not intend to kill Mr Boyce when he inflicted the fatal injury, and I accept this to be the case. The offender acted very quickly in the heat of the moment, without any opportunity for reflection. He swung the knife around and into the side of the deceased. Although I find that he must have intended to really seriously injure Mr Boyce at the time, I do not think that his intention was to kill him. As Mr Steel pointed out, the location of the wound to the side of the ribs was such that the offender may not have appreciated the potentially lethal consequences of a stab wound to this area. Professor Duflou said that only a moderate amount of force was needed to inflict the fatal wound. 
The maximum penalty for manslaughter is imprisonment for 25 years. It has often been said that this offence covers a greater range of criminality than any other offence in the criminal calendar. It can encompass offences which are only a little short of murder, at the higher end; down to practical jokes which have gone disastrously wrong at the bottom. This being the case, it is very difficult to compare one case with another. The scope for variation, both in the objective circumstances of each case and the subjective features of each offender, is virtually limitless. There is no standard non-parole period, and the Court is not required to make a finding as to where the particular offence stands in relation to the notional middle point of objective seriousness. In the present case, I find that it was an objectively serious offence of its kind: more serious than that of AH or Mr Bargachoun, but still in the generally serious range. 
The Offender's Subjective Circumstances 
The offender was only 18 years and three months old at the time of the offence. He is now barely 21. At the time of the offence he was living with his family at Hoxton Park, and was working for a company called Patti's Plant Hire, where his father had also been working for many years. He is of part-Aboriginal descent, and has no criminal record of any kind. Four character witnesses were called in the defence case. One was the offender's paternal uncle, Darcy Smith, who is a shift supervisor for Juvenile Justice at Wagga Wagga. He has known the offender all his life, and described him as "a very respectful young person, very honest young kid, reliable and caring". The offender is the oldest of eight children, and has always assisted his mother in the care of his younger siblings. Mr Smith said the offender was "one of the most placid young persons I have seen". 
Leonard Donaldson, who had previously worked for Patti's Plant Hire, and was a retired police officer, described the offender's family as "a great family". The offender himself, he said, has always been a good, reliable worker and a "meek and mild person". 
Donna Carter, the foster-sister of the offender's mother, had also known the offender all his life. She said that he was "an honest, reliable, loyal young man". She had never heard of him being aggressive or violent. 
Finally, Lawrence Lockhart, the owner of Patti's Plant Hire, gave evidence in which he described the offender as "a good kid, hardworking, obliging". He said that the offender got on well with everyone, and he had never known him to be violent or aggressive. 
Accordingly, the offender comes before the Court as a person of otherwise impeccable character. This is in contrast to AH and Jamie Bargachoun, both of whom had a prior criminal history, notwithstanding their youth. Indeed at the time of the offence, AH was on bail, having been charged less than a month earlier with an offence of aggravated break and enter while in company. 
I accept that the offender is and has always been genuinely remorseful for this offence. He first displayed his remorse later on the night of the stabbing, when he started to realise the enormity of what had happened. All his actions and expressions since then have been indicative of great remorse, which I accept is entirely genuine. This was also indicated by his offers to plead guilty to manslaughter. 
In the light of all the evidence, I am satisfied that this offence was entirely out of character, and that the offender is most unlikely to re-offend. Accordingly, neither personal deterrence nor rehabilitation has a significant role to play in the sentencing process. 
It is also appropriate to take account of the offender's youth. He was, as already indicated, only 18 years and 3 months old when he committed this offence. I think it highly likely that his immaturity at the time was a significant factor in his over-reacting to the perceived threat which was presented by the deceased. This being the case, the authorities indicate that greater emphasis in the sentencing process should be given to rehabilitation rather than to deterrence or retribution. 
It is apparent from all I have said that every aspect of the offender's subjective features is favourable, and deserving of leniency. 
Other Sentencing Considerations 
As already indicated, the offender offered to plead guilty to manslaughter, both before the committal proceedings and again shortly before the trial. Given that the charge was murder, this plea was not accepted by the Crown. Both AH and Jamie Bargachoun received discounts of 20% for their pleas of guilty. Mr Steel submitted that the discount should be greater in the present case. However I am unable to accept this proposition. In the circumstances, I propose to apply a discount of 20%. 
The offender was on bail for most of the time between the commission of the offence and his conviction, a total of over two and a half years. The bail conditions were very onerous, with a curfew between 8.00 pm and 6 am, a daily reporting requirement, and a prohibition on leaving his residence except in the company of one of his parents or another nominated adult relative. This is a relevant matter to be taken into account on sentence. 
The Crown concedes that, given the offender's youth and his prior good character, he is entitled to a finding of special circumstances under [s 44](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1987261/s44.html) [Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/). This is an appropriate concession, and I will therefore be varying the normal ratio between the non-parole period and the balance of term. 
Victim Impact Statements 
Extremely moving victim impact statements were read in Court during the sentencing proceedings by or on behalf of Wayne Boyce's mother, Valentina Boyle, his father, David Boyce, and his six siblings: Anna, Rebecca, Tiffany, Samantha, Nicholas and Vashti. These are testament to the great qualities of this young man who will tragically never see his two young sons grow up. On behalf of the Court, and on my own behalf, I offer sincere condolences to his family and friends. I take the statements into account in the manner provided by the law. 
Conclusion 
Finally it is necessary to bring all these strands together and reach an appropriate verdict. Some of the different considerations point in opposite directions. The seriousness of the offence, and the fact that a valuable young life was lost, point in one direction, whereas the offender's personal considerations all point the other way. Taking into account the time already spent in custody, the sentence is to date from 10 October 2011. The following sentence is reached after applying the 20% discount referred to earlier. 
Joey Aaron Smith, you are convicted of the manslaughter of David Wayne Boyce. You are sentenced to imprisonment consisting of a non-parole period of three years, commencing on 10 October 2011 and expiring on 9 October 2014, with a balance of term of three years, commencing on 10 October 2014 and expiring on 9 October 2017. The earliest date on which you will be eligible for release on parole is 9 October 2014. * * * 
