

North Sydney District Cricket Club Inc versus Sydney Cricket Association and
Anor No. 30016/95 [1995] NSWSC 34 (8 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION
GROVE J
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE 31:3:1995 #ADD 8:9:1995
ORDER
The first defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of summons including reserved costs.
JUDGE1
GROVE J: The Sydney Cricket Association conducts a District competition in the summer season. In 1994/5 20 clubs competed in various grades. The rules are published in a handbook. Except as specified in the rules, the Laws of
Cricket (1980 Code) as recognised by the Australian Cricket Board and adopted by the New South Wales Cricket Association are incorporated.
Matches in the preliminary rounds are played over two days - most often succeeding Saturdays. Points are awarded on the results of which 13 possibilities are scheduled. The Provision reads: "4(1)
The match result points allocated are: 
Result     Result               Competition
Code      
Points   Outright win after leading on first innings    10   Outright win after tieing on first innings     8   Outright win after trailing on first innings    6   Outright Tie after leading on first innings     8   Outright Tie after tie on both first and second innings            Outright Tie after trailing on first innings    2   Win on first innings          Tie on first innings                3   Draw                  Loss on first innings                0   Outright loss after leading on first innings    4   Outright loss after tieing on first innings     2   Outright loss after trailing on first innings    0"
The four teams leading on points at the end of the rounds play semifinals and a final match between the winners will determine the premiership. A subsidiary system of "quotient" calculations provides for the resolution of tied placings. Nothing presently relevant will turn on this.
The final round of the 1994/5 season was to be played over Saturdays 11/18
March. The four leading teams were Western Suburbs, Bankstown/Canterbury, St
George and Waverley. North Sydney were lying fifth. North Sydney had the potential to displace Waverley if it gained substantial competition points but
Waverley did not. In its match Waverley were defeated on the first innings by
Western Suburbs and therefore gained no points. North Sydney defeated
University of New South Wales outright after leading on the first innings, gaining ten points and claiming as a result Waverley's position in the semifinals.
I chronicle some events leading to this judgment. On Saturday 11 March no play was possible between North Sydney and University of New South Wales due to rain. At least one other match did commence and it is common ground that
Competition Rule 7 became operative.
Saturday 18 March became a new match of a minimum quota of 120 overs but it was expressly not a Limited Over match. See
Rules 7(1)(b), and (7). Of the two teams only North Sydney had potential to move into the semifinals and I am satisfied that both captains (Mr
Marks and Mr Dixon) were conscious of this.
That consciousness could be and was no doubt shared by anyone else who was interested.
University of New South Wales were in 14th place in the competition table and this game would necessarily be the end of its participation for this season.
The captains met at the wicket for inspection and toss. These need no explanation. They conversed. Mr Dixon enquired whether there would be the "usual" 60 overs played by each team. This would involve the team electing or being invited to bat first, if not all out at the end of 60 overs, closing its innings leaving the opponent to chase that total. The expectation would be that the second innings (if not terminated sooner by the loss of ten wickets) was more likely to extend only over a further 60 overs - given the constraints of time and light although the match was not limited and the scheduled end of play could be overrun to achieve the minimum of 120 overs. If the second team had wickets in hand and had not passed the opponent's first innings total the match was drawn. No points would be gained by either side.
Mr Marks candidly observed to Mr Dixon that North Sydney needed outright points i.e. to have a chance of continuing into the semifinals. He proposed the two teams play four innings of 30 overs each. Mr Dixon thought about this and offered a counter-proposal that the stipulated 120 overs be divided into overs each first innings and 40 in the second. As events transpired, it is significant to note that the suggestion came from Mr Dixon, the captain of
University of New South Wales.
I have no reservations about finding that this proposal was accepted by Mr
Marks and that neither captain had any dishonourable motive. I do not doubt that if they contemplated the matter they would have realised that the arrangement would significantly increase the chance of one of the teams obtaining first innings points, but it is probable that any attention that was paid focused on the prospect that one or other side might win outright. Each team intended to strive to win and gain the best result that it could. There was no attempt to shroud the arrangement in secrecy. The umpires were consulted, although specifically to enquire whether the procedure, if adopted, would cause loss of overs between innings. They were told it would not.
The game commenced. If it be relevant, I am satisfied that a foreseeable consequence of the arrangement would be an alteration of tactics, that is, that things would be different from what would be the case in a game unconstrained by the arrangement in terms of batsmen not having leisure to play themselves in, shot making, taking risks of run out, choice of bowlers and the length of their spells and so forth. I find nothing sinister about those circumstances.
North Sydney lost the toss and were invited to bat.
They scored 101 for the loss of 9 wickets by the end of over number 20. They declared. This was implicit in the arrangement. University of New South Wales were all out for 99 in the 20th over of their innings. The last wicket fell to a run out when the batsman was attempting to score runs to win or at least tie. North Sydney therefore led on the first innings. It was also implicit in the arrangement that University of New South Wales would in any event have declared at the end of the 20th over of the first innings.
At the end of the next 35 overs North Sydney declared at 5 wickets for
I note that this evoked no protest from University of New South
Wales on the ground that there was any expectation that North Sydney must bat out 40 overs unless it had lost ten wickets.
 .
University of New South Wales were all out for 168 in their 43rd over.
North Sydney won outright after leading on the first innings.
Ten points.
I interpolate to specify that there was no suggestion made at the hearing that either team did not play with a will to win and to the full extent of the abilities of the players.
As the matter is mentioned in the recounting of a meeting to which I will later refer, I take the opportunity to note that there was nothing to attribute the smallest grain of truth to a rumour said to have circulated to the effect that North Sydney and University of New South Wales had made some deal to deliberately lose the first grade game in return for a win for
University of New South Wales in the 4th grade - that grade being positioned to and in fact making an accession into the semifinals.
I return to the subject match. An umpire signed the scorebook and on
Sunday and Monday the results along with the results in the other games in the round were published in newspapers.
On Monday March Ian Field, the Assistant Secretary of the Sydney
Cricket Association sought the attendance of the captains of North Sydney and
University of New South Wales first grade sides together with a representative of the respective clubs at a meeting of the Committee of Management at 5.30 that evening. Having regard to the content of a confirmatory fax and the timing of the meeting, I am satisfied that it was appreciated by all concerned that exercise of power under Rule 4(3) was in contemplation.
Rule 4(3) is in these terms: "Contrived Results 
The Management Committee retains the power to investigate any circumstances in any match and, if it considers that a result has been contrived, to deduct any competition points gained by either or both teams and take action under
Competition Rule 5."
I do not need to elaborate Rule 5. It deals with loss of competition points generally.
The Committee present consisted of Mr Laming (Chairman) Mr Griffith and Messrs Freedman, Jeffries and Horsell and in attendance were Mr
Field and Mr Hughes, the General Manager of the Sydney Cricket Association.
Mr Dixon and Mr Carmichael (Secretary of University of New South Wales
Cricket Club) were called in and discussion took place, the significant parts of which related to the previous Saturday's game. At one point a Mr Clancy, a solicitor and playing vice president of North Sydney entered but was asked to, and did, leave. Mr Dixon and Mr Carmichael left, and Mr Marks with Mr Clancy and Mr White (North Sydney President) were ushered in. A discussion similar to that with University of New South Wales representatives took place and the party was then invited to leave, which they did. The Chairman said the matter was going to be then considered. In evidence Mr Laming agreed that he closed the meeting fairly abruptly.
A couple of observations might be made. Mr Horsell was from Waverley
District Cricket
Club which was, as a consequence of the North Sydney outright win together with its own loss to Western Suburbs, displaced from the semifinals. His interest was stated and it was said that he would not vote.
Presumably he could participate in discussions if he chose. He was not excluded from the meeting.
Some complaint has been made that Mr Marks and party (or for that matter the
University of New South Wales representatives) were not asked whether the result was, or Mr Marks considered the result was contrived.
It is not unlawful to conduct a meeting such as this with a degree of informality. As the fax confirming the meeting referred to
Rule 4(3) which appears in the handbook under the sub-title "Contrived Results", Mr Clancy sought the
Committee's definition of "contrived" during the discussion (but received no relevant response) and the Committee announced its intention to consider "this now". I regard it as quite unreal to suggest that there was some deficiency in natural justice because the purpose of the meeting was obscured.
Although the notes are somewhat cryptic and Mr Field himself had difficulty in interpreting some of them, his are the only known contemporary records of the meeting.
One part reads, inter alia "offended at accused of contrivance". This is attributed to Mr Marks. There was no deficiency in making the allegation that the or a result had been contrived known. That is not the only relevant aspect of natural justice which needs to be explored.
A peripheral issue might be inferred from the relating of the expressed attitude of Mr Marks and Mr Dixon that the discussions between captains are confidential. The content is germane only to the extent of the arrangement to play a 2x20 over first innings and a 2x40 second. This was no secret and could easily have been learned from the umpires if inquiry were made of them.
On the next day, 21 March, the secretary of North Sydney received by fax this letter from Mr Hughes: "Following an investigation conducted last night by the
Committee of Management into your club's round 15 first grade match against University of New South Wales I advise that in terms of the provisions of Competition
Rule 4(3) the
Committee considers that the result of that match was contrived and has decided to deduct the points gained by your club in this match. As a consequence the team will not contest the first grade semifinals to be played on 25/26 
March 1995."
Litigation essentially commenced on the late afternoon of 22 March when counsel for North Sydney and Sydney
Cricket Association attended on the Judge administering the Administrative Division List who made certain orders including adding
Waverley District Cricket Club as a defendant. It was arranged that the matter would be listed for hearing before me on Friday 24
March. On 23rd March the parties appeared before me at 2pm for further direction and, resolution by the Sydney Cricket Association having been made to postpone the semifinal matches for a week, the hearing was by consent and upon a certain undertaking adjourned to Tuesday 28 March. Waverley Cricket
Club has appeared by its solicitor and submitted to such order as the Court sees fit, save costs. North Sydney has undertaken not to seek such an order irrespective of the outcome.
The Court proceedings will be a futility unless a determination is made before tomorrow and it will not be possible to include in these reasons an analysis of every piece of evidence nor reference to every argument advanced.
I indicate findings and reasons which are designed to enable the parties to know at least skeletally the basis of my decision.
Rule 4(3) is not a statutory provision requiring judicial construction.
I have every reason to conclude however that amongst cricketers by whom it must be heeded there is ambiguity and consequently disagreement as to its application. After they were given what amounts in sufficient substance the facts of the game on 18 March between North
Sydney and University of New South
Wales, I have four affidavits from Messrs Bernard, Bennett, Chappell and Bush.
The first and second mentioned opining that the facts bespeak a result which has been contrived. The other two, that they do not. All are men of relevant experience and I do not exhaust their qualifications when I record that they are respectively Australian and New South Wales team selectors, former
Australian Test captain and a solicitor who has captained a first grade side over several years. I do not doubt the sincerity with which the opposing views have been expressed. I very much suspect that the differences in opinion stem in part from the perception taken. Messrs Bernard and Bennett look at the result in terms of the overall competition, whereas Messrs Chappell and Bush look at it in terms of an individual match.
To add to the melange Mr Marks stated that he thought Rule 4(3) did not mean that teams could not make an arrangement on how a game could be played but it prohibited intentionally losing a match. I paraphrase him as saying that one must not cheat specifically by "throwing" a game or conspiring to do so. Mr Marks was cross-examined upon a variety of permutations of four innings games leading to outright result but I do not find anything is to be determined upon his responses to the sundry hypotheses.
There are manifest problems about the language chosen to express Rule (3). The key phrase is that a result has been contrived. An initial difficulty is to know the ambit of result. It could mean any sort of result.
The winning, losing or drawing of a match. It could include the points to be gained. It could include the relativity of position in the competition table.
It could mean a particular outcome of a match as distinguished from its other possibilities. These uncertainties are compounded by the indirect expression "has been contrived". So far as I can gauge the vice perceived by the
Committee would seem to be the arrangement between the two captains, but there the language of the rule is not limited to bipartite action. In one sense not obviously excluded from the language of Rule 4(3) a declaration of a high scoring second innings where that team trails on the first innings seeks to contrive a result, namely that the dismissal of the opponent in its second innings so that its combined total is less than that of the team which is declared, thus securing a result of outright victory. As an extreme interpretation, it is not only contrivance by the teams which might fit the text of the rule. Result could include prevention as distinguished from achievement.
Let me give an extravagant example. Team A has a first innings lead over
Team B. Malefactors independent of both teams then destroy the wicket and it so happens that it is in Team B's interest in the points table that team A get no more than first innings points. A result - Team A's first innings win but no more - has been contrived, but not by the parties.
What becomes important - despite inherent ambiguities is what the
Committee applied as a meaning. The sanction of the deduction of competition points attaches a meaning to "has been contrived" beyond planned or devised so as to merit the possible application of that sanction.
I have some reservations about whether the Committee members ever clearly comprehended what the criteria were that any facts as found by them on investigation had to fulfil before they applied the sanction. I do not mean that the Committee had some obligation solemnly to construe the provision in abstract but I note that at the meeting with North Sydney representatives, Mr
Clancy asked what was "your" definition of "contrived" to which Mr Laming responded, "We don't want to get caught up with semantics or legalities. We just want to know what happened".
The foregoing observations highlight a flaw which would seem to bedevil any attempt at application of the rule. That being the absence of any indication in the text of Rule 4(3) or elsewhere as to whether it was intended to suppress achievement of a result or any particular result or whether it is directed to match play, or to the wider spectrum of the whole competition.
Against that background I deal with the plaintiff's claims for granting of remedy by the Court and the responses of the defendant (as I shall refer to the first defendant) to them.
[Section 75](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s75.html) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) represents a conferral of jurisdiction to make declaratory orders in appropriate circumstances. It is not available only on condition that a cause of action in law or equity can potentially be brought. The provision was in its present form introduced in the reorganising
Act of 1970. I do not find assistance in reference to decided cases antedating that introduction.
I reject the defendant's submission that North Sydney District Cricket
Club Inc. lacks standing to bring this action. I need not pause to describe in detail the history of the plaintiff's participation and its affiliation as a member of the Sydney Cricket Association. Both rights and obligations flow in the relationship. I consider the defendant's submission that there are not contractual relations between the parties is incorrect.
In any event, I hold that the plaintiff has locus standi deriving from a real and genuine interest in raising the issue of the treatment of one of its constituent teams in the grade competition.
The plaintiff's case is founded on two broad bases which can be sufficiently described as alleged misconstruction of [Rule 4(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s4.html) and denial of natural justice.
Three aspects of the latter are contended. The defendants's first response is that the rules of natural justice do not apply, or alternatively if they do, they are fulfilled by a low level of procedural fairness. The
Committee of Management operates as a control mechanism, the scope of which at least affects 20 clubs by 4 grades by 11 players plus one 12th man plus sundries. I imagine the scope is much larger but the evidence suggests at least this. It therefore affects a great number of people. It is of sufficient apparent importance to have the first grade result published in Sunday and daily newspapers of general circulation. I do not regard the nature of the interest of one team affected as being so minimal as not to attract requirement of natural justice.
The content of natural justice varies with circumstance. I am dealing with an amateur sporting body but one of considerable apparent status. That would not indicate a very low level of requirement but little will be achieved by my attempting to construct some sort of scale. I should determine whether what did (or did not) happen constituted a breach of procedural fairness in the circumstances.
It was argued that the existence of a right of appeal was relevant. I shall point out later that I doubt such existed but even if it did, the plaintiff was entitled to lack confidence in it. It is not disputed that the conduct of the
Committee hearing must be judged with an allowance for the need for prompt and urgent action. That need was not so great as to extinguish the requirements to render natural justice at some level. The first aspect of denial is argued by the plaintiff to stem from the pre-determination of the issue by at least three of the four members of the Committee who voted. There is no evidence concerning the attitude of the fourth but I draw no conclusion from this absence.
The starting point is Sunday 19 March when Mr Freedman spoke to Mr Laming after seeing the Sunday papers. Mr Freedman's stated recollection of the content was as follows: Mr Freedman: "Have you seen the paper yet?" Mr Laming: "No, I haven't but what are you talking about?" Mr Freedman: "There has been an outright achieved in one day between North Sydney and University of New
South Wales which throws Waverley out of the semis and they have only batted for 20 overs each in the first innings". Mr Laming: "As far as I am concerned that's not on."
It was said a discussion about the matter followed and the following was added: Mr Freedman: "If we are to do anything we will have to move quickly because of the semis next weekend." Mr Laming replied, "I will call them into the meeting tomorrow night."
Mr Laming's recollection was given as follows: Mr Freedman said, "Have you seen this morning's paper?" Mr Laming: "No." Mr Freedman: "You should look at the result of the match between North Sydney and University of New South
Wales. We can't accept that." Mr Laming said he then went to look at the result in the paper and returned to the telephone phone and said, "I agree. We will arrange for them to be called tomorrow night".
Mr Griffith did not converse. He acknowledged that he suspected an arrangement between the teams to bat 20 over first innings and he regarded the calling of the meeting as an investigation to see if that suspicion was correct and if it was he had already decided that that arrangement would be a breach of [Rule 4(3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s4.html)
I accept the defendant's submission that the issue is not to be tested in terms of a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of an observer such as is applicable to the conduct of judicial proceedings. However, in my view, relevant actual bias is proved in the testimony of the three members above identified. I add that I do not find they were activated by malice or the like. Rather the impression I formed was that none of them had any real appreciation of the concept of prejudgment.
My view on the issue so far as it concerns Mr Laming is confirmed by his own affidavit of a further conversation later on Sunday 19 March with Mr
Davidson.
I stress that no evidence was adduced from Mr Davidson himself and he has not been given the opportunity to state any version he may have. Mr
Laming's recounting of the excerpt of their exchange is this: Mr Davidson, referring to the matters that have been discussed, "That's a contrived result.
You can't have that. They have certainly contrived to create an outright result." Mr Laming's response, "I agree. I have talked earlier to members of my committee and we intend to do something tomorrow night".
It is obvious that it is unlikely in the extreme that the plaintiff would have become aware of this conversation had it not been disclosed in the proceedings.
It was said that Mr Davidson was a member of the New South Wales
Cricket Board, the body to which the defendant has contended the plaintiff should have appealed and still invites it to appeal. In the light of this revelation the plaintiff might reasonably regard such an appeal (the existence of a right to which it disputes) with some reservation.
The second aspect of the plaintiff's argument centred upon an alleged failure of the defendant to identify to the plaintiff what specific actions were alleged to give rise to a result which had been contrived. This was refined in argument to the proposition that what the plaintiff did not know was what was the result which the Committee considered had been contrived.
Some time was spent cross-examining Mr Laming who asserted that the obnoxious result was the ensuring or, as he put it, guaranteeing that, unless there was a tie, one or other of the teams would gain first innings points at least. As
I understood his posture, that this also included the chance of outright points which crystallized into reality, was in his opinion a matter of aggravation.
A judgment on this issue could only be made applying objective justice if
I resolved a number of conflicts in the versions of those present from time to time at the Monday night hearing.
The exigencies of this litigation - most prominently the scheduled resumption of the semifinal round tomorrow - will not permit this.
Some witnesses were not called and cross-examination was avowedly truncated.
I believe, however, that the general description of events does enable me to reach a conclusion against the plaintiff on this issue without being unfair to it. The plaintiff was entitled to know what was the focus of allegation and what it was being asked to respond to and, assuming the versions contended for by the plaintiff, I find that an appropriate communication to comply with the canons of natural justice on this aspect emerged in the exchanges given, especially, the stated reason for calling people as contained in the fax sent earlier in the day.

The plaintiff fails on this issue but the failure is limited to the aspect of adequately informing as above specified.
The third aspect involves what is stated to be the failure to grant a separate hearing on penalty. I do not consider that separation to be a literal requirement. The strength of this submission should be tested against my finding of what was the course of events.
The committee sat to establish by question and answer whether their suspicions that an arrangement at least that each team would bat a 20 over first innings were correct. As I have noted, once that was established it was applied to the predetermined notion that it constituted a breach of [Rule 4(3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s4.html)
They did not canvass with the representatives of the plaintiff (or
University of New South Wales for that matter) anything beyond the confirmation of the suspicions.
Even if an invitation to make submissions as to why the findings should not be made could be implied from the content of exchange it is abundantly plain that the plaintiff was not given an opportunity, either the express or implied, to put forward reasons why the committee should not apply the available sanction.
I reject the defendant's submission that there had been fair cognizance of all relevant matters. As I have said, there does not have to be a formally divided hearing of what I might call offence and penalty but that there was only one inevitable result upon demonstration of the former must be wrong. The expression in the rule that the Committee "retains the power" to deduct competition points is permissive rather than mandatory. Even assuming breach of the rule, it was not the situation that nothing could be relevantly said against application of the sanction. For example, the Committee might discharge its function with integrity yet decide not to deduct points if it was persuaded that the game was fairly and vigorously contested in an honest but mistaken belief held by both participants as to the meaning of some obscurely worded provision; likewise it might consider that the full knowledge and absence of intervention by the umpires, having regard to the presumed acknowledgment of Laws of Cricket number 3(7) contra-indicated any sanction.
The plaintiff was entirely deprived of a hearing on this aspect. It should have been granted.
On two bases the plaintiff has prima facie shown matters which attract remedy.
I turn to the plaintiff's argument which for ready reference I will term misconstruction.
I approach this task in time pressured circumstances with undisguised reluctance. I have earlier narrated contemplation of some - including some unlikely - facts of which the undefined and indefinite language of [Rule 4(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s4.html) could comprehend. The ambiguity of expression is such as to defy any precise construction being offered. Indeed, the Committee member witnesses impressed me that they had no definite concept of the parameters of the rule but rather relied on their intuition that they would know a contrived result if they encountered one.
The context of [Rule 4(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s4.html) is penal in the broad sense in which penalty is a word pertaining to sporting endeavour. In it the expression "has been contrived" must connote more than the dictionary meanings of planning with ingenuity or devising. I think it must connote less than the alternative dictionary suggestion of plotting evil. Senior counsel for the plaintiff submitted the qualification of some turpitude which the
Oxford synonymises with baseness, depravity and wickedness. A Thesaurus-like exercise is not appropriate but turpitude would seem too strong.
The preferable gloss on "contrived" in a sporting rule is something in the vicinity of the meaning of 'unfair'.
The immediate problem arises, "unfair" to whom? The opponents, all of the other teams in the competition or a specific team likely to be affected, for example - a team which could indirectly lose a place in the semifinals?
A somewhat elaborate argument was developed by the plaintiff by reference to the incorporation of the Laws of Cricket in competitions [rule 2(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s2.html) The conclusion was that the conduct identified by Mr Laming as giving rise to the breach, (agreement to limit first innings overs) was permitted by Law 12.(1) as annotated in Note (b).
The defendant submitted that the argument was incorrect but in any event irrelevant as [Rule 4(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s4.html) assumed that there had been compliance with the rules.
I am unconvinced of the validity of either submission. The reference to "a result" in the Rule properly construed refers to the outcome of a match, not consequential effects upon the standing of other teams in a competition table. It lies within the scope of the application of the rule to determine that a result has, by the implementation of what is capable of being found to be unfair, been achieved, but the Laws of Cricket and the Competition rules may or may not be silent on the specific facts.
Attention has been directed to the indefinite article "a" rather than the definite article "the" preceding the word "result". I note that in its resolution the Committee referred to "the result". I consider the term should be construed as encompassing an outcome of a match rather than the more abstract achievement of any result at all. Insofar as the purpose of the rule can be discerned, it is to penalise a team which gains points in one of the ways specified in the [Rule 4(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s4.html) table by unfair planning, which planning must necessarily have been implemented.
Thus in the present case, the question which the Committee should have answered was whether it was satisfied that North Sydney won outright as a consequence of implementing an unfair plan or stratagem. The Committee did not address that question and, again prima facie, the plaintiff is entitled to remedy.
I do not conclude that that question must inevitably be answered in favour of North Sydney although to do otherwise would, it would seem, adopt a view contrary to that apparently held by the appointed arbiters of fair and unfair play who were present at the match. I am referring to the umpires. I decline to enjoin the first defendant from requisitioning a meeting, if it chooses.
The defendant contended that I should, in any event, refuse relief on discretionary grounds. The first and principal proposition is that the plaintiff has declined to avail itself of a right of appeal within the internal structure of the organisation. I am referred to Clause 50 of the
Sydney Cricket Association [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/). That clause vests rights in the parties to a protest or dispute which has been adjudicated upon by the
Committee. There was evidence that Waverley District Cricket Club intended to protest. They did not, apparently because they were told North Sydney and
University of New South Wales were being called before the Committee. There was no dispute between North Sydney and University of New South
Wales nor between North Sydney and anyone else which was adjudicated upon by the
Committee. Clause 50 vested no relevant right. North
Sydney were before the
Committee on a matter of the Committee's own motion. I do not need to explore case law concerning granting relief by the Court when internal appeals have not been exhausted.
The next matter was the failure to disclose the arrangement to the
Committee. This became irrelevant. The Committee found the arrangement proved and, I repeat, it was never a secret from the umpires or for that matter all the members of the teams. What Mr Marks and Mr Dixon sought to maintain was a claimed tradition of confidentiality of exchanges between captains. Whether such a tradition exists or not I am not in a position to determine.
 .
It was said that the decision of the Committee was (inevitably) correct.
It should be clear from the foregoing that I do not uphold that contention.
Lastly it was said that the Court should not be eager to adjudicate in relation to sporting events and should decide that the matter is best left to be determined by cricketers. I take the word "eager" to be used in a forensic rather than literal sense. This part of the submission can really only be gauged by weighing the considerations offered against the matters for which the plaintiff has demonstrated, subject to discretion, an entitlement to remedy. The exercise clearly favours the plaintiff.
 .
Before turning to the question of orders some commentary should be recorded.
I repeat, there is no evidence whatsoever that
North Sydney and
University of New South Wales first grade teams competed other than honestly and honourably in the match on 18 March.
That integrity is unequivocally to be attributed to the captains Mr Marks and Mr Dixon.
I also state that the evidence provokes no conclusion that anyone else (including club officials, committee men, administrators and players) acted in any way contrary to a belief that he was making a decision or acting in the best interests of the game. My findings concerning pre-judgment by the members of the Management Committee should be regarded in the light of the indistinct language of the Rule they were attempting to administer and their failure really to appreciate the notion of pre-determination. Their minds may have been open to the extent that they were ready to receive evidence to allay their suspicions about what the arrangement was, but they were quite closed to any proposition other than that - if the facts turned out as they expected - the Rule and its sanction must unhesitatingly be applied. If I may continue the theme, the requirement of fairness was that the members kept their minds open in the sense of being ready to be persuaded in respect of the whole issue to be determined and it did not fulfil that requirement to have an open mind as to only part of the issue.
That there was room for persuasion one way or the other is thrown into sharp focus by the divergence of views between Mr Bennett and Mr Bernard on one hand and Mr Chappell and Mr Bush on the other.
This leads to my final comment. The rule was, so Mr Laming testified, introduced only two years ago. The submissions on behalf of the first defendant attempted to skirt the gross ambiguities in the expression of [Rule (3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s4.html) I respectfully suggest that there should be no great difficulty in drafting a rule of clear ambit and application and I commend consideration of so doing to the body responsible for the rules.
I propose to make a declaration in terms of paragraph one of the summons.
The matter will be remitted to the decision maker but in the light of my findings the Committee should not include in its constitution the four who voted on Monday 20 March. It would be appropriate to secure this by undertaking, but if this cannot be offered I will entertain submissions as to why I should not make an injunctive order to that extent. Subject to the position of the second defendant, costs should follow the event but, again, if there is some submission wished to the made to the contrary I will hear it now.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/34.html  
