

Regina versus Fadel Matter No Cca 60010/95 [1998] NSWSC 125 (1 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
REGINA versus KAMILLE FADEL /95 May 1998 
Studdert J, James J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Supreme Court (McInerney J) 
FILE NO: 60010/95 
DELIVERED: Friday 1 May 1998 
HEARING DATE: Wednesday 1 April 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus KAMILLE FADEL 
JUDGMENT OF: STUDDERT, JAMES, HIDDEN JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - M ADAMS QC 
RESPONDENT - C K MAXWELL QC 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - JOAN BAPTIE 
RESPONDENT - S E O'CONNOR 
RESULT: DISMISSED 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - murder - circumstantial evidence - witness takes number plate of car from which fatal shot fired - sufficiency of directions in summing-up. 
CRIMINAL LAW - murder - circumstantial evidence - whether verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory.

NO. OF PAGES: 31 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The appellant, Kamille Fadel, stood trial in October 1994 on a charge of having murdered Melhem Taouk at Stanmore on 1 August 1993. The appellant was found guilty of this charge and was sentenced to a minimum term of fourteen years imprisonment to date from 1 August 1993 and an additional term of four years to date from 1 August 2007. The appellant has appealed against his conviction and he also seeks leave to appeal against sentence. 
On Sunday 1 August 1993 the deceased attended a memorial service for a cousin who had died in Lebanon. After the service the deceased drove to Stanmore to attend a wake at premises at 193 Stanmore Road, Stanmore. The deceased parked his car in Holt Street, Stanmore, but before he was able to leave it a shot was fired from another vehicle that drew alongside and the deceased sustained a wound to the head, causing his death. It was the Crown case that the appellant fired the fatal shot. The appellant denied having done so.

A key witness in the prosecution case was a police officer, Sgt John Squires, who lived at 18 Holt Street, Stanmore. The building at that address was a three storey block of flats with two flats per floor. Sgt Squires lived in a flat on the top floor and his evidence was that he went out on to the balcony looking for his wife, who he had expected to return home earlier. He saw the deceased's vehicle park directly in front of the flats where Sgt Squires lived. He said that he then saw a red vehicle drive up Holt Street and stop beside the blue car, with a distance of some three to four feet separating the driver's side of the blue car from the passenger's side of the red one. Sgt
Squires noticed the driver of the red vehicle reach across, raising a rifle or a gun. He noticed that that person was wearing a dark coloured coat. The gun was a single barrel gun. He heard a shot being fired and the sound of glass breaking. The car from which the shot had been fired then drove off and Sgt
Squires read its registration number as KGR 125. He said he read it through twice and went inside where he wrote the registration number down on the back of a ticket which was introduced into evidence. Sgt Squires next rang 000 to report the matter. The telephone conversation was recorded, and the relevant tape was introduced into evidence. The conversation was reported as commencing at 1.01 pm and Sgt Squires advised that the "offending vehicle" was a red
Falcon wagon, registered number KGR 125.

The vehicle registered number KGR 125 proved to be a red station wagon and it was registered in the name of the appellant. It was not a Falcon, but a
Holden.

Other people in the vicinity of the shooting gave evidence for the prosecution. Mr Fady Taouk arrived at Stanmore to attend the wake and greeted the deceased briefly before walking to the wake venue in Stanmore Road. As he was walking down Holt Street he saw a red station wagon driving slowly down the street and Mr Taouk saw the driver of this vehicle wearing headphones. He noticed that he had black hair, a black moustache and that he was wearing a black jacket. Some forty to fifty seconds after seeing the red station wagon
Mr Taouk heard a loud bang which he thought was a wheel exploding. He looked around but did not see the red station wagon.

Mr Joils was a resident of Stanmore who, at the time, was resting on the
Stanmore Public School fence, near the intersection of Holt Street and
Cavendish Street. He heard a loud bang and very shortly afterwards he heard a screech. Looking up, he saw a long red car driving towards him. As it did so, it slowed down and he observed the driver adjusting his headgear. He thought the driver was wearing something grey on his upper body.

Mr Peters, who lived near the same intersection, heard a bang and, within a second, a car accelerating. He did not see the car but was confident it had a
V8 engine.

Later that evening, police conducted surveillance of the appellant's home at
Merrylands and when the appellant arrived there at about 10.30 pm he did so in the vehicle KGR 125. Upon entering the premises, the appellant was arrested by police and conveyed to Merrylands Police Station. At the time of his arrest he was wearing a black leather jacket. Police searched his vehicle and found a black coloured Walkman radio with headphones in the car amongst other items.
Police also searched the appellant's garage where a quantity of ammunition was located and this included thirty-one rounds of .30 calibre cartridges.

There was evidence in the prosecution case that the bullet which killed the deceased was a .30 M1 carbine calibre cartridge. The clothing worn by the appellant at the time of his arrest was examined for gunshot residue and positive findings were made in relation to the appellant's leather jacket.

The appellant on interview denied being responsible for the shooting and maintained that denial at the trial in a short unsworn statement: "Members of the jury, I am not guilty. I did not shoot Mr Taouk. I had no reason to shoot him. I had nothing to do with it. I do not know who shoot him.
I do not know about this chemicals on my jacket. Maybe, maybe it's from the guns I had before or from welding. Since Marlene was sick I did small welding jobs for friends. I made sinkers for my fishing. I did not say that I had something in my body. I did not say that a man put a curse on me or my family.
Mr Forster said I went seven times to shoot someone. It is not true. Thank you." 
The reference in the above statement to Marlene was a reference to the appellant's daughter who was tragically stricken with a paralysing disease for which she was at the time in hospital. There was a deal of evidence from nursing staff at the hospital concerning the sighting of the appellant at the hospital on the day of the shooting. I shall return to this evidence when considering the first of the grounds of appeal.

There was also evidence from David Forster whom the appellant mentioned in his unsworn statement. This witness was an acquaintance of the appellant who regularly visited the appellant's daughter in hospital. He gave some evidence that the appellant had told him that his family was cursed and that the curse would be lifted if he went out and shot an unnamed person. I shall return to this evidence when considering a ground of appeal directed both to the question of motive and the evidence of the witness Mr Forster.

Against the above outline, I now consider the grounds of appeal. The Court received lengthy written submissions before the hearing in response to the directions of the Court. However, when the hearing began Mr Adams of Queen's
Counsel, who was very recently retained in the matter, presented further written submissions, which he advanced as alternative submissions to those earlier presented. The totality of the submissions, in particular on Ground 1, thus became extensive and varied; they all require the consideration of this
Court.

Ground 1: His Honour erred in law in failing to adequately direct and warn the jury as to identification evidence relating to the motor vehicle registration number KGR 125 and the driver of that motor vehicle 
The focus of this ground is the evidence given by Sgt Squires. He did not attempt to identify the driver of the vehicle, but it is submitted that the evidence that he gave as to the numberplate of the red vehicle was evidence that demanded those warnings of the dangers of identification evidence so fully addressed in R versus Domican [(1991-1992) 175 CLR 555.] I quote from the judgment of the court at 561-562: "...the seductive effect of identification evidence has so frequently led to proven miscarriages of justice that courts of criminal appeal and ultimate appellate courts have felt obliged to lay down special rules in relation to the directions which judges must give in criminal trials where identification is a significant issue.

Whatever the defence and however the case is conducted, where evidence as to identification represents any significant part of the proof of guilt of an offence, the judge must warn the jury as to the dangers of convicting on such evidence where its reliability is disputed (Kelleher v. The Queen <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 534] , at p 551; Reg. v. Turnbull [(1977) QB 224] , at p 228; Reg.
v. Burchielli <case>; [(1981) VR 611] , at pp 616-619; Reg. v. Bartels [(1986) 44 SASR 260], at pp -271). The terms of the warning need not follow any particular formula (Reg. v. De-Cressac [(1985) 1 NSWLR 381] , at p ; Finn [(1988) 34 A Crim R 425], at pp 435-436). But it must be cogent and effective (Reg. v. Dickson <case>; [(1983) 1 VR 227] , at p 230; Reid (Junior) v. The Queen [(1990) 1 AC ] , at p 380). It must be appropriate to the circumstances of the case (Reg. v.
Aziz [(1982) 2 NSWLR 322] , at p 328; Allen [(1984) 16 A Crim R 441], at pp 444-445). Consequently, the jury must be instructed `as to the factors which may affect the consideration of (the identification) evidence in the circumstances of the particular case' (Smith v. The Queen [(1990) 64 ALJR ).](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281990%29%2064%20ALJR%20588 "View LawCiteRecord" ) A warning in general terms is insufficient (Kelleher (1974) 131 CLR, at p ). The attention of the jury `should be drawn to any weaknesses in the identification evidence' ibid. Reference to counsel's arguments is insufficient. The jury must have the benefit of a direction which has the authority of the judge's office behind it (Davies and Cody v. The King <case>; [(1937) 57 CLR 170], at pp 182-183). It follows that the trial judge should isolate and identify for the benefit of the jury any matter of significance which may reasonably be regarded as undermining the reliability of the identification evidence." 
In the present case the learned trial judge did not give the typical identification evidence warnings nor was he asked to do so. It is plain that much attention focussed on the evidence of Sgt Squires and at one stage of his
Honour's summing-up, his Honour observed: "I think Sgt Squires' evidence has been dissected up hill and down dale and every other way. I do not think you require me to go through it all. I think both counsel went through it in considerable detail. You have got it firmly in your mind. You have got the photograph there. You have got the fact that he took the number, and, as I say, you look at the back of that Holden, look at the back of the Falcon and do you think you would have picked the difference in those circumstances when you are, as he said, trying to get the number. It is a question for you that is what he says he was concentrating on." 
The above extract is not the only passage from the summing-up where his Honour gave directions relevant to the evidence of Sgt Squires. At pp 14-15 his
Honour directed the jury: "...Sgt Squires, I am sure, when he was looking over the balcony for his wife who was late from shopping, never expected that suddenly he would be the witness to a brutal, callous killing. Of course, it is a matter of commonsense that when somebody observes something in circumstances like that, that they are not expecting, you would not or could not expect them to be absolutely a hundred percent accurate about some of the evidence that they give. Just imagine it, you are just standing there on a Sunday, a pleasant Sunday afternoon, suddenly right under your nose a man is assassinated. Now you must bear in mind, and that is where you use your commonsense, it is all very well when we come here in a court, and it has got to be done, and examine these witnesses uphill and downdale, point out discrepancies, you would expect discrepancies, you would expect them to be unsure about some of the things that they are talking about; if they were so positively sure, you would probably say to yourself, `Well, I don't know about that, he is too dogmatic about it.' Now they are matters that you have to consider, whether he was looking at the grille of the motor car, whether he observed it coming up the street, whether he was interested in it. I mean, after all, what he was doing was looking for his wife, not expecting a second or two later that someone was going to shoot somebody right in front of his nose. How would you expect him to react, would you expect him to be shocked and upset, would you expect him to be thinking rationally, as we all are in this court, whether he says everything precisely according to what he did, whether he went into the kitchen and noted this down and forgot to tell the man on the triple 0. These are all matters for you, I am not going to express a view about it. Even though he is a police sergeant, of course, after all, he does not have the ordinary experience of a police sergeant, he was 7 years doing general duties and then he has been on other things such as school lecturing and prisoner escorts and putting out licences for trucks and now because he has got hypertension, he is on clerical duties. There is no evidence that he owns a motor car, I do not know whether he owns a motor car or not, but I am not saying that you accept his evidence or reject it, it is a matter for you to look at it in those circumstances and then examine his evidence and say, `Are there such discrepancies in that evidence that I reject him?'; that is entirely a matter for you." 
Later at p 17: "I think Mr Ierace [counsel for the accused] spoke about Sergeant Squires, did you feel comfortable with his evidence, his demeanour, how do you think he appeared to you, did he appear to be answering the questions as best he could or was he shifty or was he trying to get round matters that might embarrass him." 
Then at pp 25-27, having categorised for the jury the Crown case as depending on circumstantial evidence, said: "Now when you come to consider this circumstantial evidence, firstly there are two essential maters that you have to determine and I suggest, and it is only a suggestion, that when you come to consider your verdict, you determine firstly whether or not it was the accused's car that was driven by the shooter on that day at 1 pm. That is the first thing. If you are in doubt about that, members of the jury, then, of course, you would acquit the accused, because the cornerstone of the Crown case, as I understand it, is that it was the accused's vehicle, first of all, that was involved in this shooting.

Now somebody, I think the Crown, described strands in a cable. There can be strands in a cable. The more strands you get, the stronger the cable, but your requirement in respect to this matter, that is whether it was the accused's car, has to be determined beyond reasonable doubt because it is a link, an absolute crucial link, in the chain of circumstantial evidence. Now if you are not satisfied that this was the accused's motor vehicle, then I would direct you that you would have to acquit the accused because that is a vital piece of evidence against him.

Now you consider the evidence on that in a separate fashion, in a sense, because you have to determine first of all whether or not you accept the evidence of Sergeant Squires, supported, to some extent, by the evidence of the other witnesses who observed the motor vehicle, and the fact that the accused himself has said to the police that the car was in his possession that day, he was driving it that day, and that although he drove out to various places, it was kept there, it was still there when he came back and there was no evidence of forced entry. They are all factors you take into account.

You look at the evidence of Sergeant Squires. You look at the evidence of Mr
Peters who predicted, although he did not see it, that it was a V8, and it turns out it was a V8, red car. You heard all the evidence about whether it was a Falcon or a Holden. They are all matters for you to consider whether, in the circumstances, peering over the balcony, Squires would be acute enough to pick up that it was a Holden not a Falcon. They are all matters for you." 
Later at p 33 the judge reminded the jury of a discrepancy between Sgt
Squire's description of the behaviour of the car and other witnesses: "...I think Mr Ierace emphasised here that Sgt Squires I think suggested that the car to his mind did not seem to screech. Of course it has got to go from start. It has stopped and has got to take off. He did not think it took off fairly hard but that seems not to be in accordance with the other witnesses..." 
His Honour then referred to other evidence of the screech of tyres being heard.

Later at pp 33-34: "So, members of the jury, the Crown says you would look at the evidence of
Sergeant Squires. He was there. He saw the whole thing. The only criticism you could level at him was that he picked it as a Ford not a Holden, he said he was trying to get the registration number, that is the issue, did he get it, did he get the registration number, was he accurate." 
Then at p 36: "What I was talking about when you have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that it was the accused who was responsible for the act, I think I made it quite clear what you have to consider is whether you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he was the driver of the vehicle, but if you have a reasonable doubt about it, that he was the driver, you have to acquit. I think
I did say that you have the evidence that Sergeant Squires took the number. If
I said that, I did not intend to say that. What the situation is is that
Sergeant Squires claimed to have taken the number, so bear that in mind." 
His Honour reminded the jury at p 45 that there was "no direct identification of the driver of that motor vehicle.".

When reviewing the submissions of counsel, the jury was reminded that the observations of Sgt Squires were made "where he was on the second floor block of flats" (in fact he was on the third floor). His Honour went on to direct the jury (at p 55): "You have got the photographs. You can measure the distance which he would have had this vehicle under his notice. If it was going at 15 kph, he would only have it under his observations for 1.2 seconds and, of course, it has to start from a stop. He said (and this is a reference to counsel's address) that
Sgt Squires did not recollect any screeching or the car screeching off as other witnesses had and I referred to them and they were the two persons who were canvassed by the police." 
Sergeant Squires had given evidence that he thought the vehicle was a Ford and at p 56 of the summing-up the trial judge reminded the jury of counsel's submission about that evidence and invited the jury to make what they would of it: "Sgt Squires thought it was a Ford. He formed that opinion because he said it was similar to his next door neighbour's vehicle. He said he could not see the grille, no way. Then I think Mr Ierace referred to those photographs, numbers and 26, taken with a wide angle lens. He said that the police car in that photograph would be much closer and that he would have a perfect view of it coming down Stanmore Road. He said he did not see the grille. It is a matter for you. He said he was looking for his wife. He said he had a great view, that is why Mr Ierace submitted to you that he should not have said it was a
Falcon.

Then he took you to the differences in the two cars and if you think they are important that a person looking at a number plate would note those differences is a matter entirely for you and I have referred to his experience in the police force and there was no evidence that Sergeant Squires even owned a motor vehicle. But Mr Ierace has asked you to take notice of the differences, particularly the photographs of the Kingswood, on the top, a roof rack and a wind deflector and how could he have missed that? He thought it was an automatic. Detective Hosi thought it was, but it is a gear chain. No registration of similar numbers and letter combinations and there was no broken glass or anything around the car.

Well he criticised Sergeant Squires' evidence, did he seem unreliable, unwittingly misleading, and he said, as I understand it, you could not rely on him, a history of blood pressure and stress, would be highly stressed by what he saw. He asked you to note his demeanour, the way he gave his evidence. Did you find it uncomfortable, what he had to say? Then he referred you to the question of whether it was a Holden or a Ford that he saw. When it became apparent that it was a Holden vehicle, as I understand Mr Ierace's submission, he was very careful thereafter not make a mention that he had identified it as a Ford and there was no mention of a Ford in his statement and that only came to light in his evidence in the light of the call to triple 0. He said he heard at the police station it was a Holden. He wrote down the number, rang triple 0. Mr Ierace has criticised him for not telling the operator the number straight away. Well members of the jury, that is a matter for you. You make what you like of it. And he denied that conversation on the balcony. What Mr
Ierace said, if you cannot accept him when you check him, why would you be prepared to accept him on other matters?" 
Did the above directions suffice to alert the jury to such matters as they ought properly to heed in evaluating the evidence that Sgt Squires gave?
Certainly experienced counsel for the appellant appearing at the trial sought no further directions but in the earlier written submissions of the appellant, it was argued that there was a need in this case for a warning addressing the matters referred to in Domican. It was submitted that particular features of the present case which warranted specific attention in the instruction to the jury included the following: difficulty in seeing the numberplate accurately from Sgt Squires' elevated position; the limited time which the witness had to heed the numberplate; describing the car as a red Falcon when he reported the matter to the emergency number reflected upon the reliability of his sighting; there was a failure to remind the jury that Sgt Squires might have made an error in taking down or remembering the number; the judge failed to remind the jury of a matter raised by the defence in submissions that the murderer might have used altered numberplates.

In Domican the identification evidence was evidence which the witness in question gave identifying the offender who shot the deceased. There were a number of features in relation to that identification set out in the judgment of Kirby A-CJ, as he then was, in the judgment in the Court of Criminal Appeal [(1990) 46 A Crim R 428] at pp 444-445. In the present case, Sgt Squires did not purport to identify the appellant. His evidence was that he saw the numberplate of the car and wrote it down.

In R versus Clout (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 28 July 1995) this Court upheld an appeal with Allen J and Dowd J concluding that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. Kirby A-CJ did not regard the verdict as unsafe and unsatisfactory but was also of the opinion that the appeal should be allowed because the case was one which required an identification warning. This was a case in which the appellant was the driver of a laden semi-trailer which overturned and the accident resulted with the appellant being charged with eight counts of culpable driving. Evidence was led at the trial from two witnesses who saw a vehicle behaving in a particular way some five kilometres south of the point of impact. The vehicle involved in the accident was seen subsequent to it and was observed by the witnesses to be very similar to that they had seen. Kirby A-CJ said at p 15 of his judgment: "A question thus arises as to whether the warning required in the identification of a human being should be extended to the identification of a crucial inanimate object. No authority binding on this Court governs the subject. A natural inclination is not to extend unnecessarily warnings never previously conceived as necessary, the absence of which may occasion the failure of a lengthy trial otherwise impeccably conducted by the trial judge.

Where the evidence of identification of an object is peripheral to the major issue fought at the trial one could perhaps resist, with integrity, the extension of the judicial warning obligation to warn the jury. But where, as here, the critical issue posed by the judge to the jury - central to the
Crown's case and to the accused's defence - was the identification of the semi-trailer described by Messrs Green and Guest with that of the appellant, the need for a warning becomes obvious." 
Then at p 16 the particular warning which the learned judge perceived to be required ought in his opinion to have addressed the following features: "1 The fallibility of human memory; The risks of convicting persons upon the basis of identification evidence and the injustices which have occurred in the past from such mistakes; The danger of contamination of memory by facts later discovered; The high importance of securing an early record of the uncontaminated recall of the witness before the passage of time to prevent later elaboration or distortion in the retelling of the event; and  The specific danger that memory may sometimes become enlarged (even quite innocently) to include matters which the observer expects, or is expected to recall." 
The extraction of the above five points distinguishes Clout from the present case. Sgt Squires' evidence was that he wrote the number down immediately and that it was immediately passed on by telephone. Those factors numbered 1, 3, 4 and 5 by Kirby A-CJ do not arise. The jury had the ticket on which Sgt Squires wrote down the number of the car and they had evidence of the telephone conversation which Sgt Squires had with the police operator immediately after his sighting.

Sgt Squires' evidence was not identification evidence in the strict sense because he did not see the appellant's car at any time after this shooting and say of it: "That is the car I saw below my flat." Nor did he attempt at any time to identify the appellant or to give any description of the occupant of the motor vehicle from which the jury was invited to conclude that a description given by the witness tallied with the appellant. That Sgt Squires wrongly described the vehicle in question as being a Falcon was a matter that was drawn to the jury's attention. The importance of the evidence that the police officer gave as to the number of the vehicle was made plain to the jury as was the importance of their assessment of the reliability of his evidence.
The jury was instructed in terms that made it clear that they had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the accuracy of what Sgt Squires had seen and recorded.

Mr Adams argued, however, that the jury, in deciding whether Sgt Squires' testimony was reliable, should have been reminded of the evidence which bore upon the issue as to whether the car the police officer saw was the appellant's car. In particular: there was the evidence of absence of ammunition residue in the vehicle when it was examined; there was the evidence of Sister Bresnahan that she saw the appellant at the hospital at a time which would have meant it was impossible for him to be driving his car in Holt Street, Stanmore at 1.00 pm.

Mr Adams submitted that the direction given by the trial judge that the jury should consider the issue as to whether the car sighted was the appellant's car, approaching the evidence on that in a separate fashion, was illogical and incorrect, and if followed would have drawn the jury's attention away from factors (a) and (b) above on the critical issue as to whether Sgt Squires was correct in what he saw, recorded and reported.

I do not consider the jury was misdirected. I have set out earlier and extensively his Honour's directions in point, and it seems to me that read in context the instruction to consider the evidence about the vehicle "in a separate fashion, in a sense" would not have been regarded by the jury as an invitation to ignore any evidence in the case that might bear on the resolution of that issue. Plainly, appellant's counsel at the trial was not concerned about the directions in question because no complaint was made at the trial about them.

The only "strand in the cable" of circumstantial evidence which the trial judge perceived to be an indispensable link in the chain of circumstantial evidence was proof of the vehicle seen being that of the appellant. In my opinion, his Honour was correct in approaching the matter in this way, and what his Honour did was in accord with Shepherd versus The Queen <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 573.] I reject Mr Adams' submission that there was any other "strand", whether arising from factors (a) or (b) or otherwise requiring a like direction.

Moreover the failure to advert to those factors (a) and (b) as identified by
Mr Adams produced no imbalance in the relevant directions. His Honour did not undertake an exhaustive review of all the evidence when directing on "the indispensable link in the chain of circumstantial evidence." Had he done so, there were, as the Crown has submitted, many pieces of evidence favourable to the Crown case which required assessment along with the evidence of Sister
Bresnahan and the evidence that no ammunition residue was found in the car. If there was to be an extensive review of the evidence in the context of the direction on the indispensable link, it would have been proper for the judge to remind the jury of these matters: that the driver was seen by witnesses to be wearing a black jacket and the appellant was wearing a black jacket on that day; the driver was seen by some witnesses to be wearing headphones and headphones were later found in his car; the black jacket of the appellant was tested and found to bear particles consistent with gunshot residue; remnants of the bullets retrieved from the car of the deceased and from his body were from a .30 calibre carbine rifle. The appellant admitted to having owned such a rifle in the past when he was interviewed and there was the finding of ammunition of that type in the appellant's garage.

The evidence given by Sister Bresnahan was not the only evidence of the appellant having been sighted at the hospital on 1 August 1993, and the significance of his sighting is to be viewed against the evidence of travel time from Holt Street, Stanmore to the hospital.

There were varying estimates as to how long the journey from the scene of the shooting to Prince of Wales Hospital took and, no doubt, that would depend upon traffic conditions. The range expressed in evidence was from thirteen to fourteen minutes (Mr Rumore, T 452) to nineteen minutes (Mr Rumore, T 447).

Bearing in mind the time of the shooting, a sighting of the appellant at the hospital after 1.20 pm would not have been inconsistent with his being at the scene of the crime when it occurred.

Sister Bresnahan, in her evidence-in-chief, said that she left her ward at the hospital at 1.10 pm and then went to the tea room where she had a sandwich.
She then visited the appellant's daughter and stayed in her ward until about .30 pm. She said that Mrs Fadel was there when she first arrived but Mr Fadel appeared just before she left, at about 1.30 pm. However, in cross-examination this witness was reminded of a statement made to the police on 2 August 1993 in which she said that she went down to the child's ward at 1.10 pm to 1.15 pm. The witness agreed in cross-examination that the version given to the police was possibly more accurate than her recollection of the times given in evidence.

Sister O'Brien was the nurse in charge of the child's ward on the afternoon in question. She saw the appellant's wife and children in the ward between midday and 12.20 pm but the appellant was not there. Sister O'Brien said that she was in and out of the child's room throughout the shift "every five minutes" and apart from that she could see into the room from her work station. The first time she saw the appellant that day was at 1.45 pm when he walked in from the back entrance into the ward, walking past the nurses' station.

Sister Casaceli was rostered on duty in the relevant ward from 1.30 pm till .15 pm and she said that she was late to arrive on 1 August, not arriving until 1.45 pm. She saw the appellant's wife and other people with the appellant's daughter but she first saw the appellant at approximately 1.55 pm when he walked into the ward.

Nurse Stack began her shift in the relevant ward at 1.30 pm. She recalled seeing the appellant's wife then but the first time she saw the appellant was at 4.00 pm.

Nurse Byrnes was on duty on the relevant date in the relevant ward but he was unable to say whether either the appellant or his wife was present at the hospital between 11.30 am and 1.30 pm.

Of the three nursing sisters who gave evidence of seeing the appellant at varying times after 1.00 pm, there would seem to be some merit in the Crown's submission that the more reliable estimates as to time may have been those given by Sister Casaceli and by Sister O'Brien. Each had a particular reason to be aware of the time, because Sister Casaceli was late to start her shift, a matter that affected both nurses in particular.

If the trial judge had reviewed all the relevant evidence in the context of directing the jury as to the need to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
Sgt Squires was correct in his observation of the relevant number plate, my assessment of that evidence is that the appellant's prospects would not have been assisted by such a review.

In my opinion ground 1 fails. Since no relevant point was taken at the trial, [Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) applies and bearing in mind the conclusions I have expressed on the arguments addressed, I would refuse the appellant leave to rely upon this ground in any event.

Ground 2: His Honour erred in law in failing to adequately provide a direction to the jury as to the unreliability of the Crown witness, David Forster.

I referred earlier to the evidence which this witness gave that the appellant had told him that his family had been cursed and that the curse would be lifted if the appellant went out and shot somebody. Mr Forster also gave evidence that he mentioned what the appellant had said to a psychologist at the hospital whom he identified as being the psychologist that looked after
Marlene. The psychologist in question was Ms Duffy and she was called in the appellant's case. She said that she did not know Mr Forster and she said that she had never been told by the appellant that he believed his family was cursed or that he had to kill someone to have the curse lifted.

In his remarks on sentence, McInerney J expressed the view that he regarded Mr
Forster as an unconvincing witness and the complaint is made in this ground that his Honour should have so directed the jury at the trial because Mr
Forster's evidence in point was, in counsel's submission, "inherently incredible." 
In my opinion there is no substance in this ground. What the jury made of the evidence of Mr Forster was a matter for the jury as the tribunal of fact. His
Honour would have been trespassing upon the jury's function had he given them the direction which it is contended he ought to have given. I would add that no such direction was sought at the trial.

Ground 2 fails.

In the written submissions in relation to ground 2, complaint is made that his
Honour stopped certain cross-examination of Mr Forster. At that stage counsel was questioning the witness about the powers of a particular person who Mr
Forster believed to have healing gifts and who he had arranged to come to the
Prince of Wales Hospital. No ground of appeal was directed to this complaint but upon the hearing of the appeal Mr Adams was granted leave to add a ground: "That his Honour erred in law in prohibiting counsel from testing Mr
Forster's credit by reference to his religious beliefs." 
The cross-examination explored Mr Forster's religious beliefs and it was in this context that the witness was asked about the lady he believed to have the healing powers. The topic was pursued extensively between pp 198-200 of the transcript of evidence. I do not propose to set the cross-examination out in full but at p 200 the following is recorded: "Q. Can you say that slowly? 
A. Mirna is a well known lady throughout the world.

Q. Can you repeat the words you said? 
A. She produces olive oil from her body through the grace of God.

Q. Whereabouts from her body does the olive oil come from? 
HIS HONOUR: What does this go to, if this man has religious beliefs, no need to belittle them.

IERACE: The accused denies he ever used the word curse or curses.

HIS HONOUR: So what? What has it got to do whether he used the word curse or not. What has it got to do with his belief about some religious person who excretes olive oil from her body whether your client used the word curse? What has that got to do with it? 
IERACE: This whole notion of a curse is foreign to the accused but it is quite comfortable in the beliefs of this man, it is a lie and a lie that comes from his beliefs.

HIS HONOUR: You can put that to him, but I am not going to allow you to cross-examine this man on his belief as to what goes on and talking about a video, what has that got to with it? I won't allow any more of it. Get on to the facts of the case and concentrate on them for a change." 
It is plain that his Honour perceived the cross-examiner had strayed from any relevant area. His Honour's ruling did not prevent experienced trial counsel from pursuing relevant cross-examination and I regard this added ground as having no substance.

There was a further complaint advanced in the written submissions that his
Honour prevented counsel from asking Miss Hardiman, a paediatric social worker at the hospital, whether Mr Forster had reported hallucinations he had experienced. Mr Adams did not address the Court on this issue and it is not the subject of any ground of appeal.

It is apparent from a reading of the transcript that his Honour rejected a question directed to Miss Hardiman which sought to elicit evidence that the witness Forster had claimed to have heard voices. Counsel at the trial submitted that this evidence would be relevant to give an insight into the state of mind of the witness Forster but his Honour rejected the questioning because it had not been put to Mr Forster in cross-examination that he claimed to have heard voices. Trial counsel appears to have acknowledged that the rule in Browne versus Dunn applied, and clearly it did. In fairness, if evidence was going to be led from Miss Hardiman about the subject, Mr Forster should earlier have been cross-examined about it. The transcript records his Honour's remark that the witness Forster "has gone, he has not no chance to reply" to what Miss Hardiman might say.

In the circumstances I consider his Honour was correct to take the course which he did.

Ground 3: His Honour erred in law in failing to adequately direct the jury as to motive 
It is submitted that the jury should have been told the element of motive must be proved beyond reasonable doubt if it was to support an inference of guilt.
No such direction was sought at the trial, nor do I consider it was required having regard to what was said in Shepherd versus The Queen (supra). The element of motive was not an indispensable intermediate step in the reasoning process towards an inference of guilt. What his Honour said to the jury by way of direction on motive (at p 29 of the summing-up) was: "Now motive, you have heard a lot said to you about motive. Now I give you a direction of law on that. The Crown, as part of its case against the accused, is not required to prove motive and that is obvious because in a number of killings there may be a motive for the killing of which the Crown has been unable to determine, but the absence of motive is an important matter because there is invariably a reason why people commit crimes such as this. The Crown puts forward some material which it says goes to motive, that is that the accused believed his family had been cursed and he had to kill someone in order to have that curse lifted. It would follow on that, for some reason or other not clear, that it was the unfortunate deceased who was the target..." 
His Honour then on to review the competing submissions of counsel as to how the evidence of Mr Forster should be evaluated and then further instructed the jury (at p 30): "Well, if you reject that evidence, it is an important matter that, on the face of it, there is no evidence of motive for what can only be described as a deliberate premeditated killing of the deceased..." 
In my opinion there was no error in the directions given on motive, and I accept the Crown submissions that the concluding passage was favourable to the appellant.

Since no point was taken by counsel at the trial on the direction as to motive, [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s4.html) applies.

I would refuse the appellant leave to rely upon this ground.

Ground 4: His Honour erred in law in admitting the evidence of the Crown witness Dib Taouk, specifically the evidence of unrelated earlier death threats received by the deceased 
Dib Taouk was the brother of the deceased. He was cross-examined about some letters which the deceased received between 1981 and 1983. The witness saw one of those letters and the writer called the deceased, in Arabic, "a dog".
His wife and children and mother were similarly described. The witness said that the deceased took those letters to the Pymble Police Station.

There is no substance in this ground of appeal and indeed Mr Adams did not pursue it. The evidence about the letters was evidence which counsel for the accused elicited in his cross-examination of the witness, and the cross- examination was pursued without objection.

Ground 5: The verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory 
The circumstances in which this Court should act to disturb a jury's verdict upon the basis that it is unsafe and unsatisfactory are well settled: see M [(1994) 181 CLR 487] and Jones versus The Queen (1997) 72 ALJR 78. In the latter case, Gaudron, McHugh and Gummow JJ said in their joint judgment (at 85): "... the test formulated by the majority in M must now be accepted as the appropriate test for determining whether a verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory." 
Earlier in the same judgment their Honours referred to the joint judgment in
M of Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ: "In M, Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ said that the test for an unsafe and unsatisfactory verdict was whether the court thought that, upon the whole of the evidence, it was `open to the jury' to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. The majority emphasised, however, that it was not the function of the court to answer that question merely by examining the transcript of evidence and the exhibits. Their Honours said that: `in answering that question the court must not disregard or discount either the consideration that the jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the jury has had the benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses. On the contrary, the court must pay full regard to those considerations.' 
The majority judges explained the application of the test as follows: `In most cases a doubt experienced by an appellate court will be a doubt which a jury ought also to have experienced. It is only where a jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by a court of criminal appeal that the court may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred. That is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it was given, a reasonable doubt experienced by the court is a doubt which a reasonable jury ought to have experienced. If the evidence, upon the record itself, contains discrepancies, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force in such a way as to lead the court of criminal appeal to conclude that, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based upon that evidence.'" 
I approach Ground 5 mindful of all that was said in Jones.

It was essentially a matter for the jury to evaluate the reliability of the evidence that Sgt Squires gave. The appellant's written submissions focus upon what is perceived to be unsatisfactory features of his evidence and no doubt these matters were all put to the jury. However, having studied the evidence the witness gave and recognising the position of advantage that the jury enjoyed in seeing him give his evidence, it seems to me that it was open to the jury to accept Sgt Squires as being both truthful and reliable. I would not regard the fact that he mistakenly thought the vehicle to be a Falcon was of any real significance because on his evidence his concentration was directed to the registration number, and in my opinion it was plainly open to the jury to accept that he recorded it correctly.

Detective Sgt Constable, who examined the deceased's car on the day after the shooting, concluded that the most likely murder weapon was a .30 M1 carbine.

Mr Wrobel removed from the appellant's jacket taken by the police on the night he was arrested articles of material "consistent with gunshot residue".
Indeed he could think of no possible source of the combination of chemicals he found on that garment other than gunshot residue. He gave an account as to how that residue could have settled on the coat had the garment been worn when a shot was fired from the rifle. Mr Wrobel was subjected to searching cross- examination, but the jury was certainly entitled to accept the evidence that he gave concerning his findings in relation to the jacket.

Again it was a matter for the jury to evaluate the evidence of Mr Lawton, the former British Army officer, and the evidence of Mr Kobus, the Adelaide scientist. Each witness commented upon the evidence of Mr Wrobel. Mr Kobus felt that he could never exclude the possibility of a non-firearms source for the particles and counsel in the earlier written submissions has adverted to a number of features to be weighed against the evidence that Mr Wrobel gave.
There was no residue of gun discharge found in the appellant's car nor on the other items of clothing of the appellant that had been tested. Assuming it was gun discharge residue on the appellant's jacket, there were other possible explanations for its presence being innocent, because the appellant was arrested by officers with drawn guns and his clothes were subjected to further handling. The appellant had previously owned and fired guns and he used welding equipment and perhaps the residue could have found its way on to his jacket in one or other of these ways. Moreover the residue contained calcium, not found in any .30 calibre ammunition that Mr Wrobel had heard of specifically.

Notwithstanding the evidence of Mr Kobus and Mr Lawton, and the matters to which I have adverted, it was open to the jury to assess the evidence of Mr
Wrobel as affording a significant link in the chain of circumstantial evidence.

There was the discovery of the .30 cartridges in the locked cupboard in the appellant's garage and the discovery of the Walkman which, in the context of other evidence in the Crown case earlier reviewed, assumed significance.

Whilst the appellant certainly visited his daughter in hospital on 1 August , there was evidence upon which the jury could properly have found, as obviously they did, that he was absent from the hospital at the relevant time.
I reviewed the evidence of Sister Casaceli. Sister O'Brien and Sister Brenahan earlier in the context of considering Ground 1. His Honour reviewed the evidence of opportunity in the summing-up on pp 37-45. I do not propose to refer to the detail of that review but his Honour referred to the evidence of
Mrs Fadel and to the various nurses, Mr Byrnes, Sister O'Brien, Sister
Bresnahan, Sister Stack and Sister Casaceli. There was the evidence I mentioned earlier as to the time that a journey would have taken from the place where the killing occurred to the hospital, and once again it was open to the jury to conclude that the appellant had sufficient time to commit the crime and still appear when the jury was satisfied that he was seen at the hospital.

On my assessment of the whole of the evidence in this case, it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant.
Ground 5 therefore fails.

Accordingly I conclude that the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

Sentence 
This brings me to the application for leave to appeal against the sentence imposed.

The sentencing judge did not accept that the motive for the killing was that expressed by Mr Forster and his Honour found no credible evidence on which he could find that the killing was brought about by the appellant being mentally unbalanced at the time. The reasons for the killing were unexplained, but his
Honour correctly regarded the objective facts as pointing directly to a premeditated murder. Objectively the learned judge regarded this as being "a very serious brutal killing" and one which called for "salutary punishment". With that assessment I would entirely agree.

Subjectively, the prisoner was forty-six years of age and he had no previous criminal convictions. He came to this country from Lebanon in 1970 and he had a reasonable working history. There was tragedy in his married life with the seriously disabled child, Marlene, and a son who was also disabled. These circumstances prompted his Honour to state that this case ranked as one of the most tragic murder cases he had had to deal with, but after fully considering counsels' submissions, he concluded that the exceptional hardship which the prisoner's wife and children must inevitably endure by reason of his sentence, did not justify a lesser sentence than that which the judge determined ought to be imposed. His Honour considered the question of special circumstances, but found none.

It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that his Honour should have accepted the evidence of Mr Forster on motive and that this, in conjunction with the family circumstances, called for a lesser sentence.

I do not accept that submission. The mere fact that the issue of motive had been left to the jury did not mean that it was not necessary for the judge to determine the basis upon which he was to approach his sentencing task. His
Honour's finding in rejecting the evidence of Mr Forster was not inconsistent with the verdict of the jury.

I do not consider that the appellant's family circumstances called for a lesser sentence than was imposed. That sentence I consider to have been entirely appropriate.

I would grant leave to appeal against sentence, but I would propose that such appeal be dismissed.

JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of Studdert J. 
HIDDEN J: I agree with Studdert J. * * * 
